P01 Reproductive Genetics/Prenatal Genetics chromosome microdeletions. The etiology of infertility remains unknown and novel genes other than y chromosome microdele- tionsshould be identiﬁed withhighthroughput techniques. 
P01 .001.A Frequency of Y chromosome microdeletions in A.KalayciYigin:None. G.Erdogan: None.D.Agirbasli:None. Turkishinfertile men: Single CenterExperience M.Seven: None. AyselKalayciYigin, GizemErdogan, DenizAgirbasli, MehmetSeven 
P01 .002.B Serotonin transporter 5-HTTLPR genotypes and Department of Medical Genetics, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, trinucleotide repeats of androgen receptor exert a combina- IstanbulUniversity-Cerrahpasa, Fatih, Turkey. torial effect on hormonal milieu in patients with lifelong prematureejaculation Objective:Ychromosomemicrodeletionsaretheleadinggenetic causeofmaleinfertilityandtheirdetectionisclinicallyrelevantfor ShahzadBhatti,HaroonLatifKhan,SanaAbbas,YousufLatifKhan appropriategeneticcounseling.Ychromosomeincludesgenesfor testicular development and spermatogenesis. The aim of this Lahore Institute of Fertility and Endocrinology, Hameed Latif study was to establish the frequency of the Y chromosome Hospital,Lahore, Pakistan. microdeletionsinTurkishinfertilemenwhoreferredtoourcenter withsevere oligozoospermia andazoospermia. Premature ejaculation is one of the most common sexual MaterialsandMethods:Inourstudy,396infertilemenreferred to İstanbul University- Cerrahpaşa, Cerrahpaşa Medical Faculty disorders in men due to the uncontrolled modulation of spinal reﬂexes.Inthis study, weinvestigatethecombinatorial effects of Department of Medical Genetics (GETAM) between 2016 to 2020 trinucleotide repeats of androgen receptor and allelic variants of with azoospermia/severe oligospermia. We evaluated microdele- the5-HTTLPRgeneonsexsteroids,hypophysealhormones,sexual tions of the Y-chromosome STS markers AZFa, AZFb and AZFc, performance, and premature ejaculation assessment parameters ZFX/ZFY,terminalsY160regionsbyusingDNAFragmentanalysis. amongevidence-basedlifelongprematureejaculationsubjects.A Results:Amongthe396infertilemen,wedetermined30cases total of 271 patients consulting for evidence-based lifelong ofYchromosomemicro-deletions(7.57%).Among30cases,AZFc premature ejaculatory dysfunction were selected in this study. microdeletionswerefoundin18cases(60%),AZFamicrodeletions Thecontrolgroupconsistsof155menwithnormalIELT(>4min). in4cases(13.3%),AZFbmicrodeletionsin1case(3.3%),AZFa,b,c in 4 cases (13.3%), AZFb,c in 3 cases (10%). Our ﬁndings are Thestudy revealedthat thesubjects whohave thehighest(≥26) CAG stretch depicted signiﬁcantly higher serum oxytocin levels consistent with theliterature.Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 89 (102.1pg/ml;n=126,p<0.001)comparedwiththecontrolgroup CarlaLeal3,MárciaBarreiro3,AntónioJoséArséniaNogueira4,Paula (71.2 pg/ml; n=75, p=<0.001). Almost 33 (26.1%) lifelong Jorge1,2 premature ejaculatory patients had AR variant of longer (≥26) CAG repeats was homozygous for S alleles (SS), 45 (35.7%) was 1Molecular Genetics Unit, Centro de Genética Médica Dr. Jacinto homozygous for L allele (LL), and 48 (38%) had the L/S or S/L Magalhães (CGMJM), Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto genotype of 5-HTTLPR gene. Homozygous (SS) alleles have a (CHUP),Porto,Portugal,Porto,Portugal,2UnitforMultidisciplinary signiﬁcantpositivecorrelation(r=0.44,p<0.0001)withthehigh Research in Biomedicine (UMIB), Institute of Biomedical Sciences score of BDI-II (39.1, n=126, p<0.001). However, LL alleles have Abel Salazar (ICBAS), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, Porto, shown a signiﬁcant positive correlation with PEDT (r=0.46, p< Portugal, 3Centre for Medically Assisted Procreation/PublicGame- 0.001) and a negative correlation with self-estimated IELT. The teBank,CentroMaterno-InfantildoNorteDr.AlbinoAroso(CMIN), study design elaborates that androgen receptor trinucleotide Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto (CHUP), Porto, Portugal, repeatsand5-HTTLPRgenotypeshaveacombinatorialimpacton Porto, Portugal, 4Center for Environmental and Marine Studies hormonal milieu and sexual function regarding evidence-based (CESAM), Department of Biology, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, lifelongpremature ejaculatorydysfunction patients. Portugal, Aveiro, Portugal. S.Bhatti:None.H.LatifKhan:None.S.Abbas:None.Y.Latif Khan:None. Introduction: X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) occurs ran- domly; however, skewing can occur in 3.2-3.5% of females. The association of XCI skewing with premature ovarian failure 
P01 .003.CChallengeinprenataldiagnosticsofsevereskeletal andimplicationofalowFMR1geneCGGnumber(CGGs<26)in dysplasias: acase ofAchondrogenesis type 2 ovarian dysfunction are still controversial. Aiming to test the effect of the AGG interspersions, our group developed a Natalija Krasovskaja1,2, Aušra Matulevičienė1,2, Kamilė Šiaurytė1,2, mathematical model that combines the AGG interspersion GabrielėŽukauskaitė2,Algirdas Utkus1 number and pattern as well as the FMR1 total repeat length. WethentestediftheFMR1allelicscoreobtainedcorrelateswith 1DepartmentofHumanandMedicalGenetics,InstituteofBiomedical XCI pattern in females with idiopathic infertility. Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, Material and Methods: Blood samples from females at 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santaros reproductive age, in an infertility clinic setting: 40 infertile and Klinikos, Vilnius,Lithuania. 27potentiallyfertilefemales.AllelicscoreofeachFMR1allelewas determined using our mathematical model, as was XCI pattern Introduction:Achondrogenesistype2(ACG2)belongstoagroup usingHUMARA. of most severe type 2 collagen related skeletal dysplasias with Results: No signiﬁcant difference was observed between the autosomal dominant inheritance. Characteristic phenotype fea- proportionofinfertilecasesineachequivalentanddissimilarallelic tures include short stature, extreme micromelia, narrow chest, combinations, respectively 25/41 and 15/26. In the equivalent pulmonary hypoplasia, edema. The condition can be diagnosed group one sample carried a 56 CGG premutated allele with two prenatally. AGG interspersions. The dissimilar group was enriched with low Materials and methods: Primegravida, 23 years of age, was FMR1CGGgenotypes(16/26;62%),63%beinginfertilefemalesas referred at 21st week of gestation due to asymmetrical fetal opposed to 39% (16/41) and 50% respectively in the equivalent growth restriction. Fetal ultrasound revealed micromelia, narrow group. chest, prominent abdomen, brachydactyly, talipes, polyhydram- Conclusions:Theincidenceofhighly-skewedXCI(>90:10)was nios.Pedigreewasuninformative.SangersequencingofDNAfrom statistically higher in the dissimilar group (80% versus 50%), amniotic ﬂuid identiﬁed no pathogenic changes in the FGFR3 suggesting an association between allelic score and preferential gene. Next generation sequencing (NGS) of skeletal dysplasia XCI. Although exploratory, this study suggests that such associa- genepanelwasperformed. tionmayresultfromaprotectiveFMR1AGGinterspersionpattern- Results: NGS skeletal dysplasia gene panel identiﬁed variant related effect or unknown X-chromosome-linked anomaly that NM_001844.5:c.[4387_4389del];[4387=] (rs527236145) in exon 54 likelycorrelates with female infertility. ofCO
L2 A1geneofuncertainclinicalsigniﬁcance(insilicoanalysis: B.Rodrigues:None.E.Vale-Fernandes:None.D.Sousa:None. Provean: deleterious, Varsome: likely pathogenic). Segregation R. Brandão: None. N. Maia: None. I. Marques: None. R. Santos: analysis in the family showed de novo origin. Several therapeutic None.C.Leal:None.M.Barreiro:None.A.J.A.Nogueira:None.P. amniocentesis were done to reduce severe polyhydramnios. Jorge: None. Pregnancy was carried to 37 gestational weeks. Male newborn wasdeliveredbyCaesareansection,birthweight-2050g,height- 33 cm, Apgar score - 5/8. Condition quickly derteriorated due to 
P01 .006.BHow simple isasimple genetic counseling? severe pulmonary hypoplasia. Palliative care was administered. Babydied in11days. Moran Echar1, Amir Peleg1, Amalia Harari-Shacham1, Shirley Conclusions: Precise fetal ultrasound is essential for early Modan1,Lena Sagi-Dain1,2 suspicionofACG2.Clinicaldiagnosisenablesadvanceddiagnostic methods to be applied intimely mannerand informed decisions 1Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 2The Ruth and Bruce onprenatal and postnatal careto be made. Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion - Israel Institute of N. Krasovskaja: None. A. Matulevičienė: None. K. Šiaurytė: Technology, Haifa,Israel. None.G. Žukauskaitė:None. A.Utkus: None. Introduction: Prenatal genetic counseling before amniocentesis in uneventful pregnancies is considered to be a "simple" 
P01 .004.DTheimpactofFMR1allelicscoreininfertilefemales counseling. In some medical centers the duration of such withpreferential X-chromosomeinactivation consultations is limited (to 15 minutes or less), to provide only the basic explanation. The purpose of this study was to evaluate Bárbara Rodrigues1,2, Emídio Vale-Fernandes2,3, Daniela Sousa3, the time required for such supposedly "simple" genetic RaquelBrandão3,NunoMaia1,2,IsabelMarques1,2,RosárioSantos1,2, consultations. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 90 MaterialandMethods:DatawascollectedfromJanuary2018 Moreover, customization of the panel with newly discovered until August 2020 of all patients undergoing genetic counseling genes increases the chance of ﬁnding the genetic cause of male before amniocentesis in uneventful pregnancies, and were given patient infertility. Funding: The European Regional Development byfourgeneticcounselorsandtwomedicalgeneticists.Wehave Fund(KK.01.2.1.01.0113). estimated thetime required foreach consultation. M. Logara Klarić: None. L. Trgovec-Greif: None. L. Žunić: A. Results: Of the 1085 consultations, 60.5% required additional Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genom Ltd.. F. Rokić: explanation. The reasons for extended counseling included None. A. Vičić: None. T. Marić: None. A. Merkler: None. A. medical disorders of the woman or spouse (21.2%), carrier state Katušić Bojanac: None. R. Belužić: None. F. Stipoljev: None. O. for autosomal recessive diseases (18.6%), genetic conditions of a Vugrek: None. M. Barbalić: A. Employment (full or part-time); child or previous pregnancy (9.6%), or medical disorders in the Signiﬁcant; Genom Ltd. extended family (79.1%). In 31.0% of patients, carrier screening tests were recommended or added. The additional explanations were estimated as short (up to 5 minutes) in 36.9% of the cases, 
P01 .010.B Molecular genetic carrier screening of in the intermediate (5 to 15 minutes) in 59.9%, and long (over 15 Republic ofSakha(Yakutia) (Russia) minutes) in 2.6% of cases. The consultation’s length was not affectedfrom itbeinga ﬁrstor arecurrent consultation. Aitalina Sukhomyasova1,2, Anastasia Danilova1, Tatyana Grigor- Discussion: This study reﬂects the need for a proper genetic ieva1,2, Lutcia Gotovtseva1,2, Polina Golikova1, Nadezhda consultation for all seemingly simple indications, with an Maksimova1 emphasis on detailed personal and family history. As over half oftheconsulteesrequiredextendedcounselingbeyondthebasic 1North-Eastern Federal University named after M.K. Ammosov, explanation, assigning sufﬁcient time for the consultation is MedicalInstitute,Yakutsk,RussianFederation,2"RepublicanHospital important. No.1-National Centerof Medicine", Yakutsk, Russian Federation. M.Echar:None.A.Peleg:None.A.Harari-Shacham:None.S. Modan:None. L.Sagi-Dain: None. Introduction: The Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) is a region of Russia with a high prevalence of some hereditary diseases among the indigenous population, due to genetic and popula- 
P01 .009.A Genetic analysis of azoospermic men by an tion reasons and the founder effect.With the Medical Genetic integrated NGS panel Center of the National Center of Medicine for people of Yakut nationality, molecular genetic carrier screening of major muta- Monika Logara Klarić1, Lovro Trgovec-Greif1, Lucija Žunić2, Filip tionswith7frequentautosomalrecessivediseasesiscarriedout: Rokić1, Ana Vičić3, Tihana Marić4, Ana Merkler5, Ana Katušić Three M-syndrome, SOPH-syndrome, tyrosinemia type 1, neuro- Bojanac4, Robert Belužić1, Feodora Stipoljev3, Oliver Vugrek1, Maja nal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 6, non-syndromic type 1 A Barbalić2,6 deafness, type 1 methemoglobinemia, mucopolysaccharidosis- plus syndrome. 1Ruđer Boškovic Institut, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Genom Ltd., Zagreb, Materials and Methods: peripheral blood samples with free Croatia,3DepartmentofObstetricsandGynecology,ClinicalHospital informedconsentweretakenfrom404pregnantwomenatearly "Sveti Duh", Zagreb, Croatia, 4Department of Medical Biology, prenatal screening and 341 women consulted for pregnancy University of Zagreb School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 5Depart- planning using in vitro fertilization. To detect mutations in 7 ment of Laboratory Diagnostics, University Hospital Centre Zagreb, diseasesall745 samples wereanalyzedby real-time PCR. Zagreb,Croatia,6DepartmentofMedicalBiology,SchoolofMedicine, Results:outof404pregnantwomenexamined,105(26%)were University of Split, Split, Croatia. heterozygous carriers of at least 1 hereditary disease, and 3 pregnantwomenwerecarriersof3diseases.3coupleswerecarriers Introduction: Y chromosome microdeletions, Klinefelter syn- of the same disease as mucopolysaccharidosis-plus syndrome and drome and CFTR mutations are the leading genetic causes of SOPHsyndrome.Theywereofferedprenataldiagnosis. azoospermiaandareallanalyzedbydifferentmolecularmethods. Conclusions: ahighfrequency of mutation carriers isrevealed Inaddition,anumberofcandidategeneswererelatedtoinfertility in the Yakut population, which is important both for family inthelasttwo decades. planning, as well as for the provision of medical and genetic Materials/Methods: We designed an NGS amplicon-based assistance and the expansion of molecular genetic screening panel that simultaneously analyzes all the known above- among the population of the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia). The mentionedgeneticvariantsaswellas11additionalgenesrecently work was carried out within the framework of the state assign- being associated with azoospermia and ran the analysis on 44 ment of the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the azoospermic men.Twelvesamples with knowngenetic aetiology RussianFederation (project FSRG-2020-0№14). were used to evaluate the performance of the NGS amplicon- A. Sukhomyasova: None. A. Danilova: None. T. Grigorieva: based test. Remaining thirty-two samples consisted of azoosper- None. L. Gotovtseva: None. P. Golikova: None. N. Maksimova: micmenwithnodeﬁnedcauseofinfertility.Thepanelconsisted None. of 393 amplicons covering regions of interest. In house bioinfor- maticpipeline wasdevelopedto analysethe rawdata. Results:Wecorrectlydetectedallgeneticvariantsinmenwith 
P01 .012.D Personalised non-invasive prenatal diagnosis knowngeneticaetiology.In32sampleswithnodeﬁnedcauseof (NIPD) for maternally inherited variants in rare conditions infertility,wedetectedthreeYchromosomemicrodeletionsand6 usingdroplet digital PCR variants in selected genes that passed our ﬁltering criteria for functionalimpact(inCFTR,SYC
E1 L,TEX15andAR).Altogether,we Joe Shaw1, Ben Paternoster1, Maureen Ramos1, Sarah Nesbitt1, detectedageneticcauseofazoospermiain4individualsandlikely Sophie Sheppard1, LynS.Chitty1,2, NatalieChandler1 causative variants in another 4 out of 32 individuals by running our NGSamplicon-basedpanel. 1NHS North Thames Genomic Laboratory Hub, London, United Conclusions:Thisworkshowedthatgeneticvariantsassociated Kingdom, 2UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, withmaleinfertilitycouldbedetectedbyrunningonlyoneassay. London,United Kingdom. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 91 Introduction: NIPD for maternally-inherited variants is challen- frequent structural abnormalities were as: 46,XX/XY, inv(9) (p11; ging due to the high background of the maternal variant in cell q12)/(p11;q13)(27.69 %), 46,XX/XY, 1qh(+)(12.58%), 46,XY, Yqh(-) freeDNA.Relativehaplotypedosageisusedclinicallyforcommon (7.19%), 46,XX/XY, 16qh(+)(6.83%), 46,XX/XY, 9qh(+)(4.31%) and X-linked and recessive conditions, but is not suitable for 46,XY, Yqh(+)(4.31%). Balanced and unbalanced translocations, consanguineous couples or those where there is no proband deletionsandduplicationswerealsofoundinlessratio.According DNA available, and is too expensive to permit validation for rare to the literature and our results, advanced maternal age is the disorders. Droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) offers the potential for main cause of fetal chromosomal abnormalities. Fetal chromoso- development of NIPD assays personalised to maternal variants, mal abnormality ratio that we found was 7.38%. This ratio regardlessof inheritancetype, through relative mutation dosage. emphasize theimportance of prenatal diagnosis. Methods: ddPCR assays were designed for 24 pregnancies at A.Pazarbasi:None.D.Alptekin:None.S.Kocaturk-Sel:None. risk of X-linked recessive (14), X-linked dominant (1), autosomal I.N. Uslu: None. N.S. Ilgaz: None. G. Ay-Aksoy: None. O. dominant(7)andautosomalrecessive(2)conditions.Assayswere Demirhan: None. U. Luleyap: None. M.B. Yilmaz: None. S. optimised using maternal genomic DNA, before testing cfDNA Buyukkurt: None. extracted from stored maternal plasma obtained from 10 weeks gestation.FetalfractionwasdeterminedusingZFYorapaternally inherited SNP for pregnancies bearing male and female fetuses, 
P01 .016.D Is it time to report carrier state for recessive respectively. disordersineverymicroarrayanalysis?-Apilotmodelbased Results: ddPCR testing was concordant with fetal genotype onhearingloss genesdeletions determined following invasive testing in 20 cases. Four cases, all with fetal fractions <4%, were inconclusive. The analysis was Lena Sagi-Dain1, Idit Maya2, Lina Basel2 modiﬁed to reﬂect the different inheritance patterns, including a case where both parents were affected with the common 1CarmelMedicalCenter,Haifa,Israel,2RabinMedicalCenter,Petach achondroplasiavariant,FGFR3c.1138G>A.Inthisscenario,ddPCR Tikva, Israel. correctlypredictedthefetustobehomozygousforthereference allelewith afetal fraction of2.6%. Purpose: To examine the implications of reporting heterozy- Conclusion: ddPCR offers personalised NIPD for maternally gous losses of recessive genes in Chromosomal Microarray inherited variants, using only maternal samples regardless of Analysis (CMA), based on the incidence of microdeletions of inheritancepattern.FundingwasfromtheGOSHNIHRBiomedical three common hearing impairment genes in the local cohort Research Centre. Samples were obtained from the RAPID sample and the prevalence of sequence variants in these genes in bank. worldwide databases. Methods: Prevalence of heterozygous microdeletions in OTOA J. Shaw: None. B. Paternoster: None. M. Ramos: None. S. and STRC genes, as well as deletions in the DFNB1 locus Nesbitt: None. S. Sheppard: None. L.S. Chitty: None. N. encompassingGJB6gene,wasdeterminedusingelectronicdatabase Chandler: None. of Rabin Medical Center. ClinVar archive and Deafness Variation Database were used to generate a list of clinically signiﬁcant sequence variants in these three genes, as well as GJB2 gene, and 
P01 .015.CChromosomalabnormalitiesinprenatalyidentiﬁed estimationofthefrequencyofsequencevariantswasperformed. caseswithamniocentesis fromsouth ofTurkey Results: Of the 19,189 CMA tests were performed in our laboratory,107STRCmicrodeletionswerefound(0.56%),followed Ayfer Pazarbasi1, Davut Alptekin1, Sabriye Kocaturk-Sel1, Inayet N. in frequency by OTOA deletions (39, 0.2%), and DFNB1 locus Uslu1,NerminS.Ilgaz1,GulsevincAy-Aksoy1,OsmanDemirhan1,Umit deletions (10, 0.05%). Theestimated risk for a hearing loss in the Luleyap1,Mehmet B.Yilmaz1,Selim Buyukkurt2 examinedindividualcarryingthemicrodeletionwasestimatedas 0.11-0.67% for STRC, 0.016-0.13% for OTOA, and 1.9-7.5% in the 1Faculty of Medicine, Dept of Medical Biology, Adana, Turkey, DFNB1locus(includingdoubleheterozygocitywithGJB2clinically 2Faculty of Medicine, Dept of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Adana, signiﬁcant sequence variants). The risks were higher in speciﬁc Turkey. populations. Conclusions:Webelievethatthatgeneraldecisionwhetherto Amniocentesis is a medical procedure used in prenatal diagnosis reportortodisregardsuchincidentalﬁndingscannotbepartofa ofchromosomalabnormalitiesandverycrucialforpreventingthe uniformpolicy,butratherbasedonadetailedevaluationoforigin- birth of genetically defective fetuses in order to decrease the speciﬁc variants for each gene, with a careful consideration and prevalence of genetic diseases in populations. A retrospective discussionwhethertoincludethemicrodeletionintheﬁnalreport reviewofouramniocentesisdatabasefortheperiodfromJanuary foreach patient. 2000 to February 2021 was carried out. The karyotyping of 8635 L.Sagi-Dain: None. I.Maya: None. L.Basel: None. fetuseswascarriedoutinDepartmentofMedicalBiologyfromthe samples of amniotic ﬂuids which were sent from Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics of Balcali Hospital. A standart 
P01 .018.B Prenatal craniofacial malformations should be nomenclature has been developed to describe each of types of analysedbywholeexomesequencinginadditiontochromo- abnormality found in human chromosomes. A total of 8635 somal microarray analysis amniocentesisspecimenswereprocessedduringthestudyperiod. 638 fetuses (7.38%) had various chromosomal abnormalities. Rachel Michaelson-Cohen1, Amihood Singer2, Lena Sagi-Dain3, 54.23% of abnormal karyotypes (346 cases) were numerical and Reeval Segel1 43.57%(278cases)werestructural.Bothnumericalandstructural chromosomalaberrationswereobservedin14cases(2.19%).The 1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Hebrew University, Jerusalem Israel, ratios were as: trisomy 21 (49.42%), trisomy 18 (18.49%), Jerusalem,Israel,2DepartmentofCommunityGenetics,PublicHealth monosomy X (9.24%), trisomy 13 (6.64%), Triploidy (4.62%), Services, Ministry of Health, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Genetics Institute, Klinefelter Syndrome (3.46%), Trisomy X (1. 15%), XYY Syndrome Carmel Medical Center, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion (0.86%), and the others in all numerical abnormalities. The Instituteof Technology, Haifa,Israel. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 92 Introduction: Craniofacial malformations (CFMs) account for use of animated videos (85.1%), 76.0% of the respondents felt approximately 15% of congenital malformations. Genetic evalua- they were better prepared for CMA testing and 78.1% indicated tionisimportantfordecision-makingprocessesincouplesdealing thattheywouldrecommendthetooltoothers.Decision-aidbased with fetal CFMs, yet previous assessments are limited. Our oninterviewsdatawasreportedhelpfulby63.4%ofrespondents. objectivewastoexaminethedetectionrateofclinicallysigniﬁcant Conclusions:Apre-CMAtestinteractiveweb-basededucational chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) ﬁndings in pregnancies tooliswellreceivedandvaluedbywomen/couplesandassistsin withCFMs. making informed decisions regarding the disclosure of complex genomic-results. Methods: Data from all CMA tests in pregnancies with H. Hochner: None. T. Millo: None. G. Siegal: A. Employment sonographicdiagnosisofCFMs(cleftlipand/orpalate,malforma- (fullorpart-time); Modest;Thisauthor isthefounderandCEO of tions of eyes, nose or ears, micro-retrognathia etc) performed ConsentMD.S. Shkedi-Raﬁd:None. between January 2016 and April 2020 were retrospectively obtained from the Israeli Ministry of Health computerized database.RatesofclinicallysigniﬁcantCMAresultsinfetuseswith 
P01 .020.D Prenatal ﬁndings of cataract and arthrogryposis: CFMswerecomparedtobaseline risk,based onalocalcohort of recurrence of cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome and pregnancies withno major sonographic anomalies. reviewofdifferential diagnosis Results: A total of111 CMA tests were performeddue to fetal CFMs.Inthe18pregnancieswithnon-isolatedCFMs,three(16.7%) Fabio Sirchia1, Ilaria Fantasia2, Agnese Feresin3, Elisa Giorgio1, clinically signiﬁcant CMA results were detected, a signiﬁcantly Moira Barbieri3, Valentina Guida4, Alessandro De Luca4, Tamara higher frequency compared to the control cohort, for whom the Stampalija3,2 rateofpathogenicCMAis1.4%(RR14.1(95%CI3.7-54.2)).Ofthe 93 cases with isolated CFMs, four (4.3%) clinically signiﬁcant 1University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2Burlo Garofolo Hospital, Trieste, pathogenic CMA results were detected, a rate slightly increased Italy,3UniversityofTrieste,Trieste,Italy,4DivisionofMedicalGenetics, comparedto thecontrolpopulation (RR3.17(95% CI1.02-9.83)). Fondazione IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Discussion: Fetal CFMs diagnosed by sonogram, whether Rotondo,Italy. isolated or associated with additional sonographic defects, are associatedwithabnormalCMAﬁndings.However,whenisolated, Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome (COFS) is a severe and abnormal CMA rate is only slightly higher than the background progressive neurologic condition characterized by prenatal onset risk. Therefore, combining CMA and whole exome sequencing of arthrogryposis, cataract, microcephaly and growth failure. The should beconsidered foroptimizing genetic evaluationof CFMs. aimofthisstudywastopresentacaseofrecurrenceoftheCOFS R. Michaelson-Cohen: None. A. Singer: None. L. Sagi-Dain: syndrome and to propose a differential diagnosis ﬂow-chart in None.R. Segel: None. case ofprenatal ﬁndings ofarthrogryposis and cataract. We report a case of recurrence of COF
S3  syndrome within the same family, with similar diagnostic features. In the ﬁrst case the 
P01 .019.C Web-based interactive educational tool to prepare COFSsyndromeremainedundiagnosed,whileinthesecondcase, couples forprenatal chromosomal-microarray-analysis (CMA) due to prenatal ﬁndings of arthrogryposis and cataract, genetic investigation focusing on responsible genes of COFS (ERC
C5 , HagitHochner1, Talya Millo2, Gil Siegal3,Shiri Shkedi-Raﬁd4 ERC
C6  and FKTN genes) was carried out. The fetus was found to be compound heterozygous for two different ERC
C5  mutations, 1BraunSchoolofPublicHealth,theHebrewUniversityofJerusalem, conﬁrmingtheclinicalsuspectofCOFSsyndrome.Areviewofthe Jerusalem, Israel, 2Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Ono literature on possible causative genes of prenatal cataract and AcademicCenter,CenterforHealthLaw,BioethicsandHealthPolicy, arthrogryposis was performed and we present a ﬂow-chart to Kiryat Ono, Israel, 4Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, guidedifferentialdiagnosisandpossiblegenetictestingincaseof Jerusalem, Israel. theseﬁndings. COFS syndrome is a rare autosomic recessive condition. Introduction: Results from prenatal Chromosomal-microarray- However, it can besuspected and diagnosed prenatally. The analysis(CMA)includevariantswithuncertainclinicalsigniﬁcance ﬂow-chart illustrates a pathway to guide differential diagnosis (VUS), low-penetrance susceptibility-loci (SL) and risks for late- according to the prenatal ﬁndings. Main syndromes, key testing onsetconditions.Somemedicalcentersofferparentsthechoiceif and speciﬁc genes are included. Targeted molecular testing to be informed about these ﬁndings. We set-out to design and shouldbeofferedtothecoupleinordertoreachadiagnosisand implement a web-based interactive educational tool for women/ assessthe recurrencerisk for future pregnancies. couples undergoing prenatal CMA aimed to assist in making F. Sirchia: None. I. Fantasia: None. A. Feresin: None. E. informed decisions and improve their preparation for potential Giorgio: None. M. Barbieri: None. V. Guida: None. A. De Luca: ﬁndings. None.T.Stampalija: None. Methods: Development of the tool was based on interviews with women/their partners (N=42) following prenatal CMA to explore their experience with parental choice. Knowledge and 
P01 .021.A Hypomorphic variants in FLNA cause isolated feedback questions were incorporated into the web-based tool, congenital anomalies of kidney and urinary tract in a large thatwasofferedtowomen/couplespriortotheCMA-test.Uptake, family knowledgeandsatisfactionwereevaluatedontheﬁrst180users. Results:About80%ofthewomenwhologgedintothesystem ShaliniS.Nayak,Shravya MS, KattaM. Girisha completed the process. Distribution of choices made using the educational tool was 88.9%, 63.6%, and 57.6% for disclosure of Kasturba Medical College, Manipal,Manipal, India. late-onset,SLandVUSﬁndings,respectively,similartodistribution ofchoicespublishedpriorthetool’simplementation.Themajority Introduction: FLNA encodes ﬁlamin A, an actin binding protein of respondents answered the knowledge questions correctly that regulates the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton by (range88.8%to98.7%).Reportedsatisfactionwashighestforthe interacting with integrins, transmembrane receptor complexes EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 93 and secondary messengers. FLNA is known to cause several C. Ventura: None. R. Lemos: None. P. Costa: None. M. X-linked allelic diseases. Recently unrelated four individuals Teixeira: None. J. Sá: None. G. Soares: None. M. Mistrík: None. were noted to have isolated congenital anomalies of the kidney R.Cerqueira: None. and urinary tract (CAKUT) and hypomorphic variants in FLNA. We hereby report a family with six affected offspring’s with CACUT. 
P01 .023.C Three foetuses with Cornelia de Lange diagnosis: Methods: We evaluated a consanguineous family with three- prenatalﬁndingsandgenetic diagnosis years-old male living child and ﬁve abortions. We performed chromosomal microarray followed by duo exome sequencing for Fe Amalia García Santiago1,2, Elena Mansilla1,2, Eugenia Antolin3, theliving probandand sixthabortuses. Fernando Santos Simarro1,2, Roberto Rodriguez3, Julian Nevado4,2, Results: The family had bilateral renal pyelectasis in ﬁrst Maria Palomares-Bralo4,2, Karen Heath1,2, Rita Maria Regojo5, pregnancy, gross ascites in second conceptus and cardiac Carmen Rodriguez-Jimenez6, Isabel Vallcorba6, Angela del Pozo4, anomalies in ﬁfth pregnancy. However, a detailed postnatal PabloLapunzina4,2 examination was not possible. Autopsy from third pregnancy revealed bladder outlet obstruction whereas the sixth pregnancy 1INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Idipaz, UMDE, Ciberer, had bilateral tortuous ureters. The living child has hydroureter- Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de onephrosis, mildly impaired functioning of left kidney and Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER, U753), Instituto Carlos III, Madrid, preserved functioning of right kidney with non-obstructive Spain., Madrid, Spain, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, clearance. Exome sequencing identiﬁed a novel hemizygous Hospital Universitario La Paz, Idipaz, UMDE, Madrid, Spain, variant, c.7282G>A; p. (Gly2428Arg) in exon 44 of FLNA, mother 4INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Idipaz, Ciberer, Madrid, isa carrierand father has wildtype allele. Spain, 5Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Conclusion:Thehypomorphicvariantc.7282G>AinFLNAisthe UMDE, Madrid, Spain, 6INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La Paz, likely genetic cause responsible for CAKUT seen in this family. Madrid,Spain. However, the segregation analysis in other affected fetuses was notpossibleduetounavailabilityofDNA.Also,therewaslimited Introduction: Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS; MIM #12270, phenotypicdatainﬁfthpregnancytoexplainthecardiacanomaly. 300590, 610759, 614701, 300882) is a rare and clinically variable S.S. Nayak:None. S.Ms:None. K.M. Girisha:None. disorder that affects multiple organs. Ultrasound ﬁndings are highly variable and include distinctive facial features, prenatal growth retardation (FGR), malformations of the upper limbs, 
P01 .022.B Two prenatal cases with a variant of loss in diaphragmatic hernia, heart defects and genitourinary malforma- homozygosityinvolving the CRPPA(ISPD)gene tions. To date, ﬁve genes (NIPBL, SM
C1 A, SM
C3 , RAD21 and HDA
C8 ) have been associated with CdLS. We report 3 foetuses Cíntia Ventura1, Raquel Lemos1, Patríca Costa1, Marisa Teixeira1, with ultrasound characteristics and pathology examination with JoaquimSá1, Gabriela Soares1, Martin Mistrík2, RitaCerqueira1 abnormalities associated with CdLS. MaterialsandMethods:anNGScustompanelcontaining1663 1CGC Genetics UNILABS Portugal, Porto, Portugal, 2Alpha Medical genes involved in common genetic disorders (RD seq (R) v6.0), UNILABSEslováquia, Zilinsky, Slovakia. exome trio and MLPA (multiplex-ligation dependent probe ampliﬁcation) 
P141  (MRC-Holland) were performed after a CMA Introduction: Homozygous mutations of the CRPPA gene [MIM normalresult. 614631] are associated with congenital muscular dystrophy- Results: foetus 1(23 weeks): severeFGR, ulnar hypoplasia and dystroglycanopathy with brain and eye anomalies (type A7) oligodactylyofrighthand,hypospadias,leftdiaphragmatichernia, described by OMIM [MIM 614643] including features such as prefrontaledema,retrognathia.Geneticanalysis:alossofdosage hydrocephalusandbeingthecauseofthemostseverephenotype inheterozygosityisdetectedintheprobehybridisingtoexon43 of Walker-Warburg syndrome. We present, in the context of oftheNIPBLgenebyMLPAthecnique.Foetus2:(21weeks):severe prenatal diagnosis, two cases with aCGH results involving a FGR,micromelia,congenitalheart,prefrontaledema,microcepha- homozygous deletionthat includesthe CRPPA gene. Thefetus in lia, short corpus callosum. Genetic analysis: NIPBL NM_133433.3: case 1 presented hydrocephalus and abnormal morphology - c.5639_5642del, p.Pro1880Hisfs*10 heterocygosis. Foetus 3: (17 Dandy Walker malformation. The fetus in case 2 presented weeks): severe FRG, radius hypoplasia and oligodactyly of left hydrocephalus. hand, left diaphragmatic hernia, micrognathia. Genetic analysis: Methodology: The aCGH was performed using Affymetrix NIPBLNM_133433.3:c.598C>T;p./Gln200*) heterocygosis. Cytoscan 750K. PCR ampliﬁcation of exons 1 and 9 of the CRPPA Conclusions: CdLS is a heterogeneous clinical and genetic gene(chromosome 7)was performed. condition. It is essential to have a thorough ultrasound examina- Results:Case1-Afemalegenomicproﬁlewasdetectedwitha tionandtoperformthisgeneticstudyincasesofFGRthatcannot loss in homozygosity (zero copies) in 7p21.2p21.1 of 360 Kbp beexplained by chromosomal orvascular alterations. involving the CRPPA, CRPPA-A
S1  and SOSTD
C1  genes. No F.A. García Santiago: None. E. Mansilla: None. E. Antolin: ampliﬁcation of exons 1 and 9 of the CRPPA gene was observed, None.F.SantosSimarro:None.R.Rodriguez:None.J.Nevado: conﬁrming the ﬁndings of aCGH. Case 2 - A female genomic None.M.Palomares-Bralo: None.K.Heath:None. R.M.Regojo: proﬁlewasdetected withaloss inhomozygosity (zerocopies) in None. C. Rodriguez-Jimenez: None. I. Vallcorba: None. A. del 7p21.2p21.1 of 360 Kbp involving the CRPPA, CRPPA-A
S1  and Pozo: None. P.Lapunzina: None. SOSTD
C1  genes. These variants are classiﬁed as pathogenic and maycorrespond tothese fetuses’phenotypes. Conclusions:TheseﬁndingsreinforcetheimportanceofaCGH 
P01 .024.D Transcriptome landscape of the human decidual asaﬁrst-linediagnostictestinfetuseswithultrasoundanomalies. cells GeneticCounseling isimperative to guide thecouple inthe best decisionaswellastowarnoftheneedforfurtheranalysisinthe AnastasiaA.Babovskaya,EkaterinaTrifonova,MariaSwarovskaya, family. Viktoria Serebrova, Alexei Zarubin, Vadim Stepanov EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 94 Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Research members revealed that healthy mother and healthy maternal MedicalCenteroftheRussianAcademy ofSciences,Tomsk,Russian grandmother are heterozygous carriers of c.34G>C mutation as Federation. well. Previously, another heterozygous mutations in GATA4 were detected in 46,XY DSD patients. Interestingly, the same mutation Humanreproductivesuccessdependsonaproperlydecidualized waspreviouslyshowninpatientwithAtrioventricularseptaldefect uterineendometriumthatallowsimplantationandtheformation 4. Obtained data are the evidence of phenotypic variation and of the placenta. At the core of the decidualization process are incomplete penetrance in women. It is in line with previously endometrialﬁbroblaststhatdifferentiatetodecidualstromalcells obtainedexplanation forpossible molecular mechanisms ofsuch (DSCs).CharacterizingtranscriptomeofDSC,whichiscrucialfora inheritanceinmice(Boumaet.al.,2007).Toourknowledge,thisis pregnancy’s outcome, can serve as a basis for identifying the the ﬁrst report on c.34G>C in patient with 46,XY DSD and the mechanisms underlying physiological and pathological preg- resultsoffamilymemberanalysissupportthehypothesisthatthis nancy. In our study for the ﬁrst time for native cells high- variant is causative for 46,XY DSD with autosomal dominant throughput sequencing (RNA-seq) was applied to analyze the inheritance and incomplete penetrance in women. Study was global transcriptome of the human DSCs during uncomplicated performedasapartofSCOPE
S2013 -2017:JointResearchProjects pregnancies. DSCs were obtained by Laser capture microdissec- -Genetics ofHuman Disordersof SexualDevelopment. tion. During analyses we obtained 17960 transcripts expressed L. Livshits: None. D. Sirokha: None. O. Gorodna: None. K. with CPM >1 in each sample. Most of the analyzed transcripts Kusz-Zamelczyk:None.P.Sproll:None.A.LauberBiason:None. corresponded to protein coding regions of the human genome S.Nef:None. N.Zelinska:None. (13683). Antisense RNAs, long noncoding RNAs, and processed pseudogenes predominated in the remaining cluster. To gain a betterunderstandingofthebiologicalimplications,theassembled 
P01 .026.B Prenatal detection of a familial 640 kb microdele- transcriptswereannotatedusingDAVIDBioinformaticsResources. tion in chromosomal region 6q27 in a fetus with isolated The top 5 represented GO terms for the biological process were severe bilateral ventriculomegaly cell-celladhesion,transcription,proteintransport,rRNAprocessing andproteasome-mediated ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolic Yvonne Stratis1, Cornelie Müller-Hofstede1, Malvina Kuschmann1, process.TheﬁndingssuggestthathumanDSCsplayakeyrolein Matthias Meyer-Wittkopf2,AxelBohring1, Albrecht Röpke1 the induction of maternal-fetal communication. We applied an upstreamanalysisapproachimplementedingeneXplainplatform 1Institute of Human Genetics, Münster, Germany, 2Department of and identiﬁed top 10 master regulators (DUS
P10 , MOS, ROCK2, Gynecology and Obstetrics at the Health Center Rheine, Mathias MAPK6, HTT, SGK1, PRKCI, PASK, DUS
P22 , and CUX1). These key Spital,Rheine, Germany. genes may be potential biomarkers of diagnosis or new therapeutic targets for pregnancy complications.The reported The phenotype associated with terminal deletions of the study wasfunded by RFBR№20-34-90128, №18-29-13045. chromosome 6q27 region includes intellectual disability, seizures A.A.Babovskaya:None.E.Trifonova:None.M.Swarovskaya: and multiple brain malformations. The most common brain None.V.Serebrova:None.A.Zarubin:None.V.Stepanov:None. malformations are corpus callosum abnormalities, periventricular nodular heterotopia, polymicrogyria, hydrocephalus, ventriculo- megaly and cerebellar malformations. The smallest region of 
P01 .025.ANovelpathogenicc.34G>CmutationinGATA4gene overlapforthephenotypeofbrainmalformationsandintellectual detectedin46,XYDSDpatientfromUkraine.Theevidencefor disabilityisreﬁnedtoasegmentof325kbin6q27,comprisingthe autosomal dominant DSD inheritance with incomplete pene- protein coding genes DL
L1 , PSMB1, TBP and PDCD2.Haploinsufﬁ- trancein women ciencyofDL
L1 ,whichisaNOTCHligand,causesaneurodevelop- mental disorder with nonspeciﬁc brain abnormalities with or Ludmila Livshits1, Dmytro Sirokha1, Olexandra Gorodna1, Kamila without seizures. TBP is a candidate gene for ID and is linked to Kusz-Zamelczyk2, Patrick Sproll3, Anna Lauber Biason3, Serge Nef4, PDCD2andPSMB1inaconservedmanner,suggestingapotential Nataliya Zelinska5 interactionbetweenthesegenes.Herewereportonaninherited 640 kb terminal 6q27 deletion in a 29-week fetus with isolated 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, National Academy of severe bilateral ventriculomegaly detected by SNP-array on Sciences of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2Institute of Human Genetics, unculturedamniocytes.Thedeletioncomprisessixgenes,includ- Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 3Section of Medicine, ing the aforementioned protein coding genes DL
L1 , PSMB1, TBP University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland, 4Faculty of Medicine, andPDCD2whichdeﬁnetheminimalcriticalregion.FISH-analysis UniversityofGeneva,Geneva,Switzerland, 5UkrainianScientiﬁcand of cultured amniocytes conﬁrmed the deletion on metaphase PracticalCenterforEndocrineSurgery,TransplantationofEndocrine cells.SNP-arrayandFISHanalysisshowedthatthemildlyaffected Organsand Tissues, Ministry ofHealth of Ukraine, Kyiv,Ukraine. mother harbors the same 6q27 deletion. Prenatal diagnosis of 6q27deletionisextremelyrareandtothebestofourknowledge Disordersofsexualdevelopment(DSD)areanimportantgroupof only nine patients have been reported yet. Of these, only four rare human diseases. To date there are more than 150 known cases had isolated ventriculomegaly, whereas ﬁve cases had genes involved in DSD and up to 1000 candidates possibly additional malformations. Our case clearly demonstrates the implicatedingonadaldevelopment.Theaimoftheresearchwas importance of performing prenatal array analysis also in cases of to identify novel DSD genetic variants using whole exome isolatedbilateral ventriculomegaly. sequencing (WES). The WES was performed for a 46,XY SRY Y. Stratis: None. C. Müller-Hofstede: None. M. Kuschmann: positive patient with gonadal dysgenesis. A c.34G>C None. M. Meyer-Wittkopf: None. A. Bohring: None. A. Röpke: (rs750597721) mutation in GATA4 gene was identiﬁed and None. conﬁrmed as pathogenic using bioinformatic tools. This is a heterozygous missense substitution that leads to Gly12Ala mutation in a protein sequence that corresponds to transactiva- 
P01 .027.C Telomere length in individuals with early preg- tion domain 1. Sanger sequencing analysis conducted in family nancylosses EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 95 Nataliya Huleyuk1, Danuta Zastavna1, Iryna Tkach1, Ivanna meta-analysis and a Two-Sample Mendelian Randomization Haiboniuk1, Miroslaw Tyrka2 (2SMR) analysis of results from public GWASs on endometriosis andtheabovementioned gynecological cancers. 1Institute of Hereditary Pathology of AMS Ukraine, Lviv, Ukraine, Results:Firstly,ourmeta-analysisrevealednovelsusceptibilityloci 2Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Faculty of sharedbetweenendometriosisandendometrial,breast,andovarian Chemistry,Rzeszow University ofTechnology, Rzeszow, Poland. cancers, although the input of endometriosis was minor when compared to the cancer studies. Secondly, our 2SMR analysis Introduction: Over the past decade, telomere biology has conﬁrmedpreviouslyreportedgeneticpleiotropybetweenendome- become an important topic in the ﬁeld of human reproduction. triosis and endometrial cancer but gave inconclusive results about Earlypregnancyloss(EPL)occursin~15%ofclinically-recognized breast cancer, also in line with previous reports. Our research pregnanciesandisthemostcommoncomplicationofpregnancy. provides, for the ﬁrst time, solid evidence of a causal genetic Spontaneously lost pregnancies are characterized by shortened association between endometriosis and ovarian cancer, particularly telomeres. We focused on the relationship between relative clear cell type, and endometroid subtypes. Furthermore, we also telomerelength(RTL)and tendency toEPLin humans. identiﬁedgeneticvariantsthatcouldmediateinthoseassociations, MaterialandMethods:Relativetelomerelengthwasmeasured allowingfuturefunctionalexperiments. in DNA isolated from the blood samples using a real-time Conclusions: This study represents the ﬁrst Bioinformatics polymerasechainreactionapproach.RTLwasexaminedincontrol approach to elucidate the causal genetic relationship between group(C)(N=209)-women(CW)(N=107)andmen(CM)(N= endometriosis and gynecological cancers. Funding: GVSAN2020/ 102)whohadhealthypregnancieswithnohistoryofinfertilityor 111043,GVSAN2018/111086,andGVSAN2019/111085toI.G.-S.,J. miscarriage,andingroupwithEPL(N=445)-women(EPLW)(N R.B., and N.F.-J.,respectively. =223) and men (EPLM) (N=212) who had single or more EPL. A. Rueda-Martínez: None. B.P. González-García: None. A. RTLdatawereanalysed by genderand reproductive history. Garitazelaia: None. A. Cilleros-Portet: None. S. Marí: None. R. Results:Women(CW+EPLW)havesigniﬁcantlyhigherRTLthat Arauzo:None.J.deMiguel:None.N.Fernandez-Jimenez:None. men(CM+EPLM)(1.74±0.06inwomenand1.40±0.05inmen,Р J.Bilbao: None.I. García-Santisteban: None. =0.000053). Average RTL were signiﬁcantly lower in CM compared to CW (CW:2.27±0.12 versus CM: 1.15±0.08, Р= 0.0000001), and were similar in EPLW and EPLM (1.50±0.06 in 
P01 .029.A Assisted reproductive technology can be arisk for EPLW and 1.53±0.06 in EPLM, Р=0.47). The EPLW group had epimutation-mediated imprinting disorders for mothers over signiﬁcantly lower RTL than control (EPLW:1.50±0.06 versus 30years CW:2.27±0.12, P=0.0000001). Average RTL were signiﬁcantly lowerinCMcomparedtoEPLM(1.15±0.08inCMand1.53±0.06 Kaori Hara-Isono1, Keiko Matsubara1, Masashi Mikami2, Takahiro inEPLM,P=0.00006). Arima3, TsutomuOgata4, MakiFukami1, MasayoKagami1 Conclusions: Women with no history of EPL have longer telomere that men. Woman with EPL have shorter telomere that 1National Research Institute for Child Health and Development, womenwithoutmiscarriage.InEPLgroupwomenandmenhave Tokyo, Japan, 2National Center for Child Health and Development, similartelomere length. Tokyo, Japan, 3Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, N. Huleyuk: None. D. Zastavna: None. I. Tkach: None. I. Sendai, Japan, 4Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hama- Haiboniuk: None.M. Tyrka: None. matsu,Japan. Backgrounds:Theproportionofassistedreproductivetechnology 
P01 .028.DGeneticbasisofendometriosisinthesusceptibility (ART)-conceived livebirths of patients with imprinting disorders ofdeveloping gynecological cancers (IDs)ishigherthanthatofthegeneralpopulation.Whetherthisis duetoARTorconfoundingeffectsofadvancedparentalagewas AintzaneRueda-Martínez1,2,BárbaraPaolaGonzález-García1,2,Aiara unknown. The aimsof this study are 1) to clarify whether ART or Garitazelaia1,2, Ariadna Cilleros-Portet1,2, Sergi Marí1,2, Rebeca maternal ages facilitates development of epimutation-mediated Arauzo1,2, Jokin de Miguel1,2, Nora Fernandez-Jimenez1,2, Jose IDs(epi-IDs),and2)toidentifythedifferentiallymethylatedregion RamonBilbao1,2,3, Iraia García-Santisteban1,2 (DMR)that isvulnerable to theeffect ofART and parentalages. Results: We enrolled 136 patients with epi-IDs and obtained 1University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain, generalpopulationARTdatafromtheJapaneserobustnationwide 2Biocruces-Bizkaia Health Research Institute, Barakaldo, Spain, registry.WecomparedtheproportionofART-conceivedlivebirths 3Spanish Biomedical Research Center in Diabetes and associated andmaternalchildbearingagesbetweenpatientswithepi-IDsand Metabolic Disorders, Madrid,Spain. the general population. The proportion of ART-conceived live- births in patients with epi-IDs was higher than that in mothers Introduction:Endometriosisisacommongynecologicaldisorder aged≥30 years, the age group in which more than 90% of ART in which the endometrium grows outside of the uterus. Despite proceduresperformed.Thematernalchildbearingagesofpatients being considered a benign condition, epidemiological evidence withepi-IDswerewidelydistributedfrom19to45(median:32).In shows that women with endometriosis develop more frequently addition,wecomparedtheproportionofART-conceivedlivebirths certain types of gynecological cancers, including endometrial, andparentalagesatchildbirthacrosspatientswitheightepi-IDs. breastandovariancarcinomas.However,themechanismsunder- We demonstrated that most ART-conceived patients with epi-IDs lyingthisrelationshipremainuncertain.Sincegeneticfactorsplay were found in Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) and Beckwith- a key role in these complex gynecological diseases, we Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) patients, and parental ages were hypothesized that the biological mechanisms behind this almostconsistent inpatients witheight epi-IDs. comorbiditycouldbemediated,atleastinpart,bysharedgenetic Conclusions: ART can be a risk factor for the development of predisposition factors. epi-IDs for mothers aged≥30 years. In addition, methylation MaterialsandMethods:Totestthishypothesis,weundertook status of SRS- and BWS- related DMRs may be vulnerable to the a Bioinformatics approach that consisted of a cross-disorder effectsof ART. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 96 K. Hara-Isono: None. K. Matsubara: None. M. Mikami: None. these were 119 structurally normal fetuses. Analysis included T. Arima: None. T. Ogata: None. M. Fukami: None. M. Kagami: SNVs, copy number variants and uniparental disomy. Reports None. included pathogenic and likely pathogenic ﬁndings, including ACMGsecondary ﬁndingsthat are relevant duringchildhood. Results: Two fetuses (1.7%) had molecular diagnoses of 
P01 .030.BAnalyzingtheeffectsofETV5andCXC
L12 genesin moderate to severe disease severity. Pathogenic compound patients withSertoli cell-only syndrome heterozygous variants were identiﬁed in AT
P7 B gene and NR2
E3 , responsible for Wilson disease and for Enhanced S-cone O. Sena AYDO
S1 , Dunya AYDO
S2 , Yunus YUKSELTEN3, Asuman syndrome, respectively. Notably, Wilson disease is a potentially SUNGUROGLU1, KaanAYDO
S4  treatable disease and early diagnosis is critical to postnatal management. 1Department of Medical Biology, Ankara University School of Conclusions:Withcarefulmanagementandrestrictiveanalysis, Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ankara University Stem Cell Institute, prenatal ES should be considered as an adjunct to chromosomal Ankara, Turkey, 3Research Laboratories for Health Science, Y Gen microarray in sonographically normal fetuses. Further studies are Biotechnology Company Ltd., Ankara, Turkey, 4Department of called for in order to determine the yield of prenatal ES in this Urology, AnkaraUniversity Schoolof Medicine, Ankara, Turkey. setting. H.Daum:None.T.Harel:None.S.Gershon-Naamat:None.A. Introduction: Ets variant gene 5 (ETV5), belongs to a family of Basal:None.O.Elpeleg:None.V.Meiner:None.H.Mor-Shaked: transcriptionfactors,regulatesseveralgenesessentialforsperma- None. togonial stem cells (SSCs) self-renewal. Silencing of ETV5 in mice led to total loss of stem/progenitor spermatogonia, resulting in Sertolicell-only(SCO)phenotype.ETV5-deﬁcientSertolicellswere 
P01 .032.D Genetic variants of MTHFR and TNF-α in fetal alsofoundtohavedecreasedCXC
L12 levels.Inembryonicmouse growthrestriction gonads,CXC
L12 wasshown todirectthemigration ofprimordial germcells(PGCs)tothegonadalridges.Weaimedtoinvestigate dema alset1, Elena Butenko1, Ekaterina Zabanova2, Natalia theroleofinteractionbetweenETV5andCXC
L12 genesinhumans Kuznetsova2 withSCO syndrome. Materials and methods: Fold changes in expression levels of 1southern federal university, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, CXC
L12  and ETV5 were determined by quantitative PCR in non- 2RostovStateMedicalUniversity,Rostov-on-Don,RussianFederation. obstructive azoospermia (NOA) (n=10) patients with SCOS and obstructive azoospermia (OA) (n=2) as control cases. Testicular Introduction: Fetal Growth Restriction (FGR) is a multifactorial tissue samples were taken during microTESE attempt and condition in which fetus cannot reach its genetically deter- testicular biopsy wasperformed forhistopathological evaluation. mined potential size. This syndrome is considered as an Results: Fold decreases in CXC
L12  and ETV5 expression levels important cause of fetal morbidity and mortality and affects were found as 0.44±0.1 and 0.27±0.11, respectively, and the 5-10% of all pregnancies worldwide and 5-17.6% in Russia. differences weresigniﬁcant comparedto controls (p<0.001). Clinician trials are concerning maternal, fetal and placental Conclusions: According to our results, the decrease in CXC
L12  polymorphisms as possible prenatal FGR-markers. This study and ETV5 expression levels in patients with SCOS indicated that aimed to investigate associations of two polymorphisms: CXC
L12  and ETV5 work together in harmony to regulate the 5,10–Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase/ MTHFR(677T) and presenceandmaintenanceofSSCsinhumans.Whetherthegerm Tumor necrosis factor alpha/TNF-α(G308A) with FGR risk. cell loss is due to inhibition of PGCs migration or impaired Materialandmethods:UsingPRISMAstatement,20studieswere differentiation ofSSCs needsfurther investigation. included in meta-analysis of MTHFR (
C677 T) and TNF-α (G308A) O.S. Aydos: None. D. Aydos: None. Y. Yukselten: None. A. associations with FGR. Then MTHFR (
C677 T) genotyping was Sunguroglu: None. K. Aydos:None. conducted with Allele-speciﬁc PCR to conﬁrm meta-analysis result inFGR-diagnosed(n=26)andhealthy(n=37)pregnantwomen. Results:Meta-analysis showednoassociation ofTNF-α(G308A) 
P01 .031.C Exome sequencing in structurally normal fetuses - but a strong association of MTHFR(
C677 T) with high FGR risk yield anddilemmas (OR=1.22, 95 % CI: 1.07-1.39, P=0.002). However, Genotyping showed that in the studied population, MTHFR(
C677 T) has no Hagit Daum, Tamar Harel, Shiri Gershon-Naamat, Adily Basal, Orly signiﬁcantassociationwithFGR(OR=0.917,95%CI:0.328-2.560, Elpeleg, Vardiella Meiner, Hagar Mor-Shaked P=0.956). Conclusion:Toourknowledge,thisistheﬁrstmeta-analysisof Hadassah, Jerusalem, Israel. TNF-α(G308A) in FGR. About MTHFR(
C677 T), genotyping result wasinconsistentwithmeta-analysis.Thissuggeststhatassociation Abstract Introduction: Although there is a growing body of differs according to ethnicity, since some of the studies included literatureregardingtheyieldofchromosomalmicroarrayanalysis inmeta-analysisﬁgurednoassociationintheirsamples.However, forstructurallynormalfetuses,thereisnodataregardingtheyield duetooursmallsamplesize,furtherclinicaltrialsarerequiredto ofexomesequencinginthispopulation.Exomesequencing(ES)is conﬁrmresultsinthestudiedpopulation.Thisstudywasfundedby a powerful tool for identifying disease-causing single nucleotide the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian variants (SNVs) and small indels. In the prenatal setup, when the Federation#0852-2020-0028. clinical phenotyping of the fetus is frequently vague and non- D. alset: None. E. Butenko: None. E. Zabanova: None. N. speciﬁc, the contribution of exome sequencing to the diagnostic Kuznetsova: None. procedure isinvaluable. Materialandmethods:FromFebruary2017toFebruary2021, a total of 635 fetal exomes were analyzed at our center. Among 
P01 .033.A The FTOgene andadolescent puberty EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 97 Elena Mashkina, Maria Amelina, Michail Shkurat patients presented with chromosomal instability of unknown origin.Inonepatient,amosaicforthePhiladelphiachromosome SouthernFederal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation. was detected, revealing the unexpected diagnosis of chronic myeloidleukemia. Introduction: The time of the onset of puberty and obesity are Conclusions:Fromacohortof97candidates,21.7%presented multifactorial features of human. The aim of this work was to a family/personal history or an anomalous laboratory result that analyze the association between the FTO 23525T>A gene required additional genetic counseling, stressing the importance polymorphismandthedelayedsexualdevelopmentinboysaged ofperformingpre-donationgeneticcounselinginthispopulation. 11-15years. C. Azevedo Soares: None. A.R. Soares: None. E. Vale Materialandmethods:DNAsamplesisolatedfrombloodcells Fernandes: None. M. Abreu: None. C. Falcão Reis: None. A.M. of 322 adolescents were used. The boys were divided into 2 Fortuna: None. N.Tkachenko:None. groups - with a normal rate of sexual development and with a delay in sexual development. The stages of sexual development were determined using the Tanner scale. Allele-speciﬁc PCR was 
P01 .035.C Ascertainment of genome-wide androgenetic used toanalyze thers99305069 FTO. mosaicismafterdiscordantresultsfromprimaryfetalsamples Results:WeanalyzedthefrequenciesofgenotypesfortheFTO andcultured cells gene 23525T>A polymorphism among 11-15 year old boys depending on the stage of puberty. Heterozygotes 23525TA of Gioia Mastromoro1, Daniele Guadagnolo1, Enrica Marchionni1, the FTO gene predominated (45%) among boys with normal Francesca Di Palma1, Barbara Torres2, Marina Goldoni2,Annamaria sexual development. The frequency of homozygotes for the Onori2, Laura Bernardini2, Alessandro De Luca2, Isabella Torrente2, 23525A allele was 28% in this group. In the group with delay AntonioPizzuti1 sexual development the frequency of 23525AA genotype was 40%. Homozygotes 23525AA have an increased risk of delayed 1Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 2Fondazione IRCCS Casa sexual development during puberty (OR=1.38 CI 1.1-2.78). Also Sollievo dellaSofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo,Italy. the 23525A allele of the FTO gene is more frequently recorded among adolescents with delay in sexual development (χ2=6.26 Introduction: Genome-wide androgenetic mosaicism is a rare p=0.01; OR=1.49 (1.09-2.04)). Thus, an association of the condition in which two euploid cell lines coexist in the same 23525T>A polymorphism of the FTO gene with a disturbance in individual, one with biparental content and one with genome- the rate of puberty in adolescents was revealed. This study was wide paternal isodisomy. It can present prenatally resembling funded by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS). We report a fetus with a RussianFederation #0852-2020-0028. laborious diagnosis due to discordant results from cultured and E.Mashkina: None. M.Amelina: None. M. Shkurat: None. uncultured samples. Materials and Methods: A pregnant was referred at 15 gestational weeks for placental mesenchymal dysplasia and 
P01 .034.B Genetic counseling and carrier screening of omphalocele. Karyotype, chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) candidates for gametedonation at apublic bank and BWS molecular testing (methylation-speciﬁc multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MS-MLPA) analysis of Celia Azevedo Soares1, Ana R. Soares1, Emídio Vale Fernandes2, 11p15 BWS critical region) were performed after amniocentesis. Maria Abreu1, Cláudia Falcão Reis1, Ana M. Fortuna1, Natália These tests were requested again on umbilical cord sample and Tkachenko1 onpreviously cultured amniocytes. Results:Karyotype,CMAperformedbyanoligonucleotide-array 1Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, Porto, Portugal, and BWS MS-MLPA after amniocentesis were normal. BWS MS- 2Centro Materno Infantildo Norte,Porto,Portugal. MLPA from cultured amniocytes and umbilical cord sample showedKvH19locushypermethylationandKvDMRhypomethyla- Introduction:Geneticcounselingandcarrierscreeningofhealthy tioninmosaicism.Theseresults,alongwithmicrosatelliteanalysis candidatesispartofgametedonors’selection.Weaimtoreview ofBWSregion,wereconsistentwithmosaicpaternalisodisomyof the ﬁndings of the genetic counseling of a cohort of patients at chromosome 11p15. Analysis performed to assess maternal our publicgametes bank. contamination showed on cultured amniocytes and umbilical Methods: Thirty-four male and 64 female candidates had bloodsamplethat thepaternal alleles were constantlyhigheron genetic counseling with a medical geneticist before donation. Of allthemicrosatelliteanalyzedmappingindifferentchromosomes. these, one female candidate voluntarily dropped-out. Thirty-four This result leaded to suspicion of genome-wide androgenetic malesand63femalesperformedkaryotypeandscreeningforthe mosaicism, conﬁrmed via SNP-array analysis from cultured more common pathogenic variants of CFTR-related cystic ﬁbrosis amniocytes, with mosaicrate of60%. andspinalmuscularatrophy(SMN1)inthePortuguesepopulation. Conclusions:Assessmentofgenome-wideandrogeneticmosai- In addition, all females also performed Fragile X expansion cismrequiresmultiplelaboratoryapproachesandanextensionof screening (FMR1). Thirty patients with ancestry from Southern or the current diagnostic process and caution to low rate of Central Portugal, or with known or assumed African ancestry mosaicism. Clinical acumen and an integrated testing approach performedhemoglobinopathies screening. arethekeyto asuccessful diagnosis. Results: Six patients werewithheldfrom thedonation process G. Mastromoro: None. D. Guadagnolo: None. E. Marchionni: given their family or personal history that required further None.F.DiPalma:None.B.Torres:None.M.Goldoni:None.A. investigation. Of the initial 97 candidates, 15.5% presented Onori:None.L.Bernardini:None.A.DeLuca:None.I.Torrente: anomalous laboratory results (15/97). Ten patients were carriers None.A. Pizzuti: None. for an autosomal recessive disorder - cystic ﬁbrosis (5/97), sickle cellanemia(3/30),andspinalmuscularatrophy(2/97).Onefemale was an FMR1 pre-mutation carrier (1/63). One female patient 
P01 .036.D Sensitive screening of cell free DNA to determine presented with triple X mosaicism: 47,XXX[2]/46,XX[50]. Two the originoftrophoblastic tumours EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 98 GeoffreyJ.Maher,RosemaryA.Fisher,BaljeetKaur,XianneAguiar, DNA and paternal cell freeDNA. Following optimisation, cell free Preetha Aravind, Natashia Cedeno, James Clark, Debbie Damon, DNAwasextractedfrom65frozenmaternalplasmasamplesfrom Ehsan Ghorani, Foteini Kalofonou, Ravindhi Murphy, Rajat Roy, pregnancies at risk of SCD with known fetal genotypes. ddPCR NaveedSarwar, Mark R.Openshaw,Michael J. Seckl analysis was performed blinded using a modiﬁed sequential probabilityratio test(SPRT). ImperialCollege London, London, United Kingdom. Results:ddPCRtestingcorrectlypredictedthefetalgenotypein 48 cases (32 male, 16 female), with nine of 10 HbSS fetuses Introduction: Trophoblastic tumours that secrete human chor- correctly identiﬁed. A sample from a dichorionic twin pregnancy ionicgonadotropin(hCG)arecommonlygestationalinoriginand was included, and the modiﬁed SPRT analysis correctly classiﬁed are typically diagnosed months to years after the causative one fetus as affected whilst the other was heterozygous. The pregnancy. However, hCG secretion can also occur in somatic or remaining 17 (26%) cases were inconclusive, with no incorrect germcelltumours.Despitetheclinicalimportanceofdistinguish- fetal genotypepredictions. ing between gestational and non-gestational trophoblastic Conclusion:WehavesuccessfullyoptimisedaddPCRassaythat tumours, which vary in their prognoses and treatment regimens, accurately predicts the fetal genotype in pregnancies at risk of tumour biopsies are not always available for genotyping due to SCD. Further optimisation of cfDNA extraction and sampling is theriskofhaemorrhage.Hereweaimedtodevelopasensitivecell required to reduce the rate of inconclusive results and conﬁrm freeDNA(cfDNA)assaytonon-invasivelydeterminetheoriginof accuracy.FundingwasfromtheGOSHNIHRBiomedicalResearch hCG-secreting tumours. Centre. Sampleswereobtained fromthe RAPIDsamplebank. Materials and Methods: Genomic DNA and cfDNA from 23 J. Shaw: None. B. Paternoster: None. M. Ramos: None. S. women with hCG-secreting tumours underwent library prepara- Nesbitt:None. N.Chandler: None. L.S. Chitty: None. tion, probe capture and deep (>5,000x) Illumina sequencing of 195 common autosomal single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 13 sex chromosome loci. Gestational tumours were identiﬁ- 
P01 .039.CTelomeresinTBislongerthaninICMinhumansat ablebythepresenceof‘non-host’(i.e.paternal)allelesincfDNAat the blastocyststage SNPsthat werehomozygous inthegenomic DNA. Results:Ingestationalcases,non-hostallelesweredetectedat Anna A. Pendina1, Andrei V. Tikhonov1, Vladimir A. Bogomolov2, multiple SNPs; non-host cfDNA comprised 0.3% - 41.4% of total Mikhail I. Krapivin1, Olga A. Eﬁmova1, Irina D. Mekina1, Evgeniia M. cfDNAandcorrelatedwithserumhCGlevels(906–3,042,881IU/ Komarova1,Natalia P.Smirnova3,OlgaG.Chiryaeva1,AlexanderM. ml), although detection was variable below ~1,500 IU/ml. Non- Gzgzyan1, Igor Yu. Kogan1,Vladislav S. Baranov1 host alleles were not detected in non-gestational cases, but the presence of circulating tumour DNA was conﬁrmed by the 1D.O. Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproduc- identiﬁcationof copynumber alterations. tology,St.Petersburg,RussianFederation,2St.PetersburgStatePediatric Conclusions:PreviousmethodsfordetectingcfDNAfromhCG- Medical University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3“Mother and secreting tumours lacked sensitivity or were patient-speciﬁc, ChildSt.Petersburg”,St.Petersburg,RussianFederation. making them unsuitable for routine diagnostic testing. Our sensitive non-invasive assay, applicable to any patient, will TelomeresarecomplexesofshorttandemDNArepeatsandproteins facilitate diagnosis at an earlier timepoint and improve patient attheendsofchromosomes.Theirmainfunctionistheprotection management. ofchromosomesfromshorteningcausedbyDNAlossduringeach G.J.Maher:None.R.A.Fisher:None.B.Kaur:None.X.Aguiar: replicationcycle.Correctregulationoftelomerelength(TL)iscrucial None. P. Aravind: None. N. Cedeno: None. J. Clark: None. D. for normal embryogenesis. Here, we performed a pairwise Damon: None. E. Ghorani: None. F. Kalofonou: None. R. comparison of TLs in trophectoderm (TE) and inner cell mass Murphy:None.R.Roy:None.N.Sarwar:None.M.R.Openshaw: (ICM)ofhumanblastocysts.Atotalof22blastocystswereincluded None.M.J. Seckl: None. in the study. All the blastocysts were not suitable for transfer because of genetic abnormalities revealed by preimplantation genetic testing. Each blastocyst was dissected into TE and ICM 
P01 .038.B Delivering accurate, reproducible non-invasive using a microsurgical laser and ﬁxed on a glass slide. Telomeres prenataldiagnosis(NIPD)forsicklecelldiseaseusingdroplet were detected by qFISH (Telomere PNA FISH Kit/Cy3, Agilent). To digital PCR avoidpossiblebiascausedbydifferentchromatincondensation,TLs were assessed as relative values by dividing the telomeric Joe Shaw1, Ben Paternoster1, Maureen Ramos1, Sarah Nesbitt1, ﬂuorescence by the ﬂuorescence of reference region (21q22.13- NatalieChandler1, LynS.Chitty1,2 q22.2) measured in ImageJ 1.51i. The relative TL values ranged between 0.089-0.607 in TE and between 0.061-0.414 in ICM. In TE, 1NHS North Thames Genomic Laboratory Hub, London, United therelativeTLappearedtobehigherthaninICM(p=0.029,paired Kingdom, 2UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, t-test). Longer telomeres in TE may be linked to its crucial role in London,United Kingdom. implantationandsubsequentplacentation,bothaccompaniedbya highmitoticactivity.SupportedbyRSF№18-75-10046. Introduction:Sicklecelldisease(SCD)isthemostcommonsingle- A.A. Pendina: None. A.V. Tikhonov: None. V.A. Bogomolov: gene indication for prenatal diagnosis in England. Non-invasive None. M.I. Krapivin: None. O.A. Eﬁmova: None. I.D. Mekina: prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) for SCD is desired by patients, but None. E.M. Komarova: None. N.P. Smirnova: None. O.G. complicatedbythehighbackgroundofthematernalmutationand Chiryaeva: None. A.M. Gzgzyan: None. I.Y. Kogan: None. V.S. frequent unavailability of paternal samples. Droplet digital PCR Baranov: None. (ddPCR)offersthepotentialforNIPDusingonlyamaternalsample via relative mutation dosage; however previous reports describe unacceptablerates(upto10%)ofincorrectgenotypeclassiﬁcations. 
P01 .040.DArechildren bornafter medical assistedreproduc- Methods: A ddPCR assay was designed for the common SCD tion at greater risk of having an increased de novo mutation variant, HBB c.20A>T, and validated on heterozygous genomic rate? EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 99 RoosM.Smits1,ManonS.Oud2,AukjeM.Meijerink1,PetradeVries2, Genomics (MERGE) cohort of currently 1,003 men with various GilesS.Holt3,BilalK.S.Alobaidi3,LoisBatty3,KathrinFleischer1,4,Didi infertility phenotypes and some fertile controls for variants in D.M. Braat1, Liliana Ramos1, MiguelJ. Xavier3, JorisA. Veltman3 TEX13B. Additionally, we utilised the exome data of 5,784 genetically proven fathers. The data were ﬁltered for rare stop- 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Radboudumc, Nijme- gain, frameshift and splice-site variants (minor allele frequency gen,Netherlands,2DepartmentofHumanGenetics,DondersInstitute [MAF]<1% ingnomADdatabase) in TEX13B. for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Results: We detected nine azoospermic men carrying the Netherlands, 3Biosciences Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, hemizygous stop-gain variant c.382C>T;p.(Gln128Ter) in TEX13B. A Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 4TFP fertile control, a man with asthenoteratozoospermia and a proven Centerof Reproductive Medicine, Düsseldorf, Germany. fatherwerealsohemizygousforthisvariant.Anotherprovenfather carriedthehemizygoussplice-donorvariantc.459+1G>AinTEX13B. Introduction:Denovomutations(DNMs)playaprominentrolein Conclusions: Based on these ﬁndings, we question whether sporadic disorders with reduced ﬁtness such as infertility and pathogenic variants in TEX13B are a monogenic cause for intellectualdisability.Advancedpaternalageisknowntoincrease azoospermia. We are currently screening additional fertile men diseaseriskinoffspringbyincreasingthenumberofDNMsintheir for the recurrent stop-gain variant c.382C>T;p.(Gln128Ter) to genome.Less is known about theeffect of assisted reproduction determine the frequency of this variant in the fertile male techniques (ART) on the number of DNMs in offspring. With the population.ThisworkwassupportedbytheDFGClinicalResearch on-going trend of delayed parenthood more children are now Unit326 ‘Male Germ Cells’. bornboth fromolder fathers andthrough ART. M.J. Wyrwoll: None. M.S. Oud: None. M. Vockel: None. S. Materials and Methods: We investigated 49 trios (mother, Kliesch:None. C.Friedrich: None. F.Tüttelmann: None. father and child) and 2 quartets (mother, father and 2 siblings) dividedintochildrenbornafterspontaneousconception(n=18); born after in vitro fertilisation (IVF) (n=17) and born after 
P01 .043.C Impact of cigarette smoking on the expression of intracytoplasmic sperm injection combined with testicular sperm oxidativestress-relatedgenesincumuluscellsretrievedfrom extraction(ICSI-TESE)(n=18).Groupsfurtherdividedbypaternal healthywomen undergoing IVF age,young(<35)orold(>45yearsofageatconception).Whole- genome sequencing was performed twice to independently Fani Konstantinidou1,2, Maria Cristina Budani3, Annalina Sarra4, detectand validate allDNMsin children. GianMario Tiboni3, LiborioStuppia1,2, Valentina Gatta1,2 Results: A clear paternal age effect was observed, with 70 DNMsdetectedonaverageinchildrenborntoyoungfathersand 1SchoolofMedicine andHealth Sciences,"G. d’Annunzio" University 94DNMsinthoseborntoolderfathers(p=0.001).Nosigniﬁcant ofChieti-Pescara,Chieti,Italy,2UnitofMolecularGenetics,Centerfor differenceswereobservedbetweendifferentmethodsofconcep- AdvancedStudiesandTechnology(CAST),"G.d’Annunzio"University tion (p=1)with paternal ageaffectingallmethods equally. of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy, 3Department of Medical, Oral and Conclusions: Paternal age, not method of conception, had a Biotechnological Sciences, “G. d’Annunzio” University of Chieti- majoreffectontheobservednumberofDNMsinoffspring.Given Pescara, Chieti, Italy, 4Department of Philosophical, Pedagogical theroleDNMsindiseaserisk,thisnegativeresultisgoodnewsfor and Quantitative Economic Sciences, "G. d’Annunzio" University of IVFandICSI-TESE born children, ifreplicated inlargercohorts. Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy. R.M. Smits: None. M.S. Oud: None. A.M. Meijerink: None. P. deVries:None.G.S.Holt:None.B.K.S.Alobaidi:None.L.Batty: Increased production of reactive oxygen species is an important None. K. Fleischer: None. D.D.M. Braat: None. L. Ramos: None. factorinthepathophysiologyoffertility decline.Cigarettesmoking, M.J.Xavier: None. J.A.Veltman: None. forexample,candirectlyderangefolliculogenesisbyROSproduction. Delicate communication between the germline and cumulus cells (CCs)isalsothebasisforallprocessesinovarianphysiology.Several 
P01 .041.A The relevance of loss-of-function variants in the studies have aimed to discover non-invasive tools to indirectly X-chromosomal gene TEX13Bin azoospermia isquestionable evaluate oocyte quality by focusing on CCs as a mirror of oocyte characteristics.However,thegenerallackofuniformityamongthem Margot J. Wyrwoll1,2, Manon S. Oud3, Matthias Vockel4, Sabine indicatesthattheirutilityintheclinicalsettingremainscontroversial Kliesch2, CorinnaFriedrich1, Frank Tüttelmann1 duetotheirhighsensitivitytointrinsicandextrinsicfactorsrelatedto the patient.On these premises, we focused our attention on 1Institute of Reproductive Genetics, University of Münster, Münster, evaluating the impact of tobacco smoking on gene expression of Germany,2CentreofReproductiveMedicineandAndrology,Depart- CCsintwocategoriesofindividuals,5overallhealthysmokersand5 mentofClinicalandSurgicalAndrology,UniversityHospitalMünster, non-smokers (<35 years of age) undergoing IVF treatments. Total Münster, Germany, 3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud RNAwasextractedfromCCsofallsubjectsandsubsequentlyreverse University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Institute of transcribed.Predesignedoxidativestress96-wellplateswereusedto HumanGenetics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany. perform qRT-PCR analysis. A gene was considered differentially expressedinsmokers’CCsversuscontrolCCswhenshowingafold Introduction: Azoospermia is often assumed to be of genetic change>1.4or<0.7andaP-value<0.05(ANOVA).Statisticalanalysis origin, with constantly emerging genes in the context of male showed a signiﬁcant down-regulation of genes protecting and infertility.Previously,achromosomaltranslocationintwoinfertile repairingcellsagainstoxidativedamageinCCsofallorthemajority brothers with breakpoints close to TEX13B was described and a of smokingfemalescomparedtotheir correspondingage-matched recentpublicationreportedastop-gainvariantinTEX13Bascause controls, indicating a cigarette smoke-derived impact on the forazoospermia inone man. According toRNA-sequencing data, oxidative stress pathway.In conclusion, an important interaction TEX13B is a germ cell-speciﬁc gene with highest expression in between cigarette smoking and oxidative stress-related genes in spermatogonia. These ﬁndings suggest an association of the possiblefertilitybiomarkersisclearlyevidenced. X-linkedgeneTEX13B with malefertility. F.Konstantinidou:None.M.Budani:None.A.Sarra:None.G. MaterialsandMethods:Becausethesestudieswerelimitedin Tiboni: None. L.Stuppia: None. V. Gatta:None. size, we screened the exome data of our Male Reproductive EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 100 
P01 .044.D To be or not to be pathogenic - distinguishing University of Münster, Münster, Germany, 6Biosciences Institute, pathogenic mutations from benign missense variants in FacultyofMedicalSciences,NewcastleUniversity, Newcastle,United NR5A1 Kingdom. Jana Emich*1, Corinna Friedrich*1, Christina Burhöi1, Thaís Fenz We performed exome sequencing in an infertile patient and his Araujo2, Ann-Christin Tewes3, Susanne Ledig3, Albrecht Röpke3, fertileparentstoidentifythegeneticcauseofhisgermcellarrest Sabine Kliesch4, Jörg Gromoll5, Frank Tüttelmann1 in spermatogenesis. A homozygous pathogenic 22-bp insertion was identiﬁed in the FKB
P6  gene. In an independent cohort, a 1Institute of Reproductive Genetics, University of Münster, Münster, second patient with a different homozygous variant predicted to Germany, 2Department of Genetics, Ribeirao Preto Medical School, be pathogenic was also identiﬁed in FKB
P6 . RNA isolated from University of Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil, 3Institute of Human testicular tissue was used to show that FKB
P6  expression levels Genetics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany, 4Centre of were severely reduced in both patients, conﬁrmed by immunos- Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, Department of Clinical and taining.Inmalemice,Fkbp6functionsinthefetalpiRNA-pathway Surgical Andrology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany, andlocalizestothesynaptonemalcomplex(SC)duringmeiosis.In 5Centre of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, Institute of adult male KO mice, failure to complete chromosome synapsis Reproductive and Regenerative Biology, University of Münster, causesmeioticarrest,presumablyduetoitsabsencefromtheSC. Münster, Germany. Toascertainifthesefeaturesalsounderlieinfertilityinhumans,we analyzedmeioticprogressioninthetwocases.Germcelllossdid *Theseauthors contributed equally. occur during meiosis but not due to incomplete synapsis of the Introduction:Infertilityaffects10-15%ofallcouples.Themost chromosomes. In control samples, we were unable to detect severeformofmaleinfertilityisazoospermia,ofwhichmostcases FKB
P6  at the SC, altogether suggesting a function for FKB
P6  aresuspectedtobeofgeneticorigin.ThetranscriptionfactorSF1, outsideSC-biology.TodetermineifaroleforFKB
P6 inthepiRNA- encoded by NR5A1, plays a central role in gonadal development. pathway was evident in humans, we assessed its co-localization Severe variants are associated with gonadal dysgenesis and sex withpiRNA-pathwayfactorsPIWI
L1 andTDRKH.Incontrols,FKB
P6  reversal, while mild missense variants have been reported in localized to cytoplasmic granules together with PIWI
L1  and isolatedforms ofmale infertility. TDRKH. Loss of FKB
P6 , however, did not affect the localization Materials and methods: The exome data of 1,003 otherwise of these factors. Our data indicates that FKB
P6  is required for healthy infertile men from the Male Reproductive Genomics human spermatogenesis and that it might play a role in the (MERGE)cohortwasﬁlteredforheterozygousmissensevariantsin piRNA-pathway rather thanintheestablishment of theSC. NR5A1 with a minor allele frequency of ≤0.1% in the gnomAD G.W. van der Heijden: None. M. Oud: None. R. Stakaitis: database. The identiﬁed variants were forwarded to functional None.I.Golubickaite:None.C.Gaasbeek:None.N.Rotte:None. analysis by site-directed mutagenesis and a luciferase reporter S. Kliesch: None. L. Ramos: None. K. Almstrup: None. M.J. assay. Xavier: None.J.A.Veltman: None.F. Tüttelmann: None. Results: We detected eight potentially relevant missense variants in nine patients with severe oligozoospermia or azoospermia, resulting in a detection rate of 1.0% for NR5A1 in 
P01 .047.C Effects of polymorphisms of energy metabolism the MERGE cohort. In the luciferase assay, two of these variants andangiogenesis geneson intrauterine growthrestriction showedreducedSF1 transcriptional activity. Conclusions: The assessment of missense variants is challen- IrinaNovikova,Inna Pokudina, Elena Mashkina, Tatiana Shkurat ging, warranting functional analyses to distinguish pathogenic mutations from benign variants. The luciferase reporter assay SouthernFederal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation. supports thattwo oftheinvestigated variantsarerelevant inthe pathogenesisof spermatogenic failure and maleinfertility. Introduction:Intrauterinegrowthrestriction(IUGR)isacondition ThisworkwassupportedbytheDFGClinicalResearchUnit326 inwhichthegrowthrateofthefetusduringpregnancyislessthan ‘MaleGerm Cells’. expected.Energymetabolismgenesplayanimportantroleinthe J.Emich*:None.C.Friedrich*:None.C.Burhöi:None.T.Fenz regulationofbothmaternalandfetalbodyweightandthusinthe Araujo:None.A.Tewes:None.S.Ledig:None.A.Röpke:None. development of IUGR. Another placental key factor of IUGR S.Kliesch:None. J.Gromoll: None. F.Tüttelmann: None. physiopathology is angiogenesis. The aim of research is to study the polymorphisms of genes of energy metabolism (LEPR; FTO) and angiogenesis (NO
S3 ; VEGFA) in women with IUGR compared 
P01 .045.A FKB
P6  has an essential role in human tothecontrolgrouptoidentifyit`spossiblefunctionalsigniﬁcance spermatogenesis inthepathogenesis ofIUGR. MaterialsandMethods:Thematerialforthestudywasblood GodfriedW.vanderHeijden1,2,ManonOud2,RytisStakaitis3,Ieva samples from 36 pregnant women diagnosed with IUGR and 30 Golubickaite3, Channah Gaasbeek2, Nadja Rotte4,5, Sabine Kliesch4, healthy women. Genotyping of targeted SNPs: A223G (LEPR), Liliana Ramos1, Kristian Almstrup3, Miguel J. Xavier6, Joris A. A23525T(FTO),
C786 T(NO
S3 ),
C634 G(VEGFA)weredetectedbyRT- Veltman6,Frank Tüttelmann5 PCR. Results:NostatisticallysigniﬁcantassociationsofLEPRandFTO 1Division of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and genepolymorphismswithIUGRwerefound(p=0.765;p=0.461, Gynecology, Radboud University Medical Centre, The Netherlands, respectively). Genotypes CT (NO
S3 ) and CC (VEGFA) were Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Human Genetics, Donders signiﬁcantly associated with low risk of developing IUGR. OR Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University were 0,309 (CI 95% 0,110-0,868 p<0.001) and 0.14 (CI 95% 0.04- Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Copenhagen University 0.46p=0.003)respectively.GenotypesTT(NO
S3 )andGG(VEGFA) Hospital - Rigshospitalet, Department of Growth and Reproduction, were associated with higher relative risk of developing IUGR. OR Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Centre of Reproductive Medicine and were 2,400 (CI 95% 1,462-3,339 p<0,001) and 3.67 (CI 95% 1.26- Andrology,DepartmentofClinicalandSurgicalAndrology,University 10.7p=0.003)respectively. of Münster, Münster, Germany, 5Institute of Reproductive Genetics, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 101 Conclusions: The data obtained indicate the need for further globozoospermia suggesting that this phenotype is likely investigation to search for genetic determinants of the develop- genetically heterogeneous. ment of IUGR. This study was funded by the Ministry of Science Methods: As alterations of DPY19
L2  gene represent the main andHigherEducationoftheRussianFederation#0852-2020-0028 cause of globozoospermia in human, we ﬁrst screened for I. Novikova: None. I. Pokudina: None. E. Mashkina: None. T. DPY19
L2  molecular defects in a cohort of 10 patients of African Shkurat: None. and European origin, diagnosed with complete or partial globozoospermia. Whole genome analysis with SNP array was carriedout in patientslacking geneticdefects ofDPY19
L2 . 
P01 .048.D KIR-HLAC genotyping in married couples with Results: Molecular analyses performed on 9 genetically unexplained early reproductive losses independent individuals showed that four (44%) were homo- zygous for the DPY19
L2  deletion, two were heterozygous Kateryna Sosnina, Danuta Zastavna, Oresta Terpyliak, Bogdan composite for two novel non-synonymous mutations (p.R686G Tretiak andp.D687E)inexon21.Nogeneticcauseswereidentiﬁedinfour patientswith partial globozoospermia. InstituteofHereditaryPathology,NAMSofUkraine,Lviv,Ukraine. Conclusion: Our results highlight the importance of screening for DPY19
L2  mutations in the absence of DPY19
L2  deletions and The immune interaction between the uterus and the embryo is strongly suggest that partial globozoospermia is not due to crucial to achieve a pregnancy. Maternal immunotolerance is genetic defects on DPY19
L2 . Alghough the genetic diagnosis of provided by the interaction between the cells of the maternal globozoospermia does not yet provide any clear therapeutic immune system in the uterus (uterine NK cells) and the embryo. indications, a molecular diagnosis remains useful to provide ThesecellsrecognizetheembryothroughKIRreceptors,interact- adequate genetic counseling. Considering these points, we ingwiththeirHLA-Cligandsontheembryo.Theaimofthisstudy recommend the search for DPY19
L2  defects as the ﬁrst-line was to establish and analyze the combinations of KIR and HLA-C geneticanalysisincompleteglobozoospermiabutnotinitspartial genes in married couples with unexplained early reproductive form. losses. F. Abdelhedi: None. E. Dulioust: None. N. Gharbi: None. S. Results: KIR-HLAC genotyping was performed in 43 married Barbaux: None. A. Ziyyat: None. L. Keskes: None. J.M. Dupont: couples with unexplained reproductive losses. Depending on the None. number and type of genes, the KIR genotype of women (AA, AB and BB) was established. The results were compared with the parentalHLACgenotype,andtheriskofreproductivelossesinsuch 
P01 .051.C Causal inference analyses reveal population risks a pair was calculated. According to the results, 23.3% of women and beneﬁts of extending female reproductive lifespan have the AA genotype (high risk of reproductive loss), 76.7% of throughmanipulation ofbiological processes women had the AB genotype (medium risk). According to the resultsofKIR-HLACgenotypingofcoupleswithearlyreproductive Katherine S. Ruth1, Felix R. Day2, Anna Murray1, John R. B. Perry2, losses,58.14%ofmarriedcoupleshaveahighriskofreproductive ReproGen consortium (www.reprogen.org) losses. Suchmarried couples had theKIRAA genotype in women and/orthe
C2 /
C2 HLACgenotypeinwomenand/ormen. 1Genetics of Complex Traits, University of Exeter Medical School, Conclusions:KIR-HLACgenotypingisagenetictestthatallows University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2MRC Epidemiology to assess the risksof theembryo being rejected by thematernal Unit,UniversityofCambridgeSchoolofClinicalMedicine,Instituteof immunesystem,andthustodirectmedicalinterventionsinorder Metabolic Science, Cambridge, United Kingdom. toachieve asuccessful pregnancy. K. Sosnina: None. D. Zastavna: None. O. Terpyliak: None. B. Introduction: Recently we demonstrated the potential for new Tretiak: None. therapeutics to extend female reproductive lifespan by manip- ulating DNA damage response (DDR) pathways (MedRxiv https:// doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.11.20248322). We investigated the wider 
P01 .050.B Identiﬁcation of two novel point mutations in population health risks and beneﬁts of prolonged sex hormone DPY19
L2  leading to total globozoospermia in two unrelated exposure fromsuch interventions. patients MaterialsandMethods:WeperformedMendelianRandomiza- tion using a genetic instrument for age at menopause (ANM) Fatma Abdelhedi1,2, Emmanuel Dulioust3, Nourhène Gharbi2, comprised of 290 variants from GWAS in >200,000 women. We Sandrine Barbaux4, Ahmed Ziyyat4, Leila KESKE
S2 , Jean Michel tested outcomes associated with hormone replacement therapy, Dupont1,4 asbeinganalogoustolongerhormoneexposurefromlaterANM. Results: One-year later genetically-instrumented ANM 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Hôpital Cochin, APHP, Paris, France, increased the odds of female-speciﬁc hormone-sensitive cancers 2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Faculté de byupto5%.WeidentiﬁedindividualvariantswitheffectsonDDR Médecine, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Laboratoire d’Histologie Embryologie andcancerriskindependentlyofANMandsexhormoneexposure Biologie de la Reproduction, Hôpital Cochin, APHP, Paris, France, -loss-of-functionallelesinBRCA2andCHEK2resultedinANM1.69 4Génomique, Epigénétique et Physiopathologie de la Reproduction, yearsearlier(95%CI0.12-3.26,p=0.03)and2.36yearslater(1.31- U1016 INSERM-UMR 8104 CNRS, Institut Cochin, Université Paris 3.41,p=1×10-5).WeusedMR-Radialtoidentifyandexcludesuch Descartes,Paris, France. variants from analyses, strengthening the evidence for an association with ER+ breast cancer (OR=1.04, from p=4×10-9 Background: Globozoospermia is a rare and severe teratozoos- to p=3×10-16). Later ANM had protective effects on Type 2 permia characterized by the presence of round-headed sperma- diabetes(OR=0.98,p=1×10-3)andbonehealth(fracture,OR= tozoa lacking an acrosome. So far, only three genes have been 0.98, p=3×10-4). There was little evidence for associations with well documented as responsible for this phenotype in human, cardiovasculardisease, longevityor Alzheimer’sdisease. namely DPY19
L2 , SPATA16, and recently GGN. Genetic causes Conclusions: Later ANM is detrimental for hormone sensitive remain unexplained for 20% to 30% of patients with cancers yet beneﬁts metabolic and bone health, consistent with EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 102 effectsofoestrogentherapyintrials.However,ourresultsdonot Introduction: Endometriosis is a chronic disease affecting about supportassociationsfromobservationalstudies.Noveltherapeutic 10% of women worldwide. There is still a discussion among approaches to extending reproductive lifespan are likely to have scientist on the exact molecular pathogenesis of the disease widereffectson population health overprolonged fertility. appearance. MiRNAs as posttranscriptional expression regulators K.S.Ruth:None.F.R.Day:None.A.Murray:None.J.R.B.Perry: maycontribute to thedevelopment ofendometriosis. None. Materials and methods: Total RNA was isolated from tissue samples of ectopic endometrium of 30 patients with endome- triosisandhealthyendometriumof15controls(miRNeasy-MiniKit, 
P01 .052.D Locus-speciﬁc methylation of the ESR1 gene Qiagen). Three pool samples were constructed based on the promoter region as a marker for the prognosis of placental disease stage - each containing 15 RNA samples: early stage insufﬁciency andperinatal loss endometriosis, late stage endometriosis, and controls. Reverse transcription was conducted on each of the pool samples via Zoia I. Rossokha1, Ludmila I. Vorobey2, Valeriy V. Kaminskyi2, miScript-II-RT Kit,Qiagen. SYBR-Green-based Real-time PCR assay TetjanaV.Kolomiichenko2,LIliaY.Fishchuk1,NataliaL.Medvedieva1, was used to determine the expression proﬁle of 84 miRNAs LudmilaI.Brisevac2,OlexandrI.Zhdanovych2,NataliaG.Gorovenko2 (HumanmiFindermiRNAPCRArray,Qiagen).QIAGEN’sGeneGlobe Data Analysis Centre was used to perform the data analysis. The 1StateInstitution"Reference-centreformoleculardiagnosticofPublic prediction of target genes was accomplished using miRBase.org, HealthMinistryofUkraine",Kyiv,Ukraine,2SupicMedicalAcadenyof Targetscan.org andDiana tools. Postgraduate Education, Kyiv, Ukraine. Results:WedetectedmiR-196b-5pdownregulatedinbothstages of endometriosis compared to the healthy controls (fold change Introduction:Chronicstressandpollutedenvironmentareknown =-19,28fortheearlystage,foldchange=-139,54forthelatestage). directdeterminantsinprenatalmaternalpromoterhypermethyla- HOXgenesareaknowntargetofmiR-196b-5p.Thesegenesencode tionofESR1geneandblockadeofestrogen-dependentprocesses proteins that act as transcription factors. Changes of HOX genes in the placenta. ESR1 gene expression is important for embryo expressionareassociatedwithalteredendometriumdevelopment. implantation and pregnancy outcome, neuroprotection through- Conclusion: We suggest that the altered expression of miR- out life from antenatal period, and also has an organizational 196b may contribute to reveal the etiology of endometriosis impact on the formation of long-term behavioral and cognitive occurrenceandprogression.Funding.ContractNo.212/12.12.2018, functions,aswellasmaintainingenergyhomeostasis.Theaimof grant No.4731/03.07.2018, Council of Medical Science at the thestudywastoinvestigatetheeffectofhypermethylationofthe Medical University of Soﬁa, Bulgaria; Bulgarian Ministry of ESR1 gene promoter region on the risk of early pregnancy and Education and Science, National Program for Research “Young perinatal loss. Scientists andPostdoctoral Students.” Materials and Methods: 31 women with pregnancy loss and 10 women without reproductive failure were involved in the V.Spasova:None.V.Karamisheva:None.O.Antonova:None. study. 24 women had early pregnancy loss and 7 women had Z. Hammoudeh: None. L. Koleva: None. R. Staneva: None. M. perinatal loss. Methylation of the promoter region of the ESR1 Ganev: None. D. Nesheva: None. D. Toncheva: None. S. gene was determined by methyl-speciﬁc PCR using DNA after Hadjidekova: None. bisulﬁdeconversion. Results: Hypermethylated ESR1 promoter region was detected in35,48%patientswithpregnancyloss.29,16%patientswithearly 
P01 .054.B Comparative analysis of cytogenetic abnormalities pregnancy loss had hypermethylated status in ESR1. More often revealed by karyotyping and interphase FISH in chorion of hypermethylatedstatuswasfoundamongpatientswithperinatal ﬁrst-trimestermiscarriages loss - 57,14%. And no hypermethylated cases were detected in women without reproductive failure. Determination of hyper- AndreiV.Tikhonov1,OlgaA.Eﬁmova1,MikhailI.Krapivin1,Yanina methylated ESR1 promoter region was signiﬁcantly higher in M. Sagurova1, Anna A. Pendina1, Alla S. Koltsova1, Anna A. patients with perinatal loss and 75% of them had had placental Smirnova2, Olga E. Talantova1, Olga G. Chiryaeva1, Lubov’ I. insufﬁciency resulting in antenatal death at 26-28 weeks of Petrova1, VeraS.Dudkina1, Vladislav S.Baranov1 gestation. Conclusion: Hypermethylation of the ESR1 gene promoter 1D.O. Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Repro- regioninwomen was associated with placental insufﬁciency and ductology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2St. Petersburg State perinatalloss.Furtherresearchisneededtodeveloppersonalized Pediatric Medical University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. methods ofperinatal loss prevention. Z.I. Rossokha: None. L.I. Vorobey: None. V.V. Kaminskyi: Abnormal karyotype is a frequent cause of ﬁrst-trimester None. T.V. Kolomiichenko: None. L.Y. Fishchuk: None. N.L. miscarriage. In ~20% of cases conventional karyotyping is not Medvedieva:None.L.I.Brisevac:None.O.I.Zhdanovych:None. possible because of absence of mitotic activity in chorion. Here, N.G.Gorovenko: None. we compared the results of karyotyping and interphase ﬂuores- cence in situ hybridization (FISH) with centromeric/locus-speciﬁc DNA-probesspeciﬁctoallchromosomesexcludingchromosomes 
P01 .053.A The role of miR 196b in the pathogenesis of 1 and 19 (Abbott Molecular) on chorion of ﬁrst-trimester endometriosis miscarriages.Atotalof3511caseswereretrospectivelyanalyzed. In2816cases,conventionalkaryotypingwasperformedondirect Victoria Spasova1, Vesela Karamisheva1,2, Olga Antonova1, Zora metaphase preparations. In 695 cases, interphase FISH was Hammoudeh1, Liliya Koleva3, Rada Staneva1, Mihail Ganev1, performed because of no metaphases on direct preparations. Desislava Nesheva1,Draga Toncheva1, Savina Hadjidekova1 The frequency of abnormal karyotype reached 64.4%(1814/2816) inthekaryotypedgroupand57.7%(401/695)intheFISH-analyzed 1MedicalUniversityofSoﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria,2Universityobstetricsand group. Expectably, structural chromosomal abnormalities were gynecology hospital “Maichin dom”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3University detected only in the karyotyped group at the frequency of 2.9% Hospital“Pirogov”,Soﬁa,Bulgaria. (53/1814). The spectrum of revealed numerical karyotype EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 103 abnormalities did not differ between the groups. However, their IdaCharlotteBayLund1,2,NajaBecher1,2,3,JesperGraakjaer4,Dorte frequencies differed between the karyotyped and FISH-analyzed Lildballe4, Niels Uldbjerg5,6, Pauline Bogaard7, Astrid Petersen7, Else groups.Aneuploidieswererevealedwithhigherfrequencyinthe MarieVestergaard8,Ida Vogel1,2,6 karyotypedcomparedtotheFISH-analyzedgroup:73.4%(1332/1814) vs 63.8% (256/401) (p=0.0001). In contrast, polyploidy and 1DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,AarhusUniversityHospital,Aarhus mosaicism were more frequent in FISH-analyzed compared to the N., Denmark, 2Center for Fetal Diagnostics, Aarhus University karyotypedgroup:26.2%(105/401)vs16.9%(306/1814)(p<0.0001) Hospital, Aarhus N., Denmark, 3Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus and8.0%(32/401)vs4.4%(80/1814)(p=0.0047).Thus,FISHcanbe University,AarhusN.,Denmark,4ClinicalGenetics,UniversityHospital used for the detection of numerical chromosomal abnormalities in of Southern Denmark, Sygehus Lillebaelt, Vejle, Denmark, 5Depart- chorion of ﬁrst-trimester miscarriages, when karyotyping is not ment of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Aarhus University Hospital, possible. Difference in frequencies of the same cytogenetic Aarhus N., Denmark, 6Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus categories between the samples with and without mitotic activity University,AarhusN.,Denmark,7Department ofPathology, Aalborg suggests that viability of chorionic cell depends on the type of University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 8Department of Clinical chromosomalabnormality.SupportedbyRSF№19-75-00023. Biochemistry, HorsensRegional Hospital, Horsens,Denmark. A.V. Tikhonov: None. O.A. Eﬁmova: None. M.I. Krapivin: None.Y.M.Sagurova:None.A.A.Pendina:None.A.S.Koltsova: Objective: To compare mosaicisms in prenatal chorionic villus None. A.A. Smirnova: None. O.E. Talantova: None. O.G. sampleswith corresponding postpartum placental samples. Chiryaeva: None. L.I. Petrova: None. V.S. Dudkina: None. V.S. Method: We collected placentas from 15 consecutive cases of Baranov: None. mosaicismdetectedinchorionicvillussamplesandobtainedﬁve standardizedsamplesoneachplacentaafterdelivery.Allpre-and postnatal placental samples were uncultured and analyzed by 
P01 .055.CCasereport:Prenatalmosaictrisomy9asresultofa high-resolution chromosomal microarray. meioticnon-disjunction event Results: Ten cases of mosaicism for whole chromosome aneuploidy(mWC) and ﬁve cases with mosaicism for (sub) SebastianRusch1,2,Melanie Gass2, Sevgi Tercanli3,Isabel Filges2,4 chromosomal copy number variations(mCNVs) were included. In 5/10 mWC cases and in 4/5 mCNV cases the prenatally detected 1Medical Genetics, Institute of laboratory medicine, Kantonsspital aberration was conﬁrmed in the postpartum placenta. Three Aarau, Aarau, Switzerland, 2Medical Genetics, Institute of Medical postpartum placentas revealed various complex aberrations GeneticsandPathology,UniversityHospitalBasel,UniversityofBasel, differing from the prenatal results: 1) mosaicisms for different Basel, Switzerland, 3Centre for Prenatal Ultrasound, Basel, Switzer- deletions/duplications on 9p and 9q in all samples (prenatal: land,Basel,Switzerland,4DepartmentofClinicalResearch,University mosaic 5.3 Mb duplication on 9p24), 2) different regions with HospitalBasel, Basel, Switzerland. deletions/duplications/lossofheterozygosityon1pinallsamples (prenatal:mosaic2.3Mb1p36duplication),and3)mosaicismfora Introduction:Prenatalmosaicaneuploidyremainsachallengefor duplicationon5qandadeletionon6pinoneoutofﬁvesamples counseling clinicians. The impact on embryonic and fetal (prenatal:mosaic trisomy 7). development is depending on the level of mosaicism and tissue Conclusion: CNVs constitute a complex subgroup in placental distribution of the aneuploid cell line; hence, clinical conse- mosaicism. Counseling of these couples after chorionic villus quences are difﬁcult to predict. We present the rare instance of samplingshouldn´tfocusonthespeciﬁcCNVinvolved,butonthe mosaic trisomy 9 in a fetus with multiple malformations. We nature of mosaicism and the option of amniocentesis and discuss how CMA-SNP data can contribute to understand the ultrasound. mechanismofaneuploidy. Funding:ThisworkwasfundedbyTheFoundationofAaseand Methods: Prenatal sonography of a 44-year-old woman at 14 Ejnar Danielsen, The Foundation of 17-12-1981 and The Novo weeks of gestation (WG) showed tricuspid regurgitation, a Nordisk Foundation. small branchial cyst, single umbilical artery and retrognathia, at 19 I. Lund: None. N. Becher: None. J. Graakjaer: None. D. WGadditionalheart,renalandbrainanomalies.FTTfoundincreased Lildballe: None. N. Uldbjerg: None. P. Bogaard: None. A. risk scores of 1:102 and 1:2 for trisomy 21 and 13/18 respectively. Petersen:None. E.Vestergaard: None. I. Vogel: None. CMA was used on amniotic ﬂuid cells to detect copy number variants. Results:TheCMAresultonamnioticﬂuidcellswasinrespectto 
P01 .057.A Prenatal diagnosis of Neu-Laxova syndrome copynumberstate(2.5)andB-AlleleFrequencies(BAF)ofapprox. through identiﬁcation of a novel exonic-deletion and mis- 0, 40, 60 and 100% concordant with mosaic trisomy 9 of about sensemutation in the PHGDHgene 50%. Additionally, with BAF of 20 and 80% in several chromoso- mal regions of chromosome 9 SNP-data signals indicated the Aruna Marchetto1, Moneef Shoukier1, Katja Gahle1, Anne Janke1, presenceof an additionalhaplotype. Justin Seidel1, Ursula Hiener2, Vera Link3, Kai Wagner3, Sabine Conclusions: CMA-SNP data reveal regions containing an Minderer1, Karl Philipp Gloning1 additional haplotype which most likely arose from meiotic crossingoverevents.Thedistributionoftheadditionalhaplotype 1Prenatal-Medicine Munich, Munich, Germany, 2Klinikum Dritter in the centromeric region suggests a meiotic I non-disjunction Orden - Department of Radiology, Munich, Germany, 3Rotkreuzkli- eventfollowedbyapostzygotictrisomicrescueforthenormalcell nikum-Institute of Pathology, Munich,Germany. line.Weincreaseourknowledgeonthefetalphenotypecausedby theaberrant celllinewhich isonlyrarely reported. MutationsinthePHGDHgenedisrupttheserinebiosynthesisand S. Rusch: None. M. Gass: None. S. Tercanli: None. I. Filges: areknowntobeassociatedwiththeautosomalrecessivedisorder None. Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deﬁciency (PHGDH) and the 
P01 .056.D Mosaicism for copy number variations in the moresevereformNeu-Laxovasyndrome1(NL
S1 ).Todate,thereis placenta is even more difﬁcult to interpret than mosaicism no clear genotype-phenotype correlation between PHGDH and forwholechromosome aneuploidy EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 104 NL
S1 . PHGDH is characterized by congenital microcephaly, V. Vernimmen: None. A.D.C. Paulussen: None. C.T.R.M. psychomotor retardation and seizures whereas it has been Stumpel:None. R.J.T.van Golde: None. C.E.M.de Die: None. assumed that NL
S1  could be caused by more severe PHGDH- mutations with main clinical features of intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR), microcephaly, cutaneous and craniofacial 
P01 .059.C Prenatal diagnostics of NF2 mutation in the fetus, abnormalities. We present a case of a prenatal conspicuous associated withthe development ofendometrial cancer microcephaly linked to two novel mutations in the PHGDH gene likelyassociated withNL
S1 . Kalina Belemezova1,2, Kunka Kamenarova3, Kalina Mihova3, We report on a pregnant 42-year-old patient, 23rd gestational MarielaHristova-Savova1,AlbenaTodorova4,RadkaKaneva3,Ivanka week,whosefetuspresentedwithseveremicrocephaly,IUGR,cleft Dimova1,3 lip, dilated intestinal loops and mild hydronephrosis. MRI conﬁrmed sonographic ﬁndings while array-CGH was normal (arr 1Genetic Laboratory, SAGBAL Dr. Shterev, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Medical (1-22)x2,(XY)x1). A multigene panel analysis (brain malformations University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Molecular Medicine Center, panel, 400 genes) revealed two likely disease-causing variants; a MedicalUniversityofSoﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria,4LaboratoryGenika,Soﬁa, maternal inherited hemizygous missense mutation c.766G>A, p. Bulgaria. Gly256Arg in exon 7 and a paternal inherited heterozygous deletionofexon6and7ofthePHGDHgene.Thepregnancywas Endometrialcarcinoma(EC)israrelydiagnosedduringpregnancy. terminated in the 25th week. Immunohistological staining of the Anelectronicsearchoftheliteraturerevealedjust25casesofEC fetuses’ skin biopsy revealed ichthyosis and hyperkeratosis. Both diagnosedduringorafterpregnancy,fortheperiodbetween1995 detected mutations in the PHGDH gene were localized in the and 2019. Ten percent of endometrial carcinomas harbor NF2 nucleotide-bindingdomain (NBD). mutations. This observation is of interest since mutated NF2 can Considering the molecular and clinical ﬁndings, we assume activatemTOR,thedownstreameffectorofPIK3CA,andinahigh thesemutationstobecausativeforaNeu-Laxovasyndrome.Thus, percentage of this cancer type (>80%), there are PI3K pathway ourresultssupportpreviousﬁndingsindicatingthatmutationsin aberrations.NF2isacomplexgenewithsomaticmutationsbeing NBD mostly cause the more severe phenotype of PHGDH- associated with various cancers. Germline mutations cause the associated disorders (NL
S1 ). autosomal dominant disorder neuroﬁbromatosis 2 (NF2). Indivi- A. Marchetto: None. M. Shoukier: None. K. Gahle: None. A. dualswithhereditaryNF2dodevelopschwannomas,ependymo- Janke:None.J.Seidel:None.U.Hiener:None.V.Link:None.K. mas, and meningiomas. Although the somatic mutations Wagner:None. S.Minderer: None. K. Gloning:None. sometimes overlap with those in hereditary NF2, no published papersaredocumentinganincreasedriskofothercancertypesin neuroﬁbromatosis patients. Here we report a young pregnant 
P01 .058.BNeuroﬁbromatosistype1andthenextgeneration: woman, affected by classical NF2 (presence of bilateral schwan- ispreimplantation genetic testing the solution? nomas)andcarryingmutationc.592C>T(p.Arg198Ter)inexon6of theNF2gene.Becauseofthehighriskforinheritance(50%),CVS Vivian Vernimmen, Aimee D. C. Paulussen, Constance T. R. M. was performed and DNA from the fetus was analyzed for the Stumpel,Ron J.T. van Golde, ChristineE. M. de Die presence of mutation with Sanger sequencing - the fetus was found to be a carrier of the same pathogenic mutation. In the MaastrichtUniversity Medical Center,Maastricht, Netherlands. meantime,ultrasoundexaminationsuspectedtumorformationin the uterus, which was conﬁrmed to be endometrial cancer after Introduction: Future parents affected with Neuroﬁbromatosis biopsy and pregnancy was terminated. This case suggests an type1(NF1)canoptforpreimplantationgenetictesting(PGT)to adverse effect of the simultaneously NF2-affected fetus and avoid NF1 in their offspring. We aim to identify challenges and mother for endometrial malignancy and suggesting PGD when pitfallsin PGTfor NF1. themotheris affected byNF2. Methods: We collected data on PGT cycles from the medical K. Belemezova: None. K. Kamenarova: None. K. Mihova: ﬁlesofcouplesrequestingPGTforNF1betweenJanuary1997and None.M.Hristova-Savova:None.A.Todorova:None.R.Kaneva: January 2020. None.I. Dimova: None. Results: PGT was the reproductive option of choice for 96 couples.PGTwasnotpossiblefor14couples,mostlybecausethe causative variant was not identiﬁed or of unknown signiﬁcance. 
P01 .060.DPatient-friendlyintegratedﬁrsttrimesterscreening TheoriginoftheNF1mutationwas(presumed)sporadicin63%of by NIPTandfetalanomaly scan the 82 couples proceeding with PGT. PCR with multiple polymorphic markers was most frequently applied, combined Karin E. M. Diderich, Malgorzata I. Srebniak, Maarten F. C. M. withdirectmutationanalysisifneeded.PGT/PCRwork-upshowed Knapen,Marieke Joosten, Sander Galjaard, Diane VanOpstal several exceptional situations: in one family two different NF1 mutations turned out to be causal and in one family with a ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. sporadicmaleindexthemutationwasnotdetectedinthesperm cellsduringPGTwork-up.The‘OnePGT’genomewidehaplotyping Many major structural fetal anomalies can be diagnosed by ﬁrst method, based on next generation sequencing, was used for 2 trimester fetal anomaly scan. NIPT can accurately detect recent families with a familial mutation. A successful PGT test aneuploidies and large chromosomal aberrations in cfDNA in couldbedevelopedfor78coupleswith71differentvariantsinthe maternal blood plasma. This study shows how a patient-friendly NF1gene.Together,65couplesunderwent141PGTcyclesandthe ﬁrsttrimesterscreeningforbothchromosomalandstructuralfetal transfer of 162 unaffected embryos resulted in 39 ongoing anomalies in only two outpatient visits can be provided. pregnancies (pregnancy rate24,1%/embryotransfer). Genotype-ﬁrst approach assures not only the earliest diagnosis Conclusions: PGT is a successful reproductive option for of trisomy 21 (the most prevalent chromosome aberration), but couples with NF1. Test development was possible in almost all also completion of the screening at 12–14 weeks. To ensure cases reviewed despite the fact that most variants were unique proper management and avoid unnecessary anxiety abnormal andsporadic. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 105 NIPT different from trisomy 21, 18 and 13 should be referred for Introduction: Cell-free fetal DNA analysis is now performed geneticcounseling. routinely for aneuploidy screening, fetal RhD genotyping or sex K.E.M.Diderich:None.M.I.Srebniak:None.M.F.C.M.Knapen: determination. However, applications to single gene None.M.Joosten:None.S.Galjaard:None.D.VanOpstal:None. disorders (SGD) remain sparse. We previously described a standardized protocol for non-invasive exclusion of paternal mutation in SGD using a targeted, droplet digital PCR-based 
P01 .061.A NIPD for translocation carriers - yes please or no approach.Here,wereportourthree-yearclinicalexperiencesince go? offeringthis service. Patients and Methods: Patients were referred by clinicians Malgorzata I. Srebniak1, Fernanda S. Jehee1, Marieke Joosten1, nationwide for several monogenic disorders, paternally-inherited Marjan Boter1, Walter de Valk1, Robert van der Helm1, Erik or de novo, dominant or recessive, such as cystic ﬁbrosis, Sistermans2, Els Voorhoeve2, Shama Bhola2, Mariette Hoffer3, neuroﬁbromatosis type Ior FGFR3-related disorders (thanatopho- Nicolette den Hollander3, Merryn Macville4, Diane VanOpstal1 ricdysplasiaandachondroplasia).Non-invasiveprenataldiagnosis was performed using custom assays for droplet digital PCR. 1ErasmusMC,ClinicalGenetics,Rotterdam,Netherlands,2Amsterdam Results, turn-around time andcost-effectiveness wereevaluated. UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Results: Our tests proved very robust and highly discrimi- Netherlands, 3Leiden University Medical Center, Clinical Genetics, nant,asaresultwasobtainedforevery205referralexceptone, Leiden, Netherlands, 4Clinical Genetics, GROW School for Oncology where fetal fraction was too low to conclude, but returned « and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center, unaffected fetus » on a subsequent sample. All referred Maastricht, Netherlands. pathogenic variants could be targeted except one located in a repetitive genomic region. Mean time between order and Thepresence ofan unbalancedfamilialtranslocation can reliably validation of an assay was 14 days. Mean result reporting time be assessed in the cytotrophoblast of chorionic villi. However, was 6 days. carriers of a balanced translocation often refuse invasive testing Conclusion:Thisgenetictestingservicewasimplementedas duetothemiscarriagerisk.Becausethecytotrophoblastisalsothe a routine practice with a simple development and interpreta- source of cell free (cf) DNA in plasma, this study aimed to tion process that could be offered for any paternally-inherited investigate whether an unbalanced translocation can also be or de novo SGD. Thanks to a short turn-around time, an diagnosed in cfDNA by whole-genome NIPT.Pregnant women affordable price and a great robustness, this method has been carrying a fetus with an unbalanced familial translocation, from widely adopted by clinicians nationwide for dominant whom NIPT as well as microarray data were available, were paternally-inherited disorders, or as a ﬁrst test for recessive includedinthisretrospectiveassessment. NIPTwasperformedin disorders. the course of the TRIDENT study, but at the time of screening, carrier status of a parental translocation was unknown (exclusion M. Pacault: None. C. Verebi: None. M. Lopez: None. N. criterion for NIPT in the Netherlands). In 12 cases both NIPT and Vaucouleur: None. L. Orhant: None. N. Deburgrave: None. F. microarray data were available. In 10/12 cases the unbalanced Leturcq:None.D.Vidaud:None.E.Girodon:None.T.Bienvenu: translocationwascorrectlyidentiﬁedwithoutpriorknowledgeon None.J. Nectoux: None. parental translocation. One was missed due to too low fetal fraction. One was missed due to technical restrictions in calling 16p gains. Both missed cases were later identiﬁed by invasive 
P01 .063.C Implementing non-invasive prenatal testing for diagnostic testing after ultrasound anomalies were found.This aneuploidyinanationalhealthcaresysteminRussia.Moscow studysupportsthehypothesisthatroutineNIPTmaybeusedfor experience prenataldiagnosisofunbalancedinheritanceoffamilialtransloca- tions, especially with prior knowledge of the translocation Olesya Sagaidak1, Alexandra Galaktionova1, Anton Olenev2, allowing focused examination of the involved chromosomal Ekaterina Kuznetsova1, Madina Kaplanova1, Maksim Belenikin1, regions. Our study showed that routine shallow sequencing Ekaterina Songolova3, ElenaBaranova1,4 designedforaneuploidydetectionincfDNAmaybesufﬁcientfor higher resolution NIPT, if specialized copy number software is 1LLC Evogen, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Moscow City Health used andifsufﬁcientfetal fraction is present. Department,Cityclinicalhospital№24,Moscow,RussianFederation, M.I. Srebniak: None. F.S. Jehee: None. M. Joosten: None. M. Moscow,RussianFederation,3MoscowCityHealthDepartment,City Boter: None. W. de Valk: None. R. van der Helm: None. E. clinical hospital № 67 named after L.A. Vorokhobova, Moscow, Sistermans: None. E. Voorhoeve: None. S. Bhola: None. M. Russian Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Federal State Hoffer: None. N. den Hollander: None. M. Macville: None. D. Budgetary Educational Institution of Further Professional Education VanOpstal: None. “RussianMedicalAcademyofContinuousProfessionalEducation”of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, RussianFederation. 
P01 .062.B Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of paternally- inherited disorders:three years clinical experience SinceMarch2020,NIPThasbecomeavailableforwomenatriskup to 1:2500 in Moscow. Objectives. To evaluate the clinical efﬁcacy Mathilde Pacault1,2, Camille Verebi1, Maureen Lopez1, Nicolas of non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) versus prenatal screening Vaucouleur1, Lucie Orhant1, Nathalie Deburgrave1, France Leturcq1, intheﬁrst trimesterof pregnancy. Dominique Vidaud1, Emmanuelle Girodon1, Thierry Bienvenu1, Materials.Accordingtotheresultsofabiochemicalbloodtest, JulietteNectoux1 patients were dividedinto two groups: the high-risk group (threshold≥1:100) (n=338) and the average-risk group (thresh- 1ServicedeGénétiqueetBiologieMoléculaires,HôpitalCochin,APHP. old1:101-1:2500)(n=8567).NIPTwasperformedforallpatients. Centre Université de Paris, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique IncaseofhighrisksevaluatedbyNIPT,theresultswereconﬁrmed Moléculaire et d’Histocompatibilité, Centre Hospitalier Régional by karyotyping in the high-risk group and groupof the average- Universitaire, Brest, France. riskpatients. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 106 Results: The results of karyotyping were available in 280 Table:Classiﬁcationoffemalepartnersdonatingoocytes patients(82.8%)ofthehigh-riskgroup.Highrisksoftrisomiesby Classiﬁcationof Total Total Oocytes No.ofdonors No.of NIPTwereconﬁrmedin66/70casesfortrisomy21,in22/23cases femalepartners No.of oocytes with contributing oocytes fortrisomy18andin4/4casesfortrisomy13.Ahighriskoffetal basedon donors tested premeiotic oocyteswith with reproductive aneuploidy premeiotic Simple aneuploidiesbyNIPTwasidentiﬁedin29casesintheaverage-risk histories aneuploidy (SE)/ group with karyotyping available19 (65.5%) cases: 12 cases of Complex (CE)Errors trisomy 21 and 3 cases of trisomy 13 were conﬁrmed, other 4 4.Oocyte 2 10 5(50%) 2donors 1(SE);4(CE) cases were false-positives in the average-risk group (including 1 preservationdueto breastcancer case oftrisomy 21and 3casesof trisomy 13). 5.Femalecarriersof 17 30 2(6.66%) 2donors 1(SE);1(CE) Conclusion: NIPT implementation in Moscow demonstrates structural high efﬁciency and accuracy. More data is needed to choose an rearrangementsor monogenic implementationstrategyinanationalhealthcaresystem.Thework disorders(non- wassupported byMoscow City HealthDepartmentgrant. cancerrelated) O.Sagaidak: None. A.Galaktionova: None. A.Olenev: None. 6.Femalesat 4 15 0 0 0 increasedriskof E.Kuznetsova:None.M.Kaplanova:None.M.Belenikin:None. developingbreast/ E.Songolova: None. E.Baranova: None. ovariancancerdue toBRCA1/2gene mutations Total 78 202 25(12.38%) 15donors 13(SE);12 
P01 .064.D Simple and complex aneuploidy in premeiotic (CE) oocytes detected by aCGH & NGS: evidence for genetic GrantSupport-CRGH inﬂuence andeffect on fertility Harita Ghevaria1, Sioban SenGupta1, Roy Naja2, Rabi Odia3, Paul H.Ghevaria:None.S.SenGupta:None.R.Naja:None.R.Odia: Serhal4, Xavier Vinals Gonzalez3, XuhuiSun1, JoyDelhanty1 None. P. Serhal: None. X. Gonzalez: None. X. Sun: None. J. Delhanty: None. 1Preimplantation Genetics Group,University College London (UCL), London,UnitedKingdom,2MolecularGeneticsLaboratory,Igenomix UK Ltd, London, United Kingdom, 3Embryology Department, The 
P01 .065.AEvaluationoftheTelomereLengthanditsEffecton the Ovarian Reserve in aSample ofColombian Women Centre for Reproductive and Genetic Health, London, United Kingdom, 4Clinical Department, The Centre For Reproductive and Johana Marin Suarez1, Harold Moreno-Ortiz2, Lissette Otero3, GeneticHealth, London, United Kingdom. StephenMatlin3, Clara InésEsteban-Pérez2, MaribelForero-Castro1 Aneuploidyisthemajorcauseofembryonic&fetaldeath.Most errors arise in meiosis I/II in the adult female, strongly 1Universidad Pedagogica y Tecnologica de Colombia, Tunja, correlated with maternal age. Our application of array Colombia, 2Departamento Biogenética reproductiva. Invitro, Colom- comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) and next genera- bia, Bogota, Colombia, 3Life Length, Madrid,Spain. tion sequencing (NGS) has shown that 10-15% of oocyte aneuploidy is in fact premeiotic (PM) and present in the early Introduction: Studies have been carried out where they relate embryo, leading to a risk of an aneuploid conception in adult longevityinhumanswithhigherfertility,andindicatethatdelays lifeirrespectiveofage.Mosaicaneuploidymaybepresentinthe intheonsetofmenopauseinlonger-livedwomencouldbedueto primordialgermcellsormayariseduringtheextensivemitotic slower cellular aging; which has led us to think about the divisions of the oogonia. A substantial individual variation in importance of the effect of telomeric shortening in reproductive the incidenceofPMerrorsislikelytoberelatedtothegenetic aging. In addition, it has been observed that alterations in background of the oocyte donor. NGS or aCGH was performed telomere length (TL) is turn related to a decrease in ovarian on141immatureoocytes[germinalvesicles(GV)&metaphaseI reserve (OR). To evaluate telomere length and its effect on OR (MI) oocytes] and 61 mature oocytes [Metaphase II - 1st PB valuesin healthywomen with adiagnosisof PCOS. complexes]. Fifteen (19.2%) of 78 donors had oocytes with PM Methodology: 66 healthy women and 44 women with PCOS, errors. Oocyte aneuploidy incidence was correlated with the LT was quantiﬁed in mononucleated cells using the HT-QFISH reproductive histories of female partners. In categories 1 & 2 technique at the Life Length Laboratory. EB was calculated from mostcoupleshavefertilityissues&verysimilarincidenceofPM the measurement of LT. Individual RO markers were integrated errors. Groups 3, 5 & 6 from couples with no known fertility withLTandEBresults.Thechronologicalandbiologicalageofthe issues all have lower incidences. Two cases in Group 4 stand participants wascompared aswell asthereproductive status. out,withamuchhigherincidencewhichmayberelatedtothe Results:LTinbothgroupswasinthenormalrange,therewere genetic factors responsible for the onset of breast cancer in nosigniﬁcantdifferencesbetweentheLT(11.7vs11.87,p=0.33). their 30s. The mean CD was 24 years for controls and 27 years for women withPCOS.TherewerenosigniﬁcantdifferencesbetweenCDand Table:Classiﬁcationoffemalepartnersdonatingoocytes BEineachgroup(control:24vs26,p=0.46,andPCOS:27vs26, Classiﬁcationof Total Total Oocytes No.ofdonors No.of p=0.9). OR markers werehigherinwomen with PCOS. femalepartners No.of oocytes with contributing oocytes basedon donors tested premeiotic oocyteswith with Conclusion: The evaluation of TL is a tool that should be reproductive aneuploidy premeiotic Simple explored to evaluate the reproductive status in healthy women histories aneuploidy (SE)/ Complex withPCOS. (CE)Errors J.MarinSuarez:None.H.Moreno-Ortiz:None.L.Otero:None. 1.Femalefertility 27 76 11(14.5%) 6donors 7(SE);4(CE) S. Matlin: None. C. Esteban-Pérez: None. M. Forero-Castro: statusunknown None. 2.Primary/secondary 25 48 6(12.5%) 4donors 3(SE);3(CE) femalefactor infertility 3.Oocyte 3 23 1(4.3%) 1donor 1(SE) 
P01 .066.B Systematic review and meta-analysis of genetic preservationdueto socialreasons association studies ofpelvicorgan prolapse EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 107 JohnW.F.Chua1,KristinaAllen-Brady2,RomanaCuffolo3,Marianne carriers. There is a differential effect of mild versus severe Koch4,Felice Sorrentino5, Rufus Cartwright6,7 mutations: Mild mutations increase the risk of developing PD by 2.2-foldwhileseveremutationsincreasethisriskby13.6-fold.PGT 1Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, 2Genetic counseling was given to a thirty-two years old woman with GD, Epidemiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah, compound heterozygote of N370S (mild mutation) and 84GG Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 3Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, (severe mutation), whose mother (an 84GG carrier) died of early- John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, onset PD associated with severe cognitive decline. GBA sequen- Oxford,UnitedKingdom,4DepartmentofObstetricsandGynecology, cing of her spouse was negative. The couple needed IVF. PGT-M Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 5Department of wasperformedtoselectforN370Scarrierembryosbecauseofthe Medical and Surgical Sciences, Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecol- reduced risk for PD, compare to 84GG carrier embryos. Eight ogy,UniversityofFoggia,Foggia,Italy,6DepartmentofEpidemiology embryos were sampled: Four were carriers for 84GG mutation; 1 & Biostatistics, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, aneuploid; 1 had no result; 2 were N370S carriers and thus 7Department of Urogynaecology, LNWH NHS Trust, London, United transferable.ThiscasereportdemonstratestheexpansionofPGT- Kingdom. M use for selecting embryos with reduced risks for late-onset conditions. These novel indications for PGT-M will increase the Introduction and Objective: Family and twin studies demon- numbers of people who would be candidates for PGT-M. The stratethatpelvicorganprolapse(POP)isheritable,butthegenetic medical and bioethical consideration of these cases should be etiology is poorly understood. This review aimed to identify acknowledgedbytheprofessionalcommunityanddiscussedwith genetic loci and speciﬁc polymorphisms associated with POP, couplesingeneticcounselingsetting.Furthermore,Guidelinesfor whileassessingthestrength,consistency,andriskofbiasamong PGT usage for risk reduction of late-onset disorders should be reportedassociations. implemented. Methods: Updating an earlier systematic review PubMed and S.Zuckerman:None.A.Zimran:None.T.Eldar-Geva:None.E. HuGE Navigator as well as relevant conference abstracts were Farhi:None.S.Shaviv:None.E.Hakam-Spector:None.T.Dinur: searchedusinggeneticandphenotypekeywordsfrom2015-2020. None.G. Altarescu: None. Screeninganddataextractionwereperformedinduplicate.Fixed and random effects meta-analyses were conducted using co- dominantmodelsofinheritance.Weassessedcredibilityofpooled 
P01 .068.D Structural fetal defects after preimplantation associations usinginterim Venicecriteria. genetic testing -highthroughput genetic investigations Results: We screened 504 new abstracts and included 46 publishedand7unpublishedstudies.Inpooledanalyseswefound Radostina Raynova1,2, Petya Chaveeva2, Tanya Milachich2, Mom- signiﬁcant associations for four polymorphisms: rs2228480 at chilRizov2, TanyaTimeva2, AtanasShterev2, Ivanka Dimova2,3 the ESR1 gene (OR 0.67 95%CI 0.46-0.98, I2=0.0%, Venice Rating BAB), rs12589592 at the FBLN5 gene (OR 1.46 95%CI 1National Genetic Laboratory, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2SAGBAL"Shterev", 1.11-1.82, I2=36.3%, Venice Rating BBB), rs484389 in the PGR Soﬁa,Bulgaria, 3Medical University, Soﬁa,Bulgaria. gene (OR 0.61 95%CI 0.39-0.96, I2=32.4%, Venice Rating CBB), and rs1800012 at the CO
L1 A1 gene (OR 0.80 95%CI 0.66-0.96, Preimplantaion genetic diagnostics (PGD) is a useful approach I2=0.0%, Venice Rating BAB). Further credible novel variants forreducingmiscarriageandincreasesuccessfulpregnancyrate have also been recently identiﬁed in genome wide association in couples, carriers of balanced structural rearrangements. studies. Robertsonian translocation (RT) is one of the most common Conclusion: The genetic contributions to POP remain poorly balanced structural aberrations. Previous studies of embryos’ understood. Several biologically plausible variants have been chromosomes in RT carriers subjected to PGD have shown identiﬁed,butmuchworkisrequiredtoestablishtheroleofthese abnormal chromosome segregation, resulting in high levels of genesinthepathogenesisofPOP,ortoestablisharoleforgenetic mosaic embryos. testinginclinical practice. Here we report a case of PGD in a couple with two previous J.W.F.Chua:None.K.Allen-Brady:None.R.Cuffolo:None.M. miscarriages. Cytogenetic analysis of the partners revealed RT in Koch:None. F.Sorrentino: None. R.Cartwright: None. thewoman:karyotype45,XXder(14;22)(q10;q10).Becauseofthe high risk for chromosomal abnormalities in the fetus, assisted reproduction with PGT-A was recommended and performed by 
P01 .067.C Preimplantation genetic testing (PGT-M) for Par- Next Generation Sequencing after Whole Genome Ampliﬁcation kinsondisease(PD)riskreduction:Expandingofapplications usingVeriseq (Illumina)protocol. forselecting embryos Three embryos were tested at day 5, resulting in an euploid embryo, one complex aneuploidy; and a mosaic embryo - 46/46, Shachar Zuckerman1, Ari Zimran2, Talya Eldar-Geva3, Elina Farhi1, −15; +17, dup(5)(q31.1qter). Transfer was done with the euploid Shira Shaviv1, Elinor Hakam-Spector1, Tama Dinur2, Gheona embryo, but pregnacy was not realized. Mosaic embryo was Altarescu1 transferred afterwards and pregnancy was detected. In the ﬁrst trimester severe cleft palate was detected in the fetus and CVS 1MedicalGeneticsInstitute,ShaareZedekMedicalCenter,Jerusalem, wasperformedfollowedbyarrayCGHanalysis.Theresultshowed Israel, 2Gaucher Center, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, terminal duplication of 12q- 46, XN, dup(12q24.23q24.33), not Israel,3IVFunit, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. detectedduringPGT-A.Amniocentesiswasperformedtoexclude placentalmosaicism,followedbyVista™ChromosomeSequencing PGTispracticedworldwide,allowingtopreventtransmissionofa technology - 12qterminal duplication was conﬁrmed and preg- growing number of genetic conditions. For recessive disorders, nancy wasterminated. bothwild-typeandcarrierembryos aretransferable. Thejustiﬁed This case demonstrates the need for careful evaluation of applications for PGT are subject to ongoing debate. Mutations in pregnancies in which mosaic embryos are transferred; with theglucocerebrosidase(GBA)gene,causingGaucherdisease(GD), emphasize on the use of high- throughout whole genome haveemergedasaprimaryriskfactorforPDinbothpatientsand techniquesfor copynumber analysis. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 108 R.Raynova:None.P.Chaveeva:None.T.Milachich:None.M. Introduction: Initial step of PGT-M is the detection of causative Rizov:None.T.Timeva:None.A.Shterev:None.I.Dimova:None. mutation. This has been the limiting factor for patients with rare 
P01 .069.A Embryo transfer decision dilemma in PGT-M: disorders due to complex phenotype or genetic heterogeneity. Dominantor recessive inheritance ImprovementsingenomictechnologiessuchasWEShasbecome aneffectivetoolfordelineatingthemutationstoenablePGT-Mfor SuleymanAktuna,MervePolat,EvrimUnsal,LeylaOzer,VolkanBaltaci raredisorders.Thisstudy summarizesthevariability anddistribu- tion of genes from our 1085 PGT-M cases during 2014-2021 YüksekIhtisas University, Ankara, Turkey. highlightstheshift towards rare disorders. Materials and Methods: PGT-M was performed using STR Introduction: Amongthe PGT-M cases with a history ofaffected based protocolfor direct mutation and haplotype analysis. childrenhomozygousforarecessivemutation,transferdecisionof Results: Retrospective data show that PGT-M was frequently heterozygous embryos becomes challenging in case where the performed for 6 genetic loci (Table 1). Table 2 compares the mutationisassociatedwithanadditionaldiseasewithautosomal frequency6 common disordersat different timeintervals. dominant inheritance. Necessity of pretreament genetic counsel- Conclusions: Results show that PGT-M was performed for 94 ling for these couples and the risk of heterozygous embryo differentgenesduring2014-2017whileitreaches323in2021.The transferduetopossiblepenetrancedifferencestogetherwiththe highlight of the results was decrease in the freqeuncy for total patient management willbe discussed indetail. number ofcommondisorder cases(50,2%to42,4%).Furthermore Materials and Methods: PGT-M was performed with direct resuts reveals that for 90% of genes only 1-4 PGT-M cases were mutation and haplotypeanalyses. refererred which underlines the shift towards rare disorders with Results: This study investigates PGT-M results of 10 couples theextendedutilizationofWESandincreaseinnovelgenevariants. carryingdifferentraregeneticconditionsand10causativegenes presentedinTable1.Eventoughthesegenesareassociatedwith multiple OMIM phenotypes with both autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive inheritance all reported cases presented autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. The total number of embryos analysed was 60 from 2 to 14 for each patient. PGT-M analysis revealed that, 15 embryos were normal, 33 were heterozygousand 11weremutant. Conclusions: Homozygous normal embryos should be prior- itizedfortransfertoexcludeclinicalphenotypethatmayocurdue to potenital penetrance and expressivity differences. Normale mbryo was not detected in 3 cases, thus embryo transfer was cancelled with patient decision. This situation underlie the need for better understanding of this phenomenon during PGT-M management to prevent reduction of reproductive chance of patientscoping with such tedious treatment procedures. L. Ozer: None. E. Unsal: None. M. Polat: None. S. Aktuna: None.V. Baltaci: None. 
P01 .072.D Placental tissue co-expression networks across Russians and Yakuts identify key genes and pathways for preeclampsia EkaterinaTrifonova,AnastasiaBabovskaya,AlekseiZarubin,Anton Markov, Vadim Stepanov Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Research S. Aktuna: None. M. Polat: None. E. Unsal: None. L. Ozer: MedicalCenteroftheRussianAcademy ofSciences,Tomsk,Russian None.V. Baltaci: None. Federation. Populationtranscriptomicsisapromisingapproachforﬁndingloci 
P01 .071.CTheshifttowardsrare:Increasedfrequencyofrare of susceptibility to diseases which frequency depends from the PGT-Mcases ethnicity.Hereweinvestigatethepopulationtranscriptomicsina preeclampsia (PE) model using WGCNA. The study included LeylaOzer,EvrimUnsal,MervePolat,SuleymanAktuna,VolkanBaltaci whole-genome expression samples from 21 Russian (Indo- Europeans population) and 23 Yakut (Mongoloids population) YuksekIhtisas University, Ankara, Turkey. women with PE and physiological pregnancy. We found 10 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 109 clustersforRussiancontaining7968genesassociatedwithPE.The individuals diagnosed with biallelic PNKP-variants. Both carry the main categories and pathways in these clusters are processes of same splice-donor variant c.1029+2T>C and a second missense the cytokine signaling (FDR=0,005). For Yakut we found 9 variant in the FHA-domain (c.311T>C, p.(Leu104Pro) and clusters yielded 7966 PE-genes. The main GO-categories of these c.151G>C, p.(Val51Leu), respectively). RNAseq showed complex genes are amino-acid metabolism (FDR=0,003), regulation of splicing events for c.1029+2T>C and c.151G>C. Computational receptorinteractions(FD=0,047)andPI3K-Aktsignalingpathway modellingrevealedsigniﬁcantclusteringofthemissensevariants (FDR=0,023).AccordingtotheMCCanalyzeofCytoHubbathere intheFHA-domain.Here,wepresenttheﬁrstprenatallydiagnosed were 10 hub genes with rank=1 for Russians (CU
L1 , ANAP
C11 , PNKP-related primary microcephaly-/encephaly associated with LNX1, CD
C20 , UB
E2 L6
, FBXO9, KLH L13
, UBA3, KCTD7, RNF111) and variantsaffectingtheN-terminalFHA-domain.Ourdetailedclinical Yakut(KLH L3
, FB11PSXL,ASB2,LRR C41
,LMO7, RNF7,SK P2
,FBXO2). and mutational characterisation extend the continuum of PNKP- These genes are responsible for the regulation of the ubiquitin- manifestationto theprenatal stage. ligase complex. In the second step we pick-out 1701 common I. Krey: None. S. Neuser: None. A. Schwan: None. T. genes for both populations. Most functionally active (rank=1-2) Bartolomaeus: None. J.H. Döring: None. S. Syrbe: None. M. remained the genes of the ubiquitin-ligase family and key Plassmann: None. S. Rohde: None. C. Roth: None. H. Rehder: processes belong to the pathways of interferon signaling (FDR None.R.AbouJamra:None.D.LeDuc:None.S.Schubert:None. =0,004). Thus, we found population-speciﬁc pathways of PE: K.Schoner: None. B.Popp: None. these are the processes of immune response for Indo-Europeans and the processes of ligand-receptor interaction for Mongoloids. Inaddition,wehaveidentiﬁedcommonPE-genesforpopulations  P01
.074.B Pregnancy loss and Exome sequencing analysis whichareassociatedwiththeprocessesofinterferonactivityand (WES) operationtheubiquitin-ligasecomplex.SupportedbyRFBR№18- 44-700007,№18-29-1304. Aicha Boughalem1, Detlef TROST1, Constance Wells2, Audrey E. Trifonova: None. A. Babovskaya: None. A. Zarubin: None. Lamouroux2, Viorica Ciorna-Monferrato3, Amandine Diakiese4, Pas- A.Markov: None. V.Stepanov: None. cale Kleinﬁnger4, Laurence Lohmann4, Armelle Luscan4, Mylene Valduga4, Jean-Marc Costa1, Patricia Blanchet2  P01
.073.A Prenatal phenotype of PNKP-related primary 1LaboratoireCERBA,SaintOuenl’Aumône,France,2Départementde microcephaly associated withvariants in theFHA domain Génétique Médicale, Centre de Référence « Anomalies du Dével- oppement et Syndromes Malformatifs », CHU Hôpital Arnaud de Ilona Krey1, Sonja Neuser1, Annemarie Schwan2, Tobias Bartolo- Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 3Génétique Médicale et Oncogéné- maeus1, Jan Henje Döring3, Steffen Syrbe3, Margit Plassmann4, tique, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Metz-Thionville, France, 4CERBA, StefanRohde5,ChristianRoth6,HelgaRehder7,8,RamiAbouJamra1, SaintOuenl’Aumône, France. DianaLeDuc1,SusannaSchubert1,KatharinaSchoner8,BerntPopp1 Background: Genetic abnormalities are known to cause preg- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center, nancy loss. In our cohort we evaluated the usefulness of exome Leipzig, Germany, 2MVZ Dr. Eberhard & Partner Dortmund, sequencing (WES) in identifying the genetic etiology for Dortmund, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, Hospital for pregnancyloss. ChildrenandAdolescents,HeidelbergUniversityHospital,Heidelberg, Methods:Acohortof68samplesfromproductsofconception Germany,4PraxisfürPränatalmedizin,Dortmund,Germany,5Depart- or from fetal tissue, with normal karyotype and absence of ment of Radiology and Neuroradiology, Klinikum Dortmund, pathogenic copy-number variants were selected for WES. WES Dortmund,Germany,6DepartmentforPediatricRadiology,University datawereanalyzedbasedontheprenatallyobservedultrasound of Leipzig Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany, 7Institute of Medical ﬁndingsand results of fetalautopsy. Genetics, Medical University Vienna, Wien, Austria, 8Institute of Results: WES detected 12 pathogenic variants, 3 likely Pathology, Philipps-University Marburg, Marburg, Germany. pathogenic variants, and 3 variants of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS) from this cohort. The Diagnostic yield for pathogenic and Biallelic polynucleotide kinase 3’-phosphatase (PNKP) variants likely pathogenic variants was 22% and reached 26% with the cause different disorders ranging from neurodevelopmental inclusion of VUS. In 9 fetuses (50% of cases) the diagnoses disorder with microcephaly/seizures to adult-onset Charcot- followed an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern in noncon- Marie-Tooth disease. To date, only postnatal descriptions have sanguineous couples (2 homozygous variants, 6 compound been described.The index was a male fetus with prenatally heterozygous variants and one variant with X-linked recessive diagnosed micro- and brachycephaly, brain malformations and inheritance) and in 9 cases the identiﬁed pathogenic variant microretrognathia at 13th gestational week. A recessive disorder occurred “de novo”. Affected genes included those associated was suspected because of previous termination of pregnancy with ciliopathic human genetic disorder, multisystem abnormal- (TOP) for similar abnormalities in a sister fetus. Prenatal exome ities, neurodevelopmental disorders, cardiac anomalies, renal sequencingusingDNAderivedfromamniocentesisandfromboth diseases,skeletal dysplasia and metabolic disorders. unrelated parents identiﬁed compound-heterozygosity for the Conclusion: These results supported the clinical utility of WES variants c.498G>A, p.[(=),0?] and c.302C>T, p.(Pro101Leu). Segre- for detecting the monogenic etiology of pregnancy loss. The gation analysis conﬁrmed both variants in the affected previous identiﬁcation of disease-associated variants provided information fetus. Syndromic oriented fetopathology after TOP of the male for follow-up genetic counseling of recurrence risk and manage- indexfetusrevealedmicrencephalywithpronouncedhypoplastic mentofsubsequentpregnancies.Ourcohortstudyillustrateshow frontal lobes, shortened occipital lobes, missing temporo-parietal high-resolution obstetric scan, detailed observation of fetal lobulation and hypoplastic cerebellum. To characterize aberrant features and application of exome sequencing; contribute to splicingofc.498G>A,weperformedRT-PCRanalysisonRNAfrom elucidate the etiology of pregnancy loss. Keywords: Exome fetal muscle and a paternal PAXgene sample. This conﬁrmed sequencing (WES); foetopathology; pregnancy loss, medical skipping of exon 4 affecting the FHA- and phosphatase-domains termination ofpregnancy. of PNKP (p.Leu67_Lys166del). To compare prenatal/postnatal A. Boughalem: None. D. Trost: None. C. Wells: None. A. phenotypes, we retrospectively investigated two unrelated male Lamouroux: None. V. Ciorna-Monferrato: None. A. Diakiese: EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 110 None.P.Kleinﬁnger:None.L.Lohmann:None.A.Luscan:None. d’Imagerie Jean-Violette, Geneva, Switzerland, 6Centre GynEcho, M.Valduga: None. J.Costa: None. P.Blanchet: None. Fribourg, Switzerland, 7HUG, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland, 8GHOL, Groupement hospitalier de l’Ouest Lémanique, Nyon, Switzerland, 9EchoFemme, Geneva, Switzerland, 10Genesup-  P01
.076.D Prenatal exome sequencing unravels unique co‐ port, Lausanne, Switzerland. occurrence of Congenital Idiopathic arterial calciﬁcation and congenitalGaucherdisease:Apotentialpitfallforcounseling Exome sequencing (ES) has become a standard test for undiagnosed developmental disorders, now increasingly used in Sara Hisham El-Dessouky1, Mohamed Elhodiby2, Ghada M. H. prenatal diagnosis. We report here our experience with 88 Abdel-Salam3 consecutive prenatal cases through ES. The most common fetal signswere:increasednuchaltranslucency(25%),congenitalheart 1Prenatal Diagnosis & Fetal Medicine Department, Human Genetics defect (22.7 %), skeletal malformations (22.7 %) and brain and Genome Research Division, National Research Centre, Cairo, abnormalities (11.4 %). After performing a-CGH, 28 cases had Egypt, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of solo and 60 trio ES. In 25 % of cases, we have identiﬁed a Medicine,M.U.S.T.University,Cairo,Egypt,3ClinicalGeneticsDepart- pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant (as per the ACMG ment, Human Genetics and Genome Research Division, National guidelines)likelycausativeofthefetalphenotype.Thediagnostic Research Centre,Cairo, Egypt. yield was 40 % for skeletal malformations, and roughly 20 % for nuchal translucency, congenital heart defect, and brain anomaly Introduction: The presence of two or more genetic disorders cases. In 18 of the solved cases, the pathogenic variants were representsachallengeforclinicalandmoleculardiagnosis.Ifone SNVs, while 2 were pathogenic structural variants (SV). Further- conditionremainsundiagnosed,theriskofrecurrencemaynotbe more,thetrioEShasidentiﬁedintwocasescompleteuniparental appropriately assessed. In this study, we present a complex fetal disomies UPD6 and UPD17, both including isodisomic segments phenotype that occurredin twosuccessive pregnancies. withlikelycausativerecessivegenes.ESisapowerfulandaccurate Materials and Methods: Prenatal ultrasound at 25 weeks methodfortheidentiﬁcationofcausativevariantsinprenatal;trio revealed the constellation of polyhydramnios, hydrops fetalis, sequencingreduces theturnaround timeand likelyincreases the hepatosplenomegaly, arthrogryposis, microcephaly, and develop- diagnostic yield. The VUS remain a diagnostic challenge and mental brain anomalies in the form of intracranial calciﬁcations, international guidelines are needed to assist in the interpretation ventriculomegaly and cerebellar hypoplasia. Additionally, exten- and disclosure of the results. The discovery of novel mendelian sive vascular and cardiac calciﬁcation in the form of diffuse, genesandtheintroductionofadditionallaboratoryandcomputa- echogenic cardiac outﬂow tracts, generalized hyperechogenicity tionalmethodssuchaslong-readsequencingandimprovementof in tricuspid, pulmonary valves, diffuse intrahepatic, renal and SVdetectionmayfurtherincreasethediagnosticyield. placental calciﬁcations were observed. The fetus suffered intrau- E. Ranza: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; terine demise at 30 weeks gestation. Autopsy conﬁrmed the Medigenome, Swiss Institute of Genomic Medicine. E. Ownership prenatalﬁndings.Prenatalexomesequencing(PWES),karyotyping Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual andmicroarray were arranged fromthefetal blood. property); Signiﬁcant; Medigenome, Swiss Institute of Genomic Results: PWES identiﬁed two novel homozygous missense Medicine.X.Blanc:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; variants in both the GBA gene (c.170G>A, p.Cys57Tyr) and the Medigenome,SwissInstituteofGenomicMedicine.F.Santoni:A. ABC C6
 (c.3381G>A, p.Met1127 Ile) gene pointing to the co- Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Medigenome, Swiss occurrence of congenital idiopathic arterial calciﬁcation and Institute of Genomic Medicine.F. Guerry: A.Employment (full or congenitalGaucherdisease.Allidentiﬁedvariantswereconﬁrmed part-time); Signiﬁcant; Medigenome, Swiss Institute of Genomic bySanger sequencing and validatedby parental testing Medicine. B. Conrad: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- Conclusion: This is the ﬁrst report of congenital idiopathic cant;Genesupport.Other;Signiﬁcant;Medigenome,SwissInstitute arterialcalciﬁcationcausedbyhomozygousmissensepathogenic ofGenomicMedicine.I.Eperon:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); variant in ABC C6
 gene and in combination with Gaucher Signiﬁcant;Dianecho.C.Tissot:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); syndrome. We believe that comprehensive phenotyping is Signiﬁcant; Clinique des Grangettes. C. Deluen: A. Employment essential for improving the diagnostic performance of PWES. (fullor part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genesupport. T. Araud:A. Employ- Additionally our study emphasizes that unexplained phenotypes ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genesupport. L. Baerlocher: may result from the occurrence of pathogenic variants of two or A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Genesupport. Y. moregeneticdisorders inthe same patient. Sayegh Martin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; S.H. El-Dessouky: None. M. Elhodiby: None. G.M.H. Abdel- Centre d’Imagerie Jean-Violette. A. Müller-Brochut: A. Employ- Salam:None. ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Centre GynEcho. C. Bisch: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Dianecho. J. Fluss: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; HUG, Geneva Uni-  P01
.077.A Exome sequencing in prenatal diagnosis: results versity Hospitals. J. Pellegrinelli: A. Employment (full or part- from88cases time);Signiﬁcant;HUG,GenevaUniversityHospitals.M.Carrasco: A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;GHOL,Groupement Emmanuelle Ranza1, Xavier Blanc1, Federico Santoni1, Frédéric Hospitalier de l’Ouest Lémanique. T. Quibel: A. Employment (full Guerry1, Bernard Conrad2, Isabelle Eperon3, Cécile Tissot4, Cécile orpart-time);Signiﬁcant;EchoFemme.S.Lacroix:A.Employment Deluen2,Tanguy Araud2,LoïcBaerlocher2,YasmineSayeghMartin5, (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; EchoFemme. P. Extermann: A. Anne-Claude Müller-Brochut6, Christian Bisch3, Joel Fluss7, Jean- Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Dianecho.G.Pescia:A. Marie Pellegrinelli7, Marta Carrasco8, Thibaud Quibel9, Sylvie Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Genesupport.R.Robyr Lacroix9, Philippe Extermann3, Graziano Pescia10, Romaine Robyr Susini:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;EchoFemme. Susini9, Stylianos E. Antonarakis1 E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; EchoFemme. S.E. Antonarakis: 1Medigenome,SwissInstituteofGenomicMedicine,Geneva,Switzer- A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Medigenome,Swiss land, 2Genesupport, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Dianecho, Geneva, InstituteofGenomicMedicine.E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stock Switzerland, 4Clinique des Grangettes, Geneva, Switzerland, 5Centre options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Medigenome,Swiss Institute ofGenomic Medicine. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 111  P01
.078.B Mosaic Trisomy 7: A case report of discrepancies chromosomal abnormalities was higher in the genesis of SPL between noninvasive screening for fetal trisomy, array CGH, (40.1%) compared to RPL (39.2%). Among most often diagnosed cytogenetics, and fetalultrasound chromosomalchangewastriploidy-24.53%inSPLvs24.51%in RPL,monosomyX-21.62%vs17.16%andtrisomy16-20.99%vs Dorela Kroni1, Merita Xhetani2,Marina Baldi3 26.96%. Conclusions. Consequently, detected of chromosome aneu- 1StemGen Partners Ltd, University of Medicine, Immunohematology ploidies in samples from products of conception is a key part of Department,Tirana,Albania,2UniversityofTirana,FacultyofNatural theinvestigations ofreproductive failure inhumans. Sciences, Department of Molecular Biology, Tirana, Albania, I.Tkach:None.N.Huleyuk:None.D.Zastavna:None.T.Liehr: 3GenomaLaboratories, GeneticDepartment, Roma,Italy. None.E. Ciszkowicz: None. Introduction: Here we report a case of mosaic trisomy 7 diagnosed incidentally, by the prenatal screening of cfDNA  P01
.080.DGenetictestingofmiscarriagesusingaQF-PCR/aCGH/ (CentoNIPT®) in a31 years old pregnant women resulted MLPA strategy: ﬁve years experiences from North-Eastern inconclusivefortrisomy21,18,and13at15weeksofgestation. Slovenia Array CGH was performed at 18 weeks of gestation. Male karyotype with mosaic chromosome 7 trisomy 7p22. 3q36. 3 alenka erjavec škerget, boris zagradišnik, andreja zagorac, špela was reported. Ultrasound reports on fetal growth and devel- stangler herodež, nadjakokalj vokač opment werenormal.Follow-up withcytogeneticskaryotyping at21weeksofgestationwasperformed,whichrevealedaresult University Clinical CentreMaribor, maribor, Slovenia. of apparently normal male karyotype 46, XY in cultured amniocytes. Simultaneously DNA testing of both parents and Introduction:Traditionaltestingofmiscarriagesamplesinvolved fetal cultured amniocytes was performed by PCR and UPD was cultureoftissuefollowedbyG-bandedchromosomeanalysis;this excluded. Two contradictions have led us to publish this case: approach has a high failure rate, is labour intensive and has a ﬁrst,conﬁrmationofreportedlimitationofNIPTinthedetection resolution of around 8-10 Mb. To improve diagnostic yield and of mosaicism, a trisomy 7 would have been reported, taking efﬁciency we have updated our testing strategy in 2016. Since intoconsiderationthattheanalysisisperformedoncfDNAwith then we use more comprehensive strategy: QF-PCR assay for all placental and fetal origin, the result of mosaic trisomy 7 might samples, followed by array CGH or MLPA, depends on a havebeenrelatedtoaplacentalmosaicismsituation,whichwas gestational age of the embrional material. Here we describe the conﬁrmed from Array CGH analyses. Second, cytogenetics on results fromthelast5 yearsof our strategy. cultured amniocytes conﬁrmed that fetal cells don’t have Methods: Fetal tissue samples and maternal samples were trisomy7buteitherarrayCGHnorcytogeneticswerediagnostic tested using QF-PCR for the detection of aneuploidy for and conﬁrmed the origin of the mosaic trisomy 7. chromosomes 13, 15, 16, 18, 21, 22, X and Y. Conﬁrmed fetal Conclusion: We suggest the necessity of a full panel NIPT sampleswithoutaneuplodyoftestedchromosomesandlessthan instead of a narrow panel NIPT for better time management of 15weeksofgestationalagewerethentestedbyMLPAwhilefetal pregnancyand inmosaic trisomy 7where UPDis excluded. samplesolder than15weaks wereanalyzedby aCGH. D.Kroni:None. M. Xhetani:None. M. Baldi: None. Results: From 335 analysed samples, 266 samples were conﬁrmed as fetal material (78,57%). In those QF-PCR analysis  P01
.079.C The contribution of chromosomal abnormalities in identiﬁed aneuploidy/triploidy in 21.42%. MLPA detected sub- the formation of sporadic and recurrent early reproductive telomeric imbalances in a further 12.79% (11 out of 86) while losses aCGH analysis detected imbalance in 4.87% (6 out of 123) of samples. All detected imbalances by aCGH were submicroscopic IrynaTkach1,NataliyaHuleyuk1,DanutaZastavna1,ThomasLiehr2, (in range 0.19-2.6Mb) and 2 out of 6 (33.33%) were classiﬁed as EwaCiszkowicz3 causativefor thespontaneous misscariage. Conclusions: This efﬁcient QF-PCR/aCGH/MLPA strategy has a 1Institute of Hereditary Pathology, NAMS of Ukraine, Lviv, Ukraine, lowerfailurerateandhigherdiagnosticyieldthankaryotype.Itis 2Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller University, Institute of thereforeanefﬁcientandcost-effectivediagnostictestingstrategy HumanGenetics,Jena,Germany,3DepartmentofBiotechnologyand formisscarriage products. Bioinformatics, Faculty of Chemistry,Rzeszow University of Technol- A. erjavec škerget: None. B. zagradišnik: None. A. zagorac: ogy,Rzeszow, Poland. None.Š. stangler herodež:None. N.kokalj vokač:None. Background:Spontaneousabortionoccursin15-20%ofclinically recognizedpregnancy.Thekaryotypeofaspontaneouslyaborted  P01
.081.A Deciphering the genetic cause of recurrent and of products of conception (POC) provides valuable clinical sporadic pregnancyloss information for the couple as well for basic research becouse provide important information for the recurrence risk of cytoge- RickEssers1,2,GaneshAcharya3,SalwanAl-Nasiry2,HG.Brunner2,4, netic abnormalities in subsequent pregnancies Aim. The aim of S. P. Deligiannis5, E. A. Fonova6, Alexander Hoischen4, Ants Kurg7, thepresentstudywastoinvestigatethecontributionofnumerical Igor N. Lebedev6, Merryn V. E. Macville1,2, T. V. Nikitina6, Andres chromosomalimbalancesinproductsofconceptionfromsporadic Salumets3,5, E. A. Sazhenova6, Servi J. C. Stevens1,2, E. N. pregnancyloss (SPL)and recurrent pregnancyloss (RPL). Tolmacheva6, MasoudZamani Esteki1,2 Methods: Banding cytogenetic and interphase mFISH with the probepanelforchromosomes13,14,15,16,17,18,21,22,XandY. 1GROW School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Depart- Results: Cytogenetic studies of 1720 spontaneously aborted ment of Genetics and Cell Biology, Maastricht, Netherlands, fetuses were performed. The results were stratiﬁed in 2 groups 2Maastricht University Medical Center MUMC+, Department of accordingtoanamnesis:GroupI(POCofﬁrstpregnancyandPOC Clinical Genetics, Maastricht, Netherlands, 3Karolinska Institutet and from lost pregnancy, with children in anamnesis) - 1199 samples Department of Women’s Health- Karolinska- University Hospital, and Group II (POC from RPL) - 521 samples. The contribution of EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 112 Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology- Department of Clinical Materials and methods: The patient had two consecutive Science- Intervention & Technology CLINTEC, Stockholm, Sweden, pregnancies with fetuses with short, bent femurs. DNA was 4Radboud University Medical Center, Department of Human isolated from amniotic ﬂuid. CMA and WES were done on Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Institute of Clinical Medicine- Affymetrix 750K and on Ion Torrent  S5
 platform (Thermo Fisher UniversityofTartu,DepartmentofObstetricsandGynecology,Tartu, Scientiﬁc), respectively, while Sanger sequencing used BigDye Estonia,6TomskNationalResearchMedicalCenter,ResearchInstitute Terminator kit. of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 7Institute of Results:FollowinganormalCMAresult,WESwasrecommended. Molecular and Cell Biology- University of Tartu, Department of Two novel homozygous variants were found in CRTAPgene (c.793 Biotechnology, Tartu, Estonia. +1G>T) and GNS (c.811A>G, p.Arg271Gly) and classiﬁed as pathogenicandlikelypathogenic,respectively,accordingtoACMG Introduction: Spontaneous abortion (SA) occurs in 10-15% of criteria.CRTAPgeneisassociatedwithosteogenesisimperfectatype clinically recognized pregnancies and recurrent pregnancy loss VII, while GNS – with mucopolysaccharidosis type III D. Sanger (RPL) in 1-3%. One potential cause for pregnancy loss is analysisconﬁrmedthatparentsarecarriers.RevisingCMA,longruns uniparental disomy (UPD). UPD can lead to imprinting disorders of homozygosity (ROH), including these two genes, were found. characterized by features affecting growth and development in Thus, an ultrasound anomaly led to the serendipitous discovery of liveborn offspring. This study aims to investigate the prevalence thesecondpathogenicmutation,whichotherwisewouldhavebeen andeffectof(mosaic)denovogenomicaberrationsinRPLandSA. missedaccordingtoprenatalchecks. Materials and Methods: We recruited 32 families with Conclusion: While this ﬁnding will allow the selection of the pregnancyloss(n=16RPLcohort,n=16SAcohort)withnormal appropriate management of the future pregnancies, it invites to karyotyping results in both parents and the fetus. DNA was further discussion about when to proceed to WES in cases of isolatedfrombloodofbothparentsandplacentaltissuesfromthe normalCMA withlong ROHs,regardlessultrasound results. miscarriedproductsofconception.Thetissuesoriginatefromthe A.C.Tutulan-Cunita:None.L.Dimos:None.A.G.Pavel:None. extraembryonic mesoderm (EM) and the chorionic villi (CV). We F.M.Nedelea: None. A.Naszan: None. D.Stambouli: None. performed SNP-genotyping (Illumina’s Global-Screening Array-24 v2.0 BeadChips) and applied haplarithmisis to delineate allelic architecture of fetal tissues.  P01
.083.C Retrospective study of cartilage-hair hypoplasia Results:Weanalyzed132DNAsamples(n=32families).Within carrier screening cases reveal frequent insertions in the the RPL cohort, we found aberrations in 6/16 families including: promoterregionofthe RMRPgene mosaic genome-wide hexaploidy and tetraploidy, non-mosaic genome-wideheteroUPD,mosaicUPDofchromosomes14,16,6, Ezen Choo, Trevor Smart, Nina Sanapareddy, Irina Rakova, J. and 5 in different families. Within the SA group, we found DianneKeen-Kim aberrationsin2/16familiesincluding:mosaicUPDofchromosome 7, segmental UPD of chromosome 5. All UPDs were maternally Natera,Inc, San Carlos, CA, USA. inherited. Conclusions: The prevalence of maternal UPD was 20.6% in Introduction: Mutations in RMRP, a nuclear encoded, intronless fetaltissues.Theseﬁndingscould leadtoabetter understanding gene,canleadtotheautosomalrecessive,multi-systemicdisease of causative factors for SA and RPL and the need for SNP-based cartilage-hair hypoplasia (CHH). Patient studies have revealed non-invasive prenatal testing. Grants: EVA (K P111513
), MUMC+; mutationsin boththepromoter and thetranscribed region. Horizon 2020 innovation (ERIN) (EU952516), European Commis- Materials and Methods: We retrospectively studied 51,599 sion;RFBR(20-315-90111) healthyindividualstestedwitha137or274genecarrierscreening R. Essers: None. G. Acharya: None. S. Al-Nasiry: None. H.G. panel. Samples were tested by next-generation sequencing with Brunner: None. S.P. Deligiannis: None. E.A. Fonova: None. A. orthogonalconﬁrmationbySangersequencingwhenPathogenic Hoischen: None. A. Kurg: None. I.N. Lebedev: None. M.V.E. orLikelyPathogenicvariantswereidentiﬁed.Polymorphismsand Macville: None. T.V. Nikitina: None. A. Salumets: None. E.A. Benign/ Likely Benign variants were not included in the analysis. Sazhenova:None.S.J.C.Stevens:None.E.N.Tolmacheva:None. We assessed the occurrence of alteration types and distribution M.Zamani Esteki: None. across thegene. Results: We identiﬁed 397 unique RMRP alterations, of which 20%(n=78)wereinsertions.Thedistributionofinsertionsacross  P01
.082.BRegionsofhomozygosityinprenatalinvestigation: the gene included 43 within the promoter, 8 involving the to sequenceor notto sequence? transcription initiation site, and 27 within the transcribed region. Unique insertions affecting the promoter and start (n=51) were AndreeaC.Tutulan-Cunita1,LuizaDimos1,AncaG.Pavel1,Florina moreprevalentandinvolvedlargerinsertions(basepairs,mean= M.Nedelea1,2,3,Azdasher Naszan4,Danae Stambouli1 14.4, range:1-64) than those in the transcribed region (n=27, mean=2.5, range:1-17). 1CytogenomicMedicalLaboratory,Bucharest,Romania,2Filantropia Conclusions: Given that RNA polymerase III promoters are Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3Carol Davila University of usually very short, it was surprising to ﬁnd larger and more Medicine, Bucharest, Romania, 4CF2 Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, diverse alterations inthe promoter thaninthe rest ofthegene Romania. in our carrier population. Up to 30bp promoter insertions have been reported in CHH patients. We identiﬁed 3 alterations Introduction:Manyseveregeneticdisorderscannotbeidentiﬁed >30bp in the promoter region. The predicted functional prenatally by cytogenomic analyses and, often, the parents are signiﬁcance is promoter inefﬁciency and reduced transcription; unaware of their carrier status. ACMG recommendations for however,theclinicalsigniﬁcanceandrisktopatientoffspringis prenatal diagnosis state that WES may be considered when to be determined. standardCMAandkaryotypeanalysisdidnotprovideadiagnosis. E. Choo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Natera, We present the case of a fetus of consanguineous parents with Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other ultrasound anomalies and normal CMA result, where WES intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc.. T. Smart: None. N. uncovered twodistinct pathogenic variants. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 113 Sanapareddy: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Introduction: Thrombocytopenia Absent Radius (TAR) syndrome Natera, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent is characterized by bilateral absent radii and thrombocytopenia, or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc. I. Rakova: sometimes associated with other skeletal, cardiac and genitour- A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc.. E. inary anomalies. It´s an autosomal recessive disorder and results Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other from compound heterozygosity of RBM8A pathogenic variants intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc. J. Keen-Kim: A. (onenullandonehypomorphicallele).CaseReport:Wereportthe Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc.. E. Own- case of a 32-year-old female, with an ongoing pregnancy of 16 ership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual weeks,norelevantpersonalorfamilyhistory,referredtoourclinic property); Signiﬁcant; Natera,Inc.. due to an altered fetal genetic study. In the 1st trimester ultrasound, an increased nuchal translucency was identiﬁed, without other changes. For this reason, a CVS was performed  P01
.088.D Russian women’s preferences about invasive and the fetal microarray revealed an interstitial deletion in the prenataltesting 1q21.1 region. Bearing in mind that the CNV in question encompassed the morbid RBM8A gene, in the medical genetics ElenaBaranova1,ElizavetaZaiaeva1,GaukharZobkova2,Lyudmila consultation we requested the sequencing of the RBM8A gene, Zhuchenko1, Svetlana Shelykalina3,Vera Izhevskaya4 since the simultaneous presence of the 1q21.1 deletion and a mutationintheotheralleleoftheRBM8Ageneisassociatedwith 1Federal State Budgetary Educational Institution of Further Profes- TARsyndrome.Inthe18-weekultrasound,bilateralagenesisofthe sional Education "Russian Medical Academy of Continuous Profes- radius, ulna and humerus was identiﬁed, with hands visible sional Education" of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian bilaterally. The couple opted for medical termination of preg- Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2LLC Evogen, Moscow, nancy. Posteriorly, the sequencing of the RBM8A gene revealed Russian Federation, 3National Research Medical University named thepathogenic variant c.-21G>A, inhemizygosis, conﬁrmingthe afterN.I.PirogovoftheMinistryofHealthofRussia,Moscow,Russian diagnosis of TAR syndrome. The parents’ family study revealed a Federation,4Research CentreforMedicalGenetics, Moscow,Russian paternaloriginofthe1q21.1deletionandamaternaloriginofthe Federation. mutation intheRBM8A gene. Introduction: In early prenatal screening, regardless of the Conclusion:Fetalskeletaldysplasiacomprisesacomplexgroup technologyused,conﬁrmationofthefetalchromosomalabnorm- ofdisorders,whereamultidisciplinaryapproachisessentialforthe ality (CA) is required by invasive prenatal diagnosis. Russian diagnosisofrare clinicalentities. women’s preferences about invasive prenatal testing (IPT) are S. Pérez: None. B. Carrilho: None. A. Bernardo: None. A. poorlyunderstood.Theaimofstudywastoﬁndoutthereadiness Martins:None. Á.Cohen: None. I.Carvalho: None. of pregnant women to undergo IPT to diagnose fetal CA and terminatepregnancyifpathologyisdetected.Thematerialofthe research:theresultsofasurveyof800pregnantwomenfrom16  P01
.090.B Telomere length dynamics during human preim- regions inRussia. plantation development Results: It was shown that 451 (56.3%) women are ready to undergoIPTwithahighriskoffetalCA,39(4.8%)-willnotdothe Mikhail I. Krapivin, Anna A. Pendina, Olga A. Eﬁmova, Irina D. procedure,281(35.1%)wereundecided,29(3.6%)didnotanswer Mekina, Evgeniia M. Komarova, Andrei V. Tikhonov, Olga G. the question. Women who agreed to carry out an IPT, compared Chiryaeva,AlexanderM.Gzgzyan,IgorY.Kogan,VladislavS.Baranov withthosewhodecidednottocarryoutanIPT,moreoftennoted the importance of obtaining the most complete and early D.O.OttResearchInstituteofObstetrics,GynecologyandReproduc- information. Among the respondents, only a quarter of women, tology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. 209 (26.1%) are ready to terminate a pregnancy in the case of identiﬁedfetalCA,84(10.5%)willnotterminateapregnancy,474 Telomeres are complex structures that cap the ends of chromo- (59.2%)havenotdecided,33(4.1%)didnotanswerthequestion. somesandhelptomaintaingenomicintegrityandstability.Since Women who made the decision to terminate pregnancy in the telomere shorten after each cell division, their restoration during caseofidentiﬁedfetalCAwereolder,hadmorechildren, among thetransitionofDNAtoanewgenerationisofcrucialimportance. them thereweremorewomen with highereducation. Weanalyzedtelomerelength(TL)inmetaphasesfrom67human Conclusions: The main preferences of pregnant women with embryos, unsuitable for transfer into the uterine cavity due to regardtoundergoinginvasiveprenataltestingandterminationof abnormal ploidy or morphology. For metaphase preparations, pregnancy in case of detection of a chromosomal abnormality zygotes and embryos were treated with colchicines, hypotonic wererevealed. solution and ﬁxed on the glass slides. We analyzed TLs in 84 E. Baranova: None. E. Zaiaeva: None. G. Zobkova: None. L. metaphases from zygotes, 14 metaphases from the embryos at Zhuchenko: None. S.Shelykalina: None. V. Izhevskaya: None. the 3-5-cell stage, 12 metaphases from the embryos at the 6-12- cellstage, and 49 metaphases from theblastocysts. To avoid the inﬂuenceofchromatincompaction,TLsweremeasuredasrelative  P01
.089.A A rare case of fetal skeletal dysplasia: TAR values by dividing telomeric by subtelomeric ﬂuorescence syndrome intensity. The comparison of relative TL medians between the stages of preimplantation development showed signiﬁcant Soﬁa Pérez1, Bruno Carrilho2, Ana Bernardo2, Ana Teresa Martins2, differences: TL increased in the period from the zygote up to Álvaro Cohen2, Inês Carvalho1 the 3-5-cell stage (Mann-Whitney test, p=0.02) and from the zygote to the 6-12-cell stage (Mann-Whitney test, p<0.0001). 1Genetic Service, Pediatric Department, Hospital de Dona Estefânia, Then,TLdecreasedfromthe6-12-cellstagetotheblastocyststage Centro Hospitalar Universitário de Lisboa Central, EPE, Lisboa, (Mann-Whitneytest,p<0.0001). Thus, weobserved thewavesof Portugal,2PrenatalDiagnosticCenter,MaternidadeAlfredodaCosta, TL changes during preimplantation human development, with a Centro Hospitalar Universitário de Lisboa Central, EPE, Lisboa, peakat6-12-cellstagefollowedbyadecreaseuptotheblastocyst Portugal. stage.ThesealterationsofTLmaybearesultoftelomericregion EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 114 recombination and, thus, does not require telomerase activity conservative PPV for vanished twin gestations was 460/786 whichisabsentuntiltheblastocyststage.SupportedbyRSF№18- (58.5%). When cases of suspected vanished twins were included, 75-10046. thePPVimproved to499/786 (63.5%). M.I.Krapivin:None.A.A.Pendina:None.O.A.Eﬁmova:None. Conclusions:WithﬁvetimesthenumberofcasesasCurnowet I.D.Mekina:None.E.M.Komarova:None.A.V.Tikhonov:None. al., this study shows an improved triploidy PPV (7.5% versus O.G.Chiryaeva:None.A.M.Gzgzyan:None.I.Y.Kogan:None.V. previously reported 5.3% PPV.) When triploidy is combined with S.Baranov: None. vanished twin gestation, we observed an improved overall PPV (66.0% versus 47.4%). Our cohort conﬁrms the ability of a SNP- based NIPT to detect triploidy and shows an improved PPV that  P01
.091.CTwoRareCasesofMiscarriage:AneuploidTriploidy canbetterinformpost-testcounselingforbothfetalandmaternal complications. Mustafa Oguz Acar1, Sule Altiner1, Nuket Yurur Kutlay1, Ajlan V.Kantor:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Natera, Tukun2 Inc.. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc. K. Young: A. 1Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Duzen Laboratories Group, Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc.. E. Own- Ankara,Turkey. ership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc. W. DiNonno: A. Employment Introduction: More than 50% of early pregnancy losses have a (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc.. E. Ownership Interest chromosomalabnormality.Triploidyisaccountingfor∼10%ofall (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); spontaneous abortions.Here, two fetuses with atypical triploid Signiﬁcant; Natera, Inc.. karyotype referred to medical genetic department due to miscarriage at the12thgestational weekwill be presented. Materials and Methods: Conventional cytogenetic and FISH  P01
.093.A Trisomy 8 mosaicism in the placenta: a Danish analyses of both abort tissues were carried out according to cohortstudy of37 casesandaliterature review standard procedure, following tissue culture. STR analysis was used to determine the parental origins of the tetraploid SimonH.Thomsen chromosomes. Results: Karyotyping revealed, 70,XXY,+18 and 71,XXXX,+6 AarhusUniversity, Aarhus, Denmark. formations, respectively. Presence of extra chromosomes was conﬁrmed with FISH analysis. As expected, karyotypes of both Objective:Toevaluatetheriskoffetalinvolvementwhentrisomy parentswerenormal. 8mosaicism (T8M) isdetected inchorionic villussamples (CVS). Conclusions: Although triploidy is common in abortion Methods: A retrospective descriptive study of registered materials, the case accompanied by tetrasomy of some chromo- pregnancies in Denmark with T8M in CVS identiﬁed through a somes has been rarely reported in the literature. Possible database search and a review of published cases of T8M found mechanisms to explain these chromosomal abnormalities will be through a systematic literature search and inclusion of cross discussed indetail. references. Pregnancies with T8M in CVS and no additional M.O. Acar: None. S. Altiner: None. N. Yurur Kutlay: None. A. numericalchromosomal aberrations were included. Tukun: None. Results:Atotalof37Danishcasesand60publishedcaseswere included. T8M detected in a CVS was associated with fetal involvement in 18 out of 97 pregnancies (18.6% [95%CI: 11.4-  P01
.092.D Triploidy/Vanished Twin Detection: Updated clin- 27.7]). Eight out of 70 (11.4% [95%CI: 5.1-21.3]) interpreted ical experience following Single Nucleotide Polymorphism- prenatally to be conﬁned placental mosaicism (CPM) were basedNIPTtwins validation subsequentlyfound tobe true fetal mosaicisms(TFM). Conclusion:T8MdetectedinCVSposesasigniﬁcantriskoffetal ValKantor, Kathryn Young,Wendy DiNonno involvement, and examination of amniotic ﬂuid (AF) and/or fetal tissueshouldbeoffered.However,anormalresultofAFstillhasa Natera,Inc, San Carlos, CA, USA. considerable residual risk of fetal involvement. Genetic counsel- ling at an early gestational age is essential, and follow-up Introduction: Occurring in ~1-2% of clinically recognized ultrasonography should be performed to predict fetal involve- pregnancies, triploidy carries risk for miscarriage, fetal anomalies, mentifpossible.Funding:IdaVogelisfundedbyaresearchgrant and maternal complications. Detection is critical for medical fromtheNovo Nordic Foundation: NNF16O C0018772
 management. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-based NIPT S.H.Thomsen: None. was previously validated to detect additional fetal haplotypes consistent with triploidy, vanished twin, or viable twin gestation. InOctoberof2017viabletwingestationswerevalidatedforSNP-  P01
.094.B Mosaicism for genome-wide paternal uniparental based NIPT. This study determines an updated PPV for triploidy disomy -twoprenatal cases usingSNP-basedNIPT,followingtheremovalofknownviabletwin gestations. RaquelLemos1,CíntiaVentura1,FátimaTorres1,GabrielaFernandes1, Methods: Retrospective outcome was obtained on 1005 cases Isabel Durães1, Áurea Pereira1, Patricia Costa1, Jorge Castro2, withvanishedtwin/triploidyresults,followingaSNP-basedNIPT’s Conceição Brito2, RitaCerqueira1 twin validation. Pregnancy outcomes were deﬁned as: conﬁrmed triploidy,suspectedtriploidy,conﬁrmedvanishedtwin,suspected 1CGCgenetics UNILABS, Porto, Portugal, 2CHVNG, Obstetrícia, Vila vanishedtwin, and normalsingleton. Nova de Gaia, Portugal. Results:Of1005cases,outcomewasobtainedfor786 (78.2%) cases. Including only cases of conﬁrmed triploidy, data analysis Introduction:Uniparentaldisomy(UPD)istheabnormalsituation indicates a triploidy PPV of 59/786 (7.5%). If cases of suspected inwhichbothmembersofachromosomepairareinheritedfrom triploidy are included the PPV improves to 85/786 (10.8%). The one parent, and the other parent’s chromosome for that pair is EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 115 missing.UPDofthewholegenomeisnotconsistentwithlifebut determine the pathogenicity of the variant and speciﬁc risk of mosaic genome-wide UPD might be compatible with life. We recurrence. present 2 cases of prenatal diagnosis with paternal uniparental N.Capdevila:None.N.Baena:None.S.Pina:None.M.Pauta: isodisomy (GWpUPD) after contradictory QF-PCR and fetal None.M. Segura: None. A.Borrell: None. karyotype results. The fetuses died and the placentas had hydatidiform moles criteria. Methods: Cytogenetic analysis was performed on 20 meta-  P01
.096.D Prenatal TRIO WES sequencing for fetal structural phases,stainedwithGTGbands,fromthreeindependentcultures. ultrasound anomalies The most frequent aneuploidies by QF-PCR test was performed after DNA extraction from the fetus sample with STR markers Detlef TROST1, Aïcha Boughalem1, Amandine Diakiese1, Patricia speciﬁc for chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y. Chromosomal Blanchet2,VioricaCiorna-Monferrato3,PascaleKleinﬁnger1,Laurence microarray study (aCGH) was performed, after DNA extraction Lohmann1,Mylène Valduga1,Armel Luscan1, Jean MarcCosta1 from the fetus sample, using the Affymetrix Cytoscan 750K platform.ResultsInbothcases,theresultofQF-PCRtestrevealeda 1Laboratoires CERBA, 95310 ST OUEN L’AUMONE, France, 2CHU proﬁle compatible with triploidy discrepant from the karyotype Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, 34295 Montpellier cedex 5, France, that revealed a normal female chromosomal constitution. The 3CHRMetz-Thionville, 57085 Metz Cedex 03, France. aCGHontheAffymetrixCytoscanplatformallowedtheconﬁrma- tionofthemosaicismforuniparentaldisomyforallchromosomes. The usefulness of whole exome sequencing (WES) for genetic Theseresults togetherare compatible withGWpUPD. testing in cases presenting with fetal structural ultrasound Conclusions:Thearticulationbetweenthedifferenttechniques anomalies is currently evaluated. In our cohort WES was was essential for the distinction between triploidy, mosaic for performed on 128 fetus -parents TRIOs with fetal structural GWpUPD and a normal result. A prenatal case with a normal anomaliesinongoingpregnanciesandnormalkaryotypeandCNV ﬁbroblastskaryotypeandasuspectedhydatidiformmolewithout analysis. Genomic DNA was extracted from CVS or amniotic ﬂuid further studies could bemisdiagnosed. samples. WES data were analyzed based on the prenatally R. Lemos: None. C. Ventura: None. F. Torres: None. G. observed ultrasound ﬁndings. Pathogenic, or likely pathogenic, Fernandes: None. I. Durães: None. Á. Pereira: None. P. Costa: single nucleotide variants were identiﬁed in 28 of 128 (35.8%) None.J. Castro:None. C.Brito: None. R.Cerqueira: None. cases, all were compatible with respective fetal structural anomalies.In15casestheidentiﬁedpathogenicvariantoccurred “de novo”, two times an autosomal variant was found to be of  P01
.095.C Reassessing the clinical pathogenicity of genomic maternaloriginwithprobablyincompletepenetrance.In11ofthe variantbased on family history in twoprenatal cases studied fetuses recessive disorders were detected for couples unawareoftheircarrierstatus,thesewerehomozygousin7cases Núria Capdevila1, Neus Baena1, Silvia Pina1, Montserrat Pauta2, (with4consanguineouscouples) andcompositeheterozygousin Maria Segura3, Antoni Borrell2 4cases.Wecorrelatedthediagnosticyieldtothemajorultrasound ﬁndings, which may help to establish high risk ultrasound 1Parc Taulí Sabadell, University Hospital, Sabadell, Spain, 2Clinic ﬁndings, needing investigation beyond fetal karyotyping or CNV Hospital,Barcelona,Spain,3QuantitativeGenomicMedicineLabora- analyses. Prenatal WES analyses enabled us to provide pertinent tories, qGenomics, Esplugas delLlobregat, Spain. genetic counseling and to offer targeted prenatal diagnosis in case ofa newpregnancyin 35.8%ofour couples. Introduction:Wholeexomesequencing(WES)isadiagnostictool D. Trost: None. A. Boughalem: None. A. Diakiese: None. P. in postnatal settings for individuals with a suspected genetic Blanchet: None. V. Ciorna-Monferrato: None. P. Kleinﬁnger: condition. Recently, it is increasingly used as a diagnostic tool in None.L.Lohmann:None.M.Valduga:None.A.Luscan:None.J. prenatalsettingswithadiagnosticyieldrangingfrom15%to35%. Costa:None. The aim is to evaluate the pathogenicity of two genetic variants foundbyWESandinheritedfromoneparentanddeterminatethe riskof recurrence forthecouple.  P01
.097.A Prenatal diagnosis of Wieckaer-Wolff syndrome, a Methods:WESwasperformedinfetalsampleswithultrasound distinctive phenotype of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita anomalies, previous prenatal CGH-array with normal result. caused by a‘de novo’Z C4
H2 partial deletion MedExomeanalysisusingNextSeq(Illumina).Variantandsegrega- tion studieswere conﬁrmedby Sanger sequencing. ArmelleDuquenne1,CharlotteDeneufbourg1,JeanMarcM.Biard2, ResultsCase 1: A 34-years-old pregnant woman was referred YvesSznajer1 due to prenatal ultrasound of frontal antlers fusion, suspicion of holoprosencephaly, clubhand and facial proboscis. In the collec- 1Center for Human Genetics, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, tionoffamilyhistory,itisnoticedthatthefatherpresentsbilateral UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Obstetrics, Cliniques universitaires culbfeet and hypertelorism. WES detected a paternally inherited Saint-Luc,UCLouvain, Brussels, Belgium. heterozygous variant c.3323G>T GLI2 (NM_005270). Case 2: Prenatalultrasoundat18weeksdetectedshorteningupperlimbs Introduction: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) deﬁnes compatible with phocomelia in a 29-years-old woman. Family phenotype when contractures are present in ≥ 2 joints. Mono- history shows the father has bilateral thumb hypoplasia and genicconditions/cytogenetic CNVhavebeenidentiﬁedinawide abnormal electrocardiogram. WES detected paternally inherited range of diagnosis with AMC (Hall 2017). A distinctive syndromic heterozygous variant c.663+1G>A TBX5 (NM_181486.4). After formwasoriginallydescribedpostnatallyinmaleswith‘clubfeet’, genetic counselling the pregnancies were terminated in both intellectual disability, ophthalmic dyspraxia and muscle atrophy cases. Initially, the variants detected were not reported as a (Wieckaer 1985). Intragenic deletion/point mutations in Z C4
H2 responsible of the foetal phenotype until the family history was genehavebeenidentiﬁedresponsibleforthisX-linkedcondition collected. (OMIM314580/ZARD:‘Z C4
H2associatedrarediseases’).Overtime, ConclusionTheuseofWESinfoetuseswithultrasounddefects case reports and recent largest review showed that females may previous an accurate compilation of family history is required to be affected; haploinsufﬁciency was noted in 3; prenatal EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 116 presentation in 6 unrelated fetuses (Frints 2019). The Belgian D. Aydos: None. S. Aydos: None. Y. Yukselten: None. A. consortiuminprenataldiagnosis(BEMAPRE)deﬁnedSNP-arrayas Sunguroglu: None. K. Aydos:None. the ﬁrst-tier diagnostic approach for congenital malformation  P01
.099.C Hemizygous loss of Xq26.2-q26.3 including GP C3
, (Vanakker2013). GP C4
 andPHF6in afetus withlethal complex malformations Method-Case Report: A pregnant woman was referred at 22 weeks to our tertiary care center for sporadic arthrogryposis, Christa Überbacher, Irene Mutz-Dehbalaie, Renate Lunzer, Ingrid ‘unusualthinleftleg’,‘clinodactyly’,normalgrowthparametersin Weber, Johannes Zschocke, Christine Fauth a female fetus. Ultrasound study was otherly normal. Invasive procedure(amnioticﬂuidpuncture)wasperformedandSNP-array Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. (Affymetrix CytoScan 750K) identiﬁed a heterozygous 262kbs deletioninXq11.2.Breakpointencompassesexon1ofZ C4
H2;no Introduction: Hemizygous deletions of parts of the contiguous gene deletion was noted. SNP-array to parents X-chromosome are rare and due to the nullisomy for essential conﬁrmed a ‘de novo’ occurrence. Parents asked for termination genesoftenincompatiblewithlife.Typically,affectedmaleshave of pregnancy. A short neck, anomaly on 4 limbs (distal ﬁngers acontiguousgenesyndrome,whichincludesphenotypicfeatures camptodactyly, unusual thin and amyotrophic appearance of left ofdifferentdisorders.Here,wedescribetheprenatalandautopsy legwithhomolateral clubfoot) werenoted. ﬁndingsofamalefetuswithlethalcomplexmalformationsdueto Conclusion: We report on the seventh fetus with Wieacker- ahemizygous deletionXq26.2-q26.3. Wolff syndrome. Cytogenetic work-up allows for precise genetic Methods and Results: Routine ﬁrst trimester screening counselling. The recurrence risk is related to X-linked gonadal detected several abnormalities (nuchal edema, ascites, dextro- mosaïcism (±10%). versiocordis,exomphalos,growthretardation)whichprompted A.Duquenne:None.C.Deneufbourg:None.J.M.Biard:None. molecular karyotyping. A male karyotype with a 2 Mb Y.Sznajer: None. hemizygous interstitial deletion Xq26.2-q26.3 harbouring sev- eral disease genes was found (GP C3
, Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome 1, SGB S1
, MIM #312870; GP C4
, Keipert syndrome,  P01
.098.B Impaired WNT/beta-catenin signaling pathway in KPTS, MIM #301026; PHF6, Borjeson-Forssman-Lehmann syn- the etiology ofazoospermia drome BFLS, MIM #301900;HPRT1,Lesch-Nyhansyndrome,LNS #300322).Theparentsdecidedforterminationofthepregnancy. Dunya Aydos1, Sena Aydos2, Yunus Yukselten3, Asuman Sungur- Autopsy conﬁrmed ultrasound ﬁndings and revealed additional oglu2, KaanAydos4 features/malformations like hydrocephalus, hypertelorism, cleft lip and palate, bilobar lung, agenesis of the diaphragm, 1Ankara University Stem Cell Institute, Ankara, Turkey, 2Department polysplenia, anal atresia, syndactyly of ﬁngers and toes, and of Medical Biology, Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, broaddistalphalanges.Themajorityoftheseﬁndingsbelongto Turkey,3ResearchLaboratoriesforHealthScience,YGenBiotechnol- the phenotypic spectrum of SGB S1
 with the exception of ogyCompanyLtd.,Ankara,Turkey,4DepartmentofUrology,Ankara intrauterine growth retardation. Another notable ﬁnding is the University Faculty ofMedicine, Ankara, Turkey. severity of the diaphragm defect: diaphragmatic hernia is frequentinSGB S1
butagenesisofthediaphragmhasnotbeen Introduction: Dysregulated WNT signaling in Sertoli cells or in previously reported. germ cells is associated with male infertility, in particular the Conclusion: The hemizygous interstitial deletion Xq26.2-q26.3 Sertoli cell-only (SCO) pattern in testis. Secreted WNT ligands are leadstoacontiguous genesyndrome with congenitalmalforma- important in development and maintenance of adult tissue tions mostly typical of SGB S1
. Nullisomy of neighbouring genes homeostasis and are antagonized by multiple secreted inhibitors like GP C4
 and PHF6 may modulate/aggravate the severity of the that prevent ligand-receptor interactions, such as Wnt-inhibitory phenotype. factor 1 (WIF1). Understanding the association of WNT signaling C. Überbacher: None. I. Mutz-Dehbalaie: None. R. Lunzer: components with spermatogonia proliferation/differentiation; None.I. Weber: None. J.Zschocke: None. C.Fauth: None. induction of apoptosis in postmitotic germ cells could help elucidating the etiology of azoospermia. To interrelate perturbed WNT signaling control and germ cell differentiation, we proﬁled  P01
.100.D Analysis of preimplantation human and bovine expression levels of canonical WNT ligand, WNT6 and WNT embryoswithregardtoXISTrepressiononthefutureactiveX inhibitors,WNT5B and WIF1. Materials and methods: Fold changes in expression levels of MelisAtalarAksit1,BoYu2,BernardA.J.Roelen3,BarbaraMigeon1 WNT5B, WNT6 and WIF1 were determined by quantitative PCR in testicular samples taken with microTESE intervention in 1McKusick Nathans Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins NOAcaseswithSCOsyndrome(n=10)andcontrolcaseswithOA University,Baltimore,MD,USA,2FarmAnimalHealth,Departmentof (n=2). Population Health Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands, Results: WNT5B, WNT6 transcripts were found signiﬁcantly 3Embryology, Anatomy and Physiology, Department of Clinical upregulated (3.51±1.11 and 30.23±14.04 fold-change, respec- Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, tively) as compared with control cases with OA (P<0.05). WIF1 Netherlands. gene expression levels showed a signiﬁcant (P<0.001) decrease (0.41±0.11fold-change) comparedwith OAgroup. X inactivation is the means of equalizing the dosage of X Conclusions: In NOA cases increased WNT5B mRNA levels chromosomal genes in male and female mammals, so that there suggests an association with increased nuclear β-catenin in is only one active X in each cell. The XIST locus (in cis) on each postmitotic germ cells and defective spermatogenesis. WNT6 additionalXchromosomeinitiatesitssilence,makingitaninactive secreted by Sertoli cells activates WNT/β-catenin signaling in X. Yet, how the active X in both males and females is protected spermatogonia. Also, a decrease in WIF1 levels causes β-catenin frombeingsilencedbyitsownXISTlocusisnotwellunderstoodin activation. In Sertoli cells, aberrant activation of canonical WNT any mammal. Previous studies of autosomal duplications suggest signalingkeepsthemimmature,whichmayinterruptmalefertility that gene(s) on the short arm of human chromosome 19 viaprogressive degeneration ofseminiferous tubules. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 117 genetically interact with the X chromosome to repress XIST  P02
 Sensory Disorders(Eye, Ear, Pain) function on the future active human X. Here, we examine the time of transcription of the candidate genes from human  P02
.001.BIdentiﬁcationoftwodeletionsofthecis-regulatory chromosome 19 and its ortholog, bovine chromosome 7, using region of the POU3F4 gene in patients with nonsyndromic single cell RNA sequence data from preimplantation human and sensorineuraldeafness fromNorth Ossetia,Russia qRT-PCRdatafrombovineembryos.OurresultssuggestthatXIST onthefutureactiveXisrepressedinbothsexesjustbefore,orat Rena A. Zinchenko1,2, Tatyana A. Vasilyeva1, Natalya V. Balinova1, the time that, the pluripotent factors are upregulated during the Vitaly V. Kadyshev1, Elena F. Mikhailidi3, Nika V. Petrova1, Sergey I. 4-8 cell stage in the human and bovine embryo, well before the Kutsev1 late blastocyst when XIST is upregulated on the inactive X in females. They also narrow the list of these putative candidate 1ResearchCenterforMedical Genetics,Moscow, RussianFederation, humanandbovinegenes. 2N.A. Semashko National Research Institute of Public Health, M. Atalar Aksit: None. B. Yu: None. B.A.J. Roelen: None. B. Moscow,RussianFederation,3RepublicanChildren’sClinicalHospital, Migeon: None. Vladikavkaz, RussianFederation. Х-linkeddeafness2(DFNX2)representsthemostcommonformof  P01
.101.A Y-chromosome abnormalities in men with repro- Х-linkeddeafness(OMIMP S304500
).Itischaracterizedbycochlear ductive failure incomplete partition with ﬁstulous communication with internal auditory canal. Mixed conductive and sensorineural deafness is Mariela Hristova-Savova, Kalina Belemezova, Yuri Batchvarov, developing. DFNX2 is associated with small intragenic POU3F4 Petya Andreeva, Daniela Savova, Maria Yunakova, Tanya Timeva, mutations or chromosome rearrangements involving Xq21 AtanasShterev, Ivanka Dimova chromosome region. Rearrangements comprise 50% of DFNX2 geneticcauses. SAGBAL"D-r Shterev", Soﬁa,Bulgaria. Material and methods: 65 North Ossetian patients (Ironian OssetianethnicsubgroupfromtheNorthCaucasusregionofRussia) Background: The human Y chromosome harbors genes that are areincludedintothestudy.MLPAanalysisoftheXq21isimplied. responsible for testis development and also for initiation and Results: In two unrelated male patients representing sporadic maintenanceofspermatogenesisinadulthood.Maleinfertilitycan cases of Х-linked deafness a deletion in Xq21.1 has been beattributedtoseveralfactorssuchascryptorchidism,varicocele, identiﬁed: hg18:chrX:g.(081676507_081728494)_ endocrinological disorders, obstruction/absence of seminal path- (081728798_081866106)del. That removes distal cis-regulatory ways,infections,alcoholconsumptionorchemotherapy.However, region in ~920 kb upstream from the POU3F4 gene and does geneticalterationshavealsoemergedasoneoftheleadingcause not affect its coding sequence. Chromosome break points have ofmaleinfertility.Theobjectiveofourstudywastoinvestigatethe notbeendetermined.Sizecouldvaryfrom300bpto200,000bp. type and frequency of Y-chromosome abnormalities in male Earlier,twootherdeletionsinthesamearea(~8kband~200kbof infertility. size)wereidentiﬁedin Europe. Materials and methods: We have analyzed by cytogenetic Conclusions: Observations of similar chromosome region dele- analysis 1063 men, attending reproductive clinic. Among them, tions in patients from different populations from West Europe and we have applied also PCR analysis for Yq AZF microdeletions in the North Caucasus indicate that Xq21 region with its multiple 139 men with azoospermia and 195 men with conserved noncoding sequences is a hot spot for chromosome oligoasthenozoospermia. breaks.ThatrequirestoincludeXq21deletionsscreening,aswellas Results:Overall,36outof1063menweredetectedwithsome targetSangersequencingofthePOU3F4geneintheroutineanalysis Y-chromosome cytogenetic aberrations - their types and fre- of the molecular causes of inherited deafness. The research was quencyare shown intheTable. partiallysupportedbyRSFgrant№17-15-01051andwithinthestate taskoftheMinistryofeducationandscienceofRussia R.A. Zinchenko: None. T.A. Vasilyeva: None. N.V. Balinova: None.V.V.Kadyshev:None.E.F.Mikhailidi:None.N.V.Petrova: None.S.I. Kutsev:None.  P02
.002.C Genetic and environmental factors inﬂuencing sensorydecays during aging inalarge Italian cohort Giorgia Girotto1, Massimiliano Cocca2, Anna Morgan2, Eulalia Catamo2, Paola Tesolin1, Agnese Feresin1, Paolo Gasparini1, Maria BothnumericalandstructuralY-chromosomeaberrationswere PinaConcas2 detected in 1.7% of infertile men. Correlations with clinical and laboratoryparameterswereperformed.PCRanalysisrevealedAZF 1UniversityofTrieste-IRCCS-BurloGarofolo,Trieste,Italy,2IRCCS-Burlo a,b or c Y-deletions in 9 out of 139 azoospermic (6.5%) and in 2 Garofolo,Trieste, Italy. out of195 oligoasthenozoospermic men(1%). Conclusion:Y-chromosomecytogeneticandmolecular-genetic Sensoryperceptionchangesoveralifetimeanditsimpairmentplaya aberrations were found in 4.4% of infertile men. The accurate criticalroleinhealthandqualityoflife.Studiespublisheduntilnow genetic diagnosis has a great impact on decision making for havefocusedonsinglesensoryimpairmentsinelderlypeoplewhile clinical management of these patients, offering in the affected data on the signiﬁcant “multisensory phenotype” (MS) are still patientsPGT-A orspermdonor. lacking. Genetic and phenotypic data (hearing, taste and smell M.Hristova-Savova:None.K.Belemezova:None.Y.Batchvarov: evaluatedthroughsensoryfunctionsassessment)of1152individuals None.P.Andreeva:None.D.Savova:None.M.Yunakova:None.T. have been investigated. MS was calculated as the total number of Timeva:None.A.Shterev:None.I.Dimova:None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 118 impaired senses. The following steps have been applied: 1) Morethan33genesarerelatedtoalbinismandthesecanexplain regression models to assess the association between MS and the genetic background of 70-75% of all albinism cases. Among personal/lifestylecharacteristics,2)GWASmeta-analysisand3)gene- theseTYRisthemostdetectedgene.Hereweaimedtodetermine basedanalysistoﬁndgeneticinﬂuencesonMS.Regarding(1),male the genetic background of TYR negative cases by clinical exome gender,ageing,andloweducationallevelwereassociatedwithMS analysis. higher values (p-value<0.05) while no role was recognized for MaterialsandMethods:NineTYRnegativecaseswerestudied smokinghabitandhighalcoholconsumption.ForGWASanalysis(2), by clinical exome sequencing. Analyzes of the raw data were atotalofsevengenesresultedinbeingassociatedwithMS(p-value carried out both with ACURARE in-house pipeline and SOPHiA <1x10-6).Inparticular,BC L7
CandMACROD2,bothexpressedinthe GENETICS software. The sequences were mapped and aligned brainandintheinnerear,havebeenrecentlyassociatedwithLewy with the GRCh38 reference genome. The detected variants were body dementia and neurological disorders, respectively. Finally, evaluated according to the ACMG guideline. Candidate variants gene-based analysis (3) highlighted several genes implicated in werevalidatedbySangersequencinginpatientsandsegregation sensory signalling pathways such as LSAMP, PRKG1, GNG7, RYR3, analyzeswereperformedinthefamilymembersthatcanprovide PTPRN2.Presentdatashowthatseveralfactors-bothenvironmental samples. and genetic - inﬂuence concomitant sensory declines. Further Results: A homozygous variant was identiﬁed in allnine cases investigation (GWAS replication combined with in vivo studies in and eight of them were novel. The gene variants were animalmodels)areneededtoconﬁrmourresultsthatwillultimately summarized in Table1. The family members were heterozygous help to understand better the complex biological mechanisms carriers ofthe samevariant detected intheindex case. underlyingMISandageing. Conclusion: The results obtained reveal the importance of G. Girotto: None. M. Cocca: None. A. Morgan: None. E. genetic diagnosis in albinism especially in syndromic forms who Catamo:None.P.Tesolin:None.A.Feresin:None.P.Gasparini: mightneedspecialfollow-up None.M. Concas: None. S. Akyoney: None. I. Sahin: None. B. Ünal: None. N.B. Ağaoğlu: None. A. Mudun: None. Z. Parlakgüneş: None. E. Yılmaz:None.Y.Alanay:None.U.Özbek:None.Ö.HatırnazNg:  P02
.003.D Molecular Diagnosis of TYR Negative Albinism None. Patientsby Clinical ExomeSequencing SezerAkyoney1,IlaydaSahin2,3,BüşraÜnal4,NihatBuğraAğaoğlu4,  P02
.004.AClinicalandgeneticanalysisofnewcasesprovides Abdulbaki Mudun5, Zeynep Parlakgüneş6, Engin Yılmaz7, Yasemin further characterisation of ALDH1A3-related anophthalmia/ Alanay2,8, Uğur Özbek2,8,Özden Hatırnaz Ng1,8 microphthalmia 1Acıbadem Mehmet Ali Aydınlar University, School of Medicine, YesimKesim1,FabiolaCeroni1,2,AlejandraDamián3,4,FionaBlanco- DepartmentofMedicalBiology,Istanbul,Turkey,2AcibademMehmet Kelly3,4, Carmen Ayuso3,4, Kathy Williamson5, Véronique Paquis6, Ali Aydinlar University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Dorine Bax1, Claudine Rieubland7, Chamlal Mostafa8, Marta Genetics,Istanbul,Turkey,3AcıbademMehmetAliAydinlarUniversity, Cortón3,4,Nicolas Chassaing9,10,Patrick Calvas9,10, Nicola Ragge1,11 DepartmentofMedicalBiotechnology,Istanbul,Turkey,4Universityof Health Sciences, Umraniye Training and Research Hospital (UEA), 1Department of Biological and Medical Sciences, Faculty of Health DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Istanbul,Turkey,5AcibademMaslak and Life Sciences, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Hospital,DepartmentofOphthalmology,Istanbul,Turkey,6Yeditepe Kingdom, 2Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University University Eye Center, Department of Ophthalmology, Istanbul, of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Department of Genetics & Genomics, Turkey, 7Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria-Fundación Jiménez Díaz Uni- MedicalBiology,Istanbul,Turkey,8AcibademUniversityRareDiseases versity Hospital, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (IIS-FJD, UAM), and Orphan Drugs Application and Research Center (ACURARE), Madrid, Spain, 4Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Istanbul,Turkey. Diseases(CIBERER),Madrid,Spain,5MRCHumanGeneticsUnit,MRC InstituteofGeneticsandMolecularMedicine,UniversityofEdinburgh, Introduction: Albinism is a group of rare genetic conditions WesternGeneralHospital,Edinburgh,UnitedKingdom,6Department inheritedautosomalrecessivelyandassociatedwithreducedorno of Medical Genetics, Nice Teaching Hospital, Nice, France, 7Depart- melanin production. Due to high clinical/genetic heterogeneity, ment of Human Genetics, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, genotype-phenotype correlation can only be carried out by University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 8Department of Pediatrics, genetic diagnosis that is vital especially for syndromic forms. TangierHospital,Tangier,Morocco,9UDEAR,UniversitédeToulouse, Variantsingenesassociatedwithalbinismweredetectedinallpatientsincludedinthestudy Patientcode Gene Transcript Nucleotidechange Aminoacidchange MAF Inheritance Rscode TG18-30 HP S1
 NM_001322482 c.612delC p.M205Wfs*5 0,0001 Homozygous rs281865082 TG18-31 OCA2 NM_001300984 c.2186T>C p. L729
P N/A Homozygous Novel TG18-46 OCA2 NM_001300984 c.2186T>C p. L729
P N/A Homozygous Novel TG19-01 SL C45
A2 NM_001012509 c.400delC p.(Pro134Glnfs*9) N/A Homozygous Novel TG19-01 SL C45
A2 NM_001012509 c.482G>T p.G161V N/A Homozygous Novel TG19-30 SL C45
A2 NM_016180 c.386-1G>A N/A N/A Homozygous Novel TG19-36 OCA2 NM_000275 c.2037G>C p.(Gln319*) 0,0000915 Homozygous rs121918169 TG19-46 OCA2 NM_000275 c.1648G>A p.(Glu550Lys) N/A Homozygous Novel TG19-48 SL C45
A2 NM_001012509 c.328G>C p.G110R N/A Homozygous Novel TG19-54 SL C45
A2 NM_016180 c.386-1G>A Splicevariant N/A Homozygous Novel EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 119 UMR1056InstitutNationaldelaSantéetdelaRechercheMédicale- history of parental consanguinity. DNA from the proband was UniversitéPaulSabatier, Toulouse,France,10DepartmentofMedical subjected to genome sequencing and bioinformatics analysis. Genetics,PurpanUniversityHospital,Toulouse,France,11Department Hearingevaluationand family history wererecorded. ofClinicalGenetics,WestMidlandsRegionalClinicalGeneticsService Results: A novel homozygous nonsense SERPINB6 variant and Birmingham Health Partners, Birmingham Women’s and (ENST00000335686:c.217C>T, p.(Gln76Ter)) was identiﬁed in a 24 Children’s Foundation Trust,Birmingham, United Kingdom. Mb run of homozygosity. Moderate-to-severe high-frequency sensorineural hearing loss was diagnosed at approximately six Introduction: Anophthalmia and microphthalmia (AM) are a yearsofage. geneticallyheterogeneousgroupofdisordersthatcanbeisolated Conclusions: The limited literature about SERPINB6 in patients orsyndromic.BiallelicALDH1A3variantsareresponsiblefor11%of with biallelic nonsense or splicing variants hints to a postlingual recessiveAMcases,mostlydescribedinconsanguineousfamilies, onset and rapidly progressive hearing loss. Progression is andpresent severebilateral AMwith variableneurodevelopmen- consistentwithlossofafunctionalintracellularproteaseinhibitor. tal anomalies. We present six families with biallelic ALDH1A3 Weaddtothelimitedclinicalandmoleculargeneticsknowledge, variants,further characterising theassociated phenotype. bettercharacterizing SERPINB6-associated non-syndromic hearing Material and Methods: AM individuals from UK, France and loss. SpainwereanalysedbyWES,targetedgenescreeningandarrays. B. Vona: None. T. Schade-Mann: None. P. Stöbe: None. P. Results: We identiﬁed 6 families: Family 1) with two brothers Gamerdinger: None. A. Rad: None. M. Sturm: None. H. withbilateralanophthalmia,onepresent additionaldevelopmen- Löwenheim: None. T.B.Haack: None. A.Tropitzsch: None. taldelay,absentspeechandautismwithcompoundheterozygous ALDH1A3 variants (c.874G>T:p.(D292Y);c.1393A>T:p.(I465F)); 2) a boy with bilateral anophthalmia, developmental and intellectual  P02
.007.D A new cases of Axenfelt-Rieger syndrome, caused delay,seizuresandautisticfeatureswithcompoundheterozygous by anovel FOX C1
mutation and6p25deletion variants (c.845G>C:p.(G282A);c.1459A>G:p.(R487G)); 3) a girl with bilateral microphthalmia and coloboma with compound hetero- EsraKilic zygous variants (c.847_849del;p.(G283del);c.953C>A,:p.( S318
Y)); 4) a girl with bilateral anophthalmia with a homozygous missense Department of Pediatric Genetics, University of Health Sciences, variant(c.1144G>A:p.(G382R));5)aboywithbilateralmicrophthal- AnkaraCityHospital, Ankara, Turkey. mia, unilateral coloboma and cataract, with a homozygous splice variant(c.1233+2T>C)and6)aboywithbilateralmicrophthalmia, Introduction: Axenfelt-Rieger syndrome (ARS) is an autosomal iris and chorioretinal coloboma, facial dysmorphism with a dominant genetic disorder characterised by ocular anterior homozygous missensevariant (c.434C>T:p.A145V). segmentdisorderswithsystemicinvolvement.Neuralcrestorigin Conclusions: Three of the six families presented with com- dysgenesis of cornea, iris, anterior angle, glaucoma, oligodontia, pound heterozygous variants, highlighting this mode of inheri- conical incisor teeth, hypoplastic enamel, midface hypoplasia, tanceinALDH1A3-relateddisorders.Fiveof6familieshadavariant hearingdeﬁcit,growthanddevelopmentdisorder,cardiacdefects inthecatalyticdomain,supportingtheimportanceofthisdomain, and intestinal malformations are clinical ﬁndings of this disorder. which is critical for substrate selectivity. Severe neurodevelop- Mutations or deletions in forkhead box  C1
 (FOX C1
, chromosome mental phenotypes werepresent intwo individuals, and variably 6p25) are responsible 25% of ARS cases, pituitary homeobox 2 penetrant in family 1, supporting that this can be an important (PITX2,chromosome 4q25) 55%ofARS cases. featureof theALDH1A3syndrome. Patients, and Results: Case 1, 3-years-old boy with develop- Y.Kesim:None.F.Ceroni:None.A.Damián:None.F.Blanco- mental delay, hypothroidism, iridocorneal dysgenesis, glaucoma, Kelly: None. C. Ayuso: None. K. Williamson: None. V. Paquis: midface hypoplasia, thin upper lip and enamel hypoplasia on None. D. Bax: None. C. Rieubland: None. C. Mostafa: None. M. incisor teeth. Metabolic workup, hearing, abdominal ultrasono- Cortón: None. N. Chassaing: None. P. Calvas: None. N. Ragge: graphy, echocardiography and chromosomal analysis were None. normal. His microarray analysis revealed that 3,3Mb sized heterozygous deletion on 6p25 including FOX C1
 gene. Case 2, 6- years-old boy with short stature, bilateral megalocornea, iris  P02
.006.C Further evidence of involvement of SERPINB6 in coloboma, crowded teeth with hypoplastic enamel, ﬂat nasal autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearingloss bridge and everted lower lip. His developmental milestones and intellectual capacity was normal. Metabolic workup, hearing, Barbara Vona1, Thore Schade-Mann1, Petra Stöbe2, Philipp abdominal ultrasonography, echocardiography, cranial MRI, chro- Gamerdinger1, Aboulfazl Rad1, Marc Sturm2, Hubert Löwenheim1, mosomalanalysis,microarrayanalysisandPITX2sequenceanalysis Tobias B.Haack2,Anke Tropitzsch1 were normal. Sanger sequencing of FOX C1
 gene revealed, novel heterozygousde novoc.76dupT (p.Y26Lfs *57) mutation. 1Dept of Otolaryngology—Head & Neck Surgery, Tübingen Hearing Conclusion:HerewereporttwonewpatientsofARS,onehada Research Centre, University of Tübingen, Tuebingen, Germany, novel FOX C1
 mutation, and the other had 6p25 chromosomal 2Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of deletion.Wealsoobservedmoresevereclinicalphenotypeinthe Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, Tuebingen, Germany. deletiontypeARS.Ocularanteriorsegmentdisordersareclinically and genetically heterogenous conditions, by demonstrating the Introduction: Non-syndromic hearing loss is a genetically underlyinggeneticcausewegaveappropriategeneticcounseling heterogeneous sensory disorder. Autosomal recessive hearing andfollow-up. lossisthemostprevalentformofnon-syndromichearinglosswith E.Kilic: None. approximately 80 associated genes to date. SERPINB6 (serpin familyBmember6,alsocalledproteaseinhibitor6)wasmapped to the DFNB91 locus in 2010 and causally associated with  P02
.008.A Brittle cornea syndrome with a novel pathogenic moderate-to-severe high-frequencyhearing loss. variantofPRDM5 gene Materials and Methods: As part of our hereditary deafness study,weascertainedachildwithsensorineuralhearinglossanda EzgiSusam1,Nilgün Yıldırım2, Sinem Kocagil1,Oguz Çilingir1 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 120 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University Medical Genetics Department, revealed the heterozygous variant c.1447_1450delGTCA (p. Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Eskisehir Osmangazi University Ophthalmology Val4834argfsTer11) in BRPF1; cerebral MRI at 1 and 3 years were Department, Eskisehir, Turkey. normal. Having detected a peculiar ocular phenotype in  P1
, we suggestedopticalcoherencetomography(OCT)for P2
;suchexam Brittlecorneasyndromeisararesyndrome,characterizedbyextreme detectedbilateralsubclinicalopticneuropathyalsointhiscase.To thinning of cornea with estimated prevalence less than 1 in date, only a few patients with BRPF1 mutations have been 1,000,000.BiallelicpathogenicvariantsofPRDM5andZNF469genes described and none was reported to have an optic neuropathy. have been identiﬁed for etiology of the syndrome.Blue sclerae, Sincesubclinicalopticnervealterationscangoeasilyundetected, cornealthinningwithorwithoutcornealrupture,myopia,early-onset our experience highlights the importance of a more detailed keratoconus and keratoglobus are the main ophthalmological ophthalmologicevaluationin patientswith BRPF1 variant. featuresofthedisease.Althougheyesarethemostseverelyaffected E. Fiorentini: None. S. Landini: None. L. Tiberi: None. A. organs, it is a systemic disorder including hearing loss and some Pagliazzi: None. G. Gori: None. E. Dirupo: None. E. Marziali: connectivetissuemanifestationslikescoliosis,hyperelasticity,devel- None. P. Fortunato: None. G. Bacci: None. R. Caputo: None. S. opmental dysplasia of the hip and rarely increased bone fractures. Bargiacchi:None. V. Palazzo: None. R.Artuso: None. Herewereporta1-year-oldmalepatient,referredtoourclinicfrom ophthalmology department due to keratoglobus. He was born as thirdchildofhealthyﬁrst-degreecousinparentsattermwithoutany  P02
.010.C Maternally inherited hemizygous 8.5 Mb Xq21.1 complication. At physical examination, he presented with corneal deletion in a male patient with choroideremia, deafness and opacity on left eye, bilateral blue sclera, micrognathia and intellectual disability found using NGS based CNV-calling hyperelasticity. Echocardiography and hip ultrasonography were approach normal.Despitehehadpassedneonatalauditoryscreening,patient wasconsultedtoENTdepartmentagainforhearingevaluationand EwelinaBukowska-Olech1,AlexanderPepler2,AleksanderJamsheer1,3 diagnosedwithmoderatesensorineuraltypehearingloss.Withthese ﬁndings,brittlecorneasyndromewasthoughtasthemostaccurate 1Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical diagnosis and PRDM5 gene sequencing revealed a novel c.177 Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2CeGaT GmbH, Tubingen, Germany, +1G>A variant in homozygous state. This variant was classiﬁed as 3Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland. pathogenic by ACMG guidelines and segregation analysis was compatiblewithparentsoftheprobandascarrier.Accordingtohis Background: Xq21 deletions associate with choroideremia- physical examination and the results of the molecular analyses we deafness-obesity syndrome (MIM: 303110), which main clinical have concluded that this novel variant causes Brittle cornea features comprise choroideremia, obesity, moderate intellectual syndromeandgeneticcounselingwasgiventofamily. disabilityandhearingimpairment.Thiscontiguousgenedeletion E. Susam: None. N. Yıldırım: None. S. Kocagil: None. O. involves at least CHM and POU3F4 genes known to cause Çilingir: None. choroideremia and deafness,respectively. Materialsandmethods:Themalepatientwithchoroideremia, deafness and intellectual disability underwent the whole-exome  P02
.009.B Two new BRPF1 variants associated with IDDDFP sequencing(WES).Next,hewassubjectedtoconﬁrmationstudies andpreviously unreported ocular ﬁndings usingquantitativePCR(qPCR)andwholegenomearraycompara- tivegenomichybridisation(arrayCGH)(SurePrintG3HumanCGH Erika Fiorentini1, Samuela Landini2, Lucia Tiberi2, Angelica Microarray 1×1M; Agilent Technologies). Besides, we performed Pagliazzi2, Giulia Gori2, Elia Dirupo2, Elisa Marziali3, Pinuccia segregation analysisapplying qPCR. Fortunato3, Giacomo Bacci3, Roberto Caputo3, Sara Bargiacchi2, Results: We identiﬁed the maternally inherited hemizygous VivianaPalazzo2, Rosangela Artuso2 Xq21.1-q21.32 deletion (hg38 chrX:85003913-92618940) using WES based CNV-calling approach. The variant was calculated 1Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental based upon observed versus expected coverage using exome Biomedical Sciences ‘Mario Serio’, University of Florence, Firenze, sequencing data. Next, we conﬁrmed the presence of aberration Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children’s University Hospital, applying qPCR and narrowed down its size through array CGH Firenze, Italy, 3Pediatric Ophthalmology Unit, A. Meyer Children’s method(hg38chrX:84662472-93174172). Hospital,Firenze, Italy. Conclusion:OurpatientharboursahemizygousXq21deletion of a smaller size than similar CNVs reported in the medical BRPF1geneon3p26-p25encodesaproteininvolvedinepigenetic literature thus far. Our ﬁnding supports the contribution of CNVs regulation, through interaction with histone H3 lysine acetyl- to choroideremia, which is an orphan disease being tested for transferase KAT6A and KAT6B of the MYST family. Recently oculargenetherapy.Besides,wehaveshowntheclinicalutilityof heterozygous variants in BRPF1 have been identiﬁed in subjects NGS based CNV-calling approach, which effectively allowed to with IDDDFP (OMIM 617333), a disorder characterized by global detectof theCNVin theexomesequencing data. developmental delay, intellectual disability, language delay and ThisworkwassupportedbythegrantfromthePolishNational peculiar facial features (round face, ﬂat proﬁle, broad nasal root, ScienceCentre,PolandUMO-2016/22/E/NZ5/00270toAleksander hypertelorism,blepharophimosis,ptosis,abnormallyshapedears). Jamsheer. Joint hypermobility, cervical spinal fusion, EEG abnormalities and E. Bukowska-Olech: None. A. Pepler: A. Employment (full or epilepsy also occur. Reported ocular problems are strabismus, part-time); Modest; CeGaT. A.Jamsheer: None. amblyopia and refraction errors. We found the de novo hetero- zygous variant c.330delC (p.Ile110fs) in BRPF1 by whole exome sequencing (WES), conducted in a patient ( P1
) with mild  P02
.011.D Genome-wide association study identiﬁes RNF123 intellectual disability, ptosis and typical facies. Interestingly, the locus as associated with chronic widespread musculoskeletal patient also had a Chiari Malformation type I and a subclinical pain optic neuropathy, which could not be explained by variations in othergenes.WESperformedinasecondpatient( P2
)showing,as Md Shaﬁqur Rahman1, Bendik S Winsvold2, S.O. Chavez Chavez3, wellas P1
,intellectualdisability,roundface,ptosisandstrabismus Sigrid Børte2, Yakov A. Tsepilov4, Sodbo Zh. Shapov4, HUNT All-In EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 121 Pain, Yurii Aulchenko5, Knut Hagen6, Egil A. Fors6, Kristian Hveem6, heterozygous variants in different genomic loci associated with John-AnkerZwart6,J.B.J.vanMeurs3,MaximB.Freidin1,FrancesM.K. otherformsofretinaldystrophyhavebeendetected,ararevariant Williams1 in the HMCN1 gene c.9571C>T p.(Arg3191Cys) and a known pathogenic variant in the NPH P4
 gene c.2930C>T p.(Thr977Met). 1King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, 2Oslo University Pathogenic variants in the HMCN1 gene are responsible for Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, dominant age-related macular dystrophy (#603075), variants in Netherlands, 4Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian the NPH P4
 gene cause recessive Senior-Loken syndrome 4 Federation, 5PolyOmica, Maastricht, Netherlands, 6Norwegian Uni- (#266900). Encoding proteins are involved in the regulation of versityof Science andTechnology, Trondheim, Norway. integrity of blood/retina barrier at the levels of vascular endothelium and retinal pigment epithelium. The NPH P4
 gene is Background and Objectives: Chronic widespread musculoskele- expressed in connecting cilium, which normally performs impor- tal pain (CWP) is a symptom of ﬁbromyalgia and a complex trait tant function of trafﬁcking between the external and internal with poorly understood pathogenesis. CWP is heritable (48-54%), segments of photoreceptors. A mechanism of functional con- but its genetic architecture is unknown and candidate gene sequencesofthedetectedvariantscombinationisproposedtobe studies have produced inconsistent results. We conducted a accumulationofseveraldefects,violationsofblood/retinabarrier, genome-wide association study to get insight into the genetic as well as diminishing of the ciliary transporting potential. The background ofCWP. consequencescanaggravateeachotherandleadtotheobserved Methods: Northern Europeans from UK Biobank comprising phenotype.CarriedoutwithinthestateassignmentofMinistryof 6,914 cases reporting pain all over the body lasting more than 3 Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation, months and 242,929 controls were studied. Replication of three supportedinpart by RFBRgrant(No.20-015-00061). lead genome-wide signiﬁcant single nucleotide polymorphisms T.A. Vasilyeva: None. V.V. Kadyshev: None. N.V. Petrova: (SNPs) was attempted in 6 independent European cohorts (N= None.A.V. Marakhonov: None. R.A.Zinchenko: None. 43,080; cases=14,177). Genetic correlations with risk factors, tissue speciﬁcity, and colocalizationwereexamined. Results: Three genome-wide signiﬁcant loci were identiﬁed  P02
.013.B Mutation analysis in frequent genes in a cohort of (rs1491985, rs10490825, rs165599) residing within the genes Russian patients withcongenital glaucoma RNF123, AT P2
C1 , and COMT. The RNF123 locus was replicated (meta-analysis p=0.0002), the AT
P2 C1
 locus showed suggestive Andrey V. Marakhonov1, Alexander A. Sorokin2, Tatyana A. association (p=0.0227), and the COMT locus was not replicated. Vasilyeva1, Sofya A. Garifullina1, Darya M. Guseva1, Natalya A. Partial genetic correlation between CWP and depressive symp- Semenova1, Vitaly V.Kadyshev1,RenaA. Zinchenko1 toms, body mass index, age of ﬁrst birth, and years of schooling were identiﬁed. Tissue speciﬁcity and colocalization analysis 1ResearchCentreforMedical Genetics,Moscow, RussianFederation, highlight therelevance ofskeletal muscle inCWP. 2Moscow Helmholtz Research Institute of Eye Disease, Moscow, Conclusions: We report a novel association of RNF123 locus RussianFederation. withCWPandsuggestaroleofAT P2
C1 ,consistentwitharoleof calcium regulation in CWP. The association to COMT, one of the Primary juvenile glaucoma develops due to ocular hypertension moststudiedgenesinchronicpainﬁeld,wasnotconﬁrmedinthe withtheonseteitheratbirthorwithintheﬁrstfewyearsoflife.It replication analysis. arises due to abnormalities in the anterior chamber angle M. Rahman: None. B. S Winsvold: None. S. Chavez Chavez: development, that obstructs aqueous outﬂow in the absence of None.S.Børte:None.Y.A.Tsepilov:A.Employment(fullorpart- systemic anomalies or other ocular malformations. According to time); Modest; PolyOmica. B. Research Grant (principal investiga- Orphanet data, its birth prevalence in Europe is 2.2 cases per tor, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as 100,000 newborns. Congenital glaucoma could be inherited in grants already received); Modest; Russian Foundation for Basic either autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant modes. The Research. S. Zh. Shapov: None. Y. Aulchenko: A. Employment rationaleofthisstudywastoanalyzemutationsinfrequentgenes (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; PolyOmica. K. Hagen: None. E. A. inacohortofRussianpatientswithcongenitalglaucoma.Twenty- Fors:None.K.Hveem:None.J.Zwart:None.J.Meurs:None.M. one Russian patients with a primary diagnosis of congenital B.Freidin: None. F.M.K. Williams:None. glaucoma were included in the study. Targeted sequencing and MLPA analysis of FOX
C1 , PITX2 (with autosomal dominant inheritance), and CY
P1 B1 (with autosomal recessive inheritance) 
P02 .012.A Unexpected NGS ﬁndings in a case of Coats’ genes were performed.In eight patients, mutations in analyzed disease, combination of rare variants in the HMCN1 and genes were detected. One patient has previously known homo- NPH
P4 genesassociated withother forms ofretail dystrophy zygousvariant inthe CY
P1 B1gene, NM_000104.3:c.685G>A. Four patientshaveheterozygousvariantsintheFOX
C1 gene:twonovel TatianaA.Vasilyeva,VitalyV.Kadyshev,NikaV.Petrova,AndrewV. (NM_001453.2:c.246C>A, c.235C>T) andtwo previously described Marakhonov, RenaA. Zinchenko (c.379C>T, c.379C>T). Three more patients have heterozygous variantsinthePITX2gene:twonovel(NM_001204397.1:c.114G>T ResearchCentreforMedicalGenetics,Moscow,RussianFederation. and NM_153427.2:c.408_410delTCG) and one described earlier (NM_153427.2:c.191C>T). Thirteen patients lack variants in ana- Coats’disease(OMIM300216)isaformofretinaldystrophywhich lyzedgenes.Accordingtoourstudy,congenitalglaucomacouldbe occurs due to congenital abnormality of retinal vessels. Patients, associatedfrequentlywithgenesthatareusuallylinkedtoanterior mainly young men, show unilateral retinal telangiectasia, retinal segment dysgenesis including Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.Carried exudationanddetachment.Coats’diseaseoccurspreferentiallyas outwithinthestateassignmentofMinistryofScienceandHigher sporadic cases, its genetic cause is still unknown. A 17-year-old Education of the Russian Federation, supported in part by RFBR Caucasianmalepatientwithsporadicexudativevitreoretinopathy/ grant(No. 19-015-00122). Coats’ disease underwent complete ophthalmological examina- A.V. Marakhonov: None. A.A. Sorokin: None. T.A. Vasilyeva: tion, whole exome sequencing by NGS method was implied for None. S.A. Garifullina: None. D.M. Guseva: None. N.A. Seme- searching causative genetic variants of the phenotype. Two nova:None. V.V. Kadyshev: None. R.A.Zinchenko:None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 122 
P02 .014.C Congenital insensitivity to pain: molecular char- number variation (CNV) analysis was used to identify pathogenic acterization ofanovel disruptingmutation in SCN9A variants, subsequently veriﬁed by Sanger sequencing and segregation analysis. Additionally, MLPA analysis was used to Margherita M. Marchi1, Ilaria D’Amato1, Mirna Andelic1, Erika Salvi1, conﬁrmpresence ofCNVs. DanieleCartelli1,RaffaellaLombardi1,GumusEvren2,GiuseppeLauria1,3 Results: A novel RHO-mutation (c.803A>G, p.Tyr268Cys) was identiﬁed in 5 patients with adCSNB. They had full vision under 1Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy, photopic conditions, showed no fundus abnormalities but 2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of presentednightblindnesswithanalteredscotopicERG.Aknown Harran, Sanliurfa, Turkey, 3Department of Biomedical and Clinical RHO mutation, c.541G>A (p.Glu181Lys), was found in the patient Sciences"Luigi Sacco",University ofMilan, Milan, Italy. presenting typical signs of RP. CNV and further MLPA analysis detected third, novel, IMPDH1-exon-17 heterozygous deletion in Aim of this study is to investigate the splicing consequence of a 11patients,twoofwhomalsocarryingoneoftheRHO-mutations. novel intronic mutation in SCN9A (NM_002977.3) in a case of No mutation was detected in one CSNB-patient suggesting the congenitalinsensitivitytopain(CIP,#243000).CIPisanextremely presenceof another mutation segregating inthepedigree. rareconditioncausedbybi-allelicinactivatingmutationsinSCN9A, Conclusions: Here, we present a large family presenting two encoding the sodium channel Nav1.7, responsible for ﬁring and distinct RD-phenotypes and at least three mutations segregating transmission of noxious stimuli in the peripheral nociceptors. CIP across three generations. Although further functional studies are presentsclinicallyastheinsensitivitytonociceptivepainandheat, needed, this study adds a ﬁfth rhodopsin mutation associated often with anosmia.We report an 8-years-old girl, from an inbred withCSNB.Grantreferences:KP-06-N33/12/18.12.2019andD-131/ family, diagnosed with CIP, showing absence of pain sensation, 24.06.2020. diminished temperature sensation, foot burns, normal olfaction, K. Mihova: None. K. Koev: None. K. Kamenarova: None. S. hearing and MRI. Next-generation-sequencing of SCN9A revealed Cherninkova: None. R.Kaneva: None. a substitution c.377+7T>G in the donor splice-site of intron 3, homozygousin thegirland heterozygousin herhealthymother. Total RNA from the proband, her mother and one healthy 
P02 .016.A There’s more than meets the eye: dual molecular unrelatedcontrolwasextractedfrombloodandretrotranscribed. diagnosisin complex hearingloss patients The cDNA region spanning exon 2 to 4 was ampliﬁed by PCR, followed by the fragments dimensional analysis on agarose gel Beatrice Spedicati1, Anna Morgan2, Maria Teresa Bonati2, Giulia and Sanger-sequencing. Sequencing revealed in the affected girl Severi3, Agnese Feresin1, Giulia Pelliccione2, Paola Tesolin1, Claudio twomis-splicedtranscripts:bothlackingexon3andpresentinga Graziano3, PaoloGasparini1,2, FlavioFaletra2, GiorgiaGirotto1,2 non-canonical isoform of exon 4, and one showing a partial retentionof intron2. The mis-spliced transcripts are predicted to 1Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, University of induceareadingframeshift,whichprematurelystopsaftertwo(p. Trieste,Trieste,Italy,2MedicalGenetics,InstituteforMaternalandChild Lys86fs2Stop) or twelve out-of-frame aminoacids (p.Lys86fs12- Health-I.R.C.C.S."BurloGarofolo",Trieste,Italy,3MedicalGeneticsUnit, Stop),resultinginthelossofNAv1.7.Thisstudydescribesanovel S.Orsola-MalpighiUniversityHospital,Bologna,Italy. mutation in SCN9A causing the Nav1.7 deﬁciency underlying the nociceptors dysfunction and highlights the importance of Medicalgeneticistsusuallytrytoidentifypatients’clinicalconditions investigating intronicmutations outside thesplicingconsensus. byrecognizingthespeciﬁcpatternofasyndrome.Wheneverclinical M.M. Marchi: None. I. D’Amato: None. M. Andelic: None. E. featuresdonotﬁtintoaknownmodel,thepresenceoftwodistinct Salvi: None. D. Cartelli: None. R. Lombardi: None. G. Evren: conditions may be hypothesized and high-throughput sequencing None.G. Lauria:None. technologies can allow a complete molecular characterization even in the most complex cases. Here we describe patients presenting withhearingloss(HL)andothersignsthatsuggestedthepresenceof 
P02 .015.D Complex inheritance of retinal degeneration: At adualmoleculardiagnosis.Patientsweredividedintwocategories: least three mutations segregate in a family with autosomal- a) those with distinct phenotypes, i.e. syndromic or non-syndromic dominantcongenital stationary nightblindness HL plus other clinical features related to a second condition; b) patientswithoverlappingphenotypes,withHLduetoeitherofthe Kalina Mihova1, Krasimir Koev2, Kunka Kamenarova1, Silvia two conditions. In group a) Patient-1 displayed HL and periven- Cherninkova3, Radka Kaneva1 tricular nodular heterotopia, due to a homozygous deletion of the STRC gene and a nonsense variant in the FLNA gene, respectively; 1Molecular Medicine Center, Department of Medical Chemistry and Patient-2 was affected by Kabuki syndrome (KMT2D gene) and Biochemistry, Medical University - Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2University Bosmaarhiniamicrophthalmiasyndrome(SMCHD1gene);Patient-3 Hospital“TsaritsaYoanna",MedicalUniversity-Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria, was affected by Distal renal tubular acidosis with progressive 3Department of Neurology, University Hospital “Alexandrovska”, sensorineural HL (AT
P6 V1B1 gene) and Marfan syndrome (FBN1 Medical University – Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria. gene).Ingroupb)Patient-4presentedsensorineuralHLandretinitis pigmentosa: Whole Exome Sequencing revealed two compound Introduction: Congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB) heterozygous variants in the USH2A gene, responsible for Usher comprises a group of genetically and clinically heterogeneous syndrome type 2A, and a nonsense variant in the EYA4 gene, non-progressiveretinaldisorders(RD),mainlyduetoroddysfunc- associatedwithautosomaldominantnon-syndromicHL.Overall,our tion.Thisstudywasperformedtoidentifythegeneticdefectina ﬁndings highlighted that “genetic-ﬁrst diagnostics” should be the largefamilyaffectedwithautosomal-dominant(ad)CSNB. gold standard for patients with syndromic conditions of unclear Materials and Methods: Sixteen affected relatives of a large genetic origin, thus avoiding costly and distressing diagnostic Gypsy pedigree segregating adRD were examined clinically by proceduresbeforereachingaﬁnaldiagnosis. standard ophthalmological methods. Based on this, 15 patients B. Spedicati: None. A. Morgan: None. M. Bonati: None. G. were diagnosed as having CSNB and one presenting Retinitis Severi:None.A.Feresin:None.G.Pelliccione:None.P.Tesolin: pigmentosa (RP). Whole exome sequencing was performed in None.C.Graziano:None.P.Gasparini:None.F.Faletra:None.G. CSNBpatients.Asystematicﬁlteringapproachcoupledwithcopy Girotto:None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 123 
P02 .017.BNGSstrategyfortheanalysisofgenesandregions segment of the eye. LOX
L1  and CACNA1A are the main genes responsible forEarly OnsetHigh Myopia associatedwithanincreasedrisk. Materials and Methods: A case-control study with 235 Susana Noval1, Maria Nieves-Moreno1, Ana Lopez-Vazquez1, Fer- Northern Spanish patients: 55 XFS patients and 180 controls. nando Santos-Simarro2, Irene Rosa-Perez1, Inmaculada Rueda- Genotypes of LOX
L1  (rs1048661, rs3825942, rs2165241, Arenas2, Marta Naranjo-Castresana2, Agela del Pozo2, Oriana rs16958477, rs12914489, rs11638944, rs7173049) and CACNA1A D’Anna1, Victoria EFMontaño2,Elena Vallespin2 (rs4926244) SNPswere analyzedby direct sequencing. Results: The G allele and the GG genotype of SNP rs3825942 1Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, weredetectedatahigherfrequencyinpseudoexfoliationpatients IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Medical and Molecular Genetics Institute (p=0.00057,OR=6.46;p=0.00003,OR=8.96,respectively).The (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPaz, Rare Diseases T allele and the TT genotype of rs2165241 presented at Networking Biomedical Research Centre (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, signiﬁcantly higher frequencies in XFS patients (p=0.00473, OR Spain. =2.10;p=0.00001,OR=4.49,respectively).TheGalleleandthe GGgenotypeofrs1048661weredetectedatastatisticallyhigher EarlyOnsetHighmyopia(eoHM)(−6.00dioptersorless)isoneof frequency in XFS patients (p=0.04587, OR=1.78; p=0.00179, theleadingcauseofvisionlossorevenirreversibleblindnesswith OR=2.66, respectively). The AA genotype of SNP rs12914489 pathologic complications such as myopic retinopathy, maculo- wasdetectedatastatistically lowerfrequencyinXFS patients(p pathy, retinal detachment, cataract or primary open-angle =0.01898, OR=5.503). The C allele and the CC genotype of glaucoma that is present before the age of ten. In UMOG rs11638944 presented at signiﬁcantly lower frequencies in (Ophtalmogenetics Multidiciplinary Unit) we have designed and pseudoexfoliation patients (p=0.00754, OR=0.50; p=0.00876, developed a novel and comprehensive screening strategy for all OR=0.35, respectively). No signiﬁcant association between XFS genes and loci responsible for eoHM on next-generation and LOX
L1  rs16958477 and rs7173049 SNPs and CACNA1A sequencing (NGS) developing a systematic application and rs4926244was observed. automation in the clinical routine. UMOG is a multidisciplinary Conclusion: We found a signiﬁcant association for several diagnosis and research team with extensive experience in LOX
L1  SNPs, whereas no differences were attributable to diagnosis, research and teaching in ophthalmogenetic diseases CACNA1A rs4926244 SNP. LEA is supported by fellowships from in Hospital La Paz (Madrid). Samples were screened using a Fundación Jesús de Gangoiti Barrera and from the Basque customized NGS gene panel, OFT-v3-1, containing 419 genes Government (2018111062, MTVD19/BD/006 and MTVD20/BD/ associated with eye pathology of suspected genetic origin, 002). Supported by grants from the ISCIII and FEDER (PI18/ including eoHM genes and loci. The patients study was carried 00507)and BEGISARE. outonallthegenesinthepanelasithasbeenobservedbyother L. Escudero-Arrarás: None. A. Lara-López: None. M. Rodrí- researches that a signiﬁcant proportion of eoHM is caused by guez-Hidalgo: None. T. Alberdi: None. I. Rodríguez-Agirretxe: mutationsinRetNetgenes.Thispanelwasvalidatedwithatleast None.J. Mendicute: None. J. RuizEderra:None. 25sampleswithexcellentresults.Atthispoint,wealreadyran30 eoHM families and the diagnostic yield is around 30%. The development of this project will introduce the use of these new 
P02 .019.D The Fraser-complex pathologic spectrum: Familial technologies to Health Services for diagnosis and research and cryptophthalmos in two families fromGAFSA, TUNISIA therebywillhelptoimprovethediagnosis,treatmentandcareof patientswiththisandothergenomicdisorders.Wearegratefulto Nouha Bouayed ABDELMOULA, Sonda Kammoun, Fatma Abid the patients and their families. Grants: PI18-1234-ISCIII and 2020/ Mzid,SalouaBenAmor,JamelFeki,TakwaSammouda,MounaRekik 0197782-ONCE. S.Noval:None.M.Nieves-Moreno:None.A.Lopez-Vazquez: Genomics of signalopathies at the service of medicine UR17E
S36 , None. F. Santos-Simarro: None. I. Rosa-Perez: None. I. Rueda- Medical University of Sfax,Sfax,Tunisia. Arenas:None.M.Naranjo-Castresana:None.A.delPozo:None. O.D’Anna:None.V.Montaño:None.E.Vallespin:E.Ownership Recessive mutations in genes encoding members of the Fraser Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual complex (FC) or associated proteins constitute an established property);Modest;GenycellBiotech.F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard; genetic cause of Fraser syndrome in its three forms related to Modest; Diaceutics, TheScience AdvisoryBoard. mutations in three different genes FRA
S1 , FREM2, and GRI
P1  resultinginfailureoftheapoptosisprogramanddisruptionofthe epithelial-mesenchymal interactions during embryonic develop- 
P02 .018.CLOX
L1 andCACNA1ASNPsassociatedwithexfolia- ment. We report in this study two Tunisian pedigrees from the tionsyndromesusceptibilityinasampleofNorthernSpanish townofGafsainwhicharecessivecyptophthalmoswasdetected. population Material and Methods: Two male newborns were referred to our genetic counselling for cryptophthalmos. One of them was Leire Escudero-Arrarás1, Araceli Lara-López1, María Rodríguez- alsosuspectedtohaveCrigler-Najjardisease.Geneticexploration Hidalgo1, Txomin Alberdi2, Iñaki Rodríguez-Agirretxe2,3,4, Javier ofFRA
S1 and UGT1A1geneswas conducted. Mendicute2, JavierRuiz Ederra5,4 Results:Thetwounrelatedmaleswereborntoconsanguineous parentsfromGafsa.Theyhadcryptophthalmoswhichisacondition 1Biodonostia Health Research Institute, San Sebastián, Spain, 2Depart- ofeyelidmalformationassociatedtoanunderlyingmalformedeye. ment of Ophthalmology, Donostia University Hospital, San Sebastián, The ﬁrst case had unilateral right complete cryptophthalmos Spain, 3Instituto Clínico-Quirúrgico de Oftalmología, Bilbao, Spain, associated with maldevelopment of the cornea and the crystalline 4RETICS OFTARED, National Institute of Health Carlos III, Ministry of as well as microphthalmia. At the left, he had posterior embry- Economy and Competitiveness, Madrid, Spain, 5Miramoon Pharma- otoxon. Besides facial dysmorphism, he had bilateral syndactyly. BiodonostiaHRI,SanSebastián,Spain,SanSebastián,Spain. Molecularanalysisshowedahomozygosityforanintronicsequence changeinintron22ofFRA
S1 gene.Thesecondpatientaswellashis Introduction: Exfoliation syndrome (XFS) is a systemic disease brother had bilateral complete cryptophthalmos associated to characterizedbywhitishﬁbrillarsubstancedepositionintheanterior anophthalmia, microphthalmia and iris coloboma. The patient had EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 124 also a neonatal jaundice which was related to the homozygous 
P02 .022.C Clinical exome sequencing reveals different mutationofUGT1A1exon3(c.1070A>G). GUCY2D-related retinopathies in Bulgarian patients Conclusion: More recently, bilateral anophthalmia and liver malformationswithintrahepaticbiliaryatresiaweredescribed.FC Kunka Kamenarova1, Nevyana Veleva2, Kalina Mihova1, Neda screeningis thusdebatedfor thesecond family. Sergeeva2,Alexander Oscar2, Radka Kaneva1 N.B. Abdelmoula: None. S. Kammoun: None. F. Abid Mzid: None.S.BenAmor:None.J.Feki:None.T.Sammouda:None.M. 1Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University – Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Rekik: None. Bulgaria, 2Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital “Alexandrovska”,Medical University – Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria. 
P02 .021.BVariantsinFZD5areprimarilyassociatedwithnon- Introduction: GUCY2D gene encodes the photoreceptor guany- syndromic phenotypes inindividuals withocular coloboma late cyclase (GC-E) and different mutations can lead to cone-rod dystrophy (CRD), congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB), RichardJ.Holt1,DavidGoudie2,AjoySarkar3,AlejandraDamián4,5, and Leber congenital amaurosis. In this study, we describe three Alejandra Tamayo4,5, Carmen Ayuso4,5, Marta Cortón4,5, Alice unrelated families who carried different GUCY2D-variants and Gardham6,VirginiaClowes6,JuliePlaisancié7,8,NicolasChassaing7,8, presentedtwo types ofretinopathy. Patrick Calvas7,8, Nicola K.Ragge1,9 Materials and Methods: Two unrelated patients with autosomal-dominant (ad) and autosomal-recessive (ar) CRD, and 1Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2NHS Tayside, one with arCSNB were examined clinically by standard ophthal- Dundee, United Kingdom, 3Nottingham University Hospitals NHS mological methods. Targeted sequencing of clinical exome on Trust, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 4Instituto de Investigación Illumina® platform, followed by Sanger sequencing and segrega- Sanitaria-Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital - Universidad tion analysis,was usedto identify pathogenic variants. AutónomadeMadrid,Madrid,Spain,5CentreforBiomedicalNetwork Results: All patients manifested decreased vision, photo- Research on Rare Diseases, Madrid, Spain, 6Northwick Park and St phobia and elevated thresholds of dark adaptation. Genetic Mark’s Hospital, Harrow, United Kingdom, 7Purpan University analysis revealed three mutations in the GUCY2D gene Hospital, Toulouse, France, 8Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU) segregatingwiththephenotypeinthepedigrees.Thecommon deToulouse,Toulouse,France,9BirminghamWomen’sandChildren’s c.2512C>T (p.Arg838Cys) mutation presenting a relatively Foundation Trust,Birmingham, United Kingdom. severe clinical phenotype of adCRD was found in one of the analyzed families. Mutations c.2900A>G (p.His967Arg) and Introduction:Ocularcolobomaresultsfromfailureofopticﬁssure c.3224+1G>C (p.?) were identiﬁed in two different combina- closure during development. It is genetically heterogenous, with tions (c.2900A>G/c.3224+1G>C and c.3224+1G>C/c.3224 variants in 30 genes implicated, many also associated with +1G>C) in two unrelated probands affected by arCSNB and anophthalmia and microphthalmia. Most recently, heterozygous arCRD, respectively. GUCY2D mutations were accompanied by FZD5 variants have been reported in individuals with coloboma similar pattern of generalized cone (macular and peripheral) and microphthalmia, but are limited to frameshifts and inframe dysfunction with a tendency to less involvement of the rod insertion/deletions.Wedescribetwomissense,twononsense,and photoreceptors in the two CRD-patients and a less severe two frameshift variants in individuals with coloboma and/or phenotype in the proband with CSNB. microphthalmia. Conclusions: GUCY2D is a major gene responsible for Materials and methods: Variants were identiﬁed using whole progressive CRD which is estimated to affect 1 in 40,000 exome sequencing (WES) or customised NGS panels of ocular individuals. Here, we present phenotypes of adCRD, adCRD and development genes, in individuals from the UK (including the arCSNB in three Bulgarian families carrying different pathogenic DDDStudy[www.ddduk.org/access.html]), France andSpain. variants of GUCY2D. Grant references: KP-06-N33/12/18.12.2019 Results: We identiﬁed six individuals with coloboma and andD-131/24.06.2020. heterozygous likely pathogenic variants: 1) male with bilateral K. Kamenarova: None. N. Veleva: None. K. Mihova: None. N. microphthalmia, iris and chorioretinal coloboma, anal atresia, atrial Sergeeva:None. A.Oscar: None.R. Kaneva:None. andventricularseptaldefect,corticaldysplasia,microcephaly,seizures, deafness, and tracheoesophageal ﬁstula (NM_003468.4: c.539_540insG:p.(
E181 Rfs*88)), also diagnosed with a pathogenic 
P02 .024.A Beneﬁts of exome sequencing in patients diag- SL
C12 A2variant(NM_001046:exon4:c.
C980 T:p.A327V),2)femalewith nosedwithisolated orsyndromic hearingloss bilateral iris coloboma, patent ductus arteriosus, atrial septal defect, andvolvulus(NM_003468:c.
C577 T:p.(R193C)),3)femalewithbilateral Roxane van Heurck, Maria Teresa Carminho-Rodrigues, Emma- iris and optic nerve colobomas,and downslantedpalpebral ﬁssures, nuelleRanza,CaterinaStafuzza,LinaQuteineh,CorinneGehrig,Eva (NM_003468:c.G1566A:p.(W522*)), 4) female with unilateral iris and Hammar, Michel Guipponi, Marc Abramowicz, Pascal Senn, Nils chorioretinal coloboma (NM_003468.4:c.541G>T:p.(
E181 *)), 5) female Guinand,Helene Cao-Van,Ariane Paoloni-Giacobino with bilateral coloboma (NM_003468.4:c.1150G>C:p.(D384H)), and 6) female with unilateral iris and chorioretinal coloboma, and bilateral hug,genève, Switzerland. opticnervecolobomas(NM_003468.4:c.147delG:p.(H50Tfs*70)). Conclusions:WepresentsixindividualswithFZD5variantsand Purpose: Hearing loss is characterized by an extensive genetic ocularcolobomas,providingtheﬁrstevidenceforFZD5missense heterogeneity and is a common disorder in children (1/500). and stopgain variants in these disorders. As iris coloboma is the Molecular diagnosis is of particular beneﬁt and allows to identify onlyconsistentphenotype,thesedatahighlighttheimportanceof clinically-unrecognized hearing loss syndromes, as well as appro- additional pathogenic variants underlying associated complex priatemanagementandfollow-up,includinggeneticcounselling. non-ocularphenotypes. Methods:Weperformedclinicalwholeexomesequencing,with R.J.Holt:None.D.Goudie:None.A.Sarkar:None.A.Damián: analysis of a 189 gene panel associated with hearing loss, in a None. A. Tamayo: None. C. Ayuso: None. M. Cortón: None. A. prospective cohort of 70 patients including 61 children and 9 Gardham: None. V. Clowes: None. J. Plaisancié: None. N. adults presentingwith hearing lossfrom 2017to 2020. Chassaing:None. P. Calvas:None. N.K.Ragge: None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 125 Results: The overal diagnostic rate using exome sequencing D.Ozieblo:None.A.Obrycka:None.H.Skarżyński:None.M. reached47,2%-50,8%inchildrenand22%inadults.Inchildren Ołdak:None. with conﬁrmed molecular results, seventeen out of 31 (54,8%) patients showed autosomal recessive inheritance patterns, thir- teen out of 31 (41,94%) showed autosomal dominant and one 
P02 .026.C Genetic Variant Curation in GJB2 and GJB6 genes case had X-linked hearing loss. While in adults the two patients fromanArgentinean cohort ofhearinglosspatients showed autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Out of the 31 children, 17 (54,84%) had non-syndromic hearing loss and 14 PaulaI.Buonﬁglio1,CarlosD.Bruque2,SebastiánMenazzi3,Liliana (45,16%) had syndromic hearing loss. Both adult cases were Francipane3, Vanesa Lotersztein4, Ana B. Elgoyhen1, Viviana K. diagnosed with syndromic hearing loss. The most common Dalamón1 causative genes were STRC (5 cases), GJB2 (3 cases), CO
L11 A1 (3 cases), ACTG1 (2cases), GATA3(2cases) and TMPRS
S3 (2cases). 1INGEBI,CiudadAutónomadeBuenosAires,Argentina,2Hospitalde Conclusion: Exome sequencing perfomed in hearing loss Alta Complejidad SAMIC - El Calafate, El Calafate, Argentina, situations has a high diagnostic yield in children. This can reveal 3Servicio de Genética del Hospital de Clínicas “José de San Martín”., several hearing loss syndromes before involvement of other CiudadAutónomadeBuenosAires,Argentina,4ServiciodeGenética organs/systems, thus allowing the surveillance of present and/or del Hospital Militar Central Cirujano Mayor “Dr. Cosme Argerich”, future complications associated with thesesyndromes. Ciudad Autónoma de BuenosAires, Argentina. R. van Heurck: None. M. Carminho-Rodrigues: None. E. Ranza: None. C. Stafuzza: None. L. Quteineh: None. C. Gehrig: Hereditaryhearingimpairmentaffects 1-500newbornchildren.It None. E. Hammar: None. M. Guipponi: None. M. Abramowicz: ischaracterizedbythelargeamountofgenesinvolved(morethan None. P. Senn: None. N. Guinand: None. H. Cao-Van: None. A. 100) and its phenotype heterogeneity. Despite the wide genetic Paoloni-Giacobino: None. variety of hearing impairment, the most commonly mutated genes in severe to profound autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearinglossareGJB2andGJB6,accountingfornearly50%ofthe 
P02 .025.B Auditory development ofpatients withgenetically cases in most populations around the Mediterranean Sea. determinedhearing loss Molecular diagnosis enables proper genetic counseling and medical prognosis to patients. Therefore, correct interpretation Dominika Ozieblo1,2, Anita Obrycka3, Henryk Skarżyński4, Monika of the phenotypic consequences of genetic variants is crucial in Ołdak1 genetic diagnosis, since discrepancies in sequence variant interpretation and classiﬁcation has been reported to lead to 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of serious impact in patient health maintenance.In this study we Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 2Postgraduate School of Molecular aimed to identify the genetic causes of hearing loss and Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 3Depart- performed a manual genetic variant curation following the ment of Implants and Auditory Perception, Institute of Physiology American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics/Association andPathologyofHearing,Warsaw,Poland,4Oto-Rhino-Laryngology for Molecular Pathology ACMG/AMP standards and hearing-loss- Surgery Clinic, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, gene-speciﬁc criteria of the ClinGen Hearing Loss Expert Panel.A Warsaw, Poland. totalof600patientswerestudiedforgeneticvariantsinGJB2and GJB6genesby Sanger Sequencing technique and Multiplex Gap- Introduction: Every year, approximately 1-6/1000 children are PCR, respectively.Overall, 48 different sequence variants were bornwithseveretoprofoundhearingloss(HL)andforthisgroup detected in our cohort of patients, being the c.35delG the most of patients cochlear implantation (CI) is the treatment of choice. common causative variant identiﬁed. Besides, more than 50% of Theaimofourstudywastoanalysetheauditorydevelopmentof sequence variants were reclassiﬁed from their previous categor- DFNB1-negativeCI patients. ization in ClinVar after careful manual analysis. These results Materials:Thestudygroup(n=52)wasrecruitedfrompatients provide an accurately analysed and interpreted set of variants to with profound prelingual HL that were negative for DFNB1 locus betakenintoaccountbycliniciansandthescientiﬁccommunity, pathogenic variantsand had noenvironmentalHL risk factors. andhence, aid theprecisegenetic counseling topatients. Methods: In all probands exome sequencing (WES) was P.I.Buonﬁglio:None.C.D.Bruque:None.S.Menazzi:None.L. performed and followed by bioinformatics analysis. Validation of Francipane:None.V.Lotersztein:None.A.B.Elgoyhen:None.V. selectedvariantsandfamilysegregationanalysiswereperformed K.Dalamón: None. usingstandardSangersequencingorqPCR.Evaluationofpatients auditory development was performed with the LittlEARS ques- tionnaire (LEAQ) in three subsequent intervals - at the time of 
P02 .027.D MYO6 intragenic deletion in a family with cochlearimplantactivationaswellasin5thand9thmonthafter autosomal dominantdeafness CI. Results: Causative variants were identiﬁed in 69% of patients Chiara Pescucci1, Francesca Gerundino1, Costanza Giuliani1, Lucia (36/52).ThemajorityofthemarelocalizedintheMYO15A(n=6) Galli2, Giuseppina Marseglia1, Barbara Minuti1, Francesca Marin1, and PAX3 (n=5) genes. All patients presented a signiﬁcant Francesca Buchi1, Monica Trafeli1, Paola Pelacani1, Chiara Castag- improvementoftheirauditoryskillsinsubsequentintervalsat5th noli1, Elisabetta Pelo1, Alfredo Orrico2,3 (p<0.001) and 9th (p<0.05) months after CI. There were no statisticallysigniﬁcantdifferencesbetweenauditorydevelopment 1SOD Diagnostica genetica, AOU Careggi, Firenze, Italy, 2Molecular ofpatients withidentiﬁedand unidentiﬁed genetic causeof HL. diagnosis and characterization of pathogenic mechanisms of rare Conclusions: Obtained results show a high heterogeneity of genetic diseases, AOU Senese, Siena, Italy, 3Clinical Genetics ASL genetic HL causes in the population of Polish DFNB1-negative Toscana SudEst Ospedale della Misericordia, Grosseto, Italy. cochlea-implanted patients. All tested children were good candidates for CI as their HL causative genetic variants are Introduction: MYO6 loss-of-function variants can cause auto- localized in genes preferentially expressed in the cochlea. somal dominant progressive hearing loss with variable age of Supported by NCN grant:2017/27/N/NZ5/02369 onset. Here we present a family with hereditary hearing loss EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 126 transmittedinanautosomaldominantpattern.Theproband,a40- scenarios, e.g. the detection of syndromes in patients displaying year-oldfemale, begantoshowaprogressivedeafness sinceshe subtlephenotypicfeatures,earlydiagnosisoflate-onsetdiseases, was 17 years old. She was diagnosed with sensorineural hearing identify mutations in different genes involved in the same loss more pronounced in medium and high frequencies (500- phenotype, detect multiple genetic conditions in the same 8000Hz). Her mother and maternal grandmother also appeared patient,3)discovernewdiseasegenes(e.g.PSI
P1 ,TB
L1 Y,SPAT
C1 L, withthesameconditionwithanonsetduringtheseconddecade. PL
S1 ,SL
C12 A2),further exploring thecomplexity ofNSHL. Materials and Methods: libraries preparation by Illumina Conclusions:Ourapproachprovedtobeefﬁcientinidentifying TSOne sequencing kit and massive parallel sequencing, followed themolecularcausesofNSHL,leadingtoanoveralldetectionrate bybioinformaticanalysisofanin-silicopanelofhearinglossgenes of ~50% in the Italian population. Furthermore, WES demon- were performed. Reads were aligned to the GRCh37/hg19 using strateditsutilityinidentifyingnewdisease-genes,deepeningthe BWA. Single-nucleotide variants and indels were called by knowledgeof thebiological mechanisms ofNSHL. SAMtools and GATK. Copy number variants analysis was A.Morgan:None.F.Faletra:None.S.Lenarduzzi:None.M.La performed by CONTRA. Variants were functionally annotated by Bianca: None. G. Pelliccione: None. B. Spedicati: None. A. ANNOVAR and interpreted by InterVar. ArrayCGH was perfomed Feresin: None. D. Mazzà: None. A. Sensi: None. C. Graziano: using a custom array speciﬁcally designed to investigate None.M.Seri:None.U.Ambrosetti:None.P.Gasparini:None.G. intragenicCNVs in hearingloss related genes. Girotto:None. Results:anovelMYO6intragenicdeletionwasidentiﬁedinthe proband. Segregation analysis showed that the deletion co- segregates with deafness within the family. ArrayCGH analysis 
P02 .029.BUseofOTO-NGS-v2panelforthegeneticdiagnosis allowedtoconﬁrmthepresenceofa5,3kbdeletionencompass- ofhereditary hearingloss ing exons 2 and 3 of the gene: arr[GRCh37]6q14.1 (76515168x2,76527247_76532572x1,76537323x2). María Lachgar1,2, Matías Morín1, Manuela Villamar1, Miguel Ángel Discussion:theidentiﬁcationofanoveldeletionsupportswith Moreno-Pelayo1 additional evidence the known matter that a number of pathogenic variants in hereditary deafness are private. As a 1Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal and IRYCIS and CIBERER, consequence, molecular diagnosis takes advantage from com- Madrid, Spain, 2Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, King’s binedapproachesforSNVs/CNVsanalyses fromsequencingdata. CollegeLondon, London, United Kingdom. C. Pescucci: None. F. Gerundino: None. C. Giuliani: None. L. Galli:None.G.Marseglia:None.B.Minuti:None.F.Marin:None. Hereditary hearing loss is the most common sensory deﬁcit in F. Buchi: None. M. Trafeli: None. P. Pelacani: None. C. humans. It has a highly heterogeneous genetic aetiology and, Castagnoli:None. E.Pelo: None. A.Orrico: None. therefore,theuseofNextGenerationSequencing(NGS)approaches is essential to undertake a genetic diagnosis.In this work, we use OTO-NGS-v2,acustom-designedNGStargetedpanelcontaining117 
P02 .028.A GJB2 sequencing, Multiplex Ligation Probe Ampliﬁ- genes associated with hearing loss. Library preparation uses IDT cation (MLPA) and Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) for the probestocapturetheregionsofinterest,followedbysequencingin moleculardiagnosisofNon-SyndromicHearingLoss(NSHL):the the Illumina MiSeq and data analysis and variant interpretation in experience ofacohortof 277Italian families SOPHiA Genetics DDM, with all mutations conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing.OTO-NGS-v2 was validated using 16 previously geneti- Anna Morgan1, Flavio Faletra1, Stefania Lenarduzzi1, Martina La callycharacterizedsamplesfortheidentiﬁcationofsingle-nucleotide Bianca1, Giulia Pelliccione1, Beatrice Spedicati2, Agnese Feresin2, variants (SNVs), small insertions and deletions (indels), and copy Daniela Mazzà1, Alberto Sensi3, Claudio Graziano4, Marco Seri4, numbervariations(CNVs).Wehavestudied108Spanishfamilieswith Umberto Ambrosetti5,Paolo Gasparini1,2, Giorgia Girotto1,2 autosomal dominant sensorineural hearing loss (ADSNHL), 45 of which have been genetically diagnosed, thus constituting a 1Institute for Maternal and Child Health – IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo", diagnostic rate of 41.67%. The 58.33% of the cases remain Trieste, Italy,2University ofTrieste, Department of Medicine, Surgery undiagnosedandfurtherstudiesareneededtoidentifythegenetic and Health Sciences, Trieste, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, Depart- cause of the hearing impairment in these patients. Our results mentofClinicalPathology,Pievestina,Cesena,Italy,4UnitofMedical indicate that WF
S1  and MYO7A have the highest prevalence in the Genetics, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 5University of Spanishpopulation(6.48%)followedbyMYO6A(5.56%).Weconclude Milano U.O.C. Audiologia/Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale thatOTO-NGS-v2isarobustdiagnostictoolforthegeneticdiagnosis MaggiorePoliclinico, Milano,Italy. ofhereditaryhearingloss.Inthisstudy,wehavelaidthefoundations for its implementation in clinical practice and contributed to the Introduction: NSHL is the most common sensory disorder, with understandingofthegeneticlandscapeofhearingimpairmentinthe ~80% of congenital cases due to genetic causes. In addition to Spanish population.This research was funded by ISCIII (PI17/01659, screening the most frequently mutated genes (GJB2/GJB6/MT- PI20/0429,CIBERER,06/07/0036)andbytheRegionalGovernmentof RNR1), the use of WES together with techniques able to detect Madrid(CAM,B2017/BMD3721). copy number variants (CNVs) has proved to be efﬁcient in the M. Lachgar: None. M. Morín: None. M. Villamar: None. M. molecular diagnosisofNSHL. Moreno-Pelayo: None. MaterialsandMethods:Weappliedamulti-stepapproachfor testing 277 NSHL families, which included: 1) an accurate clinical evaluation, 2) the analysis of GJB2, GJB6, and MT-RNR1, 3) the 
P02 .030.CARIPOR2inframedeletionisafrequentandhighly evaluationofSTRC-CATSPER2andOTOACNVsviaMLPA,4)WESin penetrantcause ofadult onset hearingloss patientsnegative tosteps 2-3. Results: About 20% of patients carried mutations in the GJB2 Jeroen J. Smits1, Suzanne E. de Bruijn1, Chang Liu2, Cornelis P. gene.MLPAandWES ledtothecharacterization ofanadditional Lanting1,AndyJ.Beynon1,JoëlleBlankevoort1,JaapOostrik1,Wouter ~37% of cases. In particular, data analysis allowed to 1) conﬁrm Koole1, Erik de Vrieze1, DOOFNL Consortium, Cor W. R. J. Cremers1, therelevantroleofCNVsinNSHL,with~8%ofthepositivecases FransP.M.Cremers1,SusanneRoosing1,HelgerG.Yntema1,Henricus carrying a pathogenic CNV, 2) unveil a series of unexpected P.M. Kunst1, Bo Zhao2,Ronald J. E. Pennings1, HannieKremer1 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 127 1Radboudumc,Nijmegen,Netherlands,2IndianaUniversitySchoolof hearing loss in Ossetians were GJB2-associated. Also, as in other Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. North Caucasian populations (for example, in Karachai), in OssetiansthemostfrequentGJB2variantwasc.358_360delGAG. Introduction:Hearinglossisoneofthemostprevalentdisabilities Two variants, c.358_360delGAG and c.35delG, made up 90% of worldwide. The adult-onset types of the condition is highly alleles in GJB2-associated hearing loss in Ossetians. The summar- heritable,but thegeneticcauses areoften unknown. izedfrequencyofGJB2pathogenicvariantsinOssetianpopulation Methods: Family and cohort studies were performed and exceeds2%(1.8%inIraniansand2.3%inDigorians).Theresearch included exome sequencing and characterization of hearing was partially supported by RSF grant №17-15-01051 and within phenotype. Ex vivo protein expression addressed the functional thestatetaskof theMinistry ofeducation andscience of Russia. effect ofa DNA-variant. N.V. Petrova: None. N.V. Balinova: None. T.A. Vasilyeva: Results:Weidentiﬁedan in-framedeletioninRIPOR2,that co- None. E.F. Mikhailidi: None. V.V. Kadyshev: None. R.A. segregatedwithhearinglossintwelvefamiliesofDutchoriginin Zinchenko:None. anautosomaldominantpattern.Haplotypeanalysisindicatedthe in-framedeletiontobeafoundervariant,presentin18of22,952 individuals of an unselected cohort. This suggests that the 
P02 .032.AAnovelcompoundheterozygousmutationinRB
P3  deletion is a frequent cause of monogenic hearing impairment causes HighMyopia intheNetherlands,withpotentially8,000affectedindividuals,and a signiﬁcant cause of hearing impairment in neighboring Maya Gombosh1, Yuval Yogev1, Noam Hadar1, Libe Gradstein2, countries.Hearinglossassociatedwiththedeletionin63subjects OhadS. Birk3,1 displayed an average age of onset of 30.6 years (SD 14.9 years) andvariableaudiometriccharacteristics.Afunctionaleffectofthe 1The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute variant was demonstrated by aberrant localization of the mutant of Biotechnology in the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2Department of RIPOR2 in the stereocilia of cochlear hair cells. Moreover, mutant Ophthalmology,SorokaMedicalCenter,BeerSheva,Israel,3Genetics RIPOR2 failed to rescue the morphological defects observed in Institute,Soroka Medical Center,Beer Sheva, Israel. RIPOR2-deﬁcient haircells, incontrast tothewildtype protein. Conclusion:weidentiﬁedarelativelycommontypeofinherited We studied a girl presenting with isolated high myopia. Whole hearingloss,withpotentiallythousandsofindividualsatriskinthe exome sequencing was done and data were analyzed using our Netherlandsandbeyond,whichmakesitaninterestingtargetfor in-house tool, ﬁltering through our in-house 582 ethnicity- developing a (genetic) therapy. This study was ﬁnancially matched controls and available databases, based on allele supported by grants fromthe DCMN Radboudumc, the Heinsius- frequency, linkage locus, indel mutation analysis, etc. SNP arrays Houbolt foundationand NIH/NIDCD(R01 D
C017147 ). (750K)offamilymembersyieldedpossibledisease-associatedloci J.J. Smits: None. S.E. de Bruijn: None. C. Liu: None. C.P. on chromosomes 6 and 10. A single heterozygous missense Lanting: None. A.J. Beynon: None. J. Blankevoort: None. J. mutation(c.3341G>A;p.p.Arg1114Gln)inRB
P3 wasfoundwithin Oostrik: None. W. Koole: None. E. de Vrieze: None. C.W.R.J. thechromosome10locus,analyzedusingourin-housedatabases Cremers: None. F.P.M. Cremers: None. S. Roosing: None. H.G. along with open access databases and veriﬁed through Sanger Yntema: None. H.P.M. Kunst: None. B. Zhao: None. R.J.E. sequencing. In addition, CMA identiﬁed a ~5 million bp Pennings:None. H.Kremer:None. heterozygous deletion, encompassing RB
P3 , within that locus. IntegrativeGenomicsViewer(IGV)analysisofNGSdatawasused toconﬁrmthedeletionmutation,showing~50%lessreadsinthe 
P02 .031.DGJB2-associatedhearinglossinNorthernOssetians deleted region compared to controls. Segregation analysis demonstrated that the missense mutation was inherited from Nika V. Petrova1, Natalia V. Balinova1, Tatyana A. Vasilyeva1, E F. the heterozygous father and that the deletion mutation was de- Mikhailidi2, VitaliyV. Kadyshev1, RenaA. Zinchenko1,3 novo. Thus, the infantile high myopia phenotype was caused by novel compound heterozygous RB
P3  mutations: an inherited 1ResearchCentreforMedical Genetics,Moscow, RussianFederation, heterozygous missense mutation and a large de-novo deletion 2Republican Children’s Clinical Hospital, North Ossetia-Alania, mutation encompassing RB
P3 , that was identiﬁed through Indel Vladikavkaz, Russian Federation, 3N.A. Semashko National Research analysis and low levels of NGS reads of the patient compared to Instituteof PublicHealth, Moscow, Russian Federation. controls.ThisisaﬁrstreportofalargedeletionmutationinRB
P3 , which we show to be an unusual "second hit" de-novo germline Hearing loss (HL) is the most common sensorineural disorder mutation. Genetic diagnosis is important in children presenting worldwide. Pathogenic variants in the GJB2 gene are the main withinfantilehighmyopia,whichcanbethepresentingsignofa causeofcongenitaldeafnessindifferentpopulations.Theaimwas degenerativeocular disorder. todeterminethecontributionoftheGJB2genetothehereditary M. Gombosh: None. Y. Yogev: None. N. Hadar: None. L. sensorineural hearing loss (HSNHL) incidence in Ossetians, Gradstein:None. O.Birk: None. including Ironians and Digorians, the main subethnic groups, fromNorth Ossetia-Alania. Molecular genetic testing (sequencing andMLPA)wasperformedin65HLpatients.In27.7%HSNHLwas 
P02 .033.B Differential methylation of microRNAs encoding associated with GJB2 variants. The c. 358_360delGAG variant genesmay contribute to highmyopia frequencywas42.5%(19/42)inOssetianswithGJB2-associatedHL, and 15.4% (20/130) in the general sample. The c.35delG variant Joanna Swierkowska1, Sangeetha Vishweswaraiah2, Justyna A. accounts for 38.1% (16/42) in Ossetian patients with GJB2- Karolak3,1, Malgorzata Mrugacz4, Uppala Radhakrishna2, Marzena associatedHLand12.3%(16/130)inthetotalsample.368healthy Gajecka1,3 Northern Ossetian individuals, including 248 Ironians and 65 Digorians, were analyzed for variants c. 358_360delGAG and 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, c.35delG.Thefrequenciesofc.35delGandc.358_360delGAGGJB2 Poland, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Oakland variantswere0.0061and0.0121inIronians,0.0077and0.0154in University William Beaumont School of Medicine, Royal Oak, MI, Digorians. Less than 30% of cases of hereditary sensorineural USA, 3Chair and Department of Genetics and Pharmaceutical EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 128 Microbiology,PoznanUniversityofMedicalSciences,Poznan,Poland, repeated trauma and mutilation. Yet, small individual patient 4Department of Ophthalmology and Eye Rehabilitation, Medical cohorts and the lack of standardized phenotype information University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland. hinderthecomplete elucidationof these geneticdisorders. Materials and Methods: The European Network on Inherited Introduction:Highmyopia(HM),aneyedisorderwitharefractive Sensory Neuropathies and Insensitivity to Pain (ENISNIP) was error of -6.0 D or higher, has multifactorial etiology with established by seven research centers and two patient advocacy environmental and genetic factors involved. Research evidence organizations specialized on HSAN/CIP and accumulates the supports the contribution of alterations in DNA methylation and knowledge from clinicians, geneticists, basic scientists and genes encoding microRNAs (miRNAs) to myopia pathogenesis. patients. The exomes of 60 HSAN patients and, if available, Here, we combined both aspects to study the role of the miRNA unaffectedfamilymembersweresequenced.Geneticandclinical genemethylation in HM. dataweresharedand harmonized withinthenetwork. Materials and Methods: From genome-wide methylation Results:Weidentiﬁed16likelydisease-causingnovelvariantsin results of blood DNA of 18 Polish children with HM and 18 the following HSAN/CIP genes: AT
L3 , DST, FLVCR1, NGF, NTRK1, matched controls, we retrieved differentially methylated CG PRDM12, SCN9A, SPTL
C2  and WNK1. All variants were rare or dinucleotides located in miRNA genes. Those miRNA genes and absent from control cohorts and none had previously been their targets were included in over-representation analyses in reported in the literature. If applicable, the pathogenicity was ConsensusPathDB-human. Expression of selected miRNAs’ target corroborated by segregation analyses withinthefamilies. geneswerealsoassessedusingtheRNA-seqdataofhumanretinal Conclusions: Through compiling the data within the ENISNIP ARPE-19cell line. network, here we report on 16 patients with novel pathogenic Results:SigniﬁcantdifferentialmethylationofCGdinucleotides variants in known HSAN/CIP genes. In a next step, the data of located in the promoter regions of MIR3621, MIR34C, MIR423 genetically unsolved cases will be harmonized and re-evaluated. (increased methylation level), and MIR1178, MIRLET7A2, MIR548I3, We will prospectively recruit and analyze additional patients to MIR6854,MIR675,MIRLET7C,MIR99A(decreasedmethylationlevel) identifynew disease-relevant genes. genes could alter their expression. Several targets of those A. Lischka: None. K. Eggermann: None. A. Çakar: None. R. miRNAs, e.g. NA
P1 L1
 and EIF4B, were highly expressed in the Boček: None. L. Bartesaghi: None. M. Elbracht: None. T. retinal cell line. Over-representation analyses of miRNAs’ genes Hornemann: None. J. Senderek: None. M. Auer-Grumbach: and their targets revealed enrichment in biological pathways None.Y.Parman: None.P. Laššuthová: None. I. Kurth:None. relatedtoeyestructureandfunction,suchasWntsignaling,axon guidance, andinsulin signaling. Conclusions:Differentialmethylationofpromotersofindicated  P02
.036.A Genetics of Inherited Retinal Degenerations in miRNAs’genesmightinﬂuencetheirexpression.Therefore,itmay Icelandic patients contribute to HM pathogenesis via the disrupted regulation of transcription of miRNAs’ target genes and biological pathways Daniel A. Thorsteinsson1, Vigdis Stefansdottir2, Sigridur Thorisdot- crucial foreyedevelopment and function. tir2, ThorEysteinsson1, JonJ.Jonsson1,2 Support: National Science Center in Poland (2019/35/N/NZ5/ 03150)to JS. 1Univ.ofIceland,Reykjavik,Iceland,2Landspitali-NationalUniversity J.Swierkowska:None.S.Vishweswaraiah:None.J.A.Karolak: Hospitalof Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland. None. M. Mrugacz: None. U. Radhakrishna: None. M. Gajecka: None. Introduction:Thestudyobjectivewastodelineatethegeneticsof inheritedretinaldegenerations(IRDs)inIceland,asmallnationof 364.000 and a genetic isolate. Beneﬁts include delineating novel  P02
.035.C Genetics of Pain: Novel variants identiﬁed by the pathogenicgeneticvariantsanddeﬁninggeneticallyhomogenous European Network on Inherited Sensory Neuropathies and patientsaspotential investigative molecular therapy candidates. Insensitivity to Pain (ENISNIP) MaterialsandMethods:Thestudysamplecomprisedpatients with IRD in Iceland ascertained through national centralized Annette Lischka1, Katja Eggermann1, Arman Çakar2, Richard genetic and ophthalmological services at Landspitali, a national Boček3, Luca Bartesaghi4, Miriam Elbracht1, Thorsten Hornemann5, social support institute, and the Icelandic patient association. Jan Senderek6, Michaela Auer-Grumbach7, Yesim Parman2, Petra Information on patients’ disease, syndrome, and genetic testing Laššuthová3, IngoKurth1 was collected in a clinical registry. Variants were reevaluated accordingto ACMG/AMPguidelines. 1Institute of Human Genetics, RWTH Aachen University Hospital, Results: Overall, 140 IRD patients were identiﬁed (point Aachen, Germany, 2Neurology Department, Neuromuscular Unit, prevalence of 1/2.600), of which 70 patients had a genetic Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, evaluation where two-thirds had an identiﬁed genetic cause. 3DepartmentofPediatricNeurology,2ndFacultyofMedicine,Charles Thirteen disease genes were found in patients with retinitis University,Prague,CzechRepublic,4DepartmentofNeuroscienceand pigmentosa, with the RLB P1
 gene most common (n=4). The DepartmentofClinicalNeuroscience,KarolinskaInstitute,Stockholm, c.1073+5G>AvariantinthePRPF31genewashomozygousintwo Sweden, 5Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Zurich, RP patients. All tested patients with X-linked retinoschisis (XLRS) Zurich, Switzerland, 6Friedrich-Baur-Institute at the Department of had the same possibly unique R S1
 pathogenic variant, c.441G>A Neurology, University Hospital LMU Munich, Munich, Germany, (p.Trp147X). 7Division of Orthopedics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Conclusion: Pathologic variants and genes for IRDs in Iceland Austria. did not resemble those described in ancestral North-Western European nations. Four variants were reclassiﬁed as likely Introduction: Mutations in approximately 20 genes lead to a pathogenic. One novel pathogenic variant deﬁned a genetically monogenetic disorder of lack of pain perception. This includes homogenous XLRS patient group. Grants. Icelandic Student clinical entities such as hereditary sensory and autonomic Innovation Fund no. 2107575389. The Richard P. Theodore and neuropathies (HSAN) and congenital insensitivity to pain (CIP). Dora Sigurjonsdottir Fund for improving scientiﬁc knowledge on Clinically, the various disorders manifest themselves through blindnessno. 2509962099. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 129 D.A. Thorsteinsson: None. V. Stefansdottir: None. S. Thor- than 250 genes involved. The clinical and genetic heterogeneity isdottir:None. T.Eysteinsson: None. J.J.Jonsson:None. complicates the identiﬁcation of causative mutations. Here we present the results of genetic-molecular characterization in a cohort ofBasque patients.  P02
.037.B The genetic testing landscape for inherited retinal MaterialsandMethods:Aretrospectivestudywascarriedout diseases inthe European region on744IRDaffectedindividuals(from266unrelatedfamilies)using different molecular techniques, including gene panel, whole OrlaGalvin,Petia Stratieva, Avril Daly exomesequencing, andMLPA hybridation arrays. Results: Overall, 50% (133/266) of the studied families were Retina International, Dublin, Ireland. genetically characterized. 126 likely causative variants were identiﬁed. Most variants, 81, were missense/nosense; 28 small While potential treatments emerge for Inherited Retinal Diseases insertion/deletions, 12 affected splice regions, 4 involved copy (IRDs), the genetic characteristics of IRDs require a genetic number variations and 1 was a complex rearrangement. These diagnosis for inclusion in clinical trials. With a genetic diagnosis variantswereidentiﬁedin42genes.Themostrecurrentlymutated patients can take action on inheritance patterns and disease genes were USH2A, CERKL and RHO, in 21, 10 and 10 families progression.Toadvocateforequitable,affordable,accessibleand respectively. Most frequent pathogenic variants were c.2276G>T timelygenetictestingforIRDsitwasnecessarytoinvestigatethe (p.Cys759Phe) in USH2A, c.847C>T (p.Arg283Ter) in CERKL and genetic testing landscape from a processes and systems c.3260C>T(p.Ser1087Leu)inSNRN P200
,identiﬁedin12,10and8 perspective.Desktopresearchsupplementedbysurveyofophthal- familiesrespectively. micand/orgeneticspecialistsacross18countrieswasemployed. Conclusions: Our study allowed us to characterize 50% of the Information was provided by: Medical Geneticists, Clinical families in our cohort, having important implications for genetic Laboratory Geneticists, Ophthalmologists, Retinal Specialists. diagnosis and counselling to the Basque population. MRH is GenetictestingandcounsellingforIRDsvarysubstantiallyamong supportedbyafellowshipfromGobiernoVasco,Spain(Pre-2019- countries from an awareness, accessibility and affordability 1-0325). Work supported by grants from the Instituto de Salud perspective.Methodsofgenetictestingvaryandincludecerebral Carlos III y fondos FEDER (PI17/01413 and PI20/01186), from MRI, Sanger sequencing or Next Generation Sequencing, Whole Gobierno Vasco (2018111062, MTVD19/BD/006, MTVD20/BD/002, Exome Sequencing or Whole Genome Sequencing, SNP array or ZL-2020/00780) and from the Foundation of Patients of Retinitis MLPA. Affordability is a barrier for patients in countries without Pigmentosa(BEGISARE). payment schemes (e.g., Poland) and where only targeted M.RodríguezHidalgo:None.M.Ezquerra-Inchausti:None.L. population is covered (e.g., Bulgaria). Research project parfticipa- Escudero-Arrarás:None.A.Lara-López:None.M.Galdós:None. tion is in some regions an alternative, however limited, with M. Aldazabal: None. G. Garay-Aramburu: None. C. Cruchaga: patientsoftenadvisedtosendsamplesforexaminationabroad,or None.C. Irigoyen:None. J.Ruiz-Ederra: None. travelthemselvesforexaminationoutsidetheircountry oforigin. Huge disparity exists in the approach to genetic testing for IRDs. Greater awareness of genetic testing services is required among  P02
.039.D RP E65
-related retinal dystrophy: mutational and thehealthsectorandeyecareprofessionals.Arevisedapproachto phenotypic spectrum in 45affected patients the provision of genetic testing services is required to ensure equitable access, empower patients, improve access to clinical Rosario Lopez-Rodriguez1, Esther Lantero1, Fiona Blanco-Kelly1, trials,therapyanddeliveryofcare.Fundedbyaneducationalgrant Almudena Avila-Fernandez1, Inmaculada Martin Merida1, Marta del fromtheAllerganFoundation. Pozo-Valero1, Irene Perea-Romero1, Olga Zurita1, Belén Jiménez- O.Galvin:B.ResearchGrant(principalinvestigator,collaborator Rolando2, Saoud Tahsin Swaﬁri1, Rosa Riveiro-Alvarez1, María José or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already Trujillo-Tiebas1,EsterCarreñoSalas2,BlancaGarcía-Sandoval2,Marta received); Signiﬁcant; The Allergan Foundation. P. Stratieva: B. Corton1,Carmen Ayuso1 Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant andpendinggrantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant; 1Department of Genetics & Genomics, Instituto de Investigación The Allergan Foundation. A. Daly: B. Research Grant (principal Sanitaria-Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital- Universidad investigator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell AutónomadeMadrid(IIS-FJD,UAM),CentreforBiomedicalNetwork asgrantsalready received); Signiﬁcant;The AllerganFoundation. ResearchonRareDiseases(CIBERER),Madrid,Spain,2Departmentof Ophthalmology, Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital (FJD), Madrid,Spain.  P02
.038.CMutationspectrumofinheritedretinaldystrophies inacohort from the Basque Country (Spain) Introduction: Biallelic pathogenic RP E65
 variants are related to a spectrum of clinically overlapping inherited retinal dystrophies María Rodríguez Hidalgo1, Maitane Ezquerra-Inchausti1, Leire (IRD). A better knowledge of the mutational spectrum and the Escudero-Arrarás1, Araceli Lara-López1, Marta Galdós2, Maialen phenotype-genotype correlation inRP E65
-related IRD isneeded. Aldazabal3, Gonzaga Garay-Aramburu3, Carlos Cruchaga4, Cristina Materials and Methods: Forty-ﬁve affected subjects from 27 Irigoyen5,Javier Ruiz-Ederra6,7 unrelated families with RP E65
-related IRD were included. Clinical evaluation consisted on self-reported ophthalmological history 1IIS Biodonostia, San Sebastián, Spain, 2Cruces University Hospital, and objective ophthalmological examination. Patients’ genotype Bilbao, Spain, 3Araba University Hospital, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain, wasclassiﬁedaccordinglytovariantclass(truncatingormissense) 4Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA, or to variant location at different protein domains. Main 5Donostia University Hospital, San Sebastián, Spain, 6Miramoon phenotypicoutcomewasageatonset(AAO)ofthesymptomatic Pharma-Biodonostia HRI, San Sebastián, Spain, 7RETICS OFTARED, disease and a Kaplan-Meier analysis of disease symptom event- Madrid,Spain. freesurvivalwas performed. Results:Twenty-ninedifferentRP E65
variantswereidentiﬁedin Introduction: Inherited retinal dystrophies (IRD) are a hetero- our cohort, 7 of them novel. Most frequent variants were p. geneousgroupofdiseasesthatmainlyaffecttheretina,withmore (Ile98Hisfs*26),p.(Pro111Ser)andp.(Gly187Glu)accountingforthe EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 130 24%ofthedetectedalleles.Patientscarryingtwomissensealleles Palazzo: None. R. Artuso: None. S. Landini: None. L. Giunti: showed a later disease onset than those with 1 or 2 truncating None.E. Dirupo: None. S.Bargiacchi: None. variants.While the60% of patients carryinga missense/missense genotype presented symptoms before or at the ﬁrst year of life, almost all patients with at least 1 truncating allele (91%) had an  P02
.041.ACone-relatedtranscriptomicproﬁlesinKeratoconus AAO≤1year (LogRank test p<0.05). corneal epithelium Conclusion: Our ﬁndings suggest an association between the type of the RP E65
 carried variant and the AAO, providing useful KatarzynaJaskiewicz1,MagdalenaMaleszka-Kurpiel2,3,Malgorzata dataforclinical management ofthese patients. Rydzanicz4, JustynaA. Karolak5,RafałPłoski4,Marzena Gajecka1,5 Funding: CIBERER (06/07/0036), IIS-FJD BioBank (PT17/0015/ 0006), RAREGenomics-CM (CAM, B2017/BMD-3721), CAM (PEJD- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, 2018/BMD-9544), ONCE, Ramon Areces Foundation, Conchita Poland, 2Optegra Eye Health Care Clinic, Poznan, Poland, 3Chair of RabagoFoundation,theUniversityChairUAM-IIS-FJDofGenomic Ophthalmology and Optometry, Poznan University of Medical Medicine, ISCIII (PI16/00425, PI19/0321, FI17/00192 and CPII17/ Sciences,Poznan,Poland,4DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Medical 00006)and FEDER. University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 5Chair and Department of R.Lopez-Rodriguez:None.E.Lantero:None.F.Blanco-Kelly: Genetics andPharmaceutical Microbiology, Poznan, Poland. None.A.Avila-Fernandez:None.I.MartinMerida:None.M.del Pozo-Valero: None. I. Perea-Romero: None. O. Zurita: None. B. Introduction: Keratoconus (KTCN) is the most common corneal Jiménez-Rolando: None. S.T. Swaﬁri: None. R. Riveiro-Alvarez: ectasia, affecting 1:2000 individuals worldwide, characterized by None. M.J. Trujillo-Tiebas: None. E. Carreño Salas: None. B. progressive thinning of the cornea leading to pathological cone García-Sandoval: None.M. Corton: None.C.Ayuso: None. formation.Sincecornealepithelium(CE)thinningandCEthickness asymmetry constituting characteristic pattern were observed in KTCN,weaimedtoanalyzetranscriptomicproﬁlesofthreedistinct  P02
.040.A Expanding genetic investigation in patients with CEregions. isolatedfoveal hypoplasia Materials and Methods: The 17 KTCN patients undergoing cross-linking procedure and 5 mild myopia patients undergoing Lucia Tiberi1, Camilla Rocca1, Angelica Pagliazzi2, Giovanna refractive error correction (non-KTCN controls) were ascertained. Traﬁcante2,GiacomoBacci3,ElisaMarziali3,PinaFortunato3,Debora Thecentral,middleandperipheryCEregionswereseparatedfrom Vergani2,1,DanielaFormicola2,VivianaPalazzo2,RosangelaArtuso2, each obtained CE, based on CE thickness mapping. The RNA SamuelaLandini2,1, LauraGiunti2,1,Elia Dirupo2, SaraBargiacchi2 samples were extracted using RNA/DNA/Protein PuriﬁcationPlus MicroKit (NorgenBiotek). The NGS libraries were prepared using 1University of Florence, Department of Experimental and Clinical TruSeq Stranded TotalRNA LibraryPrep Gold (Illumina) and Biomedical Sciences, Florence, Italy, 2Meyer Children’s hospital, sequencedonIlluminaNovaSeq6000platform(100mlnreadpairs Medical Genetics Unit, Florence, Italy, 3Meyer Children’s Hospital, persample).RNA-seqdatawasanalyzedimplementingpreviously Pediatric Ophthalmology Unit, Florence, Italy. establishedpipelines. Results: We observed a characteristic doughnut pattern (thin Foveal Hypoplasia is a rare ocular malformation that can be cone center surrounded by thickened annulus) on each ectatic associated with variable ocular features such as congenital epithelial thickness map. The average CE thickness values of the nystagmus, premature cataract, anterior segment dysgenesis three analyzed regions were found to be statistically different in and chiasmal misrouting, or either can be found in the context KTCN patients. Those irregularities in epithelial thickness proﬁles of aniridia, albinism or retinal dystrophy. To date, only PAX6, in KTCN were reﬂected in transcriptomic proﬁles. The identiﬁed SL C38
A8andAHRareknowntobeassociatedwithIsolatedFoveal differentially expressed pathways (extracellular matrix organiza- Hypoplasia(FVH),butfewpatientsundergoextensiveclinicaland tion, epithelial-mesenchymal transition) were consistent with molecular investigations. In order to elucidate the genetic previously reportedasdysregulated inKTCN. background of FVH, we performed WES in eight trios recruited Conclusions:ThephenotypicabnormalitiesindistinctKTCNCE at Meyer Children’s Hospital in Florence. The patients were regionsare related tothe identiﬁedtranscriptomic alterations. phenotypized by ophthalmologist and geneticist and they all Support:TheNationalScienceCentre grantno.2018/31/B/NZ5/ presented FVH with no clear iris transillumination defects. In ﬁve 03280. Co-ﬁnanced by the European Social Fund, Operational patients,WESrevealedacombinationoftwoincispolymorphisms ProgrammeKnowledgeEducationDevelopment,project‘Interna- that are in trans with another TYR deleterious mutation: this tional scholarship exchange of doctoral students and academic triallelicgenotype,alreadyknowntoexplainmissingheritabilityin staff’,No.POWR.03.03.03.00-00-00-PN13/18. someOCA1Balbinismpatients,islikelytoexplainalsopartofFVH K. Jaskiewicz: None. M. Maleszka-Kurpiel: None. M. Rydza- patients. One patient showed compound heterozygosity in TYR, nicz: None. J.A. Karolak: None. R. Płoski: None. M. Gajecka: with one frameshift and one rare missense variant. Another case None. presentedcompoundheterozygousvariantsinOCA2.Onlyinone patient we couldn’t reach molecular diagnosis, although variants in TYR and OCA2 were found: nonetheless, no clear support of a  P02
.042.CAssessingthepotentialofnext-generationsequen- possibledigenicconditionwasfoundintheliterature.Ourresults cing technologies to unravel the molecular spectrum of revealed that patients with FVH harbour mutations in genes maculopathies classically associated to albinism, suggesting that FVH and OCA could be considered as part of the same spectrum. However, Marta del Pozo-Valero1,2, Rosa Riveiro-Álvarez1,2, Inmaculada further studies in a larger cohort are necessary to better Martín-Mérida1,2, Fiona Blanco-Kelly1,2, Saoud Swaﬁri1,2, Isabel characterize genotype-phenotype correlation. Lorda-Sanchez1,2, M Jose Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, Ester Carreño3, Belén L. Tiberi: None. C. Rocca: None. A. Pagliazzi: None. G. Jiménez-Rolando3, Blanca García-Sandoval4,2, Marta Corton1,2, Traﬁcante: None. G. Bacci: None. E. Marziali: None. P. Almudena Avila-Fernandez1,2, CarmenAyuso1,2 Fortunato: None. D. Vergani: None. D. Formicola: None. V. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 131 1Department of Genetics, IIS-FJD, UAM, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Severalgenes, including FAM136A,DTNA, PRKCB or SEMA3D have Madrid,Spain,3DepartmentofOphthalmology,IIS-FJD,UAM,Madrid, been found in autosomal dominant familial Meniere’s disease Spain,4DepartmentofOpthalmology,IIS-FJD,UAM,Madrid,Spain. (FMD). The aim of this study was to investigate 73 FMD patients (46families)to searchfor newgenesinFMD. Introduction: Inherited macular dystrophies (MD) comprise a Materials and Methods: Rare variants were selected from heterogeneousgroupofdisorderscharacterizedbybilateralcentral patient exome sequencing data to perform a gene burden visual loss and atrophy of the macula and underlying retinal analysis. Allelic frequencies were compared with European and pigmentepithelium.Theaimofthisstudyistoassessthepotential Spanishreferencedatasets.Onlygeneswithatleast3rarevariants of next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies to characterize (MAF≤0.05) wereretrieved. MDpatients. Results: We observed an enrichment of rare missense variants Methods: The cohort was classiﬁed according to their inOTOGgeneinFMDcasesagainsteitherNon-FinnishEuropean suspected clinical diagnosis- Stargardt disease (STGD), cone and population from gnomAD (OR=4.0(2.6-6.1), p=4.6x10-9) or cone-rod dystrophy (CCRD) or other maculopathies (otherMD). Spanish population (OR=3.0(1.9-4.8), p=1.2x10-5). Ten rare Unsolved cases without NGS were re-studied mainly by exome missense variants were identiﬁed in 15/46 (33%) families with sequencing. MDintheOTOGgene.Sixfamilieswith2ormoresharedvariants Results: With the implementation of exome sequencing and were identiﬁed, suggesting compound heterozygous recessive the study of intronic regions of ABCA4, a total of 677 patients inheritance (Table). (65%)werecharacterized.There-studyofunsolvedcasesshowed Conclusions:OTOGisafrequentgeneinFMDandsomefamilies a characterization yield of 63%, including 75% of monoallelic with shared variants showed an autosomal recessive inheritance STGD cases in which a second pathogenic variant was found. consistingofcompoundheterozygousmissensevariants. WhilemostofthepatientsreferredwithSTGDwerecharacterized Funding:J.A.L.E.ispartiallyfundedbyINT18/00031fromISCIII. withABCA4,mostofpatientswithotherMDwereunsolved.Other This study was funded by the Luxembourg National Research MD-related(BEST1,PROM1,PRPH2)butalsounrelated(RHO,RPGR) Fund INTER/ Mobility/17/11772209 Grant and EF-0247-2017 from geneswereinvolved. Andalusian HealthGovernment toJ.A.L.E. Conclusions: This study provides a genetic landscape of 1036 P. Román-Naranjo: None. P. Robles-Bolivar: None. M. arMDfamilies,givingamutationalspectrumofthegenesinvolved Moleón: None. A. Soto-Varela: None. I. Arán: None. J. inSTGD,CCRDandotherMDgroupsofpatientsaccordingtotheir Espinosa-Sánchez: None. J. Amor-Dorado: None. A. Batuecas- suspected diagnosis. We demonstrate the increase of the Caletrio: None. P. Perez-Vazquez: None. A. Gallego-Martinez: characterization diagnostic yield after the implementation of None.J. Lopez-Escamez: None. exome sequencing regardless their diagnosis together with the analysis of the intronic region of ABCA4 in monoallelic STGD patients.Thisallowstheirgeneticcharacterization,evenwhenno  P02
.045.B Novel stopgain variant in SOX2 gene causing clinicalandfamiliardataareavailable,leadingtotheirreclassiﬁca- autosomal dominanttype 3syndromic microphthalmia tion. Funding: ISCIII, CIBERER, ONCE, UniversityChairUAM-IIS-FJD, RAREGenomics-CM Florina Stoica1, Adela Chirita-Emandi2, Andreea Ionescu2, Nicoleta M.delPozo-Valero:None.R.Riveiro-Álvarez:None.I.Martín- Andreescu2, Maria Puiu2 Mérida:None. F.Blanco-Kelly:None.S.Swaﬁri:None.I.Lorda- Sanchez: None. M. Trujillo-Tiebas: None. E. Carreño: None. B. 1OphthalmologyDepartment,EmergencyClinicalMunicipalHospital, Jiménez-Rolando: None. B. García-Sandoval: None. M. Corton: Center of Genomic Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy None.A. Avila-Fernandez: None. C.Ayuso:None. “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 2Center of Genomic Medicine, UniversityofMedicineandPharmacy“VictorBabes”,RegionalCenter of Medical Genetics Timis, Clinical Emergency Hospital for Children  P02
.044.AAburdenofraremissensevariantssupportsOTOG “Louis Turcanu”, partof ERNITHACA, Timisoara, Romania. asafrequent gene in familial Meniere disease WeaimtopresentanovelvariantinSOX2geneassociatedwitha Pablo Román-Naranjo1, Paula Robles-Bolivar1, María del Carmen particular ocular phenotype in a child with AD type 3 syndromic Moleón2,AndrésSoto-Varela3,IsmaelArán4,JuanManuelEspinosa- microphthalmia. Sánchez2,JuanCarlosAmor-Dorado5,AngelBatuecas-Caletrio6,Paz Methods: The patient was evaluated by a multidisciplinary Perez-Vazquez7, Alvaro Gallego-Martinez1, Jose Antonio Lopez- team. NGS used the TruSightOne Illumina gene panel (4813 Escamez1,2,8 genes),supported by our Ministry of Health. Results: Ocular phenotypes in the 4 years old male patient 1Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research (GENYO), Granada, included bilateral microphthalmia, retinal detachment, iris and Spain, 2Department of Otolaryngology, Instituto de Investigación chorioretinal coloboma, retinal dystrophy and severe visual Biosanitaria, ibs.GRANADA, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las impairment. The left eye presented high myopia and retinal Nieves, Granada, Spain, 3Division of Otoneurology, Department of pigment deposits. Head MRI showed optic nerve and chiasma Otorhinolaryngology, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario, Santiago hypoplasia. Other abnormalities were: mild intellectual disability, de Compostela, Spain, 4Department of Otolaryngology, Complexo epilepsy, walking difﬁculty, leg bone pain, genu varrum, pes Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain, 5Department of planus, and patent foramen ovale. He had normal male genitalia Otolaryngology, Hospital Can Misses, Ibiza, Spain, 6Department of and height at 50th percentile for age. The endocrinologist Otolaryngology, Hospital Universitario Salamanca, Instituto de monitors the child’s growth. NGS performed at 4 years of age Investigación Biomédica de Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain, detected a heterozygous stopgain variant NM_003106.3(SOX2): 7Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Hospital Universitario de c.600C>A,(chromosome3q26.33).Thissequencechangecreatesa Cabueñes, Gijón, Spain, 8Department of Surgery, Division of premature translational stop signal NP_003097.1:p.(Tyr200Ter), Otolaryngology, Universidad de Granada, Granada,Spain. classiﬁed aspathogenic. Conclusions: Heterozygous pathogenic variants in SOX2 gene Introduction:Menierediseaseisasetofarareinnereardisorder are associated with syndromic microphthalmia, including ocular characterized by sensorineural hearing loss, vertigo, and tinnitus. andsystemicabnormalities.Syndromicmicrophthalmiadiagnosis EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 132 RarevariantsfoundinOTOGgeneinfamilialMDcases. Variantposition Families MAFFMD MAFNFE MAFCSVS CADD Domain AAchange ExAC GnomAD 11:17574758G>A F1;F14 0.021(3/73) 0.00080 0.0011 0.0033 24.8 vWD V141M 11:17578774G>A F2;F3;F4;F5 0.034(5/73) 0.0090 0.0041 0.017 15.95 vWD V269I 11:17594747C>A F34 0.013(2/73) — — — 22.2  C8
  P747
T 11:17621218C>T F6;F7 0.013(2/73) 0.0026 0.0058 0.0033 34  C8
  P1240
L 11:17627548G>A F14 0.012(1/73) 0.0056 0.0045 0.0054 23.6 Abf R1353Q 11:17631453C>T F8 0.0069(1/73) 0.017 0.011 0.014 12.89 —  L1548
F 11:17632921C>T F2;F3;F4;F5 0.034(5/73) 0.0015 0.0011 0.0054 7.71 — A2037V 11:17656672G>A F10 0.0069(1/73) 0.0034 0.0052 0.0039 31 — R2556Q 11:17663747G>A F1;F13;F14 0.027(4/73) 0.0058 0.0024 0.0054 19.41 — R2802H 11:17667139G>C F9;F11;F12 0.041(6/73) 0.019 0.023 0.017 27.2 CT K2842N was considered since patient’s birth, yet NGS was performed at 4 1Blueprint Genetics, a Quest Diagnostics Company, Espoo, Finland, years, showing that access to molecular diagnosis is still limited in 2Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest Diagnostics Company, Seattle, WA, Romania.Thenovelpathogenicvariantidentiﬁedinthepatientwas USA. associated with a particular phenotype speciﬁcally in regards to retinal pigment deposits, yet with normal male genitalia. The Introduction: Hereditary hearing loss (HHL) is a genetically molecular diagnostic was important for the patient to receive heterogeneous group of disorders. Determining the molecular specializedcare,whilethefamilytobeneﬁtfromgeneticcounselling. etiology allows for personalised patient management and F.Stoica:None.A.Chirita-Emandi:None.A.Ionescu:None.N. surveillance, and recurrence risk estimation for families. Compre- Andreescu: None. M.Puiu: None. hensivegenetictestinginHHLusingnext-generationsequencing (NGS) is complicated owing to pseudogenes and segmental duplications affecting several key genes, such as STRC. A testing  P02
.046.CThe role ofBM P3
 in the development ofmyopia strategy that includes difﬁcult-to-sequence regions is needed to maximisediagnostic yield. Amy Findlay, Thibaud Boutin, Chloe Stanton, Ian Jackson, Materials and Methods: To assess the diagnostic efﬁcacy, we Veronique Vitart performed a retrospective review of test results from NGS panels performedfor934de-identiﬁedpatientstestedconsecutivelyforHHL MRC Human Genetics Unit, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, at Blueprint Genetics, a CLIA-certiﬁed diagnostic laboratory. The United Kingdom. analysis was boosted with clinically relevant deep intronic variants and a proprietary copy number variation (CNV) analysis method for OurresearchfocusesonfunctionalfollowupofGWAShitsusinga exon-level CNVs. Variant interpretation followed ACMG guidelines. variety of cell and animal models. A locus overlapping the BM P3
 Most cases(86%,799/934)wereanalysed usingthe Comprehensive gene, signiﬁcantly associated with retinal detachment risk and HearingLossandDeafnessPanel(239genes),whileaminority(14%, myopia, was further examined. Within the associated region, a 135/934)wereanalysedusingsmallerpanels. BM P3
 coding variant was prioritized as the candidate causal Results: Molecular genetic diagnosis was established in 29.9% variant, alongside non-coding potentiallyregulatory variants. The (279/934)ofpatients,distributedin54genes.Themostcommonly BMP signalling pathway has long been implicated in the implicatedgeneswereGJB2(24.4%),STRC(9.7%),MYO15A(5.0%), patterning and development of the eye, but BM P3
’s role both and SL C26
A4 (4.7%). CNVs were reported in 16.1% (45/279) of within this pathway and during eye development and disease is diagnosed patients; 38.5% of CNVs were intragenic. Tailored unclear. The region of interest is conserved between mouse and molecular testing approaches for difﬁcult-to-sequence genes humansoproducinganimalmodelscarryingthemissensevariant contributed to 12.9% (36/279) of diagnoses (conﬁrmed with along with loss of function mutations was easily accomplished orthogonalmethods). usingCRISPRcas9genomeeditingandcomprehensivephenotyp- Conclusions: These results emphasise the value of tailored ingwasperformed.Ourunitisuniquelyequippedtoanalyseeye approaches for difﬁcult-to-sequence genes as well as the phenotypes and using the Optical Coherence Tomography importanceofincludinghigh-resolution CNVdetectioninenhan- machineweareabletotrackdiseaseprogressionthroughoutlife cingtheclinicalutilityofgenetictestingusingNGSpanelsforHHL. and show that loss of function mice exhibit myopia. RNAseq L. Sarantaus: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; analysisoflossoffunctioncelllineshasshownderegulationofa Blueprint Genetics. K. Gall: A. Employment (full or part-time); number of genes including BM P2
, and 4, which have also been Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics Inc. S. Tuupanen: A. Employment implicatedinmyopia.Futureworkisrequiredtoassesshowmuch (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. M. Gandia: A. the mouse and human cell line results converge, but our results Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. H. strengthena role fora BMPpathway inmyopiadevelopment. Duzkale: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint A. Findlay: None. T. Boutin: None. C. Stanton: None. I. Genetics. I. Saarinen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Jackson:None. V. Vitart:None. niﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Sistonen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. Koskenvuo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T.  P02
.047.D Next-generation sequencing panels for hereditary Alastalo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint hearinglosstestingwithapproachesfordifﬁcult-to-sequence Genetics Inc. regions Laura Sarantaus1, Kimberly Gall2, Sari Tuupanen1, Marta Gandia1,  P02
.048.A North Carlina macular dystrophy: phenotypic Hatice Duzkale1, Inka Saarinen1, Johanna Sistonen1, Juha Kosken- variability and computational analysis of disease-implicated vuo1, Tero-Pekka Alastalo2 non-codingchanges EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 133 David J. Green1, Eva Lenassi1, Cerys S. Manning1, David absentordesynchronized(81%).Allpatientswithhomozygousor McGaughey2,VinodSharma1,GraemeC.Black1,JamieM.Ellingford1, compound heterozygous "loss of function" variants had con- Panagiotis I.Sergouniotis1 genital bilateral profound hearing loss, patients compound heterozygous for a “loss of function” variant and a missense 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2National variant had variable presentations. Those with two missense EyeInstitute, Bethesda, MD,USA. variants had a mild to severe hearing loss, which could be of secondary onset. 54% received cochlear implant rehabilitation, Introduction: North Carolina macular dystrophy (NCMD) is an 16% of which were bilateral. Our study conﬁrms a successful autosomaldominant,congenitaldisorderaffectingthecentralretina. hearing rehabilitation with cochlear implants, with open word Here, we report clinical and genetic ﬁndings in three families perception increasing from 0% before surgery to 80% at 8 years segregatingNCMDanduseepigenomicdatasetsfromhumantissues after implantation. However, cochlear implantation cannot be togaininsightsintotheeffectofNCMD-implicatedvariants. consideredasatreatment(disturbanceinnoise,socialdifﬁculties Materials and Methods: Clinical assessment and genetic andprofessionalintegration...).GenetherapytrialsinmutantOTOF testing were performed. Publicly-available transcriptomic and -/- adult mice have shown prolonged hearing rehabilitation, epigenomic datasets were analyzed and the ‘Activity-by-Contact’ making it possible to consider a short-term therapeutic trial for (ABC)methodforscoringenhancerelementsandlinkingthemto thisisolatedcongenitalformofdeafness(RHUAUDINNOV E2019
). target geneswasused. Thisphenotype-genotypestudyisanessentialprerequisiteforthe Results: A previously-described, heterozygous, non-coding future therapeutic trial. variant upstream of the PRDM13 gene was detected in all six S. Achard: None. M. Serey-gaut: None. L. Jonard: None. I. affectedstudyparticipants(chr6:100,040,987G>C[GRCh37/hg19]). Rouillon: None. M. Parodi: None. N. Loundon: None. E. Inter-andintra-familialvariabilitywereobserved;thevisualacuity Rubinato:None. S.Marlin: None. rangedfrom0.0to1.6LogMARandfundoscopicﬁndingsranged fromvisuallyinsigniﬁcant,conﬂuent,drusen-likemaculardeposits to coloboma-like macular lesions. Variable degrees of peripheral  P02
.050.C A newborn with corneal clouding and a diagnosis retinal spots (that were easily detected on wideﬁeld retinal ofposteriorpolymorphouscornealdystrophytype1duetoa imaging)wereobservedinallstudysubjects.Notably,a6-year-old duplication ofthe OVO L2
gene patient developed choroidal neovascularization and required treatmentwithintravitrealbevacizumabinjections.Computational Hester Y. Kroes1, M B. Muijzer1, L Haer-Wigman2, E S. M. Voskuil- analysis of the ﬁve single nucleotide variants that are known to Kerkhof1, P M.van Hasselt1,RP. L. Wisse1 cause NCMD revealed that these non-coding changes lie within two putative enhancer elementspredicted to interact with 1University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Radboud PRDM13 in the developing human retina. PRDM13 was found to University Medical Centre, Nijmegen,Netherlands. be expressed in the fetal retina, with highest expression in the amacrineprecursor cellpopulation. Introduction: PPCD1 was recently shown to result from activating Conclusions: We highlight the utility of wideﬁeld retinal mutations in the promotor region of OVO L2
. We present a new imaging in individuals suspected to have NCMD and provide pathogenicmechanisminlinewiththisobservation.CasereportAn further evidence supporting the role of PRDM13 dysregulation in infant boy presented with progressive corneal clouding at the thepathogenesisof this condition. DepartmentofOphthalmology.Pregnancywasunremarkable,family D.J. Green: None. E. Lenassi: None. C.S. Manning: None. D. history negative. Ophthalmologic investigation revealed bilateral McGaughey: None. V. Sharma: None. G.C. Black: None. J.M. diffuse corneal clouding and otherwise normal results. Physical Ellingford:None. P.I. Sergouniotis: None. examination was normal. A diagnosis of autosomal recessive CHED (congenitalhereditaryendothelialdystrophy)wassuspected. Methods:HighthroughputDNA-analysiswasperformedinthe  P02
.049.B Genotype phenotype correlations of 37 DFNB9 indexcaseandhisparents.Aninsilicopanelanalysisof424genes patients with auditory neuropathy and 17 new OTOF associated with visual disorders was performed consisting of pathogenic variants analysis of single nucleotide variants and copy number variants (CNVs), followed by SNP-array. SophieAchard1,MargauxSEREY-GAUT2,LaurenceJonard3,Isabelle Results:Nocausativesinglenucleotidevariantsweredetected Rouillon1, Marine Parodi1, Natalie Loundon1, Elisa Rubinato2, inSL C4
A11,OVO L2
oranyothergene.CNVanalysisandSNParray SandrineMarlin2 revealed a duplication of ~49 Kb in the chromosomal region 20p11.23encompassingOVO L2
,leadingtoadiagnosisofPPCD1. 1Hopital Necker - Service d’ORL, Paris, France, 2Hopital Necker - Theduplication wasabsentin DNA fromtheparents. ServicedeGénétiqueClinique,Paris,France,3HopitalNecker-Service Conclusion: We present the ﬁfth index case of molecularly de Génétique Moléculaire, Paris, France. proven PPCD1. The underlying molecular abnormality, a duplica- tionoftheentireOVO L2
gene,suggestsagenedosageeffect.So Auditory neuropathy represents 5-10% of child’s hearing loss. far, four PPCD1 families have been described, each with an Pathogenic bi-allelic variations of OTOF result in autosomal activating variant in a distinct part of the promotor region of recessive deafness DFNB9. We retrospectively studied the OVO L2
. OVO L2
 is a transcription factor acting as a repressor of genotype-phenotype correlations of 37 cases from 30 families ZEB1. Loss of function variants in ZEB1 cause PPCD3. This case with pathogenic bi-allelic OTOF variations. Seventeen new seemsto conﬁrm thatgain offunction of OVO L2
causes PPCD1. pathogenic variants were identiﬁed. All patients had isolated H.Y.Kroes:None.M.B.Muijzer:None.L.Haer-Wigman:None. auditoryneuropathy.Hearinglosswaspre-lingualin78%ofcases E.S.M. Voskuil-Kerkhof: None. P.M. van Hasselt: None. R.P.L. and profound in 70%. Hearing loss was progressive in 30%, Wisse:None. ﬂuctuating in 30% and temperature-sensitive in 22%. The diagnosis of auditory neuropathy was mainly based on the discordance of electrophysiological tests with acoustic otoemis-  P02
.051.DFunctionalcharacterizationofnon-canonicalsplice sions present (78%) and brainstem auditory evoked responses variants in aniridia by minigenesand ex-vivo approaches EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 134 Alejandra Tamayo1,2, María Tarilonte1, Jennifer Moya1, Patricia Results: According to clinical signs, patients with congenital Ramos1, Saoud T Swaﬁri1,2, Fiona Blanco1,2, Cristina Villaverde1,2, aniridia were distributed: the presence of complete or partial CarmenAyuso1,2,Marta Cortón1,2 aniridia, nystagmus, keratopathy, cataracts and glaucoma. With nonsense mutations, the complete absence of iris tissue and the 1Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Fundación Jiménez Díaz developmentofkeratopathyobservedinaverageage5±1years. University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 2Centre for Biomedical Network Patientswithopenreadingframeshiftmutationsaresigniﬁcantly Research onRareDiseases (CIBERER), Madrid,Spain. more likely to develop complicated cataract and glaucoma in average age 10±2 years. Partial aniridia occurs with missense Introduction: Mutations in PAX6 cause aniridia, a congenital mutationssigniﬁcantly more often. disorder characterized by several structural eye anomalies. We Conclusions: The identiﬁcation of age-related characteristics describe the development of in-vitro and ex-vivo tools for the depending on the detected mutations is of not only clinical, but functionalcharacterizationofpotentiallyspliceogenicvariantsand alsoscientiﬁcinterest,sinceitindicatesoneofthemechanismsof theirimpacton thecanonical PAX6splicing. regulation of the PAX6 gene function in case of damage to the Materials and Methods: For minigene assays, a genomic organofvision.TheresearchwaspartiallysupportedbyRSFgrant segmentencompassingtheregionofinterestofPAX6wascloned №17-15-01051 into expression vectors and variants were introduced by site- N.Sukhanova:None. R. Zinchenko:None. directedmutagenesis.In-vitroassayswereperformedbytransient transfection into HEK293 and/or ARP E19
 cell lines. Lymphoblas- toid cell lines (LCL) were established by Epstein Barr virus-  P02
.053.BMinigeneexpressionsystemforassesstheeffectof mediated transformation of blood lymphocytes from patients variants in the PAX6gene onpre-mRNA splicing carrying splicing variants and control individuals. Total RNA was extractedandreverselytranscribed.ThesplicingpatternsofmRNA KseniaDavydenko,Alexandra Filatova, MikhailSkoblov transcripts were compared by semiquantitative PCR and sequencing. ResearchCentreforMedicalGenetics,Moscow,RussianFederation. Results:WedevelopedfourminigenePAX6constructs:i)exons 1 to 4, ii) exons 5a and 6, iii) exons 5 to 7 and iv) exons 8 to 11, Introduction: Mutations in the PAX6 gene affect the normal respectively.Todate,atotalof13potentiallyspliceogenicvariants development of the eye and lead to a spectrum of phenotypes, wereassayed and11 ofthem showed aberrant splicingpatterns. the most severe is aniridia. Today more than 600 mutations in Expressionanalysisin4patient-derivedLCLshowedalterationson PAX6 have been reported, about 100 of them wereannotated as splicing patterns. Two out these 4 variants were also tested by affecting splicing. Moreover, variants affecting splicing could minigene assays and the ﬁndings on splicing patterns showed a masqueradeasmissense, nonsenseorsynonymous indatabases. correlationbetween bothapproaches. Inordertoestablishtheeffectofreportedmutationsonsplicing,a Conclusions:MinigeneassayscarryingmultipleexonsandLCL functionalanalysis isrequired. studiesareusefulstrategiestogaininsightintothepathogenicity Materialsandmethods:Bioinformaticsanalysiswasperformed ofnon-canonicalsplicePAX6variants.Thesemethodsareeasy-to- using the SpliceAI (Illumina, USA) and MaxEntScan (MIT, USA) carry approaches for robust splice variant analysis and to help tools. The minigene expression system was used to evaluate the bringmolecular diagnosisto aniridiapatients. functionaleffect of SNVs onsplicing. A. Tamayo: None. M. Tarilonte: None. J. Moya: None. P. Results: We created a system of 8 plasmids containing all 10 Ramos: None. S. Swaﬁri: None. F. Blanco: None. C. Villaverde: coding exons of the PAX6 gene. Plasmids were tested for correct None.C.Ayuso: None. M.Cortón: None. splicingandresultedinnormallysplicedwild-typetranscripts.For all 354 PAX6 SNVs from the HGMD, LOVD, and ClinVar databases wepredictedtheprobabilityofinﬂuenceonsplicing.Weselected  P02
.052.A Clinical molecular genetic age characteristics of 18 intronic SNVs outside ±1,2 position whose effect on splicing congenitalaniridia in children has not been conﬁrmed experimentally and 20 exonic (synon- ymous,missenseandnonsense)SNVswhichactuallycouldaffect NatellaSukhanova1,RenaZinchenko2,L.A.Katargina.A.V.Marakho- splicing. Functional analysis of these SNVs in the minigene nov,T.A.Vasilieva, expressionsystem revealed awide rangeofsplicing defects. Conclusion: We created and successfully tested a minigene 1Federal State Budgetary Institution of Health’s Central Clinical expressionsystemforassesstheeffectofvariantsinPAX6geneon Hospital of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian pre-mRNA splicing. This system can be used to establish the Federation, 2Federal State Budgetary Scientiﬁc Institution “Research pathogenicity of splicing variants in the PAX6 gene, and to Centrefor Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. reclassify misclassiﬁed variantslocatedin databases. K.Davydenko: None. A.Filatova: None. M.Skoblov: None. Introduction:Therelationshipbetweentheclinicalfeaturesofthe phenotype and the genotype conﬁrmed by molecular genetic methods in children with aniridia expands our understanding of  P02
.054.C novel phenotype-genotype correlation with PEX6 theclinicalcourseofthediseaseandcorrectspossibletreatment. genein Saudi patients withheimler syndrome Congenital aniridia (OMIM # 106210) is a monogenic hereditary pathology.Theleadingdiagnosticsignsarecongenitalabsenceof BasamatAlmoallem iristissue, hypoplasia offovea, accompanied bynystagmus. Materials and Methods: The data of ophthalmological Department of Ophthalmology, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi examination and molecular genetic analysis of 83 patients from Arabia,Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. 0 to 18 years old were analyzed. Mutations were previously identiﬁedin56patientsasaresultofsequencingofexonsofthe Purpose: Peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBDs; MIM# 601539) PAX6 gene. In 27 patients, various deletions of the 11p13 region areheterogeneousdisorderscausedbydefectsingenesencoding wereidentiﬁed byMLPA. proteinsthatareessentialforperoxisomalmatrixandmembrane EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 135 proteins. Heimler syndrome is one of the PBDs that is caused by Conclusions: Our study detected aberrant upregulation of mutationsinPEX1andPEX6genes.Inthisstudy,weaimedtofully OVO L2
 in PPCD1, supporting the hypothesis for pathogenic characterise the clinical and molecular aspects of two Saudi mechanism, and identiﬁed other EMT-associated genes and probands whowerediagnosedearly with Usher syndrome. pathways that are signiﬁcantly disrupted in PPCD1 CECs. Our Method: We set up a comprehensive clinical and molecular data suggests that overexpression of the epithelial cell type- genetic workﬂow including detailed ophthalmological and sys- speciﬁc splicing regulator, ESR P1
, induces aberrant splicing of temic assessments followed by genome-wide SNP microarrays CD44andFGFR2.Wehypothesisethatthismechanismcontributes analysisandtargetedPEX6genescreeningbySangersequencing. to the ‘epithelialisation’ of the corneal endothelium observed in Results: Clinically: both probands appeared dysmorphic with PPCD1 and may represent a target for future therapeutic longfaces,highforehead, shortnose, smalllow setears,and full interventions. lips.Moreover,advancedinheritedretinaldysfunctionrepresented N.J. Hafford-Tear: None. L. Dudakova: None. S.J. Tuft: None. by waxy pallor optic disc, attenuated vessels, RPE mottling with A.Sadan:None.N.Bhattacharyya:None.C.Zarouchlioti:None. intraretinal bony spicules pigmentations and central foveal A.J.Hardcastle: None. P.Liskova: None.A.E. Davidson: None. atrophic changes in both eyes with bilateral sensory neural hearing loss and amelogenesis imperfecta. Genetically: an autozygous block was identiﬁed on chromosome 6p21.1 encom-  P02
.056.A Clinical-genetic correlation of the functional state passing PEX6 gene using SNP microarrays. Novel PEX6 ofthe retinain ABCA4-associated pathology (NM_000287.3)c.290T>G (p.Val97Gly) was found and co- segregated with the phenotype in both families and found to Vitaly V. Kadyshev1, Andrei V. Marakhonov1, Inna V. Zolnikova1,2, be“likelypathogenic”according toACMG guidelines. SergeyI.Kutsev1, RenaA. Zinchenko1 Conclusion: Our study represents the ﬁrst report of PEX6 associated Heimler syndrome in the middle east and considered 1ResearchCentreforMedical Genetics,Moscow, RussianFederation, tobethethirdintheliteraturesofar.Ithighlightstheimportance 2Helmholtz National Medical Research Center of Eye Diseases, of combining molecular diagnosis with the clinical ﬁndings to Moscow, RussianFederation. expand our knowledge of PEX6-related PBDs phenotype and the allelicspectrum forthis gene. Aim:Tosetclinicalandgeneticcorrelationsofretinalpathologyby B.Almoallem: None. ABCA4 gene mutations, considering the functional state Material and methods: 15 Russian patients aged from 7 to 32 y.o. with inherited eye diseases ABCA4-associated. All patients besides  P02
.055.D Investigation of transcriptional dysregulation ophthalmic examination, spectral-OCT, fundus autoﬂuorescence, events driving Posterior Polymorphous Corneal Dystrophy full-ﬁeld electroretinogram (ERG), 30-Hz ﬂicker ERG, macular chro- type 1 matic ERG (MERG) to red stimulus, molecular genetic studies includedNextGenerationSequencingandSangerdirectsequencing. Nathaniel J. Hafford-Tear1, Lubica Dudakova2, Stephen J. Tuft1,3, Results: In ABCA4-associated Stargardt disease (SD) genotype Amanda Sadan1, Nihar Bhattacharyya1, Christina Zarouchlioti1, [p. L541
P, p.A1038V] of «frequent» mutations was revealed in 9 AlisonJ. Hardcastle1, PetraLiskova2,4, Alice E.Davidson1 patients,in2casesinwasassociatedanother«frequent»mutation p.G1961E. In 4 patients with genotype [p. L541
P, p.A1038V] 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, «severe» phenotype of Stargardt disease was found: with large 2Research Unit for Rare Diseases, Department of Pediatrics and defect of the ellipsoid zone, severely subnormal macular ERG Inherited Metabolic Diseases, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles (MERG)toredstimulusandsubnormal30Hzﬂickerandfull-ﬁeld University and General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, maximal ERG. In 2 cases with genotype [p. L541
P, p.A1038V] and 3Moorﬁelds Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4Department of mutation p.G1961E was found «mild» phenotype. Nonrecordable Ophthalmology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and MERG was found in 7 of 15 cases, 8 patients had subnormal. General University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. Subnormal 30 Hz ﬂicker ERG was found in 8 patients with SD. MaximalERG wasreducedin 6patients withSD. Purpose: Posterior Polymorphous Corneal Dystrophy (PPCD) is Conclusions:Thestudymadeitpossibletoassesstheeffectof associated with a dysregulated cell state, induced by mutations mutationsintheABCA4genenotonlyonthestructural changes that alter the levels of epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT)- but also on the functional state of the retina. The study expands regulating transcription factors ZEB1, GRH L2
 or OVO L2
. Here we the range of clinical and genetic features of hereditary ophthal- investigatethetranscriptomicsignatureofdysregulationinPPCD mologicalpathologyassociatedwiththeABCA4gene.Supported type 1 (PPCD1) corneal endothelial cells (CECs) to identify by RFBR (project № 19-015-00122 А), within the state task of the biomarkers ofthedisease aspotential therapeutic targets. Ministry ofeducation and science ofRussia Methods: Primary CECs were cultured from ﬁve individuals V.V.Kadyshev:None.A.V.Marakhonov:None.I.V.Zolnikova: affectedwithPPCD1andﬁvecontrols.AllPPCD1individualswere None.S.I. Kutsev:None. R.A.Zinchenko: None. conﬁrmedtoharbourthesameregulatorymutationintheOVO L2
 promoter(NM_021220:c.−370T>C).TotalRNAwasextractedfrom each primary culture and paired-end Illumina RNA sequencing  P02
.057.DHealth-relatedqualityoflifeamongstpatientswith was performed. Transcriptomic analysis was performed using retinal dystrophies DESeq2 and IsoformSwitchAnalyzeR programs to investigate differential gene expression and splicing events in PPCD1 CECs Deborah Schoﬁeld1, Joshua Kraindler1, Rupendra Shrestha1, Sarah comparedto controlCECs. West1,OwenTan1,AlanMa2,3,DianaJelovic2,JohnGrigg4,3,5,Robyn Results: Utilizing the EMT Gene Database, 279 EMT-associated Jamieson2,4,3 geneswerefoundtobehighlydysregulated(p-value<.05;Log-2 fold change>1) in PPCD1 including CDH1, OVO L2
,GRH L2
, GATA6 1GenIMPACT: Centre for Economic Impacts of Genomic Medicine, and the epithelial splice regulator ESR P1
. Alternative splicing in Macquarie Business School, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia, PPCD1 vs controls was further identiﬁed for ESR P1
 targets, CD44 2Eye Genetics Research Unit, Children’s Medical Research Institute, andFGFR2. University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 3Sydney Children’s Hospitals EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 136 Network, Sydney, Australia, 4Save Sight Institute, Sydney, Australia, Results: In 36 (60) patients different pathogenic variants were 5SydneyEye Hospital, Sydney, Australia. found in R P1
, R P2
, RHO, EYS, USH2A, BEST1, PROM1,  C9
, ABCA4, ADGRV1, BEST1, CE P290
 genes. In two patients identiﬁed variants Introduction: Retinal dystrophies (RD) are diseases leading to were classiﬁed as variants of unknown signiﬁcance. In 22 patients incurable blindness attributable to variations in more than 200 NGSanalysisdidnotrevealmutationsingenesassociatedwithRD. genes. There have been signiﬁcant advances in gene therapies Conclusion:Moleculargenetictestingofretinaldystrophieshas includingVoretigeneNeparvovec(VN),whichwasrecentlyapproved been successfully used to clarify clinical diagnoses and direct forinterventioninRDduetovariantsinRP E65
,bytheFoodandDrug geneticcounselling.NGSprovedtobeefﬁcientandusefulmethod Administration,andtheNationalHealthService.Approvalofpublicly for setting up the diagnosis in 63% of patients.This study was fundedinterventionsoftenrequirecost-effectivenessanalysis(quality supportedbyCERRM,RepublicofCroatia,andbytheEUthrough adjusted life years (QALYs) gain). To our best knowledge, studies ERDF, under grant agreement No. KK.01.1.1.01.0008, project reporting health-related utility of RD - a key metric in computing „Reproductive and Regenerative Medicine - Exploring New Plat- QALYs - are scarce or have insufﬁcient or indirect measures of QoL formsand Potentials”. outcomes.Weaimtopresenttheﬁrstpaperexaminingthehealth- A. Bobinec: None. M. Kero: None. L. Boban: None. N. Vidan related utility of RD using an established QoL measure - the Rogulj: None. A. Meašić: None. I. Sansović: None. L. Morožin AssessmentofQualityofLife-8D(AQoL-8D). Pohovski: None. M. Bjeloš: None. M. Bušić: None. I. Barišić: Materials and methods: As part of the EPIC-Vision study, we None. collected patient (age≥18) reported AQoL-8D data as part of a customised survey. AQoL-8D measures functioning across eight dimensions: independent living, pain, senses, mental health,  P02
.059.D Implementation of the targeted retinal dystrophy happiness, coping, relationships, self-worth. The EPIC-Vision panelintheroutinegeneticdiagnosticsofretinaldisordersin survey also collected data on visual functioning (NEI-VFQ), and Polish patients socioeconomic data. Results:Averagehealth-relatedutilityforpatientswithRDwas Ewa Matczyńska1,2, Przemysław Łyszkiewicz1, Anna Wąsowska1,2, 0.6, signiﬁcantly lower than the average population norm (0.8). RobertSzymańczak1,EwaSuchecka1,KatarzynaStradomska1,Marta Patient’s scores were relatively lower on independent living, Beć1, Maria Jędrzejowska1, Sławomir Teper2, Maciej Krawczyński3, mental health, relationship, self-worth, and senses. Regression Anna Boguszewska-Chachulska1 analysisshowedthatpatientswithbettervisualfunctioningscore hadbetter health-related utility. 1Genomed S.A., Warsaw, Poland, 2Chair and Clinical Dept. of Conclusions: We reported for the ﬁrst time, health-related Ophthalmology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland, utilityforRDpatients,whichcanbeusedtoinformfurtherstudies 3Centerof Medical Genetics Genesis Sp.zo.o.,Poznań, Poland. on new interventions.Funding: NHMRC Partnership Grant (AP P1116360
). A targeted panel approach for genetic diagnosis of inherited D. Schoﬁeld: None. J. Kraindler: None. R. Shrestha: None. S. retinal dystrophies (IRD) was developed, based on the results of West: None. O. Tan: None. A. Ma: None. D. Jelovic: None. J. the preceding NeuStemGen project (a cohort of Polish IRD Grigg:None. R. Jamieson:None. patients analysed using WES). The implementation of the approachinroutinediagnosticsprovidedanopportunitytoassess itsperformance alongwith strengths and weaknesses.  P02
.058.CGeneticanalysisofpatientswithretinaldystrophies Polishpatientswithclinicalsymptomsofretinaldystrophies(N inCroatia =168) were subjected to NGS using a custom panel capturing coding regions of 270 IRD genes (RetNet), developed with the AdrianaBobinec1,2,MijanaKero1,2,LjubicaBoban1,2,NikolinaVidan Roche NimbleGen SeqCap EZ. Bioinformatic analysis was per- Rogulj1, Ana-Maria Meašić1,2, Ivona Sansović1,2, Leona Morožin formedwiththeGATKv4andCoNVaDING(forCNVanalysis),using Pohovski1, Mirjana Bjeloš3,4,Mladen Bušić3,4,Ingeborg Barišić1,2 theGRCh38referencegenome.Variantanalysisandinterpretation werecompletedaccordingtoACMGguidelinesusingthein-house 1Children’sHospitalZagreb,Zagreb,Croatia,2DepartmentofMedical variantinterpretation tool- BroVar. Genetics and Reproductive Health, Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Overall sequencing data metrics presented a satisfactory level Scientiﬁc Centre of Excellence for Reproductive and Regenerative of target coverage (meancoverage - 255x±55; fraction of target Medicine(CERRM),University ofZagreb SchoolofMedicine, Zagreb, bases covered >20x - 0.996±0.001) and high heterozygote SNP Croatia, 3University Department of Ophthalmology, University calling sensitivity (0.998±0.0003), indicating near-optimal perfor- Clinical Hospital Sveti Duh, Zagreb, Croatia, 4Faculty of Dental manceforSNPsandsmallindels,providingdiagnosisconﬁrmation Medicine and Health, Josip Juraj Strossmayer University of Osijek, for77patients.CNVanalysisenabledﬁndingcausativevariantsfor Osijek,Croatia. additional 9 patients (51% overall), however, CNV identiﬁcation performed sub-optimal in several batches due to technical bias Introduction: Retinal dystrophies (RD) are a group of inherited anda low numberof samplesper pool. retinaldisorderscharacterizedbyprogressivephotoreceptorsand The targeted retinal panel approach has been successfully pigmentepithelialcellsdysfunctioncausingseverevisuallossand applied in routine IRD diagnostics of Polish patients, expanding eventual blindness. Recently augmentation gene treatment has the knowledge of IRD genetic background in the Polish been approved for patients with biallelic mutations in the RP E65
 population, simultaneously allowing for a cost-effective analysis geneknownto causepigmentaryretinopathy type20and Leber (comparing to WES). Despite reliable coverage, identiﬁcation of congenital amaurosis 2. So far gene therapy in these patients CNVs remains challenging. Further reﬁnement of CNV and more provided improvement of functional vision without serious complexvariants’callingis necessary. adverse reactions raisinggreat interest for genetictesting ofRD. E. Matczyńska: None. P. Łyszkiewicz: None. A. Wąsowska: Materials and methods: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) None.R.Szymańczak:None.E.Suchecka:None.K.Stradomska: was performed in 60 patients with a referral diagnosis of retinal None.M.Beć:None.M.Jędrzejowska:None.S.Teper:None.M. dystrophy using IlluminaTruSight One Kit. Krawczyński:None. A.Boguszewska-Chachulska: None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 137  P02
.061.B Metastasis suppressor 1 <MTS S1
> as a novel Materials and Methods: 120 unrelated Greek patients were candidate gene forinherited retinal dystrophy<IRD> analyzed by Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), 13 and 107 of them using a 105 retinal and a 287 ophthalmic gene panel, Solomon Merepa1, Suzanne Broadgate1, Jing Yu1, Sumathi respectively as described (Ellingford JM et al. J Med Genet 2016, Sekaran1, Susan Downes1,2, Stephanie Halford1, United Kingdom Haer-WigmanLetal.EurJHumGenet.2017).Additionalanalysis Inherited Retinal Dystrophy Consortium (UKIRDC) methods wereused (Sanger,MLPA, array-CGH) in 6cases. Results:Potentiallypathogenic mutations weredetectedin47 1Nufﬁeld Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Department of Clinical retinaldystrophygenesincludingABCA4,PRPF31,SPATA7,MERTK, Neuroscience,UniversityofOxford,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,2Oxford FAM161A, CDHR1, USH2A, CNGB1, PROM1, RPGR and R P2
 genes. EyeHospital,JohnRadcliffeHospital,OxfordUniversityHospitalsNHS The detection mutation rates were 46.15% (6/13) and 79.4% (85/ Foundation Trust,Oxford, United Kingdom. 107) for the 105 and 287 gene panels, respectively. These mutation rates were achieved using complementary methods in Introduction: Over 260 genes underlying monogenic forms of 6 cases. Final diagnoses included retinitis pigmentosa, Usher inheritedretinaldystrophies(IRDs)havebeenidentiﬁed,enabling syndrome, cone-rod dystrophy and Leber congenital amaurosis the development of treatment regimens such as gene therapy. andtworarecasesofKnobloch andOliver-McFarlanesyndromes However,therearestillIRDcaseswhoseunderlyinggeneticcauses duetomutationsintheCO L18
A1andPNPLA6genes,respectively. are yet to be identiﬁed, prompting the need for continued Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst systematic investigation of the disease-geneidentiﬁcation studies. molecularidentityof120Greekpatientswithvarioussubformsof Methods: Two affected members of a family diagnosed with IRDs by NGS and complementary methods leading to an overall dominant retinitis pigmentosa (adRP) underwent whole-exome mutation rate of 75.8%. A plethora of novel mutations was sequencing(WES).Variousbioinformaticstoolsandgenesequen- documented further expanding the genetic heterogeneity. The cing databases including CADD and gnomAD were used to molecularidentiﬁcationestablishedthecompletediagnosisofthe annotate and prioritise candidate variants. Segregation analysis patients thus contributing to family making decision, prognosis was performed using Sanger sequencing. A variant segregating andcandidacy tocurrent and future treatments. with the condition was characterised for expression, localisation S.Kamakari:None.S.Koukoula:None.V.Kokkinou:None.L. andfunctioninthemammalianretinausingtechniquesincluding Haer-Wigman: None. I.Datseris: None. M.Tsilimbaris: None. PCR,western immunoblotting,immunostaining,andsite-directed mutagenesis. Results: Of 22 shared dominant variants determined  P02
.064.A Whole locus sequencing identiﬁes a prevalent from WES, a mutation in the MTS S1
 gene (c.624_628del (p. founder deep intronic RPGRI P1
 pathologic variant in the  E213
del))segregatedwithdiseaseinthefamily.Theexpression French Lebercongenital amaurosis cohort and function of MTS S1
 in the mammalian retina has not been previously described. We report, for the ﬁrst time, Isabelle Perrault1, Sylvain Hanein2, Xavier Gérard1, Nelson Moun- expression of MTS S1
 in the human retina and using antibodies guengue1, Ryme Bouyakoub1, Mohammed Zarhate3, Cécile Four- speciﬁc for Mtss1, we demonstrate immunostainingin layers of rage4, Fabienne Jabot-Hanin4, Béatrice Bocquet5, Isabelle Meunier5, the mouse retina including the photoreceptors. Using mutant Xavier Zanlonghi6, Josseline Kaplan1, Jean-Michel Rozet1 expression constructs, we are currently investigating if the mutation affects localisation and function of MTS S1
 at the 1LaboratoryofGeneticsinOphthalmology(LGO),INSERMUMR1163, cellular level. InstituteofGeneticDiseases,ImagineandParisDescartesUniversity, Conclusions: We provide here, for the ﬁrst time, preliminary Paris, France, 2Translational Genetics, Institute of Genetic Diseases, evidence linking mutation in the MTS S1
 with dominant RP. Imagine and Paris Descartes University, INSERM UMR1163, PARIS, Elucidating the speciﬁc role of MTS S1
 in the mammalian retina France, 3Genomics Platform, Institute of Genetic Diseases, Imagine could potentiallyinform therapeutic approachesfor IRDs. andParisDescartesUniversity,Paris,France,4BioinformaticPlatform. Funding: Retina UK, Fight for Sight, Commonwealth Scholar- InstituteofGeneticDiseases,ImagineandParisDescartesUniversity, shipsCommission Paris, France, 5Centre de Référence des Affections Sensorielles S.Merepa:None.S.Broadgate:None.J.Yu:None.S.Sekaran: Génétiques,InstitutdesNeurosciencesdeMontpellier,CHU-SaintEloi None.S. Downes:None. S.Halford: None. Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 6Eye Clinic Jules Verne, Nantes, France.  P02
.062.C First systematic molecular genetic analysis using Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) encompasses the earliest and NGSanalysis of120Greek patients withretinal dystrophy mostsevereretinaldystrophiesandcanoccurasanon-syndromic orasyndromicdisease.MoleculardiagnosisinLCAisofparticular Smaragda Kamakari1, Stavrenia Koukoula2, Vasiliki Kokkinou1, importance in clinical decision-making and patient care since it LonneckeHaer-Wigman3, IoannisDatseris4,Miltiadis Tsilimbaris5 can provide ocular and extraocular prognostics and identify patients eligible to developing gene-speciﬁc therapies. Routine 1OphthalmicGeneticsUnit,Athens,Greece,2OphthalmicaInstituteof high-throughput molecular testing in LCA yields 70%-80% of OphthalmologyandMicrosurgery,Thessaloniki,Greece,3Department geneticdiagnosis.Inthisstudy,weaimedtoinvestigatethenon- of Human Genetics, Donders Centre for Neuroscience, Radbound coding regions of one non-syndromic LCA gene, RPGRI P1
, in a UniversityNijmegenMedicalCentre,Nijmegen,Netherlands,4Depart- series of six families displaying one single disease allele after a ment of Retinal Disorders, OMMA, Ophthalmological Institute of gene-panelscreenof722LCAfamilieswhichidentiﬁed26biallelic Athens, Athens, Greece, 5Department of Ophthalmology, University RPGRI P1
 families. Using trio-based high-throughput whole locus ofCrete Schoolof Medicine, Heraklion, Greece. sequencing (WLS) for second disease alleles, we identiﬁed a founder deep intronic mutation (NM_020366.3:c.1468-128T>G) in Purpose:InheritedRetinalDystrophies(IRDs)arecharacterizedby 3/6 families. We employed Sanger sequencing to search for the clinicalvariabilityandgeneticheterogeneity.Theaimofthisstudy pathologic variant in unresolved LCA cases (106/722) and was to molecularly diagnose 120 Greek patients with different identiﬁed three additional families (2 homozygous and 1 forms ofIRDs. compound heterozygous with the c.930+77A>G deep intronic EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 138 change). This makes the c.1468-128T>G the most frequent sequencedbeforeproceedingwithadhocfunctionalexperiments RPGRI P1
diseaseallele(8/60,13%)inourcohort.Studyingpatient todeepentherole ofgenesin painful phenotype. lymphoblasts,weshowthatthepathologicvariantcreatesadonor K. Misra: None. S. Santoro: None. A. Zauli: None. M. Marchi: splice-site and leads to the insertion of the pseudo-exon in the None. E. Salvi: None. R. Lombardi: None. D. Cazzato: None. F.M. mRNA, which we were able to hamper using splice-switching Boneschi: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or antisense oligonucleotides (AONs), paving the way to therapies. consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); ThisworkwassupportedbygrantsfromRetinaFrance,UNADEV- Modest; Merck, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, Italian Ministry of AVIESAN ITMO MNP (R16073KS) and VISIO; J.-M.R. is member of Health, Fondazione Italiana SclerosiMultipla,Fondazione Cariplo.D. ERN-EYEproject (739534-‘ERN-EYE). Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert I. Perrault: None. S. Hanein: None. X. Gérard: None. N. witness); Modest; Medday, Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Excemed, Mounguengue: None. R. Bouyakoub: None. M. Zarhate: None. Roche, Sanoﬁ Genzyme, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. F. Con- C. Fourrage: None. F. Jabot-Hanin: None. B. Bocquet: None. I. sultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest;Medday,BiogenIdec,Merck-Serono, Meunier: None. X. Zanlonghi: None. J. Kaplan: None. J. Rozet: Excemed,Roche,SanoﬁGenzyme,TevaPharmaceuticalIndustries.M. None. Filippi: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Roche, Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Teva  P02
.065.B Genetic study of Italian families affected by small Pharmaceutical Industries. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers ﬁbre neuropathy identiﬁed variants in predisposing pain bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Bayer, Biogen Idec, phenotype Merck-Serono, Novartis, Roche, Sanoﬁ Genzyme, Takeda, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; KaalindiMisra1,SilviaSantoro1,AndreaZauli1,MargheritaMarchi2, Bayer,BiogenIdec,Merck-Serono,Novartis,Roche,SanoﬁGenzyme, ErikaSalvi2,RaffaellaLombardi2,DanieleCazzato2,FilippoMartinelli Takeda, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. F. Esposito: D. Speakers Boneschi3,4, Massimo Filippi5,6,7,8, Federica Esposito1,5, Giuseppe Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Pinter Lauria2,9 Modest; Novartis, Sanoﬁ Genzyme, Almirall, Merck-Serono. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Novartis, Sanoﬁ Genzyme, 1LaboratoryofHumanGeneticsofNeurologicalDisorders,IRCCSSan Almirall,Merck-Serono.G.P.Lauria:None. Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 2Neuroalgology Unit, Foundation IRCCS Carlo Besta Neurological Institute, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health, University of Milan,  P02
.066.CHumanknockoutsofolfactoryreceptorsgenesand Milan,Italy,4NeurologyUnit,FoundationIRCCSCàGrandaOspedale smellperception impairment in alargeItalian cohort Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 5Neurology and Neurorehabilita- tion Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 6Vita- Paola Tesolin1, Maria Pina Concas2, Massimiliano Cocca2, Mar- Salute San Raffaele University, Milano, Italy, 7Neurophysiology Unit, gherita Francescatto1, Agnese Luglio1, Beatrice Spedicati1, Agense IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 8Neuroimaging Feresin1,Anna Morgan2,Paolo Gasparini2,1, Giorgia Girotto2,1 Research Unit, Institute of Experimental Neurology, Division of Neuroscience, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 1University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Institute for Maternal and Child 9Department of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences "Luigi Sacco", Health– IRCCS“Burlo Garofolo”, Trieste, Italy. University of Milan, Milan, Italy. Genetic variations across Olfactory Receptors (OR) genes inﬂuence Peripheral Neuropathy (PN) affects 2.4% of people and almost the diversity of odorant sensitivity among individuals. Nevertheless, 50% of general population is known to have pain-related thereisstillalackofknowledgeregardingthegeneticbasesofsmell symptoms. Genetic studies in painful PN (PPN) revealed that performance. Whole-genome sequencing and smell phenotypes Voltage Gated Sodium Channels (VGSCs) genes are involved in dataof218Italianindividualsallowedtheidentiﬁcationof41natural painampliﬁcation.Hereweaimedtobroadenthegeneticaspect OR knockouts (KO) (i.e., genes carrying biallelic loss of function ofPPN byusing wholeexome sequencing (WES). variants). In detail, the following steps have been performed:1. SixfamilieswithPPNwereselectedhavingatleastoneaffected recursivepartitioninganalysistoevaluatetheeffectofOR-KOgenes’ member, positive neurological examination and pain question- burdenonthesmellperception(measuredbythenumberoferrors naireresultwithnumericalratingscore>=4.Variantswereﬁltered in the Snifﬁn Sticks test),2. evaluation of the expression of these with manually curated gene panel, allele frequency (AF) and genes in human and mouse tissues using publicly available data,3. computational predictors. Segregation causative/protective mod- estimation of the presence of organ-related diseases in Human KO elswereappliedaccordingtopedigreeandsharingmodelswere (HKO) individuals for OR expressed in non-olfactory tissues (Fisher appliedafter grouping probands of eachfamily. test). Regarding (1), ageing and the burden of OR-KO led to a According to segregation causative and protective model, we worseningofsmellperception(p-value<0.05).Inparticular,theeffect found 129 and 112 variants respectively (AF<=10%) across of the OR-KO burdenwas higher in younger individuals (aged≤57). families. Among genes shared between two families with With respect to (2), 33/41 OR genes have been detected in the causative approach, variants were observed in SCN9A, SV2C and human olfactory system (OS) and 27 in other tissues, while among DST, whereas protective variants in TRPM2 and LR P1
. In shared the 60 putative ORs mouse homologues,58 were expressed in the model,weidentiﬁed21variantsand53genessharedacross>=3 OS and 37 in other tissues. Finally, (3) 14 pathologies resulted in probands. Among shared genes with predicted high-impact being more frequent in OR-HKO individuals (p-value<0.01). Our variants in probands were observed in SCN9A, SCN7A,  P2
RY4, work conﬁrms the predominant role of age in worsening smell  P2
RX7,TRPV4 andTRPM1. perceptionandhighlights,fortheﬁrsttime,theroleoftheburdenof WES approach appears powerful in mutation detection and in OR-KOgenes. revealing new genotype-phenotype association. In addition to P. Tesolin: None. M. Concas: None. M. Cocca: None. M. VGSCs,othergenefamiliesincludingTransientReceptorPotential Francescatto: None. A. Luglio: None. B. Spedicati: None. A. and Purinergic Receptor seem to play a role in pain modulation. Feresin:None.A.Morgan:None.P.Gasparini:None.G.Girotto: The same approach will be replicated on new families already None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 139  P02
.067.DInsightsintothepathogenesisofStargardtdisease Hamid Ahmadieh3, Mohsen Rajati7, Narges Hashemi8, Barbara associated with splicing mutation c.5714+5G&gtA in ABCA4 Vona1,Miriam Schmidts9 gene 1Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Jana Sajovic1, Andrej Meglič1, Zelia Corradi2,3, Mubeen Khan2,3,4, Tübingen, Germany, 23Pediatric Genetics Divison, Center for Frans F.M. Cremers2,3, Claire-Marie Dhaenens2,5, Martina Jarc Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg, Vidmar1,DamjanGlavač6,AlešMaver7,MarijaVolk7,BorutPeterlin7, Freiburg University Faculty of Medicine, Mathildenstrasse 1, 79106 MarkoHawlina1, AnaFakin1 Freiburg, Germany, Freiburg, Germany, 3Ophthalmic Research Center, Research Institute for Ophthalmology and Vision Science, 1Eye Hospital, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, ShahidBeheshtiUniversityofMedicalSciences,Tehran,Iran,Tehran, Slovenia, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Iran, Islamic Republic of, 4Department of Molecular Genetics, Next MedicalCenter,Nijmegen,Netherlands,3Donders InstituteforBrain, GenerationGeneticPolyclinic,Mashhad009851,Iran,Mashhad,Iran, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Nether- Islamic Republic of, 5Department of Clinical and Movement lands, 4Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University Neurosciences, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 5Univ. Lille, CollegeLondon,UnitedKingdom,London,UnitedKingdom,6Ocular Inserm,CHULille,U1172-LilNCog-LilleNeuroscience&Cognition,Lille, Tissue Engineering Research Center, Research Institute for Ophthal- France, 6Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology, mology and Vision Science, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 7Associate 7Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre professor of Otorhinolaryngology, Ghaem Hospital, Sinus and Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Surgical Endoscopic Research Center, Department of Otorhinolar- yngology, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Introduction: >1200 ABCA4 variants cause Stargardt disease Sciences, Mashhad, Iran, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of, makinggenotype-phenotype correlations difﬁcult. Approximately 8Department of Pediatric Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad 15%ofSlovenianStargardtpatientsharbourc.5714+5G>Awhich UniversityofMedicalSciences,Mashhad,Iran,Mashhad,Iran,Islamic allowed phenotypic speciﬁcationof this variant. Republic of, 9Pediatric Genetics Divison, Center for Pediatrics and Methods: Sixteen patients with different genotypes were AdolescentMedicine,UniversityHospitalFreiburg,FreiburgUniversity recruited. Group 1 harboured c.5714+5G>A in trans with a null Faculty of Medicine, Mathildenstrasse 1, 79106 Freiburg, Germany, mutation (N=6) and group 2 had two null mutations (N=10). Freiburg, Germany. Correlation between the degree of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE)atrophy (represented by thearea of decreased autoﬂuores- Introduction: Stickler syndrome (STL) is a clinically and molecu- cence on fundus imaging) and loss of photoreceptors (repre- larly heterogeneous connective tissue disorder that includes sented by outer nuclear layer (ONL) thickness on optical ocular impairment, hearing loss, joint and craniofacial abnormal- coherence tomography (OCT) and pattern electroretinography ities.PathogenicvariantsoccurringinavarietyofgenescauseSTL, (PERG) amplitudes) was compared between groups. Effect of mainly inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Autosomal c.5714+5G>A on RNA splicing was analyzed using reverse recessiveSTLisultra-rarewithonlyafewcasesreportedtodate, transcription (RT)-PCR of mRNA isolated from patient-derived including three families with biallelic CO L9
A3 variants. Here, we photoreceptor progenitor cells(PPCs). reportthree unrelated families clinically diagnosed with STL who Results: RT-PCR of mRNA from PPCs from a patient carrying presentnovel biallelic lossof function variantsinCO L9
A3. c.4539+1G>Tandc.5714+5G>Ausingprimersinexons38and44 MaterialsandMethods:Exomesequencing(ES)wasemployed showedamajornormalproductandminorexon40andexon39/ to sequence the DNA of probands from three unrelated Iranian 40deletionproducts.Statisticalanalysisshowedthatforasimilar families. Conventional PCR and Sanger sequencing were per- RPE atrophy area, patients in Group 1 had signiﬁcantly better formed to conﬁrm segregation of the candidate variants in structural (thicker ONL) and functional (higher PERG amplitudes) accessiblefamily members. preservation of photoreceptors (multiple linear regression, p< Results:Ourdatarevealedthreenovellossoffunctionvariants 0.01). Preserved photoreceptors were seen above preserved RPE in CO L9
A3 in three unrelated families. All affected individuals onOCT inGroup 1. shared moderate- to high-myopia and moderate to severe Conclusions: Patients harbouring c.5714+5G>A exhibit dis- sensorineural hearing loss. The other clinical observations includ- tinctly different phenotype than patients carrying two null ing hypermobility, mild spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, midface mutations,characterizedbylessphotoreceptorlossatcomparable hypoplasia,depressednasalbridge,antevertednares,biﬁduvula, degrees of RPE loss. We hypothesize that remaining ABCA4 clefthardpalate,andmicrognathiawereslightlydifferentamong function originating from the retained normally spliced product cases. The parents in all three families did not have any STL- spares photoreceptors from early degeneration and shifts the associated phenotypes. pathogenesisto aprimarily RPEdisease. Conclusions: Our report substantially expands the molecular J.Sajovic:None.A.Meglič:None.Z.Corradi:None.M.Khan: geneticbasisofautosomalrecessiveSTLandconﬁrmstheclinical None. F. Cremers: None. C. Dhaenens: None. M. Jarc Vidmar: phenotypes of CO L9
A3-associated autosomal recessive STL.Key- None. D. Glavač: None. A. Maver: None. M. Volk: None. B. words:Stickler syndrome,CO L9
A3,Autosomal recessive Peterlin: None. M.Hawlina: None.A. Fakin:None. A.Rad:None.M.Najaﬁ:None.F.Suri:None.S.Loum:None.E. GhayoorKarimiani:None.D.Murphy:None.M.Doosti:None.N. Daftarian:None.P.Najarzadeh Torbati:None. A.Moghaddasi:  P02
.068.A Biallelic pathogenic variants in CO L9
A3 conﬁrm None.H.Ahmadieh:None.M.Rajati:None.N.Hashemi:None.B. autosomal recessive stickler syndrome Vona: None.M. Schmidts: None. Aboulfazl Rad1, Maryam Najaﬁ2, Fatemeh Suri3, Stephen Loum1, Ehsan Ghayoor Karimiani4, David Murphy5, Mohammad Doosti4,  P02
.069.B Clinical and molecular revaluation yield a 52% of Narsis Daftarian6, Paria Najarzadeh Torbati4, Afrooz Moghaddasi3, characterization in syndromic retinal diseases EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 140 Irene Perea-Romero1,2, Fiona Blanco-Kelly1,2, Iker Sanchez- Introduction:TGFBI-relatedcornealdystrophiesarecharacterized Navarro1, Isabel Lorda-Sanchez1,2, Saoud Tahsin-Swaﬁri1,2, Almu- by hyaline or amyloid deposition in the cornea due to missense dena Avila-Fernandez1,2, Inmaculada Martin-Merida1,2, Maria Jose mutationsofTGFBI.Theproteinproductofthisgene(TGFBIp)was Trujillo-Tiebas1,2, Rosario Lopez-Rodriguez1,2, Ionut Florin Iancu1,2, shown in the cornea of zebraﬁsh. Mutations of TGFBI affecting Raquel Romero1,2, Mathieu Quinodoz3,4,5, Pablo Minguez1,2, Marta arginineresidueonthe124thpositionwerereportedasoneofthe Corton1,2,Carlo Rivolta3,4,5, Carmen Ayuso1,2 hot spots for this group of corneal dystrophies. This arginine residue was also conserved in zebraﬁsh. Therefore, we aimed to 1Health Research Institute-Fundación Jiménez Díaz University make an in-frame change in zebraﬁsh genome affecting this Hospital, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (IIS-FJD, UAM), Madrid, arginine residue by using CRISPR/Cas9 and then observe if any Spain, 2Center for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases accumulation would occurinthe corneaofadult zebraﬁsh. (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 3Institute of MaterialsandMethods:Forthein-framechangeinthetarget Molecular and Clinical Ophthalmology Basel (IOB), Basel, Switzer- region nine injection groups were planned. The mixtures land, 4Department of Ophthalmology, University of Basel, Basel, consisting of sgRNAs, Cas9 mRNA/protein with or without donor Switzerland, 5Department of Genetics and Genome Biology, Uni- DNAwereinjectedtoone-cellstageembryosineachgroup(n= versityof Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. 100). T7 endonuclease assay, restriction fragment length poly- morphism assay and Sanger sequencing were used for genotyp- Introduction:Syndromicretinaldiseases(SRD)areagroupofrare ingintheinjection groups. and complex inherited systemic disorders, characterized by a Results: The variation p. Ser115_Arg117delinsLeu (c. challengingmolecular study and clinicalmanagement. 347_353delinsT) was detected in one of the injection groups in MaterialsandMethods:Acohortstudywasperformedon100 F1 embryos. This variation deleted the target arginine in TGFBIp index cases with an a priori diagnosis of non-Usher SRD, using without causing frameshift. Three-months old and 1-year old available clinical and familiar data and HPO (Human Phenotype heterozygote zebraﬁsh were euthanized, and corneas were Ontology)annotation,soeverycasewasclassiﬁedinto7different examined under the light microscope. No deposits could be clinical categories according to the most prominent symptoms. detected with hematoxylin-eosin, Masson’s trichrome and congo Overtheyears,diversemolecularandbioinformaticmethodshave redstaining. been used. Accordingly, cases were classiﬁed into 3 subgroups Conclusion:Thisistheﬁrststudyinliteraturethatsucceededto depending on the previous molecular technique utilized, deter- makeanin-framevariationeffectingthehotspotarginineresidue miningthe newapproach toperform. of TGFBIp in zebraﬁsh. However, this success could not result in Results: After the phenotypic classiﬁcation, the most common deposit formation inzebraﬁsh cornea. SRD were ciliopathies (36%). A characterization rate of 52% was F. Yaylacioglu Tuncay: None. B. Talim: None. P.R. Dinçer: obtained, being 6 cases incompletely characterized with a gene None. thatpartiallyexplainedthephenotype.Anincreasedcharacteriza- tionratewasachievedtakingthenaïve(67.4%)ortheciliopathies (66.7%) subgroups independently. Our results suggest that  P02
.071.D AnUSH2A founder mutation is the cause of Usher customized panels and clinical exome would be the ﬁrst-tier syndrome type 2inSardinia approach in the naïve cases, whereas whole-exome sequencing would be in the re-studied and reanalysed. Due to the causative Vincenzo Rallo1,2, Rita Serra1,2, Maristella Steri2, Stefania Olla2, gene found, 27.3% of the completely characterized cases were Michele Marongiu2, Edoardo Fiorillo2, Antonio Pinna1, Francesco reclassiﬁed into another clinicalsubgroup. Cucca1,Andrea Angius1,2 Conclusions.OurstudyprovidesanexampleofSRDinthedaily clinicalpracticeandtheimportanceofathoroughclinicalanalysis 1University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 2Institute for Genetic and and election of the molecular approach, in order to solve these BiomedicalResearch (IRGB), Monserrato (Cagliari), Italy. complex cases and elucidate new possible phenotype-genotype associations. Introduction: Usher syndrome (USH) is the most common cause Funding: ISCIII (PI16/00425; PI19/00321; FI17/00192), CIBERER of combined sight and hearing loss, responsible for half of deaf- (06/07/0036), University Chair UAM-IIS-FJD Genomic Medicine, blindness cases. USH has divided into three types: USH1, RAREGENOMICS-CM characterized by severe bilateral hearing loss and early retinitis I. Perea-Romero: None. F. Blanco-Kelly: None. I. Sanchez- pigmentosa (RP); USH2, distinguished by moderate hearing loss Navarro:None.I.Lorda-Sanchez:None.S.Tahsin-Swaﬁri:None. and RP; USH3, showing progressive hearing loss, vestibular A.Avila-Fernandez:None.I.Martin-Merida:None.M.J.Trujillo- dysfunction and RP. USH is associated with 19 loci, with 16 Tiebas: None. R. Lopez-Rodriguez: None. I.F. Iancu: None. R. causativegenesidentiﬁed.Here,wedescribetheclinicalﬁndings Romero: None. M. Quinodoz: None. P. Minguez: None. M. andmolecularanalysisof3USH-affectedunrelatedfamiliesliving Corton:None. C.Rivolta: None. C.Ayuso:None. intheisland ofSardinia (Italy). MaterialsandMethods:Weinvestigatedallthemembersof3 families in which 9 patients showed both sensorineural hearing  P02
.070.C Could TGFBI-related corneal dystrophies be loss and RP. All individuals underwent a complete ophthalmic mimicked in zebraﬁsh via CRISPR/Cas9-mediated hot spot examinationandvestibularmedicaltests.Whole-genomesequen- arginine variations? cingdatawereavailable forgenetic analysis. Results: Clinical hypothesis indicated a suspected USH2 FulyaYaylacioglu Tuncay1, BerilTalim2, PervinRukiye Dinçer3 syndrome. We identiﬁed a single missense causal variant in the USH2A gene, in homozygous status in all patients and hetero- 1DepartmentofMedicalBiology,GulhaneMedicalFaculty,University zygous in unaffected parents. Mutation-related haplotype recon- of Health Sciences, Ankara, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatrics, struction revealed a founder effect. To understand if this event Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 3Depart- wasrestrictedtoageographicalareaorwholeisland,weanalysed ment of Medical Biology,Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, about 3500 Sardinians, revealing a frequency of about 2% Ankara,Turkey. heterozygotes distributed overall inSardinia. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 141 Conclusions:Byusingourapproach,wewereabletodescribe None.A.Romera-López:None.M.Gil-Borja:None.S.Santillán: the ﬁrst case of USH syndrome, its incidence and distribution in None.C.M.Moya: None. Sardinia.Thus,weareabletoprovideanattractiveperspectivefor the feasibility of carrier status screening, possible genetic counselling at the base for prevention and early treatment  P03
.003.CThemildeffectoftheCO L4
A5variantp.Gly624Asp strategiesof this hereditarysyndrome. inagroup of15Polish patients withAlport syndrome V.Rallo:None.R.Serra:None.M.Steri:None.S.Olla:None.M. Marongiu: None. E. Fiorillo: None. A. Pinna: None. F. Cucca: PaulinaHalat-Wolska1,ElżbietaCiara1,LukaszObrycki2,Katarzyna None.A. Angius: None. Gadomska-Prokop2, Dorota Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, Joanna Kosińska3,MałgorzataRydzanicz3,PiotrStawiński3,4,BeataChałupc- zyńska1, Kamila Frączak1, Marzena Gawlik1, Dorota Jurkiewicz1,  P03
 Internal Organs& Endocrinology (Lung,Kidney, Liver, PawełKowalski1,MagdalenaPelc1,DorotaSiestrzykowska1,Szymon Gastrointestinal) Szyszkowski1, Dorota Wicher1, Ryszard Grenda2, Krystyna Chrza- nowska1, RafałPłoski3, MieczysławLitwin2  P03
.001.AMolecular analysisofPKD1andPKD2genes:akey for achieving a great diagnosis rate in autosomal dominant 1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health polycystic kidney disease Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Nephrology, The Chil- dren’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Elena Mesa-Rísquez, Alfonso Andújar, Isabel Sánchez-Guiu, Anna Medical Genetics, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland, Baquero-Vaquer, Tania Otero-Rodríguez, María Dolores Ruiz, Roser 4Department of Genetics, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Martínez-Rubio,AmparoGirós,MaríaSánchez-Ibáñez,VanesaFelipe- Hearing, Warsaw, Poland. Ponce, Dan Diego-Álvarez, Rosario Ferrer-Avargues, Uxía Esperón, NatalíRiva,BárbaraMasotto, YolandaMoreno-Sáez, JoséLeonardo Introduction: Alport syndrome (AS) is aclinically and genetically Díaz, Jaime García, Carmen Collado, María Dolores Oliver, Norma heterogeneous nephropathy caused by pathogenic variants in Aliaga, Angela Gaspar, Laura Cano, Ana Perpiñán, Nuria Serrano, CO L4
A3, CO L4
A4 or CO L4
A5. About 85% of AS patients have Clara Casañ, Celia Buades-Gomis, Alejandro Romera-López, Mayte X-linked inheritance, which causes more severe phenotype in Gil-Borja, SoniaSantillán, Christian Martín Moya males, whereas in females, penetrance depends on X-chromosome inactivation pattern. Originating in the Middle AsciresSistemas Genómicos, Paterna (Valencia), Spain. Ages CO L4
A5 variant c.1871G>A p.Gly624Asp is predominant in Central/East Europeand mostly gives mild AS symptoms. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the Materials and Methods: Next-generation sequencing analysis most common inherited kidney disease, mainly caused by PKD1 ofglomerulopathyandchronickidneydiseaserelatedgenespanel andPKD2genes.PKD1geneanalysisistechnicallycomplexdueto wasperformedin Polishpatients with suspected AS. itslargesizeandthepresenceofseveralpseudogenes.Theaimof Results: In 65 patients clinical diagnosis was conﬁrmed at the this workis topresent thediagnostic results ofa ADPKDcohort. molecularlevel.ThemostfrequentwasX-linkedAScausedby32 143 ADPKD cases were included, of which 71.6% had family different CO L4
A5 variants (75%). A recurrent CO L4
A5 variant p. history of ADPKD. Patients were screened for PKD1 and PKD2 Gly624Asp in 15 patients (nine males and six females) was genesusingLongRangePCRandSangersequencingorNextera™ identiﬁed. Additionally, four patients with this substitution had Technology for NGS. In some patients, a MLPA study was pathogenicvariantinCO L4
A3,HNF1BorMYH9.Theclinicalcourse performedifa negativeresultwas obtainedfrom sequencing. ofpatientswiththisgenotypewasmostlymilderthanobservedin Genetic screening revealed 88 diagnosed patients and 55 individuals with other CO L4
A5 variants. They presented only undiagnosed, 27 of whom were carriers of Variants of Uncertain haematuriawithorwithoutproteinuria.Ofthese,twopatientsalso Signiﬁcance (VUS) and the remaining 28 were negative. Disease- hadhearingimpairment:malewithonlyp.Gly624Aspvariantand causingvariantswereeitherfoundinPKD1(65cases)orPKD2(23 femalewith additional variantin CO L4
A3. cases).Amongthedisease-causingvariantsinbothgenes,25%of Conclusions: The results of this study broaden the genotypic them were novel variants. Diagnostic variant effects were mainly spectrum of AS, which will facilitate future research on the nonsense (37.5%) and small deletions (26.14%). Other types of genotype-phenotypecorrelations.Variantp.Gly624AspinCO L4
A5 identiﬁed variants included small insertions (12.5%), missense was predominant and accounted for 31% of X-linked AS in the (11.36%),splicing(7.95%),grossdeletions(3.41%)andsmallindels studygroup.Observationsofmildphenotypeinourpatientswith (1.14%). thisgenotyperelatetoliteraturedata.Partiallysupported:CMHI- Our rate of 61.54% positive genetic diagnosis highlights the M29/18 effectiveness of molecular genetic analysis as a powerful tool for P. Halat-Wolska: None. E. Ciara: None. L. Obrycki: None. K. achieving a diagnosis in ADPKD patients. NGS allows PKD1 and Gadomska-Prokop:None.D.Piekutowska-Abramczuk:None.J. PKD2 simultaneous analysis, reducing processing time and costs. Kosińska: None. M. Rydzanicz: None. P. Stawiński: None. B. Extending the genetic analysis by exome directed panels to Chałupczyńska: None. K. Frączak: None. M. Gawlik: None. D. related genes as GANAB, DNAJB11 or performing cosegregation Jurkiewicz: None. P. Kowalski: None. M. Pelc: None. D. and functional studies of VUS could lead to a higher diagnostic Siestrzykowska: None. S. Szyszkowski: None. D. Wicher: None. rate. R. Grenda: None. K. Chrzanowska: None. R. Płoski: None. M. E. Mesa-Rísquez: None. A. Andújar: None. I. Sánchez-Guiu: Litwin: None. None. A. Baquero-Vaquer: None. T. Otero-Rodríguez: None. M. D. Ruiz: None. R. Martínez-Rubio: None. A. Girós: None. M. Sánchez-Ibáñez: None. V. Felipe-Ponce: None. D. Diego-  P03
.004.A Delineation of the phenotypic and genotypic Álvarez: None. R. Ferrer-Avargues: None. U. Esperón: None. N. spectrum of type-IV-collagen-related nephropathy - Alport Riva:None.B.Masotto:None.Y.Moreno-Sáez:None.J.L.Díaz: syndrome andthin basement membranenephropathy None. J. García: None. C. Collado: None. M.D. Oliver: None. N. Aliaga: None. A. Gaspar: None. L. Cano: None. A. Perpiñán: Korbinian M. Riedhammer1,2, Matthias C. Braunisch2, Jasmina None. N. Serrano: None. C. Casañ: None. C. Buades-Gomis: Ćomić1,AdrianLungu3,JovanaPutnik4,GordanaMiloševski-Lomić5, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 142 Michaela Gessner6, Nataša Stajić4, Ludwig Patzer7, Nora Emini8, 2Department of Nephrology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical VeliborTasic8, JuliaHoefele1 UniversityofMunich,SchoolofMedicine,Munich,Germany,3Center for Human Genetics and Laboratory Diagnostics Dr. Klein, Dr. Rost 1Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, School of and Colleagues, Martinsried, Germany, 4Pediatric Nephrology, Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, Pediatrics II, University Children’s Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany, 2Department of Nephrology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, School of 5University Children’sHospital, Marburg, Germany. Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 3Pediatric Nephrology Department, Fundeni Clinical Institute, Introduction: Type-IV-collagen-related nephropathy covers a Bucharest, Romania, 4Institute for Mother and Child Health Care of spectrum of hereditary hematuric diseases (thin basement Serbia "Dr Vukan Čupić", Department of Nephrology, Faculty of membrane nephropathy, TBMN; Alport syndrome, AS). Whereas Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 5Department of AS results from disease-causing variants in CO L4
A3-5 (autosomal Nephrology,UniversityChildren’sHospital,Belgrade,Serbia,6Depart- recessiveandX-linkedAS),monoallelicdisease-causingvariantsin ment of General Pediatrics and Hematology/Oncology, Children’s CO L4
A3/4are associated with TBMN. University Hospital Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany, 7Children’s Methods: Variants of 96 index cases reported between 2009 Hospital St. Elisabeth and St. Barbara, Halle (Saale), Germany, and 2014 with the clinical tentative diagnosis AS (77/96), TBMN 8University Children’s Hospital, Medical School Skopje, Skopje, (13/96) or unclear determination of AS/TBMN (6/96) were Macedonia, The Former YugoslavRepublic of. meticulously reinterpreted based on ACMG criteria and current amendments.Monoallelic(likely)pathogenicvariantsinCO L4
A3/4 Introduction:“Type-IV-collagen-relatednephropathy”describesa in an AS case were not considered as diagnostic, as the spectrum of hereditary hematuric diseases comprising Alport designation “autosomal dominant AS” is contested. 6 cases had syndrome (AS) and (milder) thin basement membrane nephro- tobe excluded fromfurther analysisdue tolimiteddata. pathy (TBMN). AS results from biallelic causative variants in Results: In total, 84 variants (allocated to 96 cases) and their CO L4
A3/4 (autosomal recessive AS) and hemizygous causative genotypes have been reassessed (CO L4
A3: 21/84, CO L4
A4: 18/84, variants in CO L4
A5 (X-linked AS). Females with heterozygous CO L4
A5:45/84).64/90casesincludedinthefurtheranalysiscould causative variants in CO L4
A5 show a variable phenotype. be classiﬁed as solved (original report: 83/90; p<0.001, Fisher MonoalleliccausativevariantsinCO L4
A3/4areidentiﬁedinTBMN. exacttest).26/90wereclassiﬁedas“notsolved“(originalreport:7/ The designation “autosomal dominant AS” for heterozygous 90), due to inconclusive results on variant (11/90), on genotype carriers ofcausative variantsinCO L4
A3/4 is contested. (12/90)orboth variant andgenotypelevel (3/90). Methods: 64 index patients, in whom exome sequencing had Conclusions: Transparent and coherent variant-/genotype- beenperformed,wereassignedtoaTBMN(18cases)orAS(46cases) interpretation enablesphysicianstodiagnosehereditarydiseases subgroup based onclinical/histopathologic presentationand family and allows them to provide patients with well-founded informa- history.Phenotypicandgenotypicfeatureswerecompared. tion concerning prognosis and recurrence risk. This is especially Results:Diagnosticyieldoftype-IV-collagen-relatednephropathy true for type-IV-collagen-related nephropathy, covering an intri- classiﬁedasAScompared toTBMN wassigniﬁcantlydifferent (65% cate phenotypic and genotypic spectrum. Since reassessment of vs.28%;p=0.01).One case,clinically classiﬁed as TBMN,had Dent variants/genotypesinthisstudyshowedasigniﬁcantreductionin disease genetically. The further solved TBMN cases carried hetero- genetic diagnoses, reports on type-IV-collagen-related nephro- zygous causative variants in CO L4
A3, CO L4
A4 or CO L4
A5 (female). pathyobtainedinthepre-ACMGerashouldbecriticallyevaluated. Median age at ﬁrst manifestation was signiﬁcantly lower in AS K.M. Riedhammer: None. P. Richthammer: None. D.S. comparedtoTBMNcases(5.5yearsvs.16.0years;p=0.001).TBMN Westphal: None. J. Ćomić: None. R. Günthner: None. M.C. cases had no extrarenal manifestations, in contrast to 28% of AS Braunisch: None. S. Rath: None. A.K. Büscher: None. H. Klein: cases(p=0.01).39%ofTBMNcaseshadareportedfamilyhistoryin None.S. Weber: None. J.Hoefele: None. contrastto78%inAScases(p=0.006). Conclusions: This study delineates the phenotypic and genotypic spectrum of type-IV-collagen-related nephropathy.  P03
.006.B Impact of human genetic variants on C-Reactive Importantly, it takes the perspective of the clinician who has to Protein levels andacuteappendicitis integratephenotypicandanamnesticdatatoassessthepossibility ofa hereditarydisease. Isis Ricaño-Ponce1, Toon Peeters1,2,3, Vasiliki Matzaraki1, Mihai K.M. Riedhammer: None. M.C. Braunisch: None. J. Ćomić: Netea1,4, IngeGyssens1,2,3, Vinod Kumar1,5 None. A. Lungu: None. J. Putnik: None. G. Miloševski-Lomić: None. M. Gessner: None. N. Stajic:́ None. L. Patzer: None. N. 1DepartmentofInternalMedicineandRadboudCenterforInfectious Emini:None. V.Tasic: None. J.Hoefele: None. Diseases, Radboud University Medical Center, NIJMEGEN, Nether- lands, 2Department of Infectious Diseases & Immunity, Jessa Hospital, Hasselt, Belgium, 3Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences,  P03
.005.ASystematicvariantreinterpretationinpatientswith Hasselt University, Hasselt, Belgium, 4Human Genomics Laboratory, type-IV-collagen-related nephropathy (Alport syndrome/thin Craiova University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Craiova, Romania, basement membrane nephropathy) reveals a high rate of 5University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, ambiguous results Department ofGenetics, Groningen, Netherlands. Korbinian M. Riedhammer1,2, Patrick Richthammer1, Dominik S. Introduction: Acute appendicitis is one of the most common Westphal1, Jasmina Ćomić1, Roman Günthner2, Matthias C. Brau- abdominal emergencies worldwide. Both environmental and nisch2,SabineRath3,AnjaK.Büscher4,Hanns-Georg Klein3,Stefanie genetic factors contribute to disease. C-Reactive protein is (CRP) Weber5, Julia Hoefele1 isoneofthemostimportantbiomarkersinthediagnosisofacute appendicitis. CRP-levels are signiﬁcantly affected by genetic 1Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical variation. However, it remains unclear whether such genetic University of Munich, School of Medicine, Munich, Germany, variation is causally related to appendicitis risk. Therefore, in this study, we investigate the causal relationship between SNPs EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 143 associatedwithcirculatingCRP-levelsandtheriskandseverityof F. Romani: None. E. Micaglio: None. F. Martinelli Boneschi: acute appendicitis. None.G.N.Casari:None.S.Benedetti:None.P.Carrera:None.C. Materials and Methods: we measured CRP-levels in serum of Pappone: None. appendectomy patients (n=325) with appendicitis severity categorised as complicated/uncomplicated. We also performed GWASinthesamegroupofpatients.Weperformedintersection,  P03
.009.A Association of KEA P1
 polymorphism with auto- colocalization of our GWAS results with appendicitis and CRP- immunethyroiditis associatedlocifromthePan-UKBBcohort.Weemployedpathway enrichment analyses and functional-genomics approach to Cristina Robles Lázaro1,2, María Ovejero-Sánchez3,2,4, Nerea prioritisegenes andpathways. Gestoso-Uzal2,3,4, Carlos Gutiérrez-Cerrajero2,3,4, Paloma Martín- Results: We observed a signiﬁcant enrichment of CRP-loci in Bejarano Soto2,3,4, Pamela Vázquez-Cárdenas3,2,4, Ana Belén Her- SNPs associated to appendicitis and complicated appendicitis. rero2,3,4,Rogelio González-Sarmiento2,3,4 Amongthesesharedloci,wecharacterisetwotoplociat1q41and at 8p23.1. The HLX gene at 1q41 is involved in blood cells 1Endocrinology Service, University Hospital of Salamanca, Sala- differentiation, liver and gut organogenesis. The locus at 8p23.1 manca, Spain, 2Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, affects multiple genes that are overexpressed in appendix tissue UniversityofSalamanca,Salamanca,Spain,3InstituteofBiomedical fromappendicitispatients.Usingafunctionalgenomicsapproach Research (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain, 4Institute of Molecular and we provide genetic evidence for the involvement of interferon Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University of Salamanca-CSIC, signallingpathway incomplicated appendicitis. Salamanca,Spain. Conclusions: Our results suggest shared genetic mechanisms between appendicitis and CRP-levels. By identifying new path- Introduction: Autoimmune thyroiditis is a chronic inﬂammatory ways, our study identiﬁed genetic causes for severity of process characterized by the presence of glandular lymphocytic appendicitis. inﬁltration and thyroid speciﬁc antibodies. Some studies suggest Project funded by LimburgClinical Research Program. thatoxidativestresscouldbeinvolvedinthedevelopmentofthis I.Ricaño-Ponce: None. T.Peeters:None. V.Matzaraki: None. disease. Keap1-Nrf2 pathway is the major regulator of cytopro- M.Netea: None. I.Gyssens: None. V. Kumar:None. tective responses to oxidative and electrophilic stress. Thus, the main aim of this study is to determine if Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms(SNPs) inthesegenescould be associated with a  P03
.008.D Novel CTLA4 heterozygous mutation in a family higherriskof developingautoimmune thyroiditis. withtype 2autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome Material and methods: 202 autoimmune thyroiditis patients and340healthysubjectswithoutprevioushistoryofautoimmune FedericoRomani1,EmanueleMicaglio1,FilippoMartinelliBoneschi2, disease were recruited. Genotyping of SNPs in Keap1 (rs1048290 Giorgio Nevio Casari3, Sara Benedetti3, Paola Carrera3, Carlo and rs11545829) and NRF2 (rs2706110) was performed using Pappone1 TaqMan allelic discrimination assays. Odd ratios and 95% conﬁdenceintervalswereestimatedforeachpolymorphicvariant 1IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, San Donato Milanese, Italy, 2IRCCS to evaluate the association with risk of developing autoimmune Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 3IRCCS San Raffaele thyroiditis, with p-values<0.05 being considered statistically Hospital,Milan, Italy. signiﬁcant. Results: The analysis of genotypic and allelic distribution of Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes are an emerging ﬁeld in rs1048290 SNP in Keap1 gene and rs2706110 SNP in NRF2 gene current medicine due to both diagnostic and therapeutic did not show statistically signiﬁcant differences between both improvements. Although generally accepted as complex traits, groups of subjects. However, the heterozygous GA genotype of many genes play a pivotal role in both pathogenesis and the Keap1 rs11545829 polymorphism was associated with prognosis of autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes. Among increased risk of developing autoimmune thyroiditis. Also, the those genes, CTLA4 has been described as very important for statistical analysis showed that G allele confers protection from autoimmunityagainstendocrinetissuessince2004.Wedescribea this disease. familyinwhichaheterozygousvariantinCTLA4genesegregates Conclusion: Our study suggests that the genotype AG in the with a type 2 autoimmune polyendocrine overt phenotype. Both polymorphism rs11545829 of Keap1 gene could increase the risk the proband and his sister are indeed affected by recurrent oral ofdevelopingautoimmunethyroiditisduetoanalterationofthe candidiasis,hypothyroidism,type1diabetesmellitusandAddison cellularresponse to oxidative stress. disease.Interestingly,inbothpatientstheonsetofclinicalpicture Thisstudy wasfunded by FIS-FEDER: PI16/01920. happenedwitharecurrentoralcandidiasis,inabsenceofgenetic C. Robles Lázaro: None. M. Ovejero-Sánchez: None. N. mutation in MODY genes. Proband and sister carry a c.475G>C Gestoso-Uzal: None. C. Gutiérrez-Cerrajero: None. P. Martín- heterozygousmutationofCTLA4gene,withunknowninheritance. BejaranoSoto:None.P.Vázquez-Cárdenas:None.A.B.Herrero: The bioinformatic analysis suggested a pathogenic effect likely None.R. González-Sarmiento: None. related to the absence of the described mutation in healthy people.Thisconclusionissupportedbythesegregationwiththe pathologicphenotypeintheexaminedfamily.Tothebestofour  P03
.010.B The use of high throughput sequencing for the knowledge,thisistheﬁrstcaseofCTLA4heterozygousmutationin identiﬁcationofvariantscontributingtoautosomaldominant a clinically conﬁrmed family affected by type 2 autoimmune polycystic kidney disease inthe Maltese population polyendocrine syndrome. Although proband’s parents were not availableforthegeneticanalysis,thiscasehighlightsthegrowing Maria Cini Masini1, Francesca Borg Carbott1, Ritienne Attard1, relevanceofgenetictestingforthiscondition.Moreover,ourdata Adrian Pleven1, Karen Cassar2, Roberta A. Callus3, Angela Borg suggest a possible new genotype - phenotype correlation Cauchi3,ValerieSaidConti4,StephanieBezzinaWettinger1,Rosienne requiring further studies in order to increase the diagnostic yield Farrugia1 ofgenetic testinginautoimmune polyendocrine syndromes. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 144 1Department of Applied Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health persedoesnotcauseaprolongedQTinterval;thisindicatesthat Sciences, University of Malta, L-Imsida, Malta, 2Department of cortisoldeﬁciencymightbethecauseofthispatientpresentation. Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, University of Malta, L- A.Alsubhi: None. M. Aldubayee: None. W.Eyaid:None. Imsida, Malta, 3Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Mater Dei Hospital, L-Imsida, Malta, 4Department of Paediatrics, Mater Dei Hospital,L-Imsida, Malta.  P03
.014.B A novel homozygous missense variant in PTPN2 associatedwithearlyonsetCrohn’sdiseaseandgrowthfailure Introduction: Autosomal dominant polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) though rare, is the most common hereditary kidney Tony Yammine, Alain Chebly, Nabiha Salem, Rita Esber, Mirna disease.Itischaracterizedbyenlargedkidneys,bilateralformation Souaid, ChantalFarra and progressive expansion of renal cysts, as well as systemic manifestations from the progression of renal disease requiring Medical Genetics Unit, Beirut, Lebanon. renalreplacement therapy ortransplantation. MaterialsandMethods:DNAsampleswereobtainedfrom16 Crohn’s disease (CD) is a chronic idiopathic inﬂammatory bowel recruited probands and 6 additional affected family members as diseasethatcanaffectanypartofthegastrointestinaltract.Major part of the Malta NGS Project. We used Agilent SureSelectXT manifestations are diarrhea, abdominal pain, weight loss with or Targeted Enrichment gene panel and high throughput sequen- withoutfever.CDisamultifactorialdisorderwheregeneticfactors cing (HTS) on Illumina HiSeq4000 for 3 nuclear families. Whole are important players. Several candidate loci or genes including exomesequencingwascarriedoutonanother15probands.HTS PTPN2 (#MIM 176887) have been reportedly associated with CD. data was mapped to GRCh37 as paired-end libraries using PTPN2isamajorcontributorincontrollinginﬂammatorysignaling NextGENe® software. After variant ﬁltering and prioritization, cascades and maintaining intestinal barrier functions. We con- variants were conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing using primers ducted whole-exome sequencing in a 9-year-old Lebanese girl uniqueto PKD1 orPKD2. with a CD onset at 13 months and in both her asymptomatic Results: We identiﬁed 13 variants in PKD1; two frameshifts, parents.AnalysisdetectedanovelhomozygousvariantinPTPN2: seven missense changes (2 novel), and four nonsense mutations c.359C>T, p.(Ser120Leu) in the patient, while both her parents (2novel).EachPKD1variantwasidentiﬁedinasinglefamily,and were heterozygous for the variant. c.359C>T is located in the onefamilyhad2linkedvariants.APKD2splicesitemutation,was protein tyrosine phosphatase domain within a highly conserved identiﬁed in two unrelated probands. For two patients no amino acid. It is classiﬁed as likely pathogenic according to the causativevariantwasidentiﬁedinknownADPKDcandidategenes. ACMG criteria, deleterious by SIFT and disease causing by Conclusion:Thisstudydemonstratesthatlaboriouslong-range Mutation Taster. In order to evaluate the hypothetical functional PCRs of PKD1 and PKD2 may be replaced by HTS and stringent consequences of the identiﬁed variant, we performed a quanti- dataanalysisreducing cost and analysistime. tative expression analysis of PTPN2 in blood tissues from the Funding: The Malta NGS Project was supported by the R&I patient, her parents and two healthy controls. An almost absent programme of 2012 through the Malta Council for Science and PTPN2 expression was noted in the patient compared to her Technology.M.CiniMasiniisfundedthroughaTertiaryEducation parents and the controls, suggesting a functional PTPN2 impair- Scholarship Scheme. ment caused by c.359C>T. This is the ﬁrst time, a homozygous M.CiniMasini:None.F.BorgCarbott:None.R.Attard:None. PTPN2variantisassociatedwithanearlyonsetCD.Furtherreports A. Pleven: None. K. Cassar: None. R.A. Callus: None. A. Borg withPTPN2genevariantswouldenableabetterdelineationofthe Cauchi:None.V.SaidConti:None.S.BezzinaWettinger:None. molecular basisof CD. R.Farrugia: None. T. Yammine: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Saint Joseph University. A. Chebly: A. Employment (full or part- time); Signiﬁcant; Saint Joseph University. N. Salem: A. Employ-  P03
.013.A Association between cortisol deﬁciency and life ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Saint Joseph University. R. threatening arrhythmia Esber:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;SaintJoseph University. M. Souaid: A. Employment (full or part-time); AfafAlsubhi1, Mohammed Aldubayee2, WafaaEyaid1 Signiﬁcant; SaintJoseph University. C.Farra: A.Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Saint Joseph University, Hotel Dieu de 1DepartmentofPediatrics,Geneticsdivision,KingAbdulAzizMedical France. City,RIYADH,SaudiArabia,2DepartmentofPediatrics,KingAbdullah Specialized Children’sHospital (KASCH), RIYADH, Saudi Arabia.  P03
.015.C Spectrum of CFTR variants in patients with cystic A 5 days old full term baby girl was admitted to our pediatric ﬁbrosisrevealed inWestern SiberianUgra region(Russia) intensive care unit with non ketotic hypoglycemia, abnormal movement along with bradycardia and progressive prolongation Maxim Donnikov1,2, Vitaly Mescheryakov1, Dmitry Lozhkin2, Lev of the QT interval. The Whole exome sequencing showed likely Kolbasin2,AndreyGlotov3,OlegGlotov4,IrinaUrvantseva5,Lyudmila pathogenic variant in the TBX19 gene that is associated with Kovalenko1 congenital isolated adrenocorticotropic hormone deﬁciency that was proven biochemically. She was treated with hydrocortisone 1Medical Institute of Surgut State University, Surgut, Russian and showed dramatic improvement of her QT interval length. Federation, 2Medical Genetics Counseling Service of Diagnostics After discharge, she lost follow up. She was readmitted again at and Cardiovascular Surgery Center (Cardiology Clinic) of KHMAO- theageof16monthswithsimilarsymptomsthatimprovedafter Ugra,Surgut,RussianFederation,3DepartmentofGenomicMedicine, restarting hydrocortisone therapy with improvement of the EKG D. O. Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics, Gynecology and ﬁndingsandbradycardia.Intheliteraturethereisonecasereport Reproduction, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4City Hospital of an adult patient with similar association between central 40, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5Diagnostics and cortisol deﬁciency and life-threatening arrhythmia.Hypoglycemia EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 145 Cardiovascular Surgery Center (Cardiology Clinic) of KHMAO-Ugra, 1”Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Surgut, RussianFederation. Romania, 2”Carol Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Medical Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 3National Introduction:Duringtheeraofcysticﬁbrosis(CF)targettherapy Institute for Mother and Child Health ”Alessandrescu-Rusescu”, knowing population structure of CFTR variants is of immense Bucharest, Romania, 4Synevo Romania, Department of Medical need. Applying battery of molecular genetics tests in routine Genetics, Chiajna, Romania, 5”Carol Davila” University of Medicine practice of regional genetics laboratory allowed to perform and Pharmacy, Department of Epidemiology, Bucharest, Romania, extensiveanalysisof CFTR variantsinregional CFpatients. 6UniversityofBucharest,FacultyofBiology,DepartmentofGenetics, Materials and methods: gDNA obtained from 57 CF patients Bucharest, Romania. (1998-2020 yob) from regional CF registry by column extraction; HRMA performed using Bio-Rad software; MLPA and Sanger Background:Cysticﬁbrosisisonethemostcommonautosomal- sequencing performed on GenomeLab GeXP (Beckman-Coulter); recessivegeneticdisordersintheCaucasianpopulation,causedby NGSperformedonMiSequsingNimbleGenSeqCap_EZ_CysFibkit. homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the CFTR Results: Total of 117 CFTR alleles were revealed (see Table), gene(onthelong armofchromosome 7). among them 6 major regional mutations covering 69.2% of all Material.Methods:Thestudygroupincludes74patientswith alleles, with most frequent [delta]F508 variant. 28 variants of theclinicaldiagnosisofcysticﬁbrosisand132healthyrelativesof differenttypes(mostlymissenseandnonsense)withfrequencyof patientswithcysticﬁbrosis(carrierscreeningtesting).Thetesting 0.9% each (found only in 1 patient each) comprise 23.9% of all method was PCR using a panel including the most common 38 alleles. If classiﬁed by type of nucleotide sequence change, the mutationsinCFTRgeneintheEuropeanpopulationandthe5T-7T spectrum contains 50.4% of ins/del without frameshift mutations allelepolymorphism. ([delta]F508asrepresentative);20.5%ofmissensevariants( E92
K); Results: All the patients with the clinical diagnosis of cystic 9.4%nonsense( S466
X);9.4%ins/delwithframeshift(1677delTA); ﬁbrosis were positive for mutations in the CFTR gene, in a 5.1% large rearrangements (dele2,3); 3.4% VUCS; 1.7% splicing homozygous or in a heterozigous compound state. Of all these defects. pacients, 56.75% (42/74) had the frameshift deltaF508 mutation, Conclusions: If ranged, CFTR variants spectrum from regional followedbyothercommonmutationsinthestudiedgroup,such CF cases resembles that of common Russian alleles for 5 major as the G551D, the R553X or the R1158X variants. 57 out of the variants (except R1066C, listed in Table), while sharing only 2 total of 132 suspected healthy carriers (43.2%) were positive for major mutations with Europe ([delta]F508, N1303K). High pre- CFTR mutations in a heterozygous status. The most prevalent valenceof rare variantsdictates thenecessity ofsequencing. mutationwasinthiscasealsothedeltaF508geneticvariant.Rarer mutations, such as the W1282X and the c.711+1G>A variants, ListofCFTRvariantsinCFpatientsfromUgra weredetected in1patient each. CFTRvariantcalling(HGVS; typeofvariant n= % Conclusions: The results of the study are concordant with the legacy) 117 reportsinliteratureregardingtheprevalenceofCFTRmutationsin the Eastern-European population. Genetic testing for CFTR 1 c.1521_1523delCTT([delta] delw/o 57 48.7 F508) frameshift mutations is important not only for the genetic diagnosis of the disease,butalsofortheidentiﬁcationofheterozygouscarriers or 2 c.54-5940_273 large 6 5.1 +10250del21kb rearrangement individualsat riskof passingthe disease on. G.Ilie:None.V.Radoi:None.A.Ionescu:None.I.Chelu:None. (CFTRdele2,3) C.Dragomir:None.G.Chelu:None.M.Popa:None.B.Basangiu: 3 c.1545_1546delTA delw/ 6 5.1 None. A. Perioc: None. O. Istrate: None. T. Grozescu: None. P. (1677delTA) frameshift Iordache:None.L.Pop:None.N.Cucu:None.C.Bohiltea:None. 4 c.274G>A( E92
K) missense; 5 4.3 R.Ursu: None. splicingdefect 5 c.3196C>T(R1066C) missense 4 3.4 6 c.3909C>G(N1303K) missense 3 2.6  P03
.018.B Late diagnosisof cystic ﬁbrosisin a 59-year-old patient 7 c.412_413insACT( L138
ins) insw/o 2 1.7 frameshift ElenaZhekaite1,ElenaAmelina2,ElenaKondratyeva1,TaguiAdyan1 8 c.1397C>G( S466
X)* nonsense 2 1.7 9 c.1399C>T(R1070Q)* missense 2 1.7 1ResearchCentreforMedical Genetics,Moscow, RussianFederation, 10 c.3209G>A( L467
F) VUCS 2 1.7 2Scientiﬁc Research Institute of Pulmonology of the Federal Medical 11-38 28variants(each0,9%) all 28 23.9 andBiological Agency of Russia,Moscow, Russian Federation. Introduction: According to Russian CF Patient Registry 2018 the M. Donnikov: None. V. Mescheryakov: None. D. Lozhkin: average age of CF patients in Russia was 12.8±9.6 years, the None. L. Kolbasin: None. A. Glotov: None. O. Glotov: None. I. average age of diagnosis - 3.1±6.1 years (4.1month in Europe Urvantseva:None. L.Kovalenko: None. according to European Cystic Fibrosis Society Patient Registry 2016).Fewpatients inRussiaare over55years ofage. Materials and methods: The patient had atypical clinical  P03
.017.AFrequnecyofCFTRmutationsinaRomaniancohort symptoms since childhood (chronic sinusitis mostly, polypotomy ofindividuals with cysticﬁbrosis at the age of 17). For the last 15 years there were complaints of persistent cough, exacerbations of chronic bronchitis about 2 Georgiana Ilie1, Viorica Radoi2,3, Andreea Ionescu4, Iuliana Chelu4, timesayear.3yearsagobronchiectasisweredetected.Patienthas Cristina Dragomir4, Gratiela Chelu4, Mihaela Popa4, Bianca Basan- no children, his profession - a worker at a steel plant. Physical giu4,AndraPerioc4,OanaIstrate4,TraianGrozescu2,PaulIordache5, examination revealed dyspnea, low BMI (19.2 kg/m2), severe Lucian Pop3, Natalia Cucu6, Camil Laurentiu Bohiltea2,3, Radu-Ioan bronchial obstruction (FVC 54%, FEV1 33%), bilateral bronchiec- Ursu2,3,4 tasis onCT. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 146 Results: Sweat test (Nanoduct) was performed - conductivity multisystemic, progressive, and lethal disease is distinguished by 83mmol/l. DNA diagnostics in the gene СFTR identiﬁed 2 the relationship of several organic components, mainly; pulmon- pathogenic variants-[c.1521_1523delCTT]; [c.413_415dupTAC]. ary, pancreatic,and gastrointestinal. Conclusions: Our clinical case shows that the patients with Materials and methods: It is was the research in the clinic "mild"CFTRgenotypecanbediagnosedatanyage,patientswith history, laboratory test, and molecular studies for the case. bronchiectasis, chronic polysinusitis should be testedfor CF. Besides, the search of the literature in PubMed, Google Scholar, E.Zhekaite:None.E.Amelina:None.E.Kondratyeva:None.T. ScienceDirect,LILACS,andScielo.Thecasereportisbasedonthe Adyan: None. CAR E2016
guideline. Results: This case report attempts an approach to the clinical ﬁndings of hepatobiliary manifestations in CF. An infant was less  P03
.019.C Familial case of Cystic Fibrosis with genotype- than1-month-oldwithaninsidiousclinicalpicturethatdebutwith phenotype correlations cholestasis and jaundice. The CFTR gene analysis results with mutationc.2353C>T(transitionofcytosinebythiaminatposition Tinatin Tkemaladze1,2,3, Mariam Ghughunishvili4,5, Eka Kvarats- 2353 of cDNA), p.Arg785* (in the protein produces a change of khelia1,5, Elene Abzianidze1, Volha Skrahina3, Arndt Rolfs3,6,7 arginineby stop codon), in a homozygous state, this change has beenreportedintheliteratureasapathogenicchangerelatedto 1DepartmentofMolecularandMedicalGenetics,TbilisiStateMedical CF. University, Tbilisi, Georgia, 2G. Zhvania Pediatric Academic Clinic, Discussion/Conclusion:CFisassociatedwithliverinvolvement Tbilisi State Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia, 3Centogene GmbH, around30%.Inchildren,hepatobiliarysymptomsoccuratpuberty Rostock,Germany,4G.ZhvaniaPediatricAcademicClinic,TbilisiState when damage to the liver system is in advanced stages. The MedicalUniversity,Tbilisi,Georgia,5BakhutashviliInstituteofMedical atypicalpresentationofCFwithliverinvolvementisveryrareand Biotechnology, Tbilisi State Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia, lethal in an infant. Understanding the different form of CF, it is 6University Rostock, Medical Faculty, Rostock, Germany, 7Arcensus essentialforearlydiagnosisandtoachieveintegralmanagement. GmbH,Rostock, Germany. D.Portillo-Miño: None.E. Cerón-Muñoz: None. Introduction: Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is the most common recessive condition in Caucasians. Clinical expression of the disease is  P03
.022.BExomesequencingimplicatesheterozygousvariant heterogeneous and no speciﬁc genotype-phenotype correlation inDSTYK infunctional urinary bladder disturbance had been observed. Certain CFTR variants are deﬁned as “CF” allelescausingCFphenotype,andotherallelesaredeﬁnedas“risk Clara Vidic1, Marcin Zaniew2, Holger Thiele3, Janine Altmüller3, factor”alleles,causing CBAVD, pancreatitisand atypical CF. Heiko Reutter1,4, Alina C.Hilger1,5 Case report:Herewedescribe afamilialcase of CFwith three children:11yoand8yosiblingswithclassicalCFphenotypehad 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, positiveNBSandelevatedsweatchloridetestresults.Inyounger6 2DepartmentofPediatrics,UniversityofZielonaGóra,ZielonaGóra, yo sibling NBS and sweat chloride test results were normal and Poland, 3Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, sheonlyhadtwoepisodesofairwayinfectionsandsmallweight. Cologne, Germany, 4Department of Neonatology and Pediatric Results: CFTR sequencing was performed for all three siblings: Intensive Care, Children’s Hospital, University of Bonn, Bonn, twooldersiblingswithclassicalCFphenotypehad1677delTAand Germany, 5Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital, University I1234V variants (both classiﬁed as “CF” alleles), whereas younger ofBonn, Bonn, Germany. sibling had 1677delTA and  L997
F variants (classiﬁed as “CF” and “risk factor” alleles respectively). When the healthy parents’ Introduction: DSTYK encodes dual serine/threonine and tyrosine samples were analyzed the father turned out to have one protein kinase. DSTYK has been associated with autosomal heterozygous 1677delTA allele, and the mother had two variants dominant congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract -  L997
F and I1234V (classiﬁed as “risk factor” and “CF” alleles and with autosomal-recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia. Here respectively). Currently mother is 40 yo and she is completely we report a father and his two dizygotic twin sons with a novel, healthy. heterozygous variant in DSTYK, all presenting with voiding Conclusion: To date none of the above-mentioned combina- dysfunction dueto functional urinary bladderdisturbance. tion of alleles detected in the siblings and the mother are MaterialsandMethods:Weperformedwholeexomesequen- describedinthecftr2.orgdatabase.Weproposethatcombination cing of the family. All three presenting clinically with hesitancy, of“CF”alleleand“riskfactor”alleledoesnotcauseCFandproper abnormalvoidingpatternandnightincontinencetilladolescence. classiﬁcation of variants is crucial for correct interpretation and In the sons cystoscopy excluded urethral valves but showed diagnosisofthe condition. hypertrophy of the bladder neck and trabeculated bladder. T. Tkemaladze: None. M. Ghughunishvili: None. E. Kvarats- Additionally, both sons were diagnosed with epilepsy. Based on khelia:None. E.Abzianidze: None. V. Skrahina: None. A. Rolfs: the pedigree, ﬁltering of exome data focused on rare (MAF< None. 0.01%),autosomal-dominantvariants,predictedtobedeleterious, residing in highly conserved regions of the exome. Validation of prioritizedvariants wasperformedusing Sanger sequencing.  P03
.020.DUnusual presentation ofCF inan infant Results: We identiﬁed a novel, heterozygous c.271C>A (p. Leu91Met)variantinDSTYKsegregatingwiththedisease.Theamino DarioPortillo-Miño,Efren Esteban Cerón-Muñoz acidishighlyconserved.Rateddeleteriousby3differentprediction programs(SIFT,PolyPhen,MutationTaster)andwithaCADDscoreof HospitalInfantil Los Angeles, Pasto,Colombia. 24.5,thisvariantwasprioritizedaslikelydiseasecausing. Conclusion: To the best of our knowledge, we describe the Introduction:CysticFibrosis(CF)isthemostcommonautosomal ﬁrst familial case with autosomal dominant inherited variants in recessive,geneticconditioninCaucasians,occurringin1ofevery DSTYK and speciﬁc functional bladder outlet obstruction and 2,000to3,000livebirths.HepaticabnormalitiesinpatientswithCF epilepsy.Acknowledgements:C.V.issupportedbyBONFORgrant have usually been reported in about 30-40% of the children. A O-149.0133.A.C.H. is supportedby BONFORgrant O-149.0123. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 147 C.Vidic:None.M.Zaniew:None.H.Thiele:None.J.Altmüller: 4Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 5Hospital Universitario None.H.Reutter: None. A.C.Hilger: None. Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 6Hospital Universitario Cruces, Barakaldo-Bizkaia, Spain, 7Hospital Donostia, San Sebastian, Spain.  P03
.024.DPolymorphismsofglutathionesynthetasegeneare associated with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes and Background: Inherited kidney diseases are one of the leading hyperglycemia causes of chronic kidney disease (CKD) that manifests before the age of 30 years. Precise clinical diagnosis of early-onset CKD is IuliiaAzarova,ElenaKlyosova,EkaterinaShkurat,AlexeyPolonikov complicated due to the high phenotypic overlap, but genetic testing is a powerful diagnostic tool. We aimed to develop a KurskState Medical University, Kursk, RussianFederation. genetic testing strategy to maximize the diagnostic yield for patients presenting with early-onset CKD and to determine the Background: The present study investigated whether single prevalenceof themain causativegenes. nucleotidepolymorphisms(SNPs)inglutathionesynthetase(GSS) Methods: We performed genetic testing of 460 patients with gene, antioxidant enzyme involved in glutathione metabolism, early-onset CKD of suspected monogenic cause using next- contribute to type 2diabetes(T2D) susceptibility. generation sequencing of a custom-designed kidney disease Methods: A total of 3198 unrelated Russian subjects including genepanelinadditiontotargetedscreeningforc.428dupCMU C1
. 1572 T2D patients and 1626 sex- and age matched healthy Results: We achieved a global diagnostic yield of 65% (300/ subjectswereenrolledforthestudy.ThreecommontagSNPssuch 460), which varied depending on the clinical diagnostic group. asrs13041792, rs1801310 andrs6088660 ofGSSweregenotyped Among the 300 genetically diagnosed patients, the clinical using the MassArray System. Plasma glutathione and reactive diagnosis was conﬁrmed in 77%, a speciﬁc diagnosis within a oxygen species (ROS) levels of study participants were measured clinical diagnostic group was identiﬁed in 15%, and 7% of cases byﬂuorometricand colorimetric assays,respectively. were reclassiﬁed. Of the 64 causative genes identiﬁed in our Results: We found that SNP rs13041792 at the GSS gene is cohort,seven(CO L4
A3,CO L4
A4,CO L4
A5,HNF1B,PKD1,PKD2,and associatedwithanincreasedriskofT2D(OR1.24,95%CI1.06-1.44, PKHD1)accountedfor66%(198/300)ofthegeneticallydiagnosed P=0.027).AGSShaplotypers1801310G-rs6088660C-rs13041792A patients. (OR 1.26, 95CI 1.08-1.47, P =0.039) showed a signiﬁcant Conclusions:Two-thirdsofpatientswithearly-onsetCKDinthis global association with T2D risk. Genotype rs13041792-A/A was asso- cohorthadageneticcause.Justsevengeneswereresponsiblefor ciated with increased levels of fasting blood glucose (FBG) in the majority of diagnoses. Establishing a genetic diagnosis is entire groupof T2D patients (P=0.032)and diabetic males(P= crucial to deﬁne the precise etiology of CKD, which allows 0.026). Meanwhile, genotype rs1801310-A/A was associated with accurategenetic counseling and improved patient management. decreasedlevelsoftotalglutathioneinplasmaindiabeticfemales Funding:InstitutodeSaludCarlosIII(ISCIII)/FEDERfunds:PI15/ (P=0.039). Genotype rs6088660-T/T showed an association with 01824, PI16/01998, PI18/00362, PI19/01633, RETIC REDINREN decreasedlevelsofFBGinmales(P=0.007)anddecreasedlevels RD16/0009/0019, and Plataforma ISCIIIBiobancos PT20/00196. ofROS infemales (P=0.039). A.DomingoGallego:None.M.Pybus:None.G.Bullich:None. Conclusion: We found for the ﬁrst time that genetic M. Furlano: None. L. Ejarque-Vila: None. L. Lorente Grandoso: polymorphisms at GSS gene are associated with susceptibility to None.P.Ruiz:None.G.Fraga:None.M.LópezGonzález:None. type 2diabetes andrelated hyperglycemia through themechan- J. Piñero Fernández: None. L. Rodríguez Peña: None. I. Llano isms involving decreased antioxidant defense and increased Rivas: None. R. Sáez: None. A. Bujons-Tur: None. G. Ariceta: production of reactive oxygen species. The study was supported None.L.Guirado: None. R.Torra: None. E.Ars:None. byRussian Science Foundation (№20-15-00227). I.Azarova: B. ResearchGrant(principal investigator,collabora- tor or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already  P03
.026.B iPSC as a genetic model for investigating NAFLD received);Signiﬁcant;RussianScienceFoundation.E.Klyosova:B. riskvariants Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant andpendinggrantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant; AntonioMunoz1,Yu-LinKuang1,GilbertNalula1,ElizabethTheusch1, Russian Science Foundation. E. Shkurat: B. Research Grant Gabriela Sanchez2, Carlos Iribarren2, Ronald M. Krauss1, Aras N. (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending Mattis3, Marisa W. Medina1 grantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;RussianScience Foundation. A. Polonikov: B. Research Grant (principal investi- 1DepartmentofPediatrics,UniversityofCaliforniaSanFrancisco,San gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as Francisco, CA, USA, 2Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente grantsalready received); Signiﬁcant; Russian Science Foundation. Northern California, Oakland, CA, USA, 3Department of Pathology, University of CaliforniaSan Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.  P03
.025.A Clinical utility of genetic testing in early-onset Introduction: Current cellular genetic models for Non-Alcoholic kidney disease: sevengenes arethe main players Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) have limitations that prevent the scalableinvestigationofgenevariants.Missensevariantsrs738409 AndreaDomingoGallego1,MarcPybus1,GemmaBullich2,1,Mónica (I148M)in PNPLA3(palatinlikephospholipase domaincontaining Furlano1,LaiaEjarque-Vila1,LauraLorenteGrandoso1,PatriciaRuiz1, protein 3) and rs58542926 ( E167
K) in TM6SF2 (transmembrane 6 Gloria Fraga3, Mercedes López González4, Juan Alberto Piñero superfamily member 2) increase hepatocyte intracellular lipid Fernández5, Lidia Rodríguez Peña5, Isabel Llano Rivas6, Raquel accumulationandarerobustlyassociatedwithNAFLD.Thegoalof Sáez7,AnnaBujons-Tur1,GemaAriceta4,LluisGuirado1,RoserTorra1, this study was to assess whether undifferentiated induced Elisabet Ars1 pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) can be used to model the effect of thesetwo NAFLD variantson intracellular lipidaccumulation. 1Fundació Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centre Nacional d’Anàlisi Materials and Methods: PNPLA3 and TM6SF2 expression were Genòmica (CNAG)-Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, conﬁrmediniPSCsfromindividualsofEuropeanancestrycarrying Spain, 3Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, PNPLA3and/orTM6SF2variantalleles(n=10)andnon-carriers(n EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 148 =10). Cells were exposed to oleate (0-100μM) or BSA control for M. Schwarz: None. M. Malíková: None. J. Martinková: None. 24hrs,andneutrallipidswerestainedwithNilered,visualizedby P. Cibulková: None. R. Michalovská: None. M. Havlovicová: ﬂuorescence microscopy, and quantiﬁed by FACS. None.M. Macek, jr:None. Results:Oleateincubationledtoadose-dependentincreasein intracellular lipids, rising 40±18% (mean±SD) in the oleate- treatedcellscomparedtocontrol-treatedcells(p=0.001,n=20).  P03
.030.B Discovery of novel miRNA markers for pituitary Notably,theincreasewasgreaterinTM6SF2and/orPNPLA3variant neuroendocrine tumour carriers(48±16%)comparedtonon-carriers(24±8%),p=0.002. EveninBSA-treatedcells,therewasatrendofelevatedlipidlevels HelvijsNiedra1,RaitisPeculis1,IlzeKonrade2,3,IngaBalcere2,3,Mihails incarriers compared tonon-carriers (p=0.25). Romanovs2,3, Liva Steina4, Janis Stukens4, Jelizaveta Sokolovska5, Conclusion: Greater oleate-induced increases of intracellular JanisKlovins1,Vita Rovite1 lipids in iPSCs with the NAFLD risk alleles indicate that undifferentiated iPSCs are a reasonable, more efﬁcient substitute 1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study centre, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga forhepatocyteswhenstudyingcellularlipidaccumulationandan East Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 3Riga Stradins informativecellularmodelfortheidentiﬁcationandfunctionaliza- University, Riga, Latvia, 4Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital, tion of NAFLD genetic risk variants. Funding Sources: Riga,Latvia,5UniversityofLatviaFacultyofMedicine,Riga,Latvia.  P50
GM115318,R01H L139902
,  P30
DK026743 A.Munoz:None.Y.Kuang:None.G.Nalula:None.E.Theusch: Introduction: Recently plasma miRNAs have been studied as None.G.Sanchez:None.C.Iribarren:None.R.M.Krauss:None. biomarkers in various tumors including pituitary neuroendocrine A.N.Mattis: None. M.W.Medina: None. tumors (PitNETs). The identiﬁcation of PitNET derived miRNAs in plasma remains challenging due to tumor volume and miRNA dilutionwithinblood.Toourknowledgethisistheﬁrststudythat  P03
.028.D Genetic heterogeneity of megacystis-microcolon- used the NGS approach to characterize circulating miRNAs in intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome plasmaacquiredfromBilateralpetrosalsinussampling(BIPSS)-a goldstandard indiagnosisof ACTHsecreting PitNETs. Martin Schwarz1, Marcela Malíková1, Júlia Martinková1, Petra Materials and Methods: We sequenced plasma miRNA Cibulková2, Renáta Michalovská3, Markéta Havlovicová1, Milan samplesacquiredfromsinistralanddextralsidesofsinuspetrosus Macek,jr1 inferiorandcomplementaryplasmafromperipheralblood(before CRHadministration, 5and 15minutes afterstimulation). 1DepartmentofBiologyandMedicalGenetics,Praha,CzechRepublic, Results:ThehighestamountofdifferentiallyexpressedmiRNAs 2AgelLaboratories-LaboratořeAGELa.s.,NovýJičín,CzechRepublic, wasobserved5minutesafterCRHstimulation(20upregulated,14 3GHCGenetics s.r.o., Praha, Czech Republic. downregulated).ThehighestamountofACTHwasreleasedinthe sinistralsideduringthe5thminuteafterthestimulationbyCRH.In Introduction: Megacystis-microcolon-intestinal hypoperistalsis the plasma of sinistral side at the 5th minute we identiﬁed two syndrome (MMIHS; MIM 249210) is a rare multisystem syndrome miRNAs: hsa-miR-7-5p and hsa-miR-375-3p that were highly whereitsnamereﬂectsmostcommonlyaffectedorgans.Although upregulated compared to peripheral blood. Using clustering ACTG2,LMOD1,MYH11,MY L9
,MYLKhavebeenassociatedwiththe analysis, we were able to distinguish plasma samples acquired disease,55% ofall cases remain undiagnosedby genetic testing. fromBIPSSandbloodplasma,indicatingthatthemiRNAfraction Hereby, we report two additional cases with pathogenic variants characterized inthis study haspotentially PitNETborne origin. inACTG2,andacasewhereapathogenicvariantinKCNMA1was Conclusions: Here we provide the ﬁrst insight into the found. landscape of circulating miRNAs in close proximity to PitNET. Materials and Methods: Next generation sequencing (NGS) The data indicates that ACTH secreting PitNET releases two wasperformed.SangersequencingwasusedtoverifyNGSresults circulatingmiRNAsuponstimulationwithCRH(hsa-mir-7-5p,hsa- and determine the segregation of the presumably pathogenic mir-375-3p) alongside with ACTH implying the further studies of variantsinavailable ﬁrstdegree relatives. thesemiRNAasdiagnostic markers. Results: Two previously described de novo heterozygous H.Niedra:None.R.Peculis:None.I.Konrade:None.I.Balcere: pathogenic variants in the ACTG2 /(c.119G>A p.(Arg40His) and None.M.Romanovs:None.L.Steina:None.J.Stukens:None.J. c.770G>A(p.Arg257His)/wheredetected.Adenovoheterozygous Sokolovska: None. J.Klovins: None. V. Rovite: None. Class 4 variant c.1132G>A (p.Gly375Arg) was detected in the KCNMA1gene. Conclusions:Only47patientswithACTG2relatedMMIHShave  P03
.031.C GCK, HNF1A and HNF4A variant analysis in beenreportedthusfar.Weidentiﬁedanothertwocaseswhichwill suspected MODY patients contribute to the better understanding of this heterogeneous disorder. Variants in KCNMA1 have also been associated with Zivile Zemeckiene, Marius Sukys, Rimvydas Jonikas, Inga Nasvy- Liang-Wang multiple malformation syndrome (LIWAS; tiene, Inga Valanciute, IngaPoceviciene, RasaUgenskiene MIM:618729), where available literature is unfortunately sparse. Previously reported cases with LIWAS bearing the same variant, The Hospital of Lithuanian University of Health Sciences Kauno have among other pathognomonic features also megacystis and Klinikos, Kaunas, Lithuania. impaired bowel motility. Clinical presentation of LIWAS in the neonatalperiodcouldbesimilartoMMIHSwithbowelandurinary Introduction:Maturity-onsetdiabetesoftheyoung(MODY)isan bladderproblemsbeingdominantclinicalsigns.Therefore,LIWAS inheritedformofdiabetesmellituswhichiscausedbypathogenic should be considered in the differential diagnosis of MMIHS, in variants in one of 14 known genes, mostly in GCK, HNF1A and particular duringearly childhood. HNF4A. A correct MODY diagnosis might change the treatment Supported byMHCZ-DRO,MotolUniversity Hospital,Prague, and reduce the risk of diabetic complications. In this study we Czech Republic00064203. analysed GCK, HNF1A and HNF4A genes in Lithuanian patients, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 149 consulted for MODY in The Hospital of Lithuanian University of nephroticsyndrome,severeproteinuria2-3g/day,nephromegaly), HealthSciences Kauno Klinikos. heart(septalheartdisease,severecourse),centralnervoussystem Materials andMethods: We performed Sanger sequencing of and hematopoietic disorders (severe anemia requiring blood GCK, HNF1A and HNF4A genes for 77 adults (over 18 years) with transfusion, coagulopathy with hemorrhagic syndrome), the suspected MODYduring2018-2020. activity of lysosomal hydrolases and urinary glucosaminoglycans Results: For nine patients causative/likely causative variants testare uninformative. were determined. Four patients had heterozygous variants S.Novgorodova:None.A.Sukhomyasova:None.E.Gurinova: previously reported as pathogenic (NM_000162.3(GCK):c.234C>G, None. V. Argunova: None. L. Nikolaeva: None. N. Maximova: NM_000162.3(GCK):c.703A>G (two patients), NM_000545.6 None. (HNF1A):c.493T>C). The other variants were novel. Heterozygous GCK variant c.471_473del was detected in two patients from the same family with persistent hyperglycaemia. Variant causes  P03
.035.C A clinical case of patient with cholestatic liver deletion of amino acid (p.Glu157del) located in an important diseasedue to mutations ofthe MYO5B enzymedomain.Duplicationof19nucleotidesc.1745_1763dupin HNF1A was identiﬁed in patient with previously diagnosed TamaraYurievnaLesnichenko1,NataliaAlexandrovnaSemenova2, diabetes. This variant creates frameshift with premature termina- Olga Nikolaevna Ivanova2, Elena Anatolievna Kamenec2, Ekaterina tion codon (p.Thr589ProfsTer66) which is known mechanism of YurievnaZakharova2 MODY. Heterozygous HNF4A variant c.704G>T was found in two unrelatedpatientswithpreviouslydiagnoseddiabetesandfamily 1Federal State Budgetary Educational Institution of Further Profes- history. This variant changes amino acid (p.Arg235Ile) in the sional Education "Russian Medical Academy of Continuous Profes- conservative ligand binding protein domain and might affect sional Education" of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian proteinstructure.Allthreenovelvariantswereevaluatedaslikely Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Federal State Budgetary pathogenic. ScientiﬁcInstitution"ResearchCentreforMedicalGenetics",Moscow, Conclusions: Six different pathogenic/likely pathogenic var- RussianFederation. iants were determined in nine patients with suspected MODY diabetes.Three ofthe variantswerenovel. Introduction:DefectsinMYO5B gene,onwhichbilesaltexport Z. Zemeckiene: None. M. Sukys: None. R. Jonikas: None. I. pump depends to localize to the canalicular hepatocellular Nasvytiene: None. I. Valanciute: None. I. Poceviciene: None. R. membrane usually cause diarrhea 2, with microvillus atrophy Ugenskiene: None. (OMIM # 251850) but also may result in liver disease without enteropathy. It characterized by low-GGT-cholestasis variable severity, hepatomegaly, normal or mildly elevated  P03
.033.AClinical description ofanew typeofmucopolysac- transaminases. charidosisin Yakutia Materials and Methods: We present a female patient at the age of 2y4m with isolated cholestasis. Her infantile period was Saina Novgorodova1, Aytalina Sukhomyasova1, Elizabeth Guri- normal.The disease manifestedby hightemperature, hepatome- nova2, VeraArgunova2, Lena Nikolaeva3,Nadezhda Maximova1 galy, acholic stools. Serum clinical laboratory tests showed cholestasis with normal GGT activity, conjugated hyperbilirubine- 1Research Laboratory "Molecular Medicine and Human Genetics" of mia 30mmol/l, normal transaminase levels, increased serum theMedicalInstituteNEFU,Yakutsk,RussianFederation,2Republican alkaline phosphatase 587E/l, hypercholesterolemia 8,03mmol/l. hospital №1-National Center of Medicine, Yakutsk, Russian Federa- Deﬁciency of lysosomal acid lipase was excluded by an enzyme tion, 3Republican Hospital No. 1-National Center of Medicine, test.NGSwasusedtoanalyze52genesresponsibleforhereditary Yakutsk,Russian Federation. diseaseswithcholestasis.TwonucleotidevariantsinMYO5Bgene weredetected. Since 2005, clinical symptoms associated with Results: We identiﬁed a novel heterozygous frameshift mucopolysaccharidosis-plushavebeenrecordedinYakutpatients; duplication c.1604_1610dupGCCAGCA p.His537GlnfsTer28. previously undescribed storage disease with an autosomal- Another heterozygous variant c.1201C>T (p.Arg401Cys recessive type of inheritance was suspected [Gurinova E.E. 2014]. rs761492029), revealed in the MYO5B gene, described as In 2017, a molecular genetic cause of a new rare autosomal- pathogenic. Then, we performed Sanger sequencing on the recessive syndrome in the Yakut and Turkish populations was DNA extracted from the mother, the father and the sister of the identiﬁed, clinically similar to other types of mucopolysacchar- proband to analyze the segregation of each genetic variant idosis, but has other features of the course, such as congenital identiﬁed by NGS. Parents and older sibling are healthy and heartdefects,renalandhematopoieticdisordersleadingtoinfant heterozygousfor one oranother mutantallele. mortality [Kondo et al., 2017; Dursun et al., 2017; Vasilev et al., Conclusions: Thus, the ﬁndings support the disease-causing 2020].ThenewdiseasewasaddedintotheMcCusickinternational role of novel MYO5B mutation. Many patients with low-GGT- database under the OMIM number # 617303 and named cholestasis remain genetically undiagnosed. Veriﬁcation of the mucopolysaccharidosis-plus syndrome (MPS-PS). In the Yakut genetic aetiology of cholestasis allows selection of appropriate and Turkish populations, the same mutation was found in the treatmentstrategies,determinationofgeneticriskanddiscussion VP S33
A gene (NM_022916.4: c.1492C> T, NP_075067.2: p. ofthenecessity ofprenatal testing. Arg498Trp, subsequently referred to as p.R498W)]. In this thesis, T.Y.Lesnichenko:None.N.A.Semenova:None.O.N.Ivanova: we present brief clinical features of 17 patients with MPS-PS in None.E.A. Kamenec: None. E.Y. Zakharova: None. Yakutia. All children were born in Yakut families from young parents, not in consanguineous marriage. 9 children were born from the second pregnancy and later pregnancies. In 4 cases,  P03
.036.D Identiﬁcation of gene variants in Indonesian pregnancy was complicated by the miscarriage threat; according Hirschsprungdiseasepatientsusingwholeexomesequencing to ultrasound data, no gestation pathology was detected. A characteristic feature of MPS-PS is early debut and early infant Gunadi1, Alvin Santoso Kalim1, Marcellus1, Dyah Ayu Puspitarani1, mortality,multisystemorgandamage-lungs,kidneys (secondary KristyIskandar2,Galuh DyahNurAstuti3,4 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 150 1PediatricSurgeryDivision,DepartmentofSurgery/GeneticsWorking suffered from frequent upper-respiratory infections, short stature Group, Faculty of Medicine, Public Health and Nursing, Universitas duetosubclinicalhypothyroidism,sleepdisturbanceandlearning GadjahMada/Dr. SardjitoHospital,Yogyakarta, Indonesia,2Depart- difﬁculties. A neurologic assessment revealed generalized chorea ment of Child Health/Genetics Working Group, Faculty of Medicine, unstablegaitandmildhypotonia.Thepatient’smothersufferedof Public Health and Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada/Dr. Sardjito impairedgaitandfrequentsfalls,aswellaslearningdisabilityand Hospital, Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 3Department of Human Genetics, subclinical hypothyroidism. On examination, she presented with RadboudUniversityMedicalCenter,Nijmegen,Netherlands,4Division distal choreiform movements in the lower limbs. The patient’s of Human Genetics, Center for Biomedical Research, Faculty of auntandgrandmotherreportedgaitimbalanceandfrequentsfalls Medicine, Diponegoro University, Semarang, Indonesia. during childhood; none of them presented with movement disorder. Genetic testing for the NKX2.1 gene was performed Introduction:Hirschsprung’sdisease(HSCR)isacomplexgenetic and a run-on mutation (c.1204dupT; p.*402Leuext*37) was disorder with at least 24 genes have been identiﬁed for the identiﬁed: duplication of the thymine corresponding to the ﬁrst pathogenesisofHSCR.However,theyonlycontributedto20%of baseofthestopcodoncausesthechangingofthestopcodonina HSCR cases. We aimed to further elucidate the genetic basis of leucine-codingcodon.Theresultingframeshiftgeneratedatailof HSCRin Indonesia. 36additional amino acids at the protein C-terminus. Segregation Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was analysisconﬁrmedthatalltheaffectedrelativescarriedthesame performed in 20 sporadic isolated HSCR patients and four non- geneticvariant. HSCR subjects as controls. We excluded variants presented in F. Baldan: None. E. Cavaliere: None. A.J. Gortan: None. N. controls,followedbyinsilicopredictiontoolsandpopulationallele Passon: None. D. Fabbro: None. D. Marin: None. M. Carecchio: frequency databases to select rare variants. We determined the None.S.C.Credendino:None.R.Gallo:None.P.Cogo:None.G. minorallele frequency(MAF) using gnomAD(MAF<0.1%). Damante: None.G. DeVita: None. Results:Weinvolved11(55%)malesand9(45%)females.We identiﬁedseveralcandidategenes,includingPTPN13,UBR4,EC E1
, GDNDF, ASTN1, CELSR3, XYLT1, SOR L1
 and FAT1. One of them, a  P03
.038.B Effects of growth hormone treatment in Noonan novelframeshiftvariantinPTPN13gene(c.5763delT;p.Tyr1921Ter) syndrome:correlations withgenotype whichmayleadtolossoffunctiononproteinlevel.Moreover,we also identiﬁed compound heterozygous variants in MUTYH gene: DianaMiclea1,2, YlineCapri2, Alain Verloes2 the ﬁrst variant, a known protein truncating variant associated with colorectal cancer, c.1354G>T; p.Glu452* and the second 1"Iuliu Hatieganu" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj- variantisanovelc.116C>T;p.Ala39Valvariant.Wealsofoundco- Napoca, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2Department of Genetics, APHP- mutation of UBR4 gene (c.5497G>A; p.Gly1833Arg) and novel RobertDebré University Hospital,Paris, France. variantof GDNFgene(c.349G>A; p.Gly117Ser) in onepatient. Conclusions: We identiﬁed several novel genes and variants Background: In Noonan syndrome(NS), the treatment with that might contribute to the pathogenesis of HSCR. Our study growth hormone(GH) has been carried out in the last decades, furtherconﬁrmsthecomplexnetworkduringtheentericnervous with reported effects on improvement of growth velocity and system development and HSCR pathogenesis. This study was adult height, however, these data usually included patients with funded by the World Class Research grant (Ministry of Research NS phenotype, only the last few years bringing data about GH and Technology/National Research and Innovation Agency, treatmentingenotypedNSpatients.Aim.Toevaluatetheeffectof Indonesia GH treatment according to genotype in patients with NS, by a Gunadi: None. A. Kalim: None. .. Marcellus: None. D. systematicreview oftheliterature. Puspitarani: None. K. Iskandar: None.G. Astuti:None. Methods: We evaluated auxological, hormonal and imagistic data before and under GH treatment in patients with genetically conﬁrmedNS reported inliterature between2001 and 2020.  P03
.037.AAcaseoffamilialbrain-lung-thyroidsyndromedue Results: We identiﬁed 21 studies, including data from 336 to aNKX2.1run-on mutation genotyped patients with NS. Of these, 243patients(72.3%) presented pathogenic variant for PTPN11gene, 17patients(5%) Federica Baldan1, Elena Cavaliere1,2, Anna J. Gortan1,2, Nadia for SO S1
, 15 patients(4.4%) for RAF1, 9patients(2.6%) for SHO C2
, Passon2, Dora Fabbro2, Dario Marin1,2, Myriam Carecchio3, Sara C. 8patients(2.3%) for KRAS, 5patients(1.4%) for BRAF and 2patients Credendino4, Rosa Gallo4, Paola Cogo1,2, Giuseppe Damante1,2, (0.5%) for each of the genes MEK1,SPRED1,HRAS,NRAS and RIT1. Gabriella DeVita4 TheageofGHtreatmentinitiationwas8.3years.Themeanperiod oftreatmentwasof6.7years.TheheightbeforeGHtreatmentwas 1UniversityofUdine,Udine,Italy,2AcademicHospitalofUdine,Udine, -2.8SDandattheendofGHtreatmentwasof-2.1SD,withamean Italy,3UniversityofPadua,Padua,Italy,4UniversityofNaples,Udine, adult height of 165.6cm for males and 155.4cm for females. The Italy. target height was -0.6SD. It was not observed a difference on growthbetweenthe patient categories according tothegenes. NKX2.1 is a homeobox gene encoding a tissue-speciﬁc transcrip- Conclusion: This study is the ﬁrst review about the pattern of tion factor able to bind DNA by its homeodomain. NKX2.1 growth under GH treatment in genotyped NS and even it was expression is fundamental for thyroid, lung and ventral forebrain thought that this pattern is well known, we need more data to development and correct maturation. Indeed, loss of function concludetherealeffectongrowthregardingeachgeneinvolved mutations of this gene cause the ‘brain-lung-thyroid’ syndrome inNS. (BLTs), which is characterized by various combinations of thyroid D.Miclea:None. Y.Capri: None. A.Verloes: None. dysgenesis,infantrespiratorydistresssyndrome,andhyperkinetic movement disorders, mainly chorea. Here, we describe a familial caseofBLTsduetoaNKX2.1run-onmutation.Theprobandisan  P03
.039.C Next generation sequencing in the diagnostic eleven-year-old boy who, at birth, suffered from respiratory approach to autosomal dominantpolycystic kidney disease distress associated to pulmonary hypertension. Delayed motor and speech language milestones were reported. Moreover, he DeimanteBrazdziunaite1, Marius Miglinas2, Algirdas Utkus1 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 151 1DepartmentofHumanandMedicalGenetics,InstituteofBiomedical previously described in some patients with van Maldergem Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, syndrome type 1. 2Center of Nephrology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Conclusion:SinceDCH S1
andFAT4moleculesformareceptor- Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. ligand pair, we hypothesize that DCH S1
 mutation may cause HS- like phenotype. We demonstrate that lymphatic pathology Introduction: Classically, autosomal dominant polycystic kidney including PLE, lymphatic malformation and lymphedema can be disease (ADPKD) is presented as a common Mendelian disorder a part of both conditions. This observation extends existing data and represent the leading genetic causes of renal disease in onclinical overlapbetweenVMS andHS. adults.ItiscausedbymutationseitherinPKD1orPKD2.However, The work was supported by Russian Science Foundation grant next-generation sequencing (NGS) offers the opportunity to 20-45-01005 signiﬁcantly improve the diagnostic yield in ADPKD. Body. T.V. Gabrusskaya: None. E.N. Suspitsin: None. E.Y. Lapina: IntroductionoftheﬁrsttherapyapprovedforADPKD-vasopressin None.E.A. Kornienko: None. V2-receptorantagonist(Tolvaptan)-broughtmorenewattention  P03
.042.B Male pseudo hermaphroditism in a 54 years old to this disease. Using European Renal Association-European woman Dialysis and Transplant Association Registry, and population basedstudies,Willeyetal.(2016)indicatedthattheADPKDpoint María Luz Bellido1, Teresa de Haro1, Trinidad Gonzalez2, Matias prevalence in the EU is <5/10,000. Moreover, disease appears to Perez1 be quite genetically heterogeneous. The PKD mutation database counts more than 1000 pathogenic variants in PKD1 and about 1Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain, 200 in PKD2 gene. According to various authors, about 8-10% of 2Hospital Universitario Clínico SanCecilio, Granada, Spain. ADPKD cases do not have pathogenic variant in PKD1/2 genes. Possibility to apply extended diagnostics by NGS revealed Introduction: Disorders of sex development (DSD) comprise a previously unknown causes. Pathogenic variants in GANAB gene heterogeneous group of congenital conditions associated with andPKDphenocopiesduetovariantsinHNF1β,PKHD1,DNAJB11, atypical development of internal and external genitalia. Sex or TS C1
/2 genes are described. However, the list of novel determination is governed by genes from SRY region at Y phenocopies and potential candidate genes is not ﬁnal yet. This chromosome that initiates the male developmental program. brings questions whether clinical diagnostic criteria will be as However,thereexistmanyothergenesinvolveinthisprocess.We speciﬁc and sensitive in distinguishing these new genetic forms describe the case of a 54-years-old woman with an incidental andphenocopies ofPKD. ﬁndingofabsenceofuterus,ovaries,prostateorseminalvesicles, Conclusion:Technologicaladvancesletusdistinguishdifferent aftera TC scanperformedfor other pathologies. aetiologiesofapparentlythesamediseaseaswellasexpandour Methods:GTG-bandingkaryotypewasperformedaccordingto knowledge. Furthermore, in the era of individualised treatment standard protocols. Twenty metaphases chromosomes were themost accuratemolecular diagnosis isrequired. examined.Next-generation sequencing study was done by MiSeq D.Brazdziunaite: None. M. Miglinas:None. A. Utkus:None. analyzerfromIllumina®. Results:Karyotyperesult:male,46,XY.Sequencingstudyﬁnding:  P03
.041.AProteinloosingenteropathyandlymphedemaina Gene Variant Type Status dbSNP/ Heritage Classiﬁcation (localization) HGMD girl withahomozygousDCH S1
 mutation SRD5A2 c.679C>T, Nonsense Heterozygous rs121434248 AR Pathogenic (2p23.1) (p. /CM920642 Arg227Ter) Tatiana V. Gabrusskaya1, Evgeny N. Suspitsin1,2, Elizaveta Y. c.344G>A, Missense Heterozygous rs121434246 AR Probably Lapina1,Elena A. Kornienko1 (p. /CM920633 Pathogenic Gly115Asp) 1St.-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical University, St.-Petersburg, RussianFederation,2N.N.PetrovInstituteofOncology,St.-Petersburg, SRD5A2 codiﬁes to 5-alpha-reductase type 2. This enzyme RussianFederation. catalyzes the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, which is essential for normal differentiation of the external male Introduction: Hennekam syndrome (HS) and van Maldergem genitaliaand virilization. syndrome (VMS) are two entities sharing some clinical features. Conclusion: The ﬁnal diagnosis was male pseudo- While unusual facial gestalt and some degree of developmental hermaphroditism due to 5-alpha-reductase type 2 deﬁciency delay is observed in both conditions intestinal lymphangiectasia (OMIM#264600).46,XYpatientsshowambiguousgenitaliaatbirth, andlymphedema have beenconsideredexclusive forHS. including perineal hypospadias and a persistent urogenital sinus MaterialsandMethods:Wepresentacaseof5year-oldgirlof withablindperinealvaginaloriﬁce.DSDusedtobediagnosedat Syriandescentwithsevereproteinloosingenteropathy(PLE)due birth or childhood by pediatricians or within the family, making to lymphangiectasia, lymphatic malformation in mediastinum, our case especially unusual. The patients need an individualized asymmetric lymphedema, facial dysmorphisms (ﬂat nasal bridge, management, especially for decisions related to sex of rearing, epicanthus, microtia), bilateral hearing loss and growth retarda- futureintervention,hormonetreatmentandreproductiveoptions. tion. No parental consanguinity was reported. She was born M. Bellido: None. T. de Haro: None. T. Gonzalez: None. M. preterm, had severe course of bronchopulmonary dysplasia and Perez: None. developed symptoms of PLE in the ﬁrst year of life. The girl had hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia, and elevated fecal alpha-1 antitrypsin. Right arm and left leg lymphedema became obvious  P03
.044.DTheimportanceofNGSdatareanalysisandfurther by the age of 5. The patient was suspected to have Hennekam functional analysis: an example of impaired phosphate syndrome and subjectedto clinicalexome sequencing. metabolism Results: No pathogenic variants in Hennekam syndrome- associatedgenes(CD55,FAT4,CCB E1
andADAMT S3
)havebeen MargaritaSharova1,SvetlanaPapizh2,OlgaLevchenko1,Alexandra found.RareDCH S1
variantc.1954A>G(p. S652
G)wasdetectedin Filatova1, Andrey Marakhonov1, Anatoliy Tulpakov1, Mikhail homozygous state; biallelic DCH S1
 alterations have been Skoblov1 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 152 1ResearchCentreforMedical Genetics,Moscow, RussianFederation, ACTG2-related visceral myopathy is the most common for 2Veltischev Research and Clinical Institute for Pediatrics of the familial or sporadic (de novo) primary PIPO with autosomal Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Moscow, dominant inheritance. However, a recent case report suggests RussianFederation. that some mild ACTG2 variants may be associated with autosomal recessive inheritance. We present a family in which Introduction: The regulation of phosphate metabolism occurs both parents have relatively mild gastrointestinal symptoms, mainlyinkidneysthroughreabsorptionofphosphateionsbythe and two sons have severe PIPO, consistent with autosomal NaPi-IIa(SL C34
A1)andNaPi-IIc(SL C34
A3)transporters.Pathogenic recessive inheritance. variants in these genes are identiﬁed in patients with hereditary Results:Whole-genomesequencing(WGS)revealedamissense hypophosphatemic rickets with hypercalciuria or hypercalcemia, variant c.28G>A (p.Val10Met) in the ACTG2 gene in the mother infantile 2. and the sons, and deletion of ACTG2 exon 1 (non-coding) in the Materials and methods: patients with a clinical diagnosis of sonsand presumably inthefather. hereditaryhypophosphatemicricketswerereferredformolecular Conclusions: Our case reinforces that monoallelic mild ACTG2 genetic testing. Three patients underwent full-genome sequen- variants may underly mild primary PIPO, while biallelic mild cing followed by reanalysis of genomic data; for one NGS panel variantscancauseseverediseases.PriormolecularstudiesonPIPO data were reanalyzed. Experimental validation of the effect of in the literature were based on whole-exome sequencing or variants on splicing was performed using minigene and RNA targetedSangersequencing,whichmayfailtodetectdeletionof analysis. thenon-codingexon.Alterationsinnon-codingACTG2segments Results: Primary NGS data analysis didn’t reveal causative can be under-recognized causes of mild gastrointestinal symp- variants for the phenotype or there was only one variant for toms and may explain some instances of inter-familial variability. autosomal recessive disease. Further investigation of data found WGS offers a more comprehensive genetic workup for severe in-frame deletion p.91_97del in SL C34
A1 gene with global primaryoridiopathicPIPObecauseofsuchgeneticheterogeneity. frequency1,7%intwopatientsincompoundheterozygousstate, Notably, the absence of family history does not reliably exclude thatpreviouslywasdescribedaspathogenic.Intronicpathogenic thepresenceof geneticcauses inPIPO. deletion c.925+20_926-48del101was found in two brothers in M. Mori: None. K.V. Truxal: B. Research Grant (principal compound heterozygous state. Also, VUS c.1449G>A in SL C34
A1 investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as genewasdetected.Minigeneassayshowedthatthevariantleads well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; co-investigator, to truncation of exon 13 by 34 nucleotides with frameshift and Abeona Therapeutics. R. Hagelstrom: None. A. Clause: A. PTC formation. Another functional study by RT-PCR identiﬁed Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Illumina, Inc.. E. Owner- variant c.846G>A in SL C34
A3 as splicing variant, leading to ship Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual skippingofexon 8without frameshift. property);Modest;Illumina.V.Prasad:None.K.Manickam:None. Conclusion: Reanalysis of genomic data is important not only S.G. Kaler: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator over time, but also by other clinical bioinformaticians. Some or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already pathogenic variants with high global frequency could be ﬁltered received); Modest; Principal Investigator, NINDS (pending), Colla- outintheearlystagesofNGSanalysis.Functionalanalysisallows borator, NIGMS (pending), Sponsor, NINDS (pending). F. Con- toinvestigate thepathogenicity ofVUS. sultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Vivet Therapeutics; Chairperson, M. Sharova: None. S. Papizh: None. O. Levchenko: None. A. DataMonitoringCommittee.M.M.Alves:None.C.DiLorenzo:F. Filatova: None. A. Marakhonov: None. A. Tulpakov: None. M. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Qol, Mahana, Innovative Skoblov: None. HealthSolutions, Mallinckrodt, Allergan,Takeda.  P03
.045.AContributionofanon-codingvariantinautosomal  P03
.046.B Application of NGS sequencing for improved recessive ACTG2-related visceral myopathy identiﬁed by diagnosisin the pediatric nephrology setting whole-genome sequencing Radosveta Bozhilova1, Olga Beltcheva1, Galia Zlatanova2, Kunka Mari Mori1,2, Kristen V. Truxal1,2, R. Tanner Hagelstrom3, Amanda Kamenarova1, Kalina Mihova1, Felitsiya Shakova1, Dimitar Roussi- Clause4, Vinay Prasad5,2, Kandamurugu Manickam1,2, Stephen G. nov2, Maria Gaydarova2, Vanio Mitev1, RadkaKaneva1 Kaler1,2,6,Maria M. Alves7, CarloDi Lorenzo8,2 1Molecular Medicine Center, Dpt. Medical Chemistry and Biochem- 1Division of Genetic and Genomic Medicine, Nationwide Children’s istry,MedicalUniversity–Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria,Soﬁa,Bulgaria,2SBAL Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA, 2Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio PediatricDiseases,NephrologyandHemodialysisClinic,Department State University, Columbus, OH, USA, 3Illumina Inc, San Diego, CA, of Pediatrics, Medical University -Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, Soﬁa, USA, 4Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA, 5Pathol- Bulgaria. ogy & Laboratory Medicine, Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Colum- bus, OH, USA, 6Center for Gene Therapy, Abigail Wexner Research Introduction: Nephrotic syndrome, resulting from pathological Institute, Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA, changesintheglomerularﬁlter,isacommonchildhooddisorder. 7DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,ErasmusUniversityMedicalCenter, Whileitusuallyresolveswithcorticosteroid treatment, 10-20%of Rotterdam, Netherlands, 8Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, thecasesareresistanttotherapyandoftenprogresstoend-stage HepatologyandNutrition,NationwideChildren’sHospital,Columbus, renal disease. A monogenic cause of steroid resistant nephrotic OH,USA. syndrome(SRNS)isidentiﬁedinuptohalfofthecasesandmore than50geneshavebeen associated withthe disease. Introduction:Pediatricintestinalpseudo-obstruction(PIPO)isa MaterialsandMethods:NineSRNSpatients,initiallyscreened heterogeneous condition characterized by impaired gastroin- for NPH S1
, NPH S2
 and WT1 mutations, were recruited. Two testinal propulsion and a broad clinical spectrum ranging from children presented with extrarenal features - seizures and brain a severe form requiring parenteral nutrition to milder forms infarctions.WeusedTruSightOneSequencingPanel(Illumina)on with some ability to tolerate oral nutrition. Various molecular MiSeq platform for identiﬁcation of disease-causing variants and bases underlying primary PIPO have been identiﬁed, of which Sangersequencingforconﬁrmingthemutationsandestablishing EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 153 their origin. The pathogenicity of novel variants was evaluated RaitisPeculis1,MontaUstinova1,RaimondsRescenko1,VitaRovite1, based ontheACMG criteria. Linda Zaharenko1, Ilze Elbere1, Laila Silamikele1, Ilze Konrade2,1, Results:HomozygousmutationinNO S1
AP,recentlyfoundtobe Jelizaveta Sokolovska3, Valdis Pirags3,1,Janis Klovins1 associated with SRNS, was identiﬁed in one case. An additional rare MYH11 variant may account for the brain infarctions in this 1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia, child. A heterozygous frameshift mutation in CFHR5 and 2Faculty of Medicine, Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 3Faculty combinations of rare amino acid substitutions in known SRNS ofMedicine, University of Latvia, Riga,Latvia. genes(ACTN4,LAMB2,etc.)accounted for threeadditional cases. Conclusion: The application of NGS for screening of an Introduction:Complicationsoftype2diabetesaffectasigniﬁcant extended gene panel allowed us to identify the genetic cause of proportion of patients and their prevalence, correlates with the disease in approximately half of the SRNS patients recruited increaseddurationofdiabetes.Yet,timeofonsetofcomplications for the study. As expected, a wide variability of genes and isvariablefordifferentpersonswithtype2diabetessuggestingan mutation types were involved. A possible oligogenic inheritance individual level predisposition and protection. Therefore, investi- was observed in some of the cases. Grant references: D-93/ gationofthegeneticcomponentoftype2diabetescomplications 24.06.2020; D01-285/17.12.2019, MES, Bulgaria iswarranted. R. Bozhilova: None. O.Beltcheva: None. G. Zlatanova: None. Materialsandmethods:Wehaveassayed601type2diabetes K. Kamenarova: None. K. Mihova: None. F. Shakova: None. D. patientswith four commondiabetes complications using Human Roussinov: None. M. Gaydarova: None. V. Mitev: None. R. GSA genotyping array. Genome wide association study was Kaneva:None. performed to investigate the genetic background of following phenotypes: diabetic neuropathy, diabetic nephropathy, macro- vascularevents,andophthalmiccomplications.Genotypeanalysis  P03
.047.C Functional consequences of rs1800629 TNF gene was performed comparing diabetes patients with complication associated withasthma andtuberculosis development presentto thosewithout particular complication. Results: Association analysis identiﬁed eight novel type 2 Irina Zhalsanova, Elena Bragina, Nadezhda Babushkina, Nataliya diabetes susceptibility loci with genome wide signiﬁcance. Two Tarasenko, Maxim Freidin, Valery Puzyrev SNPs, rs1132787 (GYPA) and rs522521 (LO C105371557
) were associated with diabetic neuropathy, while seven (one shared Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Research with diabetic neuropathy) rs2477088 (PD E4
DIP), rs522521 MedicalCenteroftheRussianAcademy ofSciences,Tomsk,Russian (LO C105371557
), rs4852954 (NAT8), rs6032 (F5), rs6935464 Federation. (RP S6
KA2), rs7236163 (ZNF519), and rs3095447 (CCD C146
) (latter is also shared with ophthalmic complications) were showed Introduction: Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) is one of the signiﬁcant association with macrovascular complications. The proinﬂammatory cytokines involved in the various infectious and association results were adjusted for covariates (age, sex, BMI, allergic diseases development. We studied the SNP(rs1800629) diabetesduration,medianHbA1c,andprescriptiondruguse)and association located in the TNF gene promoter region with agenome-widesigniﬁcant threshold ofP<5×10−8was used. bronchial asthma (BA) and tuberculosis (TB) development and Conclusions: Using the genome-wide genotyping approach evaluated the functional consequences of the rs1800629 by this study identiﬁed ten novel associations with T2DM complica- analyzing the expression level in short-term cell cultures of tions (at eight loci) and provides additional insight into genetic peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) stimulated by markers of these phenotypes. The study was supported by inducers(lipopolysaccharide (LPS),interferon-gamma (IFN-γ)). European RegionalDevelopment Fund Project No1.1.1.2/VIAA/2/ Methods: Genotyping was performed using qPCR among 18/287. patients with BA, TB, and in the control group (n=1231). TNF R. Peculis: None. M. Ustinova: None. R. Rescenko: None. V. gene expression level was evaluated response to stimulation in Rovite:None.L.Zaharenko:None.I.Elbere:None.L.Silamikele: PBMC from healthy donors, differentiated on genotypes None.I.Konrade:None.J.Sokolovska:None.V.Pirags:None.J. rs1800629 (n=17). Samples were incubated with stimuli (LPS, Klovins: None. IFN-γ), and control samples without stimuli within overnight at +37°C.Targetgene expressionwas analyzedby RT-PCR. Results: Association analysis showed, AA genotype frequency  P04
 Skeletal, Connective Tissue, Ectodermal andSkin inTBpatientswashigherthaninpatientswithBA(p=0.047)and Disorders thecontrolgroup(p=0.033).TNFgeneexpressionleveluponIFN- γ stimulation was 4,2 times higher compared to unstimulated  P04
.001.B 6q13 microdeletion - mapping the clinical PBMC(p<0.05).TheAallele(AA+GA)presencepromoteda1.5- phenotype folddecreaseinTNFgeneexpressionuponstimulationwithIFN-γ compared to GG. TNF gene expression increased upon LPS RaquelRodrigues,OanaMoldovan, RosárioSilveira-Santos, AnaB. stimulation, but nosigniﬁcantly. Sousa,AnaSousa Conclusions: Thus, differences in the TNF gene transcription pattern depending on the genotype and the stimulation mode. Hospitalde Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal. These features are important for understanding the genetic susceptibility to infectious and allergic diseases of individuals Introduction: Proximal 6q11q14 deletions are exceedingly rare, living in regions with different infectious load levels. The study particularlytheenclosed6q13q14 microdeletions. Littleisknown wassupported bythe RFBRgrantNo.15-04-05852. about their phenotypic consequences, which include mild/ I.Zhalsanova:None.E.Bragina:None.N.Babushkina:None. moderate developmental delay/intellectual disability (DD/ID), N.Tarasenko: None. M.Freidin: None. V. Puzyrev: None. minor dysmorphism, and connective tissue abnormalities. We describe a case of 6q13 microdeletion, among the smallest reportedwithinthissyndromicregion,aimingtocontributetothe  P03
.048.DGenomewideassociationstudyoftype2diabetes genomicmapping of associated clinical features. complications in population ofLatvia EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 154 Methods: The proband, a 34yo male, was referred to the Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics Department for mild ID and motor clumsiness. In Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech childhood, he presented mild DD, language delay and learning Republic, 5Institute of Medical Genetics, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, difﬁculties. Additional features included strabismus, cryptorchid- Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 6Institute of Computer ism, joint hypermobility, and abnormal foot position. A DNA Science of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic, sample was analyzed by array-CGH (180K CGX-HD). Segregation 7Institute of Biophysics and Informatics, First Faculty of Medicine, wasinvestigated by FISH. Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 8National Institute of Results: Array-CGH revealed a 4.71Mb microdeletion in 6q13 Public Health, Prague, Czech Republic, 9Institute of Health Informa- (70917114_75625720; hg19), encompassing 17 OMIM genes. tion andStatistics ofthe Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic. Parental studiesconﬁrmedthis deletionoccurred de novo. Discussion:PreviousreportsproposedcandidategenesforDD/ Introduction: Omphalocele and Gastroschisis are the most ID within 6q11q4 region, namely KCNQ5, which is deleted in our important anomalies from the group of Abdominal Wall Defects patient. However, the chief candidate gene underlying learning (AWD).Themaingoalofourstudywastoevaluatethechangesin difﬁcultiesandlanguagedelaywasproposedtobeHRT1B,which the frequency of these anomalies in the Czech Republic and the is not deleted in this case. DD/ID is unspeciﬁc and frequently overalleffectiveness oftheir prenataldiagnostics. features in contiguous deletion syndromes, probably contributed Materials and Methods: We are using the ofﬁcial population by several genes in the deleted interval. Conversely, connective data from the National Registry of Congenital Anomalies of the tissue abnormalities are speciﬁc characteristics often observed in CzechRepublic,whichisrunbytheInstitueofHealthInformation 6q11q14 microdeletions, including hypermobility and foot defor- and Statistics of the Czech Republic. The registration process is mities. Thus far, the latter have been assigned to CO L12
A1 gene. country-wide and compulsory by the national law. We analyzed However, CO L12
A1 is not deleted in our case, suggesting a key the numbers of omphalocele (Q792) and gastroschisis (Q793) roleforothergenes,suchasCO L9
A1andCO L19
A1,intheetiology cases in the newborns and prenatally diagnosed cases in the ofthese problems. Czech Republic(1994-2018). R. Rodrigues: None. O. Moldovan: None. R. Silveira-Santos: Results: The total incidence of omphalocele was 3.32 per None.A.B. Sousa:None. A. Sousa:None. 10.000livebirths(1.39inbirthsand 1.93inprenatallydiagnosed cases).Forgastroschisis,thetotalincidencewas3.09(0.90inbirths and 2.19 in prenatally diagnosed cases). The total frequency of  P04
.002.C A novel truncating variant in the FGD1 gene bothanomaliesincreasedduringtheselectedperiodintheCzech associated with Aarskog-Scott syndrome in a family pre- Republic, the increase is statically signiﬁcant (p<0.05). The viouslydiagnosed withTel Hashomercamptodactyly average week of gestation at the time of positive prenatal diagnostics decreased signiﬁcantly forboth anomalies(P<0.05). Lena Sagi-Dain1, Irena Kessel1, Amir Peleg1, Tamar Paperna2, Nina Conclusions: The improvement of ultrasound prenatal diagnos- Ekhilevitch2, Alina Kurolap3, Hagit Baris Feldman3, Marina Bar- tics enabled the successful detection of AWDs in earlier gestation Shay1 weeks.Theoverallincidenceofbothanomaliesishoweverincreasing in the Czech Republic, as more and more mothers prefer surgical 1Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 2Rambam Medical Center, interventionovertheterminationofthepregnancy. Haifa,Israel, 3Ichilov Medical Center, TelAviv, Israel. Supported by the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, grantnr.AZV17-29622A Tel Hashomer camptodactyly syndrome is a genetic association, A. Sipek Sr: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- characterizedbycamptodactylywithmuscularhypoplasia,skeletal boratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswellasgrantsalready dysplasia, and abnormal palmar creases. Currently, the genetic received); Modest; Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, basis for this disorder is unknown, thus there is a possibility that research grant: AZV 17-29622A. V. Gregor: B. Research Grant this association may be contained within another genetic (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending diagnosis.Inthismanuscriptwepresentafamily withaprevious grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Ministry of clinical diagnosis of Tel Hashomer camptodactyly syndrome. Health of the Czech Republic, research grant: AZV 17-29622A. A. Whole exome sequencing revealed a novel hemizygous truncat- SipekJr:B.ResearchGrant(principalinvestigator,collaboratoror ing variant c.269_270dup (p.Phe91Alafs*34) in the FGD1 gene consultantandpendinggrantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived); (NM_004463.3)inallthreesymptomaticpatients,congruouswith Modest; Ministry of Healthof theCzech Republic, researchgrant: a diagnosis of Aarskog-Scott syndrome. Our manuscript adds to TN, 00064190. J. Klaschka: B. Research Grant (principal investi- thelimiteddataonAarskog-Scottsyndrome,andemphasizesthe gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as importance of unbiased comprehensive genetic testing towards grants already received); Modest; Ministry of Health of the Czech establishingadiagnosis forgenetic associations. Republic, research grant: AZV 17-29622A. M. Maly: B. Research L. Sagi-Dain: None. I. Kessel: None. A. Peleg: None. T. Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and Paperna:None.N.Ekhilevitch:None.A.Kurolap:None.H.Baris pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Feldman: None. M.Bar-Shay: None. Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, research grant: TN, 00064190.J. Jirova: None.  P04
.003.D Abdominal wall defects in the Czech Republic: Frequency andprenataldiagnostics  P04
.004.ABiallelic deep intronic variants c.1528-126A>Gand c.5457+81T>AinTRI P11
areassociatedwithachondrogenesis Antonin Sipek Sr1,2,3, Vladimir Gregor1,2, Antonin Sipek Jr1,4,5, Jan 1A Klaschka6,7, Marek Maly6,8, JitkaJirova9 Priyanka Upadhyai, Radhakrishnan Periyasamy, Vishal S. Guleria, 1Department of Medical Genetics, Thomayer University Hospital, Shalini Nayak, Katta M. Girisha Prague4,CzechRepublic,2DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Pronatal Sanatorium, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Medical Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Genetics, Centre for Medical Genetics and Reproductive Medicine, Manipal,India. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 155 Introduction:BialleliclossoffunctionvariantsinTRI P11
encoding in all 17 cases when performed (52%), and/ or by molecular for GMAP-210 cause lethal chondrodysplasia achondrogenesis screeningafteramniocentesis(43%).Theprenataldiagnosisledto type 1A (ACG1A). Complete depletion of TRI P11
 impairs Golgi TOP in 12 cases (34%), in a mean stage of 32 weeks. 66% of the structure,vesiculartransportandresultsinlossofIFT20anchorage foetusesdiagnosed inprenatal wentinto thebirth. totheGolgithatisvitalforciliarytrafﬁckingandciliogenesis.Here Conclusion: The systematic screening of the second term was we report four affected foetuses, two each from two families, normalin80%.OnethirdofthediagnosisledtoTOP.Theresults homozygous for putative pathogenic deep intronic variants in conﬁrm the late diagnosis of de novo achondroplasia during TRI P11
. pregnancy, leading to major psychological and ethical issues for Materials and Methods: Perinatal autopsy and radiological theparents. evaluation was performed, followed by exome and genome G. Baujat: None. R. Borghese: None. P. Sonigo: None. J. sequencing. Segregation analysis was performed by Sanger Bengoa:None.C.Michot:None.E.Millischer-Bellaiche:None.S. sequencing. Fibroblast cell-lines were available from an affected Rondeau: None. B. Childs: None. T. Attie-Bitach: None. B. foetus.TranscriptanalysiswasperformedbyqRT-PCRandRT-PCR Bessieres:None.L.Salomon:None.Y.Ville:None.J.Bonnefont: respectively. Protein levels were ascertained by immunoblotting. None.J. Steffann:None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. The Golgi, ciliogenesis and autophagy were evaluated by immunostaining. Results: The deep intronic variants c.1528-126A>G and c.5457  P04
.007.D Shared Runs of Heterozygosity Mapping using +81T>A in TRI P11
 were present in homozygous state in all whole genome sequencing reveals a complex structural affectedfoetusesandtheparentswereheterozygouscarriers.This variant in GSN causing novel cutaneous-visceral organ led to drastic depletion of TRI P11
 mRNA, protein levels and Gelsolin amyloidosis produced severely compacted Golgi in ﬁbroblasts. The c.5457 +81T>Avariantcausedaberrantsplicingandretentionof77base- Adam Jackson1,2, Glenda Sobey3, Ashutosh Wechalekar4, Dorota pairs of intron 18. We observed severe depletion of ciliated Rowczenio4, . Genomics England Research Consortium5, Glenda ﬁbroblasts and reduction in cilia length, not reported so far in Beaman2, Rob McMahon1, Unzela Khan1, Emma Miles1, Amy Gold- patient cells with TRI P11
-related disorder. Moderate autophagic man1,SimonLovell6,JillClayton-Smith1,2,SiddharthBanka1,2 dysfunctionwasnotedinaffectedﬁbroblasts,congruentwiththe roleofIFT20inmodulatingautophagyinprimaryciliadependent 1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United mannerinsome cellularcontexts. Kingdom, 2Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Conclusion: Our ﬁndings illustrate how pathogenic variants Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, occurring in deep intronic and putative regulatory regions of University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3National TRI P11
mayimpact itsexpression and activityleading toACG1A. EDS Service, Shefﬁeld Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom, 4National Amyloidosis Centre, University College P.Upadhyai: None.R. Periyasamy: None. V.S.Guleria:None. London (Royal Free Campus), London, United Kingdom, 5Genomics S.Nayak: None.K.M. Girisha:None. England, London, United Kingdom, 6Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester,United Kingdom.  P04
.005.B Pre and post-natal achondroplasia, retrospective seriesof64consecutivescaseswithanalyzeofthediagnostic Introduction: We report a multi-generational family of several methods andtimingissues individualswithcutislaxa,bowelperforation,cardiacruptureand clinical diagnosis of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Several histopatho- Genevieve Baujat, Roxana Borghese, Pascale Sonigo, Joana logical,targetedsequencing studiesfailedtoidentifythegenetic Bengoa,CarolineMichot,ElodieMillischer-Bellaiche,SophieRondeau, cause. Two affected individuals were detected with cutaneous Beatrice Childs, Tania Attie-Bitach, Bettina Bessieres, Laurent amyloid,but proteomic studies failedtoreveal itsorigin. Salomon, Yves Ville, Jean-Paul Bonnefont, Julie Steffann, Valerie Methods and Results: We devised a novel Heterozygosity Cormier-Daire Mapping approach using srWGS data and identiﬁed a ~10.38Mb disease-haplotype on chromosome 9q33.1-q34.11. This region’s Necker Hospital, Paris,France. targeted analysis revealed an ~1kb deletion involving in-frame lossofexon12ofGSNpredictedtoresultinpartial deletionand Thelastyears,diagnosisofachondroplasiabeneﬁtedofadvances fusion of two gelsolin domains of the protein. DdPCR conﬁrmed in prenatal imaging, and in invasive and non-invasive molecular the variant’s segregation with the phenotype in extended family screening. members (LOD score 4.52). Sanger sequencing revealed the Objectives: To analyse diagnosis procedures and outcome on variant to be a complex deletion-inversion-insertion event. 64 consecutive conﬁrmed cases of achondroplasia seen in the Sequence analysis showed the variant to have likely originated French Centre of Reference for Skeletal Dysplasia, between 2008 fromfork-stallingtemplate-switchingattributabletomicrohomol- and 2016.MethodsDiagnosis stage/ age, analyse of the achon- ogy and formation of complex DNA structure due to multiple droplasiafeaturesbyimaging(ultrasound(US),3D-CT),molecular nestedinvertedandmirrorrepeats.SequencingofmRNAandthe conﬁrmation method, and pregnancy outcome were retrospec- amyloidprotein is ongoing. tivelydetermined. Conclusions:Acomplexstructuralvariant(SV)involvingexon Results: 64 cases of achondroplasia were included. The 12 of GSN causes a novel form of potentially lethal ‘cutaneous- diagnosis was made during the pregnancy in 43 cases (67%, internal organ amyloidosis’ that is clinically, genetically and mean stage of 30 weeks). For the remaining 21 cases (33%), the mechanistically distinct from Finnish-type amyloidosis. To our diagnosiswasperformedatbirthinallcasesbutone,diagnosedat knowledge this is the ﬁrst example of application of hetero- 2 months. Among the eight foetuses with inherited ACH: 4 were zygositymappingtoidentifythecauseofaMendeliandisorder, diagnosed after early chorionic villus sampling, leading to and of nested mirror and inverted repeats resulting in a termination of pregnancy (TOP) and 4 diagnosed after 26 weeks, germline SV in humans. This work highlights the value of WGS by US.In the de novo prenatal 35 cases, mid-trimester US was inresolvingthecauseofunsolvedandnoveldisordersresulting normalin80%ofcases.Thediagnosiswasconﬁrmedbythe3D-CT from SVs. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 156 A. Jackson: None. G. Sobey: None. A. Wechalekar: None. D. some genes as (TGM1; 190195) on chromosome 14q11.2, are Rowczenio: None. .. Genomics England Research Consortium: relatively common while mutations in other genes are rare. Aim: None. G. Beaman: None. R. McMahon: None. U. Khan: None. E. To identify the underlying molecular pathology in a cohort of 55 Miles: None. A. Goldman: None. S. Lovell: None. J. Clayton- non syndromic ARCI Egyptian families with at least one affected Smith: None.S. Banka:None. sib,using next generationsequencing (NGS). Methods: NGS analysis was performed through a panel of 14 ARCIgenes.  P04
.008.A Clinical features and molecular characterization of Results:Geneticvariantscouldbeidentiﬁedin29(52.7%)ofthe three Japanese patients with autosomal dominant Robinow 55studiednon-syndromicARCIfamilies.Allstudiedpatientswere syndrome caused by DV L3
variants descending from consanguineous families and most of the characterized mutations were found in a homozygous state. KumikoYanagi1,ErikoNishi2,ArisaIgarashi1,MakiOmata1,Yukimi Characterizedvariantsincluded;sixteenpathogenic,amongwhich Abe1, Nana Kobayashi1, Kazuhito Satou1, Kanako Ishii3, Nobuhiko are ﬁve novel missense mutations and eleven previously Okamoto2, Yoichi Matsubara1, Tadashi Kaname1 describedvariantswithintheTGM1gene.Theﬁvenovelmissense mutations are; (NM_000359.2) c.344T>A(Val115Asp), c.1165C>T 1National Center for Child Health and Development, Setagaya, (Arg389Cys), c.1423T>A(Cys475Ser), c.1762G>A(p.Ala588Thr), and Japan, 2Osaka Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Osaka, Japan, c.1922G>(Cys641Val). 3Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. Conclusion:NGSpanelanalysesidentiﬁedmutationswithinthe TGM1 gene in 52.7% of studied families prioritizing it as a target AutosomaldominantRobinowsyndrome3(DR S3
,OMIM601368) geneforfuturemolecularanalysesamongEgyptianARCIpatients. isarareskeletaldysplasiasyndromecharacterizedbydysmorphic Limited resources prevented further whole exome analyses to features resembling a fetal face, short stature, mesomelic limb help characterize the molecular pathology in the remaining shortening, vertebral and hand anomalies. Urogenital malforma- almost 50% of our cohort as well as possible detection of other tions are frequently reported. The causative gene, DV L3
 (Dishev- involved genes that might explain the marked heterogeneous eled 3, NM_004423) mapped on 3q27 encodes cytoplasmic phenotypespresent withinour patients. phosphoprotein DV L3
 known as a homologous to Drosophila K.S.Amr: None. N.M.Elaraby: None. G.Y.El-Kamah: None. dishvelled (dsh). Dsh relays Wnt signals from receptors to downstream effectors and roles on developmental processes, including segmentation and neuroblast speciﬁcation. Only eight  P04
.011.DBonemineralizationinSATB2-associatedsyndrome variantshavebeenreportedtodate.Allaresplicingorframeshift variantswithprematurestop codonsandpredictedtoresultina AnneDittrich, Joyce Geelen, Jos Draaisma premature termination within Dhc-C domain of DV L3
. Here we report three Japanese boys who were diagnosed with DR S3
 by Rradboudumc Amalia children’shospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands. identiﬁcation of heterozygous variants in DV L3
. Two patients (Patient 1 and patient 3) were enrolled in the IRUD (Initiative on Introduction: SATB2-associated syndrome, also called Glass Rare and Undiagnosed Diseases) as undiagnosed patients. One syndrome, is caused by pathogenic variants or deletions/duplica- patient (Patient 2) was initially suspected of having Aarskog tions affecting the special AT-rich sequence binding protein 2 syndrome(OMIM305400),butwasnopathogenicvariantsfound (SATB2)gene.SATB2isatranscriptionalregulatoryproteininvolved intheFGDgenebydirectsequencing.Wholeexomesequencing in craniofacial and central nervous system development. Glass andannotatedvariantsﬁlteringwereperformedinthesepatients. syndrome is characterized by intellectual disability with severely We identiﬁed two novel frameshift variants, c.1671_1686del:p. limited speech, high palate and dentofacial abnormalities. In this (Tyr558Alafs*105) in Patient 1 and c.1716-1722del:p.(Ser573A- caseserieswewillfocusontheroleofSATB2onbonemetabolism lafs*93) in Patient 2, and one novel in-frame deletion, Materials and Methods: we collected the data on bone c.1861_1884del:p.(Pro621_Ala628del) in Patient 3. The in-frame metabolism of all children followed at the Radboudumc Amalia deletionlackseightaminoacidresiduesincludingtwophosphor- children’shospital. ylation sites, which were evolutionary conserved. The deletion Results:Wehave4childrenatfollow-upwithGlasssyndrome. wouldaffectDV L3
polymerizationleadinginterruptWntsignaling. All children have signs of increased bone turnover. The oldest Wearepresenting clinicalfeatures in eachpatient. childhadtwolongbonefracturesattheageof12andlowbone K.Yanagi:None.E.Nishi:None.A.Igarashi:None.M.Omata: mineral density with a lumbar z-score of -3.5. For this reason None.Y.Abe:None.N.Kobayashi:None.K.Satou:None.K.Ishii: therapy with intravenous bisphosphonate was started with good None. N. Okamoto: None. Y. Matsubara: None. T. Kaname: result.Therewerenoadditionalfractures andthelumbar z-score None. increasedto -1.9. Conclusion: As shown, reduced bone mineralization in SATB2- associated syndrome due to high bone turnover starts at young  P04
.009.B Deﬁning the molecular pathology of autosomal age. In an earlier study the prevalence of decreased bone recessive congenital icthyosis among a cohort of Egyptian mineralization was reported to be 76% with 67% of patients patients hadsignsofincreasedbone turn-over. However,inareportwith recommendationsontheSATB2-associatedsyndrome,itisstated Khalda S.Amr, NesmaMohamadElaraby, Ghada Y.El-Kamah that one should consider osteopenia evaluation and optimize bone mineralization as needed. However, due to our experience, National Research Centre,Cairo, Egypt. we would suggest that evaluation should be incorporated in the guideline, aspreventive andtherapeutic options are possible. Background Autosomal recessive congenital icthyosis (ARCI) are A.Dittrich: None. J. Geelen:None. J.Draaisma: None. heterogeneous group of rare genodermatoses characterized by markedphenotypicandgenotypicvariability.NonsyndromicARCI arecausedby mutationsinmorethana dozenofdistinct genes.  P04
.012.AMorethanmeetstheeye:expandingandreviewing MoleculartestingforARCIinaclinicalsettingisnotaneasytask; theclinicalandmutationalspectrumofbrittlecorneasyndrome EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 157 Tibbe Dhooge1, Tim Van Damme1, Delﬁen Syx1, Laura Muiño Enchondromasarebenigncartilaginoustumors,typicallylocalized Mosquera1,2,SheelaNampoothiri3,AnilRadhakrishnan4,PelinOzlem in the metaphyses. The most common enchondromatosis, Ollier Simsek-Kiper5, Gülen Eda Utine5, Maryse Bonduelle6, Isabelle disease and Maffucci syndrome related to IDH1 and IDH2, are Migeotte7, Osama Essawi1, Serdar Ceylaner8, Adila Al Kindy9, Brad characterized by asymmetrical lesions. Bilateral and/or symme- Tinkle10, SoﬁeSymoens1, Fransiska Malfait1 tricalenchondromascanbeseeninrarerenchondromatosissuch as metachondromatosis, dyspondyloenchondromatosis, geno- 1CenterforMedicalGenetics,DepartmentofBiomolecularMedicine, chondromatosis and spondyloenchondrodysplasia (SPENCD, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, related to recessive variants in AC P5
). Even though variants in 2Divison of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Ghent PTPN11andCO L2
A1havebeenidentiﬁedinmetachondromatosis University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Department of Pediatric and dyspondyloenchondromatosis, respectively, molecular basis Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences & Research Centre, of bilateral and/or symmetrical enchondromas remain unknown. Cochin, India, 4Department of Ophthalmology, Amrita Institute of We performed whole exome sequencing analysis from blood Medical Sciences & Research Centre, Cochin, India, 5Department of samples in a cohort of 11 individuals from eight families PediatricGenetics,FacultyofMedicine,HacettepeUniversity,Ankara, presenting with bilateral and symmetrical enchondromas. We Turkey, 6Centre for Medical Genetics, Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, identiﬁed variants in known genes in three families of the eight Brussels, Belgium, 7Center of Human Genetics, Université Libre de (38%),includingamosaicvariantintheIDH1geneintwopatients, Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, 8Intergen Genetic Research Center, with symmetrical enchondromas and a large homozygous Ankara,Turkey,9DepartmentofGenetics,CollegeofMedicine,Sultan deletionencompassingAC P5
inonepatientwithSPENCD.Variants Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman, 10Division of Medical Genetics, of uncertain signiﬁcant (VOUS) were identiﬁed in two other PeytonManning Children’sHospital, Indianapolis, IN, USA. families, including a heterozygous nonsense variant in the PELI2 gene,encodinganinterleukin-1receptor-associatedkinase(IRAK)- Brittle cornea syndrome (BCS) is a rare autosomal recessive interacting proteins, in three affected members from the same disordercharacterizedbycornealthinningandfragility,leadingto family and a de novo heterozygous 1.5 Mb deletion of corneal rupture, the main hallmark of this disorder. Non-ocular 12p12.1p11.22 in a patient with enchondroma and type E symptomsincludehearingloss,butalsosignsofconnectivetissue brachydactyly. No candidate variant was identiﬁed in three fragility,placingitintheEhlers-Danlossyndrome(EDS)spectrum. families including one family with recurrent sibs. These ﬁndings It is caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in ZNF469 or PRDM5, supporttheneedofincreasingthenumberoffamiliestestedand/ which presumably encode transcription factors for extracellular ortheanalysisof affected tissues. matrixcomponents.Wereporttheclinicalandmolecularfeatures P.Marzin:None.C.Huber:None.G.Baujat:None.C.Michot: ofninenovelBCSfamilies,fourofwhichharborvariantsinZNF469 None. A. Guichet: None. E. Colin: None. M. Panuel: None. V. and ﬁve in PRDM5. We also performed a genotype and Cormier-Daire: None. phenotype-oriented literature overview of all (N=85) reported patients with ZNF469 (N=53) and PRDM5 (N=32) variants. Musculoskeletalﬁndingsmaybethemeanreasonforreferral,and  P04
.014.CSitting-to-standingheightratioisasex-speciﬁcrisk often raise suspicion of another heritable connective tissue factor forchronic backpain disorder such as kyphoscoliotic EDS, osteogenesis imperfecta or Marfan syndrome, especially when corneal rupture has not yet Maxim B. Freidin1, Yakov A. Tsepilov2,3, Yurii S. Aulchenko2,3, occurred. Our ﬁndings highlight the multisystemic nature of BCS Pradeep Suri4,Frances M.K.Williams1 and validate its inclusion in the EDS classiﬁcation. Importantly, gene panels for heritable connective tissue disorders should 1King’sCollegeLondon,London,UnitedKingdom,2NovosibirskState include ZNF469 and PRDM5 to allow for timely diagnosis and University,Novosibirsk,RussianFederation,3PolyOmica,’s-Hertogen- appropriate preventive measures for this rarecondition. bosch, Netherlands,4University of Washington, Seattle, WA,USA. T. Dhooge: None. T. Van Damme: None. D. Syx: None. L. MuiñoMosquera: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. A.Radhakrish- Background: Chronic back pain (CBP) is more common among nan: None. P. Simsek-Kiper: None. G. Eda Utine: None. M. females for reasons not fully understood. We hypothesized that Bonduelle: None. I. Migeotte: None. O. Essawi: None. S. sitting-to-standing height ratio, known to be different between Ceylaner:None.A.AlKindy:None.B.Tinkle:None.S.Symoens: thesexes, maycontribute. None.F. Malfait: None. Methods: We used European individuals from UK Biobank (project #18219) comprising 222,361 males and 263,602 females totestthishypothesis.Logisticregressionwasusedtoassessthe  P04
.013.B Bilateral and symmetrical enchondromatosis association of CBP with sitting height, standing height, and their lesions: clinical, radiologic andgenetic ﬁndings ratio while adjusting for age, BMI, and job involving prolonged standing and heavy lifting. Mediation analysis and Mendelian Pauline Marzin1,2, Celine Huber2, Genevieve Baujat1,2, Caroline randomization (MR)were applied toassess causality. Instruments Michot1,2, Agnès Guichet3,4, Estelle Colin3,4, Michel Panuel5, Valérie for MR were selected from publicly available GWAS data for Cormier-Daire1,2 sitting-to-standingheightratio,ensuringnon-overlapwithchronic BPGWASusing UKBiobank. 1Service de Génétique clinique et Centre de référence pour les Results: Both sitting and standing height exhibited a weak maladies osseuses constitutionnelles, AP-HP, Hôpital Necker-Enfants association of similar magnitude for CBP in both sexes (Table). Malades, 75015 Paris, France, 2Université de Paris, Laboratory of However, sitting-to-standing height ratio was associated with Molecular and Physiopathological Bases of Osteochondrodysplasia, greateroddofCBPinmales(Table)butwithloweroddsinfemales INSERMUMR1163,ImagineInstitute,75015Paris,France,3Biochem- (Table).MediationanalysisshowedbothdirectandBMI-mediated istryandGeneticsDepartment,UniversityHospitalofAngers,Angers, riskeffectsoftheratioonCBPinmales;whileinfemalestherewas France, 4MitoLab, UMR CNRS 6015-INSERM, MitoVasc Institute, BMI-mediated risk effect and direct protective effect. MR UniversityofAngers,Angers,France,5AixMarseilleUniversity,CNRS, supported a causal impact of sitting-to-standing height ratio on EFS,ADES, Marseille, France. CBP riskin females,but notinmales. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 158 Conclusion: We provide evidence that different body propor- 1GHC Genetics, s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic, 2Ambulant Centre for tionsseeninmenandwomenmaycontributetothedifferentrisk DefectsofLocomotorApparatus,Prague,CzechRepublic,3Facultyof ofCBP between thesexes. HealthCareStudies,WestBohemiaUniversity,Pilsen,CzechRepublic, 4Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Department of Oddsratiosforanthropometrictraitsoverchronicbackpain Anthropology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Science, Charles Trait Males Females University, Prague, Czech Republic. Standingheight 1.013(1.011-1.016) 1.011(1.009-1.014) Introduction: Metaphyseal anadysplasia type 1 is an autosomal Sittingheight 1.030(1.026-1.034) 1.013(1.008-1.017) dominantskeletaldiseasecharacterizedbymetaphysealchanges, Sitting-to-standing 14.373(4.819-42.867) 0.139(0.050-0.382) epiphysealdysplasiaandrhizomelicshorteningoflimbsfollowed heightratio by regression of symptoms with later growth. Genetic origin is M.B. Freidin: None. Y.A. Tsepilov: None. Y.S. Aulchenko: A. associated with pathogenic variants in MM P13
 gene. Matrix Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest;PolyOmica.P.Suri:None. metalloproteinase13encodedbythisgeneplaysimportantroles F.M.K.Williams: None. inboneformation and growth. Materials and Methods: We performed massive parallel sequencing of gDNA isolated from whole blood on NextSeq  P04
.016.ATranscriptomicdiagnosisofadeepintronicCLCN7 (Illumina)usingpanelClinicalExome(CES)kitbySophiaGenetics, mutation followed by Sanger sequencing and CNV analysis. This solution consistsof116,355individuallydesignedprobesthatspanapprox. Odelia Chorin1, Naomi Yachelevich2, Khaled Mohamed3, Ilana 11 Mb of target regions covering more than 4,900 genes, with Moscatelli4, JohnPappas1, KimHenriksen3,Gilad D. Evrony1,5 knownmendelian/inheriteddisease-causing mutations. Results: Molecular genetic analysis identiﬁed two previously 1Center for Human Genetics and Genomics, New York, NY, USA, unreported heterozygous cis-variants c.236A>C and c.251T>G in 2Division of Clincal Genetic Services, Department of Pediatrics, New MM P13
inaCzechboysuspectedwithmetaphysealanadysplasia, York,NY,USA,3NordicBiosciencesBiomarkersandResearch,Harlev, type1.Clinical-radiologicalexaminationshowedrhizomelicshort- Denmark, 4Division of Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Lund ness of stature, femoral bowing, abnormality of metaphyses, University, Lund, Sweden, 5Department of Pediatrics, and Depart- delayed ossiﬁcation of carpal bones and patella. The same bone ment of Neuroscience & Physiology, New York University Grossman dysplasiaoccursinthesister,mother,maternalauntandmaternal SchoolofMedicine, New York, NY,USA. grandfather.Subsequentmoleculargenetictestinginthesefamily members showed that the two variants described above in the Background Over half of children with rare genetic diseases MM P13
 gene also occur in them and thus segregate with the remainundiagnoseddespitemaximalclinicalevaluationandDNA‐ occurrence ofthedisease inthe family. based genetic testing. As part of an Undiagnosed Diseases Conclusion: Our ﬁndings demonstrate the efﬁciency of exome Programapplyingtranscriptome(RNA)sequencingtoidentifythe sequencingapproach indetermination of molecular background in causes of these unsolved cases, we studied a child with severe differential diagnosis not only of skeletal dysplasias. Further, our infantile osteopetrosis leading to cranial nerve palsies, bone ﬁndingsexpandgenotypespectrumofMM P13
associateddisorders deformities, and bone marrow failure, for whom whole‐genome andofferprecisediagnosisofmetaphysealanadysplasiatype1. sequencing wasnondiagnostic. L. Hrušková: None. H. Paszeková: None. I. Mařík: None. V. Methods: We performed transcriptome (RNA) sequencing of Krulišová:None.D.Zemková:None.A.Vážná:None.Z.Vlčková: whole blood followed by analysis of aberrant transcript isoforms None.R. Michalovská: None. andosteoclast functionalstudies. Results: We identiﬁed a pathogenic deep intronic variant in CLCN7creatinganunexpected,frameshiftingpseudoexoncausing  P04
.018.C Very early diagnosis of Cole-Carpenter syndrome: completelossoffunction.Functionalstudies,includingosteoclas- novel variantand maternalmosaicism togenesis and bone resorption assays, conﬁrmed normal osteo- clast differentiation butloss ofosteoclast function. Daniele Guadagnolo1, Gioia Mastromoro1, Enrica Marchionni1, Conclusion:Thisistheﬁrstreportofapathogenicdeepintronic Francesca Di Palma1, Claudia Cesario2, Mario Roggini3, Antonio variant in CLCN7, and our approach provides a model for Novelli2, AntonioPizzuti1 systematic identiﬁcation of noncoding variants causing osteope- trosis—a disease for which molecular‐genetic diagnosis can be 1DepartmentofExperimentalMedicine,SapienzaUniversityofRome, pivotalforpotentiallycurativehematopoieticstemcelltransplan- Rome, Italy, 2Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù tation. Our work illustrates that cryptic splice variants may Children’s Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, elude DNA‐only sequencing and supports broad ﬁrst‐line use SapienzaUniversity ofRome, Rome, Italy. of transcriptome sequencing for children with undiagnosed diseases. Introduction:Fetalabnormalheadshaperepresentsasigniﬁcant O.Chorin:None.N.Yachelevich:None.K.Mohamed:None.I. challengeinprenataldiagnosis.Itcanbetheinitialpresentationof Moscatelli: None. J. Pappas: None. K. Henriksen: None. G.D. severaldisorders, requiring multidisciplinary approaches. Evrony: None. Materialsandmethods:A35-year-oldwomanwasreferredat 34gestationalweeksforunusualfetalheadshape.Chromosomal molecular analysis, performed after amniocentesis for multiple  P04
.017.B Two novel variants in MM P13
 gene in a Czech soft markers, was normal. After caesarean delivery at 38 familywithmetaphyseal anadysplasia type 1 gestational weeks, the baby was in normal length and weight ranges, but macrocephaly, micrognathia and broad nasal bridge Lucie Hrušková1, Helena Paszeková1, Ivo Mařík2,3, Veronika werenoted.TotalbodyX-raysandtrioClinicalExomeSequencing Krulišová1, Daniela Zemková4, Anna Vážná5, Zděnka Vlčková1, (CES) wererequested. Renata Michalovská1 Results: X-rays showed dolicocephaly, ossiﬁed metopic suture, widening of the bregmatic fontanella and of the sagittal and EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 159 lambdoidealsutures,perisuturalcalciﬁedspots.CESdetectedanovel phenotypes, proving a valuable system for molecular investiga- heterozygousmissensevariantin P4
HB(prolyl4-hydroxylasesubunit tionsanddrugdevelopment.Studieswithorganotypicmodelswill b; MIM*176790) in the proband (NM_000918.4:c.1375G>A; beusedtofurthercharacterizefunctionalchangesassociatedwith NP_000909.2:p.Gly459Arg;rs749458033).Thesamevariantwasfound ichthyosis.Patient-derivedhiPSCscanbealong-termsourcefora in heterozygosis with 34% mosaicism rate in the mother. Hetero- variety of different cells and signiﬁcantly contribute to the zygous  P4
HB mutations cause Cole-Carpenter syndrome 1 developmentofcomplexskindiseasemodels,ultimatelyfacilitat- (MIM#112240). The variant was not described in literature, HGMD, ingthetranslationoftherapeuticapproachesintoclinicalstudies. ClinVar or DECIPHER. It is very rare (GnomADv2.1.1: 0.000016) and D. Lima Cunha: None. A. Oram: None. R. Gruber: None. R. has high predicted deleteriousness. It is classiﬁed as Likely Plank:None.A.Lingenhel:None.M.Gupta:None.J.Altmüller: Pathogenic.Cole-Carpentersyndromeischaracterizedbydysmorph- None. P. Nürnberg: None. M. Moosajee: None. M. Schmuth: isms, wide sutures and fontanelles, short stature, proptosis, hydro- None. J. Zschocke: None. T. Šarić: None. K. Eckl: None. H. cephalus,bonefragility,nointellectualdisability.Somaticmosaicism Hennies:None. for a pathogenic  P4
HB has already been described in the healthy fatherofanaffectedchild. Conclusion: Early molecular analysis for skull anomalies can  P04
.021.B Four novel EFNB1 variants found through guide subsequent clinical approaches but also yield complex sequencing-based methods in female patients with cranio- results. We suspect that parental mosaicism might be more frontonasal syndrome commonthanpreviously thought for P4
HB variants. D. Guadagnolo: None. G. Mastromoro: None. E. Marchionni: Ewelina Bukowska-Olech1, Anna Jakubiuk-Tomaszuk2, Maria None.F.DiPalma:None.C.Cesario:None.M.Roggini:None.A. Jedrzejowska3, Ewa Obersztyn4, Pawel Gawlinski4, Michal Piechota5, Novelli:None. A. Pizzuti:None. Marta Bielska6, Aleksander Jamsheer1,5 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,PoznanUniversityofMedicalSciences,  P04
.020.A hiPSC-derived epidermal keratinocytes from Poznan,Poland,2DepartmentofPediatricNeurologyandRehabilitation, ichthyosis patients show altered expression of corniﬁcation Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland, 3Department of markers Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland,4DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,InstituteofMotherandChild, Dulce Lima Cunha1,2,3, Amanda Oram1, Robert Gruber4, Roswitha Warsaw, Poland, 5Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Plank1,2, Arno Lingenhel2, Manoj Kumar Gupta5, Janine Altmüller6, Poland, 6Department of Pediatrics, Hematology, Oncology and Peter Nürnberg6, Mariya Moosajee3, Matthias Schmuth4, Johannes Diabetology,MedicalUniversityofLodz,Lodz,Poland. Zschocke2, Tomo Šarić5, Katja Martina Eckl2,7, Hans Christian Hennies1,2,6 Background: Craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS) is a rare X-linked disorderthatresultsfrompathogenicvariantsintheEFNB1gene.The 1Department of Biological and Geographical Sciences, University of syndrome inherits in a paradoxical manner and exceptionally Huddersﬁeld, Huddersﬁeld, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Human presentsgreaterseverityofsymptomsinheterozygousfemalesthan Genetics, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Institute hemizygousmales. of Ophthalmology, UCL, London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Materialsandmethods:Werecruitedﬁvesporadic(patients1- Dermatology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 4)and one familialcase (patients 5&6),allofwhom presented a 5CenterforPhysiologyandPathophysiology,InstituteforNeurophysiol- spectrum of craniofacial abnormalities. Of note, we reported ogy, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 6Cologne Center discordant phenotype in twin female patients 5& 6. We applied forGenomics,UniversityHospitalCologne,Cologne,Germany,7Depart- either targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) of a custom mentofBiology,EdgeHillUniversity,Ormskirk,UnitedKingdom. genepanelorPCRandSangersequencingtoachieveamolecular diagnosis. Besides, we run both zygosity analysis and X chromo- Introduction:Inheritedichthyosesrepresentaheterogeneousgroup someinactivation (XCI) assayfor twinpatients 5&6. of skin disorders characterised by impaired epidermal barrier Results:First,wereportedthreeadditionalnovelvariantsinthe function and disturbed corniﬁcation. Current knowledge about EFNB1 gene: p.(Trp12*), p.(Tyr73Metfs*86), p.(Glu210*), and one disease mechanisms has been uncovered mainly through mouse known:p.(Cys64Phe).Second,weconﬁrmedthemonozygosityof models or humanorganotypicmodels.However,most mouselines patients 5& 6. Finally, we showed random XCI in twin patient 5 sufferfromsevereepidermalbarrierdefectscausingneonataldeath (46% vs 54%), who presents milder phenotype in comparison to and human keratinocytes have very limited proliferation ability in hertwinsister (patient6)having non-randomXCI(84% vs16%). vitro. Conclusion:Ourﬁndingsprovidevaluablemoleculardatathat Results: We have generated human induced pluripotent stem may be applied both in diagnostics and genetic counselling. We cells (hiPSCs) from patients with congenital ichthyosis, either non- havedescribedtheintriguingdifferencesoftheclinicalphenotype syndromic autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI) or the inthemonozygotictwinpatients5&6harbouringanidenticalp. ichthyosissyndrometrichothiodystrophy(TTD).hiPSCsweresuccess- (Glu210*)variantandwehavepointedtothepresenceofunusual fully differentiated into basal keratinocytes (hiPSC-bKs), with high phenomenonsuch asmildlyaffected femaleswith CFNS. expressionofepidermalkeratins5and14.Terminaldifferentiationof ThisworkwassupportedbythegrantsfromthePolishNational hiPSC-bKs was induced and markers keratin 1 and involucirn were ScienceCentre,Poland:UMO-2016/23/N/NZ5/02577toE.B.-Oand expressed. TTD1 hiPSC-bKs showed reduced expression of FLG and UMO-2016/22/E/NZ5/00270 toA.J. SPRR2Binlinewithpreviousreportsandmousemodels.ARCIhiPSC- E. Bukowska-Olech: None. A. Jakubiuk-Tomaszuk: None. M. bKs showed more severe defects, with downregulation of several Jedrzejowska:None.E.Obersztyn:None.P.Gawlinski:None.M. genes involved in epidermal ceramide metabolism. Differences to Piechota:None. M. Bielska:None. A. Jamsheer:None. ﬁndings in ARCI patients might point to the importance of speciﬁc mutations and an inﬂuence of patient treatment on their keratinocyteexpressionproﬁles.  P04
.022.C Comprehensive genetic screening in patients with Conclusions: Our results demonstrate the successful genera- syndromic craniosynostosis tion of hiPSC-based in vitro models mimicking the disease EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 160 Trayan N. Delchev, Savina Hadjidekova, Hadil Kathom, Stoyan lead to an aberrant splicing (exon skipping, inclusion of intronic Bichev,Tsvetina Veleva, IlianaBoneva, Daniela Avdjieva-Tzavella sequence) of the TCF12 transcript. Taken together, we could validatenovelsplicesitemutationsintheTCF12andFGFR2genes Medical University-Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria. andextend themutational spectrum. A. Borst: None. T. Schweitzer: None. D. Horn: None. E. Introduction: Syndromic craniosynostosis is a genetically deter- Kunstmann:None. E.Klopocki: None. mined premature ossiﬁcation and closure of one or more of the cranialsutures.Thismayresultinseveredysmorphism,increased intracranialpressure,seizures,visualandhearingdefects,psycho-  P04
.024.ATRAF3andNBR1bothinﬂuencetheeffectofCYLD motor delay and behavioural anomalies. Syndromic craniosynos- (Arg936X)mutation onNF-κBactivity tosis is also commonly associated with additional malformations anddysmorphic features. Judit Danis1,2,3, Evelyn Kelemen3,4, Neil Rajan5, Nikoletta Nagy1,3, Materials and Methods: We present our comprehensive Márta Széll1,3,Éva Ádám3 genetic investigation of 39 patients with syndromic craniosynos- tosis screened systematically with a combination of cytogenetic 1ELKH-SZTE Dermatological Research Group, Szeged, Hungary, analysis,multiplexligation-dependentprobeampliﬁcation(MLPA) 2HCEMM-USZ Dermatological Research Group, Szeged, Hungary, andarray-based comparative genomichybridisation (aCGH). 3Department of Medical Genetics, University of Szeged, Szeged, Results:Pathologicalﬁndingswereestablishedin15.3%(6/39) Hungary,4DepartmentofDermatologyandAllergology,Universityof ofthecasesusingaCGH,8.33%(3/39)usingMLPAand2.85%(1/ Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, 5Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle 39) using conventional karyotyping. About 12.8% (5/39) of the University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. patients with normal karyotype carried submicroscopic chromo- somalrearrangements. RecentlythecasesofaHungarianandanAnglo-Saxonpedigrees Conclusions: In our study array-based comparative genomic has been presented, who are affected by CYLD cutaneous hybridisation had the highest detection rate compared to syndrome (syn: Brooke-Spiegler syndrome), carry the same chromosome analysis and MLPA. „Gain of function“ variations disease-causing mutation(c.2806C>T, p.Arg936X)ofthecylindro- andduplicationswerethepredominanttypeofgeneticdefectwe matosis (CYLD) gene but exhibit striking differences in their found. This suggests the leading role of those ﬁndings in the phenotypes. By whole exome sequencing, missense genetic pathogenesisof syndromic craniosynostosis. variants of the TRAF3 and NBR1 genes were identiﬁed from T.N.Delchev:None.S.Hadjidekova:None.H.Kathom:None. affected family members of the Hungarian family, that are not S.Bichev:None.T.Veleva:None.I.Boneva:None.D.Avdjieva- present in the Anglo-Saxon family, suggesting their affected Tzavella: None. proteins (TRAF3 and NBR1) are putative phenotype-modifying factors. To clarify how wild type and mutant TRAF3 and NBR1 modifytheeffectofCYLDonNF-κBsignaltransductionpathway,  P04
.023.D Analysis of novel splice site variants in craniosy- an in vitro experimental system was set up. Our study revealed nostosis causing genes thatthecombinedexpressionofmutantCYLD(Arg936X)bothwith TRAF3andNBR1causedincreasedNF-κBactivity,regardlessofthe Angela Borst1, Tillmann Schweitzer2, Denise Horn3, Erdmute latter two proteins being wild type or mutant. We conclude that Kunstmann1, Eva Klopocki1 increased expression levels of these proteins further strengthen the effect of CYLD(Arg936X) mutation on the NF-κB activity in 1Institute of Human Genetics University of Wuerzburg, Würzburg, HEK293cellsandmayexplainthephenotypemodifyingeffectof Germany,2DepartmentofPediatricNeurosurgeryUniversityHospital thesegenesin CYLDcutaneous syndrome. of Wuerzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 3Institute for Medical and Funding:NKFIHK128736, FK134355 Human Genetics Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Ger- J. Danis: None. E. Kelemen: None. N. Rajan: None. N. Nagy: many. None.M. Széll:None. É.Ádám: None. Congenital malformation of the skull are rare disease conditions, which may have severe impact on the life of patients.  P04
.025.BDedifferentiated liposarcoma: Casereport Craniosynostosisappearswithaprevalenceof1in2500newborns andrepresentsaprematurefusionofoneormorecranialsutures. Fiorita G. L. Mundim1,2, Wesley R. S. Liberato1, Reigson A. Dias1, The disease can either occur as part of a syndrome or as non- LeticiaBenevenutti1,FelipeR.C.Meira1,KatiaM.T.C.Castro1,Pedro syndromic,isolatedcraniosynostosis.TheCraniosynostosis3(MIM G.L. Mundim1, Nathalia T. Sousa1, RenanReis2 615314) phenotype, a molecular well-described form of isolated craniosynostosis, is caused by mutations in the TCF12 gene. In 1UNIFENAS,Alfenas/MG,Brazil,2UNIVAS,PousoAlegre/MG, Brazil. contrast to TCF12, mutations in the FGFR2 gene are multifaceted and are associated with diverse syndromes, including craniosy- Introduction:Dedifferentiatedliposarcoma(DDL)isconsidereda nostosissyndromes,i.e.Apert(MIM101200),Pfeiffer(MIM101600) well-differentiated form of histological (tumor) progression of andSaethre-Chotzen (MIM101400) syndromes. liposarcoma. Around 15% of cases have the potential to The aim of our study was, to identify novel genetic variants in metastasize and with a high rate of recurrence. Since DDL can craniosynostosisassociatedgenesbyNextGenerationSequencing morphologically mimic other sarcomas that have higher rates of (NGS)usingaspeciﬁccraniosynostosis genepanelandtofurther metastasis, especially in the retroperitoneum and inguinal analyse the detected genetic variants. In a proportion of cases canal,thediagnosisandcorrectclassiﬁcationofDDLareessential changes in the splicing process of the corresponding gene were to determine an adequate prognosis and treatment for the predictedinsilico.Tovalidatetheconsequencesofthesplicesite patient. variantsoncorrecttranscriptsplicing,weperformedinvitrosplice Materials and Methods: In the present case report, it is a assayswithmutation-matchedminigeneconstructsinU2OScells. female patient, 39 years old, residing in Pouso Alegre, Brazil, in Intotal,weinvestigatedfourpotentialsplicesitevariantsinTCF12 October 2019. She started with pain in the left gluteal region andFGFR2.Inthreepatientswithcoronal synostosis, thevariants associated with nodular lesion in the place with progressive EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 161 growth. The biopsy showed a mesenchymal neoplasia. Subse- Laura Plaza, Antonio Federico Martinez-Monseny, Dídac Casas, quent immunohistochemical examination revealed a tumor AsunciónVicente, Francesc Palau compatible witha Dedifferentiated liposarcoma. Results: DDL is a cellular and typically non-lipogenic sarcoma HospitalSant Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain. withsigniﬁcantpleomorphism.Molecularlycharacterizedbyaring oragiantmarker/rodchromosomescomposedofmaterialfrom Introduction: Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS) is a group of 12q13-15. Most DDL also have gene ampliﬁcation MDM2 and hereditary connective tissue disorders that manifests as skin CDK4, which may be similar to other tumors (Intimal sarcoma, hyperextensibility, hypermobility of joints and fragility of blood Parosteal osteosarcoma, low grade central osteosarcoma, etc.) vessels. The hypermobility-type EDS (hEDS) is the most frequent Conclusion: For the diagnosis and correct classiﬁcation of the and its molecular cause is unknown. Diagnosing EDS is challen- DDL,itisessentialtocarryoutacytogeneticstudy,Immunostaining gingduetothehighclinicalvariabilityandthelackofadiagnostic forMDM2andCDK4ormoleculartestingfor12q13-15ampliﬁcation. biomarkerinpaediatrics. F.G.L.Mundim:None.W.R.S.Liberato:None.R.A.Dias:None. Materials and Methods: Prospective and retrospective obser- L.Benevenutti:None.F.R.C.Meira:None.K.M.T.C.Castro:None. vationalstudyatatertiarypediatrichospitalincludingpatients< P.G.L.Mundim: None.N.T.Sousa: None. R.Reis:None. 18 years at the date of diagnosis with EDS between 2012-2020. Thedatawas collectedreviewingclinical records. Results: Thirty-ﬁve patients were included; hEDS (65.7%),  P04
.027.D Targeted next generation sequencing of Hypohi- classical (22.8%), vascular (5.7%), kyphoscoliotic (2,8%) and droticectodermal dysplasia inEgyptian pedigrees dermatosparaxis types (2.8%). Most of them were women (62.9%). Musculoskeletal symptoms were the commonest HodaAbdallaAhmedRadwan1,KhaldaSayedAmr1,EmanRabie1, complication (91.4%), with chronic pain of joints being the Ghada El-Kamah1, Inas Sayed1, Mennat Mehrez1, Nehal Hassib1, most frequent feature (62.9%). Psychiatric disorders were Suher Zada2, Maha Abuzaid1, Mohamed Abdel-Kader1, Mostafa present in 54.3% of patients, with the most frequent being Mostafa1, Yasmine Mohsen1 anxietyanddepression(22.8%).AhigherBeightonscoredidnot correlate with musculoskeletal, dermatologic, or other compli- 1NationalResearchCentre,Cairo,Egypt,2AmericanUniversity,Cairo, cations. Atrophic scarring and easy bruising were less frequent Egypt. in hEDs patients (p<0.000,p<0.002). Chronic abdominal pain was signiﬁcantly associated with migraine (p<0.002). All the Introduction:Ectodermaldysplasia(ED)deﬁnesagroupofgenetic types have molecular conﬁrmation except the hEDS, but we disorders characterized by developmental defects of 2 or more foundsomegenes(TNXB,ELN,PIEZO2)thatcouldbeimplicated, structuresofectodermalorigin.Pathogenesisisgovernedbydefects requiring future studies. in many genes involved in multiple developmental pathways. Conclusions: This is the ﬁrst Spanish study focusing on Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is the most common ED pediatric EDS. We propose interesting and novel genotype- formcharacterizedbyhypodontia,hypohidrosis,hypotrichosisandin phenotypeaspects.Weprovidedetailedinsightsintothepotential severalinstancesdysmorphicfeatures.Mutationsinfourgenes:EDA, complicationsduringchildhoodtohelpminimizethephysicaland EDAR,EDARADDandWNT10Awerereportedtocontributeto90%of emotionalimpactof thesyndrome inpatients and theirfamilies. HED cases. The aim of our study is to assess the clinical and L. Plaza: None. A. Martinez-Monseny: None. D. Casas: None. molecularproﬁlesofHEDinEgyptianpatients. A.Vicente: None. F.Palau: None. Patients and Methods: Thirty-ﬁve HED patients descending from 32 unrelated pedigrees were clinically diagnosed based on thorough clinical and dental examination. Patients were tested  P04
.029.B New variant in TANGO1 gene in a patient with using an NGScustom panel comprising the four aforementioned hypermobile type ofEhlers-Danlos syndrome genes.Sangersequencingwasperformedforvariantconﬁrmation and segregation analysis. Pathogenicity of variants was assessed AnnaJunkiert-Czarnecka,MariaPilarska-Deltow,AnetaBąk,Marta according to American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) Heise,OlgaHaus guidelines as well as bioinformatics tools (e.g., Polyphen, SIFT, andAlamut). Department of Clinical Genetics Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Results: We identiﬁed 12 pathogenic mutations: six novel and Bydgoszcz,Poland. sixpreviouslyreportedmutations.Amolecularbasiswasidentiﬁed in16/32 pedigrees. EDA was themost frequent (13/16), followed Introduction:Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (hEDS) is a by EDARADD (2/16) and EDAR (1/16). No variantswere identiﬁed non-inﬂammatory connective tissue disorder. It is perhaps the intheWNT10Agene. most common hereditary connective tissue disorder. hEDS Conclusion: The EDA, EDAR and EDARADD harbored the unlike other types of EDS has no known genetic etiology. One molecular pathology in 50% of the studied HED patients. That of the dysfunctions in hEDS patients’ cells is the impaired might be attributed to different ethnic backgrounds, and further transport of extracellular matrix proteins from cells to inter- analyses through exome sequencing of the uncharacterized cellular space. A protein taking part in this process is TANGO1 patients might conﬁrm rare genes involvement or identify new encoded by the TANGO1 gene. The aim of the study was a genesgoverningED pathogenesis. sequencing analysis of TANGO1 gene and an attempt to H.A.A. Radwan: None. K.S. Amr: None. E. Rabie: None. G. El- evaluate its potential role in the etiology of the hypermobile Kamah: None. I. Sayed: None. M. Mehrez: None. N. Hassib: type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. None.S.Zada:None.M.Abuzaid:None.M.Abdel-Kader:None. Methods: The study was carried out on a patient with a M.Mostafa: None. Y.Mohsen: None. hypermobile type of EDS. It was a 48-year-old woman presented with:jointshypermobility,recurrentdislocations,wholebodypain, easy bruising, striae, gothic palate and arachnodactyly. Her  P04
.028.A Peds2Gene study: clinical and molecular delinea- daughter had mild symptoms of hEDS. Sequencing analysis of tion of a Spanish cohort of pediatric patients with Ehlers- TANGO1 was performed using the Sanger sequencing technique. Danlos Syndrome Forbioinformatic analysis, VarSome toolwasapplied. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 162 Results: In studied patient variant c.5637_5638insA (p. variantsin PTPN11gene highlights theimportance of expanding Leu1880ThrfsTer6) in TANGO1 gene was detected. This variant the study to other HMO genes for a more suitable personalized was not described up to now in EDS patients, and according to treatment. VarSomeitis pathogenic. M.C.Martínez-Romero:None.A.T.Serrano-Antón:None.M.J. Conclusion: Analysis of the role of the TANGO1 gene in the Sánchez-Soler: None. L. Rodríguez-Peña: None. M.J. Ballesta- etiology of hypermobile type of EDS is a new approach to Martínez:None.V.López-González:None.M.Barreda-Sánchez: evaluatingthegeneticbackgroundofthisdisorder.Theimpactof None. M.E. Pérez-Tomás: None. P. Carbonell-Meseguer: None. a pathogenic variant in TANGO1 on its function and resulting C.Salcedo-Cánovas: None.E. Guillén-Navarro: None. extracellular matrix condition need further investigations. This investigation was ﬁnanced by a grant from National Science  P04
.031.DFather anddaughter withacromicric dysplasia CentrePoland (2018/29/N/NZ5/00345). A. Junkiert-Czarnecka: None. M. Pilarska-Deltow: None. A. Bąk:None.M. Heise: None. O.Haus: None. Cinzia Mautone1, Mario Francesco Iasevoli1, Pamela Paglia1, Giuseppina Barra1, Dario Di Salvio2, Mariateresa Falco3, Carolina Mauro3, EmanueleAgolini4, AntonioNovelli4,Daniela Melis1,3  P04
.030.CMolecularspectrumin23Spanishfamiliesaffected by hereditary multiple osteochondromas 1Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry "Scuola Medica Salernitana" University of Salerno, Baronissi (SA), Italy,2Department M C. Martínez-Romero1,2,3, A T. Serrano-Antón1,2,4, M J. Sánchez- ofMaternal-Infant,PediatricSection,UniversityofNaplesFedericoII, Soler1,2,3, L Rodríguez-Peña1, M J. Ballesta-Martínez1,2,3, V López- Napoli,Italy,3PediatricUnitSanGiovannidiDioeRuggid’Aragona González1,2,4,MBarreda-Sánchez1,3,ME.Pérez-Tomás1,PCarbonell- University Hospital, Salerno, Italy, 4Departmnent of Laboratories, Meseguer5,2,CSalcedo-Cánovas6, E Guillén-Navarro1,2,4 Medical Genetic Unit Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, Roma, Italy. 1Sección de Genética Molecular (Centro de Bioquímica y Genética Clínica), Sección de Genética Médica (Servicio de Pediatría), Hospital Introduction: Mutations of FBN1 are responsible for different Clínico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca. Instituto Murciano de disorders including Acromicric dysplasia (characterized by short Investigación Biosanitaria (IMIB-Arrixaca), El Palmar (MURCIA), Spain, handsand feet, joint limitations),Geleophysic dysplasia (progres- 2CIBERER,CentrodeInvestigaciónBiomédicaenReddeEnfermedades sive heart involvement), and Weill-Marchesani syndrome (micro- Raras, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 3Cátedra de Genética Médica. UCAM- spherophakia).Casereport:Wedescribefatheranddaughterwith Universidad Católica de Murcia, Murcia, Spain, 4Departamento de short stature with no other systemic involvement. Father was Pediatría. Facultad de Medicina. UMU-Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, evaluated from ﬁrst years of life for congenital hip dysplasia and Spain, 5Sección de Genética Molecular (Centro de Bioquímica y short stature; he underwent GH therapy with poor results. His Genética Clínica), Sección de Genética Médica (Servicio de Pediatría). childhood X-rays showed shortness of long bones and hands’ HospitalClínicoUniversitarioVirgendelaArrixaca.InstitutoMurciano phalangesandtypicalnotchesofIIandVmetacarpus.Atphysical de Investigación Biosanitaria (IMIB-Arrixaca), El Palmar (MURCIA), examination both showed round face, well-deﬁned eyebrows, Spain, 6Servicio de Traumatología. CSUR ortopedia. Hospital Clínico bulbous nose with anteverted nostrils, disharmonic short stature UniversitarioVirgendelaArrixaca,ElPalmar(MURCIA),Spain. with short limbs, relative macrocephaly, and brachydactyly; hand camptodactilywasdetectedduringchildhoodinthefatherandin Introduction:Osteochondromarepresentsthemostcommonbenign the child at 4 years of age. No joint stiffness was recored during osseoustumour,20-50%;infamiliaroccurrencetwoADdiseasesare adulthood in the father. NGS panel of genes involved in skeletal probable: hereditary multiple osteochondromas (HMO)(ORPHA:321) dysplasias found an heterozygous variant (c.5285G>A) in FBN1 associatedwithvariantsinEXT1(MIM,#133700)orEXT2(MIM,#133701) gene in both father and daughter, previously unreported; a genes and metachondromatosis (MC)(ORPHA:2499), caused in different pathogenetic variant involving Glycine 1762 has been PTPN11(MIM,#156250). Both disorders have risk of malignant associated with both Acromicric and Geleophysical dysplasia. No transformation(3-5%).Ourgoalistoﬁndoutthemolecularspectrum cardiac or ocular involvement were present, thus a diagnosis of inacohortofSpanishpatientswithmultipleosteochondroma. Acromicricdysplasia was proposed. Methodology: Coding and ﬂanking exons of EXT1 Conclusion:WereportafamilialcaseofAcromicricdysplasia,with (NM_000127.2), EXT2(NM_207122.) and PTPN11(NM_002834.4) a novel variant in FBN1 gene. Clinical features of both father and genes were performed by capture (SureSelectQXT®Agilent) and daughter overlap. The father underwent GH therapy in childhood, sequenced by Illumina platform. Minimum depth coverage was with poor results. The report could expand clinical features of this 20x. Copy Number Variation (CNV) were evaluated using DecoN conditionandhelptodeﬁnenaturalhistoryofthedisease. algorismand MLPA- P215
-B3-EXT-Kit. C. Mautone: None. M. Iasevoli: None. P. Paglia: None. G. Results: 23 index patients (12 females/11 males) with average Barra:None.D.DiSalvio:None.M.Falco:None.C.Mauro:None. age of 15 years were included. Distribution of variants by genes E.Agolini: None. A.Novelli: None.D.Melis: None. were EXT1(56.5%), EXT2(34.8%) and PTPN11(8.7%). De novo variants represented 56.5% cases versus 44.5% inherited. A total of22pathogenic variants(15 novel/7reported inHGMD®2020.4)  P04
.032.AAarskog-Scottsyndrome:casereportandupdated- were identiﬁed, most of them privates (22/23) being only review recurrent one variant in two cases (EXT1:c.936-11insTG). Type of variants: frameshift (45.4%), nonsense (27.3%), splicing (13.6%), Marta Spodenkiewicz1, Gauthier Loron2,3,4, Céline Poirsier1, Fran- CNV(9%)andmissense(4.5%).Anatomicaldistributionreferredof cesco Laconi5, Marie Massier1, Perrine Venot2, Clémence Jacquin6, osteochondromawasmainlyinlong-boneextremities(65.2%)and Lucas Hérissant1,Emilie Landais1, Martine Doco-Fenzy1,7,8 hands (43.5%), nevertheless genotype-phenotype correlation by geneswasnotobserved;in7patients(30.4%)osseousdeformities 1Service de génétique, CHU de Reims, Reims, France, 2Service requiredsurgery butmalignant degenerationwas notnotiﬁed. PédiatrieB,CHUReims,Reims,France,3Facultédemédecine,Reims, Conclusion:-ThereisabroadallelicheterogeneityinEXT1and France, 4CReSTIC/ EA3804, Reims, France, 5Service de chirurgie EXT2genesresultingwith15novelvariantsidentiﬁed.-Secondary EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 163 Pédiatrique,CHUdeReims,Reims,France,6CHUReimsgeneticsUnit, symphalangism and multiple synostoses in case of hetero- Reims, France, 7SFR CAP SANTE, UFR de médecine, Reims, France, zygousgainof function;Grebe,DuPanandHunter-Thompson 8EA3801,Reims, France. syndromesincaseofbi-alleliclossoffunction;susceptibilityto osteoarthritisandhipdysplasiainthe presenceofpolymorph- Aarskog-Scott syndrome (ASS) or facio-digito-genital dysplasia isms within its promoter. Through the numerous associated (OMIM#305400) is a rare X-linked inherited disorder caused by phenotypes, GDF5 illustrates the difﬁculties in interpreting pathogenicvariantsintheFYVE,RhoGEF,andpleckstrinhomology genomic variations. We studied a large international cohort of domain-containing protein 1 (FGD1) gene. This syndrome affects 79patientsharbouringGDF5variationsinorderto:1)Describe about 1 in 1,000,000 births. Affected patients present a broad preciselytheclinicalandmoleculardataofpatients;2)Identify clinical phenotype with dysmorphism, short stature, skeletal and rare phenotypes and 3) Demonstrate genotype-phenotype urogenital anomalies. correlations. We observed that some features seems to have a The probant is a two years old boy with camptodactyly, higher frequency in our cohort compared to those of the dysmorphism, cryptorchidism and short stature. Exome sequen- literature, notably 2nd ray clinodactyly and Angel Shaped cing found a hemizygous variant c.123del (NM_004463) in FGD1, Phalango-Epiphyseal Dysplasia, joint laxity, various dental inherited from his mother who presents camptodactyly and abnormalities, premature osteoathritis and hip disorders hypertelorism. FGD1 gene encodes the FGD1 protein, a guanine (mainly coxo-femoral dysplasia). nucleotide exchange factors, able to activate Rho GTPase cell division cycle 42 (CD C42
). Rho GTPase-CD C42
 plays a role in Table1:Frequencyofthedifferentimpairmentinpatientswithbrachydactyly controlcytoskeleton-dependentmembranerearrangements,tran- typeC scriptionalactivation,secretorymembranetrafﬁcking,extracellular matrixandcytoskeletonremodeling.RhoGTPasesareinvolvedin cohort percentage literature percentage humandiseasesasdevelopmental,hematological,autoinﬂamma- patients patients Angel-Shaped 22/63 34.9% 5/27 18.5% tory, autoimmune disorders. To our knowledge less than 60 Phalango-Epiphyseal damagingpathogenicvariantsinFGD1werereportedtodate,and Dysplasia thevariantof our patient was notyet reported. 1strays 49/63 77.8% 16/27 59.3% Theaimofthisworkistoreportthecaseofourpatientandhis brachymetacarpy familywithahighlyvariablephenotypeandtoreviewtheliterature 2ndrays 51/63 81% 18/27 66.7% ofpatientsinordertoupdatethespectrumofthisraredisease. brachymesophalangy M.Spodenkiewicz:None.G.Loron:None.C.Poirsier:None.F. 3rdrays 36/63 57.1% 13/27 48.1% brachymesophalangy Laconi: None. M. Massier: None. P. Venot: None. C. Jacquin: None. L. Hérissant: None. E. Landais: None. M. Doco-Fenzy: 5thrays 47/63 74.6% 19/27 70.4% brachymesophalangy None. 2ndrays 14/63 22.2% 8/27 29.6% brachybasophalangy 3rdrays 14/63 22.2% 10/27 37%  P04
.033.B Clinical and molecular study of a cohort of 79 brachybasophalangy patientswithapathogenicvariationinGDF5geneandreview 2ndraysclinodactyly 22/66 33.3% 17/30 56.7% ofthe literature 3rdraysclinodactyly 14/66 21.2% 11/30 36.7% 5thraysclinodactyly 43/66 65.2% 17/30 56.7% William Dufour1, Fabienne Escande1, Anne-Sophie Jourdain1, Odile Boute1, Anne Dieux1, Carherine Vincent-Delorme1, Muriel Holder2, polyphalangy 19/63 30.2% 9/27 33.3% Francesca Forzano3, Laurence Faivre4, Christel Thauvin4, Marion pseudoepiphyses 16/63 25.4% 6/27 22.2% Gerard5, David Geneviève6, Marjolaine Willems6, Bertrand Isidor7, footdamage 20/49 40.8% 11/26 42.3% Chloé Quélin8, Sylvie Odent8, Valérie Cormier-Daire9, Geneviève height<-2SD 21/57 36.8% 7/19 36.8% Baujat9, Gilles Morin10, Lyse Ruaud11, Yline Capri11, Alice Gold- boneagedelay 24/26 92.3% 7/8 87.5% enberg12, Yves Alembik13, Nicole Revençu14, Bianca Ethel Gutiérrez- dentalanomalies 19/55 34.5% 1/15 6.7% Amavizca15, Nicolas Chassaing16, Fanny Laffargue17, Christine hipanomalies 15/61 24.6% 3/19 15.8% Francannet17,TiffanyBusa18,VéroniquePaquis19,SylvieManouvrier1, jointlaxity 16/62 25.8% 2/17 11.8% Florence Petit1 premature 6/33 18.2% 0/14 0% osteoarthrosis 1CHU de Lille, Lille, France, 2Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation asymptomatic 3/74 4.1% 4/33 12.1% Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, France, 4CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, W. Dufour: None. F. Escande: None. A. Jourdain: None. O. 5CHU de Caen, Caen, France, 6CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, Boute: None. A. Dieux: None. C. Vincent-Delorme: None. M. France, 7CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 8CHU de Rennes, Rennes, Holder: None. F. Forzano: None. L. Faivre: None. C. Thauvin: France, 9Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 10CHU None.M.Gerard:None.D.Geneviève:None.M.Willems:None. Amiens-Picardie, Amiens, France, 11Hôpital Robert-Debré, Paris, B. Isidor: None. C. Quélin: None. S. Odent: None. V. Cormier- France, 12CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France, 13CHU de Strasbourg, Daire:None.G.Baujat:None.G.Morin:None.L.Ruaud:None.Y. Strasbourg, France, 14Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, Capri: None. A. Goldenberg: None. Y. Alembik: None. N. Belgium, 15Ciudad Juarez Autonomous University, Ciudad Juarez, Revençu: None. B.E. Gutiérrez-Amavizca: None. N. Chassaing: Mexico, 16CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 17CHU de Clermont- None.F.Laffargue:None.C.Francannet:None.T.Busa:None.V. Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 18Hôpital Universitaire Timone Paquis: None.S. Manouvrier: None. F. Petit: None. Enfants,Marseille, France,19CHUde Nice,Nice, France. The GDF5 gene is mainly expressed in the joints during the  P04
.034.CPorokeratosisofMibelliintheTunisianpopulation: embryonic period. It is known to be responsible for different association ofnonsenseand synonymousvariants bone pathologies according to its alteration mechanism: brachydactyly in case of mono-allelic loss of function; EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 164 Haïfa El Mabrouk1,2, Lobna Boussofara3,4, Hamza Chouk1,2, Nadia Materials and Methods: Sanger sequencing of the GLI3 gene Gharyani Fétoui3,4, Ali Saad3,2, Mohamed Denguezli3,4, Dorra was performed in patients with clinical ﬁndings suggestive for a H’mida3,2 GLI3-associated polysyndactyly syndrome. Additionally, we searched the literature for previously reported cases of either 1Higher Institute of Biotechnology, Monastir, Tunisia, 2Laboratory of PHS,GCPSorisolatedpolysyndactylywithconﬁrmedmutationsin Human Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics and Reproductive Biology, theGLI3gene. Farhat HACHED University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Faculty of Results: We tested over 80 individuals with polysyndactyly for Medicine Ibn El Jazzar, Sousse, Tunisia, 4Department of Dermatology GLI3 variants and detected a causing mutation in more than 15 andVenerology,FarhatHACHEDUniversityHospital,Sousse,Tunisia. families. The mutations spanned almost the entire coding region of the GLI3 gene (c.366 - c.4172) and were mostly amorphic. We Introduction: Porokeratosis of Mibelli (PM) is a rare autosomal observed no genotype-phenotype correlation withinthose cases. dominantgenodermatosislinkedtotheMVKandPMVKgenes.We Overall,wefoundahighphenotypicvariabilitywithinandacross aim to establish molecular evidence of PM in our Tunisian families. A close review of the literature revealed more cases of patients. isolated polysyndactyly with mutations across nearly the entire Materialandmethods:Directsequencingwasperformedina coding regionofGLI3. cohort of 8 patients with PM and 9 of their clinically healthy Conclusions: We found that isolated polysyndactyly is a relativesfrom2 unrelated familiesin central Tunisia. commonphenotypeofinheritedaswellasdenovoGLI3mutations Results: 7 patients and 2 healthy relatives presented a known andisnotrestrictedtomutationsinthelastthirdoftheGLI3gene. pathogenicvariant(PMVKc.412C>T;p.R138*),and6patientsand H.L. Sczakiel: None. W. Hülsemann: None. A.T. Abad-Perez: 4 of their relatives presented a synonymous variant (PMVK None. S. Schwartzmann: None. D. Horn: None. M. Spielmann: c.147A>G;p. E49
=). None.S. Mundlos: None. M.A.Mensah:None. Discussion: In the present work, we propose to report an associationofthesynonymousvariantp.49Glu=inexon2tothe pathogenic variant p.Arg138* at exon 4, both at the PMVK gene.  P04
.037.B A novel c.671_682del NCSTN variant in a family This association seemed to modulate PM patients’ phenotype. withHidradenitis Suppurativa Patients carrying the association present either moderate phenotypes; the number of lesions exceeded 10 covering NikolaiP. Pace1, Dillon Mintoff2, PeterBauer3, IsabellaBorg1,2 approximately 5% of the body surface or severe phenotypes: in which affected body surface exceeds 10%, with lesions of the 1UniversityofMalta,Msida,Malta,2MaterdeiHospital,Msida,Malta, genitals and the face. When the synonymous variant is absent, 3CentogeneGmbH, Rostock, Germany. patients present only a few annular plaques with reduced size, suggesting amild clinicalphenotype. Introduction:Hidradenitissuppurativa(HS)isachronic,suppura- Conclusion: The association between the two variants lead us tive condition of the pilosebaceous unit (PSU), the pathophysiol- tobelievethatthesynonymousvariantcouldconstituteamodiﬁer ogyofwhichisstillbeingelucidated.Thediseaseismultifactorial, ofthePMVK gene. causedby bothgenetic andenvironmental factors. Thepotential H.ElMabrouk:None.L.Boussofara:None.H.Chouk:None.N. role of underlying genetic variants, particularly within the γ- Gharyani Fétoui: None. A. Saad: None. M. Denguezli: None. D. secretase complex has recently garnered signiﬁcant research H’mida:None. interest bythe internationalHS community. Methodology: The proband, a 21-year-old male and his 45- year-old mother had Hurley Stage IIIa HS and shared a follicular,  P04
.035.D GLI3-variants causing isolated polysyndactyly are Latent Class 2 phenotype. The maternal grandmother suffered notrestricted to the gene’slast third fromamildformofaxillaryHS.Inviewoftheseﬁndings,afamilial formofHSwithvariableexpressivitywassuspectedandmolecular Henrike L. Sczakiel1,2, Wiebke Hülsemann3, Angela T. Abad-Perez1, geneticstudies werecarried out. Sarina Schwartzmann1, Denise Horn1, Malte Spielmann4,5, Stefan Results: WES analysis on the proband revealed a novel Mundlos1,2, MartinA. Mensah1,6 heterozygous c.671_682del p. (Val224_Thr227del) variant in the Nicastrin(NCSTN)gene.This12bpin-framedeletionliesinexon6 1Charité-UniversitätsmedizinBerlin,InstitutfürMedizinischeGenetik ofNCSTN,resultinginthelossof4aminoacidresidues.Targeted und Humangenetik, Berlin, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for genesequencingidentiﬁedthesameheterozygousvariantinthe Molecular Genetics, RG Development & Disease, Berlin, Germany, affectedmother.TheNCSTNdeletionwasnotidentiﬁedinalocal Berlin, Germany, 3Handchirurgie Kinderkrankenhaus Wilhelmstift, referencedatasetcomprising60ethnicallymatchedwholeexome Hamburg, Germany, 4Institut für Humangenetik Lübeck, Universität sequences. zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 5Max Planck Institute for Molecular Conclusion:Thisresultexpandsthemutationalspectrumofthe Genetics, Human Molecular Genomics Group, Berlin, Germany, NCSTN gene. It is the ﬁrst gene variant identiﬁed in HS Maltese 6Berlin Instituteof Health,Berlin, Germany. patients.FurthergeneticstudieswillbecarriedoutonalllocalHS patients to unravel the genetic aetiology of HS in the local Introduction:LossoffunctionvariantsofGLI3areassociatedwith populationusingahighthroughputexomesequencingapproach. avarietyofformsofpolysyndactyly:Pallister-Hall-Syndrome(PHS), We hope to establish genotype-phenotype associations which Greig-Cephalopolysyndactyly-Syndrome(GCPS)andisolatedpoly- wouldleadtobetterclinicalmanagementandtargetedtreatment syndactyly.Sofar,mutationsintheﬁrstandthirdthirdoftheGLI3 forHS. gene have been associated with GCPS while mutations in the N.Pace:None.D.Mintoff:None.P.Bauer:A.Employment(full second third of GLI3 have been associated with PHS. Cases of orpart-time); Modest; Centogene. I.Borg: None. isolated polysyndactyly were attributed to mutations in the third thirdofGLI3.Herewepresentmorethan30individualsfromover 15 families with pre- and postaxial polysyndactyly in whom we  P04
.038.C A missense mutation in VAV3 in a familial case of could conﬁrmGLI3 mutations. highbone mass EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 165 Núria Martínez-Gil1, Diana Ovejero2, Natalia Garcia-Giralt2, Leo- Results: Molecular genetic research revealed an unknown nardo Mellibovsky2, Xavier Nogués2, Raquel Rabionet1, Daniel heterozygous frameshift variant c.409delA (p.Ile137fs) in the 2nd Grinberg1, Susanna Balcells1 exon EXT2 among 8 unrelated Yakut patients, which was also conﬁrmed by direct Sanger sequencing. The detected mutation 1Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, Faculty of was checked in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD), Biology, Universitat de Barcelona, CIBERER, IBUB, IRSJD, Barcelona, Leiden Open Variation Database (LOVD), Genome Aggregation Spain, 2Musculoskeletal Research Group, IMIM (Hospital del Mar Database (gnomAD). This mutation predicted to be highly Medical Research Institute), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en damaging on a protein function. Experiments were performed Red en Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable (CIBERFES), ISCIII, usingtheequipmentoftheCenterforcollectiveuseoftheNorth- Barcelona, Spain. Eastern FederalUniversity. Conclusions: As a result of this study, for the ﬁrst time in the Osteoporosisisthemostcommonbonedisease,characterizedby Republic of Sakha (Yakutia), a previously undescribed hetero- alowbonemineraldensity(BMD)andincreasedriskoffracture.At zygousframeshiftvariantc.409delA(p.Ile137fs)inthe2ndexonof the other end of the BMD spectrum, some individuals present theEXT2gene.ThestudywassupportedbytheMinistryofScience strong,fracture-resistant,bones.Bothosteoporosisandhighbone and Higher Education of the Russian Federation. (Project No. mass (HBM) are heritable and their genetic architecture encom- FSRG-2020-0014 "Genomics of Arctic: epidemiology, hereditary passespolygenicinheritanceofcommonvariantsandsomecases andpathology"). ofmonogenichighlypenetrantvariantsincausalgenes.Wehave A.E. Yakovleva: None. A.L. Danilova: None. D.A. Petukhova: investigatedthegeneticsofafamilypresentingHBMsegregating None. P.I. Golikova: None. G.D. Moskvitin: None. A.L. Sukho- in an apparently Mendelian dominant pattern. Since polygenic myasova:None. N.R. Maksimova: None. causes and mutations inknownHBM geneshad beenpreviously discarded,wesearchedforrarecausalvariantsinnovelgenesby whole-exome sequencing in two affected and one non-affected  P04
.041.B Aberrant binding of mutant HS P47
 affects post- family members. Rare coding variants fulﬁlling the inheritance translational modiﬁcation of type I collagen and leads to pattern were further restricted to include only those genes that osteogenesis imperfecta could be related to bone development, function or disease, leaving 8 variants. Of those, we highlight a missense variant in DelﬁenSyx1,YoshihiroIshikawa2,3,JanGebauer4,SergeiP.Boudko5, VAV3, a gene encoding a guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor Brecht Guillemyn1, Tim Van Damme1, Sanne D’hondt1, Soﬁe with an important role in osteoclast activation and function. Symoens1, Sheela Nampoothiri6, Douglas B. Gould2, Ulrich Bau- Althoughno previous cases ofVAV3 mutations havebeen found mann4, HansPeterBächinger3,Fransiska Malfait1 inhumans,Vav3KOmicedisplaydensebones,equivalenttothe HBMphenotypepresentinourfamily.Asecondmissensevariant, 1Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2UCSF School of Medicine, San which might play a secondary role, was found in SIK3. However, Francisco, CA, USA, 3Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, the mouse and human bone phenotypes associated with this OR, USA, 4University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Vanderbilt gene do not ﬁt with HBM. Future functional assessment of the University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA, 6Amrita Institute of VAV3variantwilllikelyconﬁrmVAV3asanovelHBMgeneanda Medical Sciences andResearch Center, Cochin,India. potential therapeutic target for osteoporosis. Funding: SAF2014‐ 56562‐R,SAF2016‐75948‐R. Heatshockprotein47(HS P47
),encodedbytheSERPINH1gene, N. Martínez-Gil: None. D. Ovejero: None. N. Garcia-Giralt: is a molecular chaperone essential for correct folding of None. L. Mellibovsky: None. X. Nogués: D. Speakers Bureau/ collagens. We report a homozygous p.(R222S) substitution in Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); HS P47
 in a child with severe osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). The Modest;Amgen,Lilly,UCB.F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest; highly conserved p.R222 residue islocated within the collagen- UCB,Amgen.R.Rabionet:None.D.Grinberg:None.S.Balcells: interacting surface and HS P47
-R222S shows a signiﬁcantly None. reduced afﬁnity for type I collagen in binding assays. This alteredinteractionleadstoposttranslationalovermodiﬁcationof type I procollagen, with increased glycosylation and/or hydro-  P04
.039.D A new variant of c409delA in the EXT2 gene xylation of lysine and proline residues as shown by mass identiﬁed among Yakut families with hereditary multiple spectrometry.Sinceanormalintracellularfoldingandsecretion exostosis rate of type I procollagen was observed, this overmodiﬁcation cannotbeexplainedbyprolongedexposureoftheprocollagen Alexandra E. Yakovleva1, Anastasia L. Danilova1, Diana A. molecules to modifying enzymes, as is commonly observed in Petukhova1, Polina I. Golikova1, Gavril D. Moskvitin1,2, Aitalina L. other OI types. We found signiﬁcant upregulation of several Sukhomyasova1,2, Nadezda R.Maksimova1 molecular chaperones and enzymes involved in procollagen modiﬁcation and folding on Western blot and RT-qPCR and 1ResearchLaboratory"MolecularMedicineandHumanGenetics",M. showed that an imbalance in binding of HS P47
-R222S to K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian unfolded type I collagen chains results in increased binding of Federation, 2Medical Genetic Center, Republican Hospital №1 - otherchaperonesandmodifyingenzymesinagelatinsepharose “National Medical Center”, Yakutsk, RussianFederation. pulldown assay. In conclusion, our ﬁndings suggest a compen- satorymechanismforaberrantHS P47
-R222Sbinding,eventually Hereditarymultipleexostosis(HME)(OMIM133700,OIMM133701) leading to overmodiﬁcation of type I (pro)collagen chains, is a genetically heterogeneous disease with an autosomal thereby underscoring the importance of HS P47
 for proper dominant mode of inheritance, characterized by the presence of posttranslational modiﬁcation and providing insights into the multiple cartilaginous growths inthemetaphyses of longbones. molecular pathomechanisms of the p.(R222S) alteration in MaterialsandMethods:Weexamined27unrelatedprobands HS P47
, which leads to a severe OI phenotype. This work was withaclinicaldiagnosisofHMEusingmassparallel -massivefor supported by Research Foundation Flanders (Belgium), Ghent all EXT1 and EXT2 coding regions, followed by validation of the University, German Research Council, National Institutes of results bySanger sequencing. Health and Shriners Hospitals for Children. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 166 D. Syx: None. Y. Ishikawa: None. J. Gebauer: None. S.P. Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is a genodermatosis in four stages Boudko: None. B. Guillemyn: None. T. Van Damme: None. S. includingblistering,wart-likerash,swirlingmacularhyperpigmen- D’hondt: None. S. Symoens: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. D.B. tation and linear hypopigmentation, and also affects hair, teeth, Gould:None.U.Baumann:None.H.Bächinger:None.F.Malfait: nails, eyes and brain. IP is caused by mutations in the IKBKG None. (NEMO)geneandinheritedinanX-linkeddominantmannerwith  P04
.042.C Association of one-carbon metabolism-related high penetrance. Affected females show a highly variable genes and ichthyosis vulgaris manifestation in Eastern phenotype. IP is usually prenatally lethal in males. About 65% of Ukraine femaleswithIPhavearecurrent~11.7-kbdeletionspanningexons 4 to 10 and ~8.6% have point mutations. Only seven other Olena M. Fedota1, Iurii O. Sadovnychenko1,2, Halyna V. Makukh3, deletionswere describedtodate. Lilia B. Chorna3, Larissa V. Roshcheniuk2,4, Vitalii M. Vorontsov4, Herewedescribea24-year-oldfemalepatientwithtypicalskin PavloP. Ryzhko4 lesions since birth. She showed neither neurological nor other symptoms of IP and suffered two miscarriages. Furthermore, the 1V.N.KarazinKharkivNationalUniversity, Kharkiv,Ukraine,2Kharkiv patienthadintoleranceoffavabeansandsomedrugs,indicating NationalMedicalUniversity,Kharkiv,Ukraine,3InstituteofHereditary X-linked dominant G6PD associated favism. Her mother and her PathologyofNationalAcademyofMedicalSciencesofUkraine,Lviv, sister werealso affected ofIPand favism. Ukraine,4RegionalClinicalDispensaryforSkinandVenerealDiseases Neitherlong-range(gap)PCRfordetectionoftherecurrentexon no.1,Kharkiv, Ukraine. 4 to 10 deletion, nor sequence analysis detected a pathogenic mutation. MLPA revealed a heterozygous deletion spanning the Introduction:Theprevalenceofichthyosisvulgaris(IV)inEastern whole IKBKG gene as well as the 5’ adjacent entire G6PD gene. Ukraine is 1:2557. The dermatosis is caused by FLG mutations NC_000023.10:g.(153,744,322_153,759,773)_ R501X and 2282del4, but their penetrance in heterozygotes is (153,793,401_153,798,250)del.Thisdeletionistoourknowledgeof incomplete.Thepurposeofthestudywastoanalyzetheeffectsof yet undescribed extent. The only two patients with large IKBKG one-carbon metabolism-related genes on the IV clinical manifes- deletionsinvolvingthewholeG6PDgenedescribedsofarbyFusco tationin FLGmutation carriers. etal.didnotshowanyclinicalmanifestationsofG6PDdeﬁciencyin Materialsandmethods:TheMTHFR C677
T(rs1801133),MTHFR contrasttothepatientsdescribedhere. A1298C (rs1801131), MTR A2756G (rs1805087) and MTRR A66G In summary, this is the ﬁrst description of a contiguous gene (rs1801394) SNPs were analyzed by PCR-RFLP in 31IV patients, 7 syndrome including Incontinentia pigmentiand favism. their non-IV ﬁrst-degree relatives with FLG mutations and 150 M. Grossmann: None. S. Spranger: None. S. Rendulic: None. healthy controls. Statistical analysis was performed using chi- A.Bier:None.S.Reif:None.M.Timmer:None.C.Jänecke:None. squaretest and OR. V.Klaschka: None. J.Plaschke: None. S.Krüger:None. Results:In2282del4/wtIVindividuals,thedistributionsofwild- type, heterozygous and variant homozygous genotypes were: rs1801133—0.29:0.71:0.00;rs1801131—0.53:0.47:0.00;rs1805087  P04
.045.B The importance of extracutaneous organ involve- —0.70:0.24:0.06;rs1801394—0.23:0.53:0.24.InthisgrouptheMTR ment for the clinical severity and prognosis observed in incontinentia pigmenti caused by IKBKG mutations 2756AAgenotypeandMTR66GGgenotypefrequencieswere1.4- 1.6 higher than in IV patients with the other FLG genotypes, the HwaYoungKim,JungMinKo,HyunBeomSong,KyuHanKim,Jong MTR 2756AA genotype frequency was 1.6 times higher than in HeeChae,Man JinKim, Moon-Woo Seong healthy controls (p<0.01). The association between IV and one- carbon metabolism-related genes was evaluated for single- and multilocus disease models. The strongest genotype-phenotype Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. relationshipswerefoundforthegenotypes:MTHFR677CT—OR= 3.60(95%CI1.21−10.71,p=0.032),MTHFR677CT/MTHFR1298AA Incontinentiapigmenti(IP)isarareX-linkedskindiseasecausedby +AC — OR=4.39 (95%CI 1.47−13.14, p=0.008), MTHFR 677CT/ mutationsoftheIKBKGgene,whichisrequiredforactivationofthe MTHFR1298AA/MTRR66AG—OR=7.64(95%CI2.34−24.94,p= nuclearfactor-kappaBsignalingpathway.Multiplesystemscanbe 0.001), MTHFR 677CT/MTHFR 1298AA/MTR 2756AA/MTRR 66AG — affectedwithhighlyvariablephenotypicexpressivity.Weaimedto OR=11.23(95%CI2.51−50.21,p=0.002). clarify the clinical characteristics observed in molecularly- Conclusion:SNPsinone-carbonmetabolism-relatedgenescan conﬁrmed Korean IP patients. Medical records of 25 females beconsideredasmodiﬁersofFLG2282del4mutationinIVclinical conﬁrmedasIPbymoleculargeneticanalysiswereretrospectively manifestation. reviewed. A phenotypic score of extracutaneous manifestations O.M.Fedota:None.I.O.Sadovnychenko:None.H.V.Makukh: was calculated to assess the disease severity. The IKBKG gene None. L.B. Chorna: None. L.V. Roshcheniuk: None. V.M. partial deletion or intragenic mutations were investigated by a Vorontsov:None. P.P. Ryzhko:None. long-rangePCR,multiplexligation-dependentprobeampliﬁcation, and direct sequencing methods. Among 25 individuals, 18 (72%) were sporadic cases. All patients showed typical skin manifesta-  P04
.044.D Incontinentia pigmenti and favism due to a large tions at inborn or during the neonatal period. Extracutaneous genomicdeletion including IKBKG andG6PD ﬁndingswerenotedin17(68%)cases;ocularmanifestations(28%), neurologicalabnormalities (28%), hair abnormalities (20%), dental Maria Grossmann1, Stephanie Spranger2, Snjezana Rendulic3, anomalies (12%), nail dystrophy (8%). The common IKBKG exon Andrea Bier1, Silke Reif1, Manuela Timmer1, Christian Jänecke1, 4-10 deletion was observed in 20 (80%) patients. In addition, 5 VivienKlaschka1,Jens Plaschke1, StefanKrüger1 intragenic sequence variants were identiﬁed, including 3 novel ones. The phenotype scores were highly variable from abnormal 1Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik, Dresden, Germany, 2Praxis skin pigmentation only to one or more extracutaneous features, fürHumangenetik,Bremen,Germany,3PraxisfürHumangenetikund even though there was no meaningful signiﬁcant difference for each clinical characteristic between the groups with sequence Prävention, Stuttgart, Germany. variants and common large deletion. Heterogeneity of EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 167 extracutaneous manifestations and high incidence of sporadic chains. PGsare important fortheconstitution and functioning of caseswereobservedinourcohortwithIP.Long-termmonitoring the connective tissue. The normal composition of the GAG side with multidisciplinary management is essential for evaluating the chains deﬁnes the nature of the PGs and a wide range of clinical status, providing adequate genetic counseling and under- biologicalevents.Deﬁcienciesofspeciﬁcenzymesinvolvedinthe standinggenotype-phenotypecorrelationinIP. linkage of GAGs to the core protein, leads to a heterogeneous H. Kim: None. J. Ko: None. H. Song: None. K. Kim: None. J. diseasegroupcalledLinkeropathies.Thisisagroupofmultisystem Chae: None.M. Kim: None. M.Seong: None. conditions characterized by skeletal dysplasia and various extra- skeletal features. The conditions show variable severity and overlapping phenotypes. β-1,3-glucuronyltransferase 3, encoded  P04
.047.D Further insights in the FKB P14
-related khyphosco- byB3GAT3,isanenzymeinvolvedinthelinkageprocess toform liotic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: report of 3 unrelated indivi- functionalPGs,andbiallelicpathogenicvariantsinB3GAT3hence duals and2new pathogenic variants leadstolinkeropathy. Case presentation: A now 22-year-old female patient, born of Marlies Colman1,2, Robin Vroman1,2, Tibbe Dhooge1,2, Zoë Mal- consanguineous parents, is presented. The disease history included fait1,2,BirutéBurnyté3,SheelaNampoothiri4,DelﬁenSyx1,2,Fransiska congenitalseverejointmalalignmentofelbows,hips,kneesandfeet, Malfait1,2 continuous hypermobility, severe kyphoscoliosis, osteoporosis with multiple fractures, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, and mild 1GhentUniversity,Ghent,Belgium,2CenterforMedicalGenetics,Ghent, dysmorphic features. Whole exome sequencing was performed, Belgium,3VilniusUniversityHospital,Vilnius,Lithuania,4AmritaInstitute and homozygosity for a novel in-frame deletion in B3GAT3, ofMedicalSciences&ResearchCentre,Kerala,India. (c.61_63delCTC(p.(Leu21del)))wasdetected.Bothunaffectedparents (ﬁrstdoublecousins)wereheterozygouscarriers. The kyphoscoliotic type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (kEDS) is an Conclusion:Thisistheﬁrstreporttodescribehomozygosityfor autosomal recessive connective tissue disorder characterized by an in-frame deletion in B3GAT3 (p.(Leu21del)) and the ﬁrst adult kyphoscoliosis,musclehypotoniaandgeneralizedjointhypermo- phenotype described. Previously described cases of B3GAT3- bility. It results from deﬁciency of either lysyl hydroxylase 1 (LH1 deﬁciency were all children with phenotypes ranging from encoded by PLOD1) or the peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase prenatal manifestation and early lethality to less severe. We familyFK506-bindingprotein22kDa(FKB P22
encodedbyFKB P14
). suggestthat this novel homozygous in-frame deletioninB3GAT3 FKB P22
actsasamolecularchaperoneinvolvedinthefoldingand causes arecessive form oflinkeropathy. quality controlof collagen molecules (amongwhich types IIIand A.C.S.Bolund:None.B.Langdahl:None.T.B.Laurberg:None. VI collagen). Deﬁciency of FKB P22
 may lead to accumulation of M.B. Hellfritzsch: None. H. Gjørup: None. B. Møller-Madsen: incorrectly folded collagen molecules in the endoplasmic reticu- None. T.Ø. Nielsen: None. S. Farholt: None. P.A. Gregersen: lum (ER), causing premature interactions. We present the clinical None. manifestationsofthreenon-relatedindividualswithhomozygous pathogenicFKB P14
variants:proband1(c.587A>G;p.(Asp196Gly)); proband2(c.362dupC;p.(Glu122Argfs*7))andproband3(c.2T>G;  P04
.049.BLipoidproteinosis:AnovelmutationinECM1gene p.(Met1?)); with experimental data of the variants found in inaTurkish patient probands 1 and 2. Both the c.587A>G; p.(Asp196Gly) and the c.362dupC; p.(Glu122Argfs*7) variant cause absence of FKB P22
 ElifcanTasdelen1, IsaAn2 protein. Inaddition,wefoundintracellular accumulation of types IIIandVIcollagenandimpairedﬁbroblastmigration.Investigation 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,SanliurfaEducationandResearch ofER-stressrelatedproteins(CHOP,XB P1
,ATF6,(p)eIF2aplha,BIP) Hospital, Sanlıurfa, Turkey, 2Department of Dermatology, Sanliurfa didnot reveal any signiﬁcantupregulation. Education andResearch Hospital, Sanlıurfa,Turkey. Conclusion: This study broadens the clinical and molecular spectrumofFKB P14
-relatedkEDSwiththreenon-relatedindividuals Background: Lipoid proteinosis (LP) (OMIM-247100), also known and two new pathogenic variants. We showed delayed ﬁbroblast asUrbach-Wiethediseasecausedbyloss-of-functionmutationsin migration and intracellular accumulation of type III and type VI the ECM1 gene, is characterized by skin lesions such as yellow collagen and we provide the ﬁrst evidence of a homozygous inﬁltratingpapules,acneiformscarsandverrucoushyperkeratosis. pathogenicmissensevariant.M.C.,D.S.andF.M.areaPhDcandidate, In most patients, hoarse voice is observed due to vocal cord a postdoctoral researcher and a senior clinical investigator respec- thickening.Alltheseﬁndingsoccursasaresultofaccumulationof tively,oftheResearchFoundationFlanders,Belgium. hyaline-like material in the skin and mucosa. Furthermore, M. Colman: None. R. Vroman: None. T. Dhooge: None. Z. neuropsychiatric ﬁndings have been associated with intracranial Malfait:None.B.Burnyté:None.S.Nampoothiri:None.D.Syx: calciﬁcationsobservedinLPpatients.Extracellularmatrixprotein- None.F. Malfait: None. 1 (ECM1) encoded by ECM1 gene is involved in differentiation of keratinocytesbybindingtostructuralproteins,andangiogenesis. Case report: Here, we desribe 7-year-old girl, a child of  P04
.048.CHomozygosityforapreviouslyunreporteddeletion consanguineousparents,withdiffuseacneiformscaron theface, inB3GAT3causeslinkeropathy-aclinicalreportdescribingan moniliform blepharosis on the eyelids, verrucous lesions on adult patient dorsum of the hands, hypopigmented patches on the arms and back and hoarse voice. In sequencing analysis of ECM1 gene, a Anneli C. S. Bolund, Bente Langdahl, Trine B. Laurberg, Michel B. novelhomozygousNM_004425:c.1246C>T(p.Arg416Ter)mutation Hellfritzsch, Hans Gjørup, Bjarne Møller-Madsen, Trine Ø. Nielsen, in exon 8 causing premature stop codon was detected. This Stense Farholt, PernilleA. Gregersen variantneitherfoundinExACnor1000Gdatabases.Theeffectof the mutation on protein is predicted as damaging by in silico AarhusUniversity Hospital, Aarhus N,Denmark. analysis. Conclusion: Approximately sixty mutations associated with LP Background: Proteoglycans (PGs) are complex macromolecules have been reported so far. Half of these mutations have been consisting of a core protein and glycosaminoglycan (GAG) side detected in exons 6 and 7 of the ECM1 gene. The p.Arg416Ter EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 168 mutation is outside these hotspot regions and have not been Bonn, School of Medicine & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, reportedpreviously.Itexplainsthephenotypeofourpatientlikely Germany,4DepartmentofDermatology,UniversityHospitalFreiburg, by causing nonsense mediated decay resulting in the non- Freiburg, Germany, 5Institute of Structural Biology, University of functionalECM1 protein. Bonn,School ofMedicine, Bonn, Germany. E.Tasdelen: None. I. An:None. Introduction: LSS, encoding for lanosterol synthase, has been associated with congenital cataract, autosomal recessive hypo- trichosis simplex resp. congenital alopecia with or without  P04
.050.C Novel variant in SMAD3 gene associated with neuroectodermal phenotypes including intellectual disability, Loeys-Dietz syndrome type 3 epilepsy, microcephaly, genital abnormalities in males and dermatological symptoms. In this study, we report novel Albertas Valintėlis1, Marius Šukys1, Eglė Ereminienė2, Inga Nasvy- pathogenic variantsfoundin LSS. tienė1, Lina Basel-Salmon3,4,5, Rasa Ugenskienė1 Materials and Methods: Direct Sanger sequencing of the LSS 1Department Of Genetics And Molecular Medicine, Lithuanian geneorWhole ExomeSequencingwas performedonindividuals University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania, 2Department of affected with hypotrichosis and their family members. Protein Cardiology, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, structure modelling was used to reveal the consequences of the Lithuania, 3Raphael Recanati Genetics Institute, Rabin Medical identiﬁedmutations. Center, Beilinson Hospital, Petah Tikva, Israel, 4Sackler Faculty of Results: All affected individuals, originating from Iraq, Syria, Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 5Laboratory of Immu- AfghanistanandGeorgia,sufferedfrommildhypotrichosistosevere nology and Genetics, Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Petah alopecia. One patient presented also with a developmental speech Tikva, Israel. disorder, learning difﬁculties and microcephaly. The following variants were found either in homozygous or in compound Introduction: Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is a systemic con- heterozygous state and co-segregated in these families: c.530G>A; nectivetissuedisordercharacterizedbyvascularﬁndings,skeletal p.(Arg177Gln), c.934C>T;p.(Arg312Trp), c.881G>T;p.(Arg294Leu), abnormalities,craniofacialfeaturesandcutaneousﬁndingswhich c.1702C>T;p.(Arg568Trp). The most interesting variant was the sometimes can be misdiagnosed as Marfan syndrome The homozygous synonymous variant c.393G>A;p.(131Leu=), shown to diagnosis is established based on clinical ﬁndings and the activateacrypticdonorsplicesite,resultinginaninframedeletionof identiﬁcation of heterozygous pathogenic variant in one of the 11aminoacidresidues(r.425-457del).Modellingofthemutantsites severalreportedgenes. basedonthecrystalstructureofLSSrevealedthatallmutationshave Methods: We report a 41-year-old woman with a prior clinical consequencesonthe3Dproteinstructure. diagnosis of Marfan syndrome (systemic score 8 and aortic root Conclusions:ItremainsunclearwhichvariantsinLSSleadtoan dilatationZscore2.99).Additionallyshehadrightvertebralartery alopeciaphenotypeonly,andwhichleadtoaccompanyingsevere tortuosity,a historyofgastrichemorrhage fromDieulafoy’sulcer, neurodevelopmental and dermatological phenotypes. If signiﬁ- handosteoarthritis,osteoporosis(repeatedspontaneousmetatar- cantly more patients with mutations in LSS will be reported, we salfractures),hypermobilejoints(Beightonscore4),uvulaaplasia, maybeabletodevelopabetterunderstandingofthisproteinand velvety and translucent skin with visible underlying veins. The allow predictions concerning the phenotypic outcomes of patientalsohasprimarythrombocythemia(withJAK2pathogenic individual LSSmutations. variant) and chronic tubotympanic suppurative otitis media. No N. Cesarato: None. M. Wehner: None. M. Ghughunishvili: affectedrelatives weredocumented. None. A. Schmidt: None. M. Lentze: None. C. Has: None. M. Results: We performed cardiovascular gene panel analysis via Geyer:None. F.B.Basmanav:None. R.C. Betz:None. Next generation sequencing: no FBN1 gene variant was found, but heterozygous gene SMAD3 variant NM_005902.4: c.1262G>A of unknown signiﬁcance was detected. This variant is not found in  P04
.052.ASearchingforTGFB3genemutationsamongPolish control databases and was not reported in literature, in silico tools patients withMarfan syndrome andrelated disorders predictitasdeleterious,UniProtdatabasesuggestthatanimportant protein domain is affected. Variant segregation analysis was not Maria Pilarska-Deltow1, Marzena Skrzypczak-Zielińska2, Anna performedaspatient’sparentsaredeceased.Asclinicalfeaturesare Junkiert-Czarnecka1, AnetaBąk1, Marta Heise1,Olga Haus1 more suggestive to Loeys Dietz type 3 syndrome and variant is predicteddeleteriouswedeterminedthevariantaslikelypathogenic. 1Nicolaus Copernicus University, Torun, Poland, 2Institute of Human Conclusion: Genetic testing allowed us to establish a proper Genetics, Polish Academy ofSciences, Poznan, Poland. diagnosis and provide more extensive management plan for the patient. Introduction: Marfan syndrome (MFS) is the best known A. Valintėlis: None. M. Šukys: None. E. Ereminienė: None. I. congenital disease of connecting tissue. The classical symptoms Nasvytienė:None.L.Basel-Salmon:None.R.Ugenskienė:None. of MFS include skeletal, cardiovascular and eye abnormalities. However, the variety and variable severity of them make the diagnosis difﬁcult due to the similarities with Marfan-like  P04
.051.D Four hypotrichosis families with pathogenic var- syndromes, including Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS). According to iants in the gene LSS presenting with and without neurode- theclassiﬁcation,therearesixsubtypesofLDS.MutationsinTGFB3 velopmental phenotypes areresponsibleforLD S5
,whichislesssymptomaticandwithout molecular analysiscaneasily be confused withMFS. Nicole Cesarato1, Maria Wehner1, Mari Ghughunishvili2, Axel MaterialsandMethods:Sangersequencingwasperformedfor Schmidt1, Michael Lentze3, Cristina Has4, Matthias Geyer5, F. Buket 119 Polish patients with suspicion of Marfan or another Marfan- Basmanav1,Regina C.Betz1 likesyndrome. Results: Sequencing of TGFB3 revealed three mutations. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, AccordingtoVarSomedatabase,mutationc.412G>T(p.Ser138Ala), 2Givi Zhvania Academic Clinic of Pediatrics, Tbilisi State Medical with the allele frequency 0.01% (ExAc) was predicted as benign. University, Tbilisi, Georgia, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Mutation c.488G>A (p.Arg163Gln), with the allele frequency EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 169 0.004%(ExAc)wasclassiﬁedasavariantofuncertainsigniﬁcance  P04
.054.C Four novel families expand the genotypic and (VUS) (VarSome). The frequency of the mutation c.1138C>T (p. phenotypic landscape of MESD-related Osteogenesis Pro380Ser)isnotavailableintheExAc,accordingtoinsilicotoolsthis Imperfecta isalsoVUS.Inthecaseofthismutation(p.Pro380Ser)weconﬁrmed thepaternalinheritanceofthemutationintheparentalstudy. ThaoTran1,RachelKeller1,BrechtGuillemyn2,MelaniePepin1,Jane Conclusions: Mutations were detected in patients in whom Corteville3, Samir Khatib4, Mohammad-Sadegh Fallah5, Sirous previousNGSexaminationofthecommongenesassociatedwith Zeinali5,6, Fransiska Malfait2, Soﬁe Symoens2, Paul Coucke2, Peter Marfan-like syndromes did not reveal pathogenic variants. The Witters7, Hamideh Bagherian4,5, Deborah Nickerson1, Michael resultspointattheneedtostudylessobviousgenesofmarfanoid Bamshad1, Jessica Chong1, University of Washington Center for syndromes to improve their diagnostics, which may have Mendelian Genomics, PeterByers1 implications for patient prognosis, as well as diagnosis and preventioninfamilymembers.Theinvestigationwassupportedby 1University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA, 2Ghent University, NicolausCopernicus University grantW L174
. Ghent, Belgium, 3Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, M.Pilarska-Deltow:None.M.Skrzypczak-Zielińska:None.A. USA, 4GMDC Al Quds University, Al Quds, Palestinian Territory, Junkiert-Czarnecka: None. A. Bąk: None. M. Heise: None. O. 5Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Haus:None. Republic of, 6Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of,7University Hospital Leuven,Leuven, Belgium.  P04
.053.BTargetednextgenerationsequencingsubstantially The bone disorder osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is genetically advances molecular diagnosis of Marfan and Marfan related heterogeneous. Most affected individuals have an autosomal disorders dominant disorder caused by heterozygous variants in either of the type I collagen genes (CO L1
A1 or CO L1
A2). Rare autosomal Darina L. Kachakova1, Kunka Kamenarova1, Kalina Mihova1, Ivo recessive forms of OI are associated with variants in genes that Kremensky1, Ivanka Dimova2, Vanyo Mitev1, Radka Kaneva1 encode proteins involved in the modiﬁcation of collagens, regulationofcollagenexpression,alterationofcellulardifferentia- 1Laboratory of Genomic Diagnostics, Molecular Medicine Center, tion along the bone lineage, and in collagen secretion. Recently, DepartmentofMedicalChemistryandBiochemistry,MedicalFaculty, fourdifferentbiallelicpathogenicvariantsinMesodermDevelop- Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Laboratory of Genomic mentLRPChaperone(MESD)wereshowntocauseaprogressively Diagnostics, Molecular Medicine Center, Department of Medical deformingrecessivetypeofOI,associatedwithrecurrentfractures Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, Medical University of and oligodontia in ﬁve patients of ﬁve families. We report four Soﬁa, 2- Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical additional patients from four independent families with biallelic University of Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria. variants in MESD: the earlier reported c.632dupA p.(Lys212- Glufs*19) and c.676C>T p.(Arg226*) - which are associated with Introduction:Therearemorethan200heritableconnectivetissue a severe form of OI - and one new pathogenic variant c.603- disorders. Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a rare, autosomal-dominant 606delTAAA (p.Asn201Lysfs*15) which causes a neonatal lethal connectivetissuemultisystemdisorder.Signiﬁcantclinicaloverlap form of OI. MESD acts in the WNT signaling pathway where it is with other systemic connective tissue diseases, has been thoughttoplayaroleinthefoldingoftheWNTco-receptorsLow documented. DensityLipoproteinReceptor-Related Proteins5and6(LR P5
and Materials and methods: Eight patients with differential LR P6
) and in chaperoning their transit to the cell surface. We diagnosis Marfan and Marfan like syndromes and 1 patient with hypothesize that in the absence of functional MESD, WNT Ehlers-Danlosweredirectedfortargetednextgenerationsequen- signaling in osteogenic cells is blocked. Our report broadens the cing(NGS)inMolecularmedicinecenterintheperiod2019-2020 phenotypic and genetic spectrum of MESD-related OI, provides year. NGS was performed on MiSeq platform using TruSight one additionalinsightintothepathogenicpathwaysandunderscores kit. Direct sequencing by Sanger was used in order to conﬁrm the necessity of MESD for normal WNT signaling and bone estimated pathogenic variants. formation. Results:Geneticcauseofthediseasewasestimatedin4from9 T.Tran:None.R.Keller:None.B.Guillemyn:None.M.Pepin: analyzed patients. In two patients FBN1 mutations were found None. J. Corteville: None. S. Khatib: None. M. Fallah: None. S. (c.8051+2T>A and p.Arg516Ter). In the other patients the Zeinali: None. F. Malfait: None. S. Symoens: None. P. Coucke: following pathogenic variants were detected: c.1877A>T (p. None.P.Witters:None.H.Bagherian:None.D.Nickerson:None. Lys626Met)inSKIandc.1642A>C(p.Ser548Arg) inSO S1
andthus M.Bamshad: None. J.Chong: None.P. Byers: None. clinicaldiagnoseswerereﬁned.InthreepatientswefoundVUSin the following genes: CO L5
A2, CO L11
A1, FLNB, NOTCH1, BAG3. In one patient with aortic aneurism a new likely pathogenic variant  P04
.055.DSixthfamilywithconﬁrmedmetaphysealdysplasia, c.779delC (p.Pro260Hisfs*47) in FOX E3
 was found. Pathogenic Spahr type and a novel variant in MM P13
: case report and mutationsinforkheaddomainofthisgenewerepreviouslylinked reviewofthe literature to autosomal dominant thoracic aortic aneurism. Although the new variant lies outside this domain we suggest that is still AndréM.Travessa1,SilviaModamio-Høybjør2,KarenE.Heath2,Ana possible tocontribute tothedisease. BertaSousa1 Conclusion:Manyconnectivetissuedisordershaveoverlapping symptomsandtargetedNGSsequencingcontributessubstantially 1MedicalGeneticsDepartment,DepartmentofPediatrics,Hospitalde to genetic diagnosis and reﬁnement of the clinical diagnosis in Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisbon, some of the cases. This work was supported by infrastructural Portugal, 2Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), projectsD01-285/2019; D01-395/2020funded by MES. Hospital Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autonóma de Madrid, D.L. Kachakova: None. K. Kamenarova: None. K. Mihova: IdiPAZ, CIBERER, ISCIII, Skeletal Dysplasia Multidisciplinary Unit None. I. Kremensky: None. I. Dimova: None. V. Mitev: None. R. (UMDE), Hospital Universitario La Paz, and ERN-BOND, Madrid, Kaneva:None. Spain. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 170 Introduction: Metaphyseal dysplasia, Spahr type (MDST, ofatargetedgenepaneltestingprogram,withgeneticcounseling MIM#250400) is an ultra-rare metaphyseal dysplasia likely often support and MPS reﬂex enzyme testing, has clinical utility in mistakenasrickets.Only16patientsfromeightfamilieshavebeen identifyingthegeneticetiologyofMPSandSD,andmayallowfor reported,withmolecularconﬁrmationinﬁvefamilies(10patients). disease-speciﬁcinterventions andproactive treatment plans. We present a case of MDST and review the existing literature, G. Seratti: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; highlighting the features that differentiate this from other BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock metaphysealdysplasias. options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; BioMarin Case report: The proband is a 23-month-old gild referred for PharmaceuticalInc.V.Pansare:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); growth delay and genu varum. She was born at 33 weeks of Signiﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership Interest gestation to healthy unrelated parents with no relevant family (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); history.Atbirth,shehadnormalsomatometryforgestationalage. Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. T.Y. Pang: A. Employment Theneonatalperiodwasunremarkable.Genuvarumwasnotedat (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E. 6months.Lengthcrossedcentilesdownwardsandwas-2.75SDat Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other 19 months. She was otherwise healthy, and had a normal intellectual property); Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E. psychomotor development. The analytical evaluation of calcium Izzo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; BioMarin and phosphate metabolism was normal, excluding rickets. Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, However, the skeletal survey showed metaphyseal irregularities patent or other intellectual property); Modest; BioMarin Pharma- in the long bones, especially the lower limbs, compatible with a ceuticalInc.W.Mackenzie:D.SpeakersBureau/Honoraria(speak- metaphysealdysplasia.AcustomizedskeletaldysplasiaNGSpanel ers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; BioMarin wasthusperformed,andthepathogenicvariantc.287_293del,p. Pharmaceutical Inc. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; LPA, (Cys96Phefs*19) in MM P13
 gene was identiﬁed in apparent BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, MPS. Other; Modest; BioMarin homozygosity, conﬁrmingthediagnosis ofMDST. Pharmaceutical Inc. C. Raggio: B. Research Grant (principal Discussion andconclusions: Wereport the11th patient (sixth investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as family) with conﬁrmed MDST, and review the existing literature. wellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;BioMarinPharmaceutical Patients with MDST present with postnatal mild short (or even Inc, NextCure, OIF. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers normal) stature. Genu varum is milder and knee pain is more bureau,symposia,andexpertwitness);Modest;BioMarinPharma- commonascomparedtoothermetaphysealdysplasias.Noextra- ceutical Inc, Alexion. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; OIF, skeletalfeaturesorlaboratoryﬁndingsexist.NGSistheinvestiga- EDS, SDMC, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Ascendis, Alexion, tion ofchoice forMDST. Mereo. K. White: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, A.M.Travessa:None.S.Modamio-Høybjør:None.K.E.Heath: collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants None.A.B. Sousa:None. already received); Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Ultra- genyx, Ascendis, Theracon. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speak- ers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; BioMarin  P04
.057.B Clinical utility of a sponsored, no-cost skeletal Pharmaceutical Inc, Ultragenyx. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; dysplasiagenepaneltestingprogram:Resultsfrom850tests Modest; National MPS Society, Little People of America, BioMarin Pharmaceutical. Other; Modest; UptoDate.com. R. Truty: A. Guillermo Seratti1, Vikram Pansare1, Tiffany Yar Pang1, Emanuela Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Izzo1, William Mackenzie2,Cathleen Raggio3, Klane White4, Rebecca Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual Truty5, BrittJohnson5,Swaroop Aradhya5 property); Modest; Invitae. B. Johnson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock 1BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Novato, CA, USA, 2Nemours Alfred I. options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Invitae. S. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, USA, 3Hospital for Aradhya:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Invitae.E. Special Surgery, Uniondale, NY, USA, 4Seattle Children’s Hospital, Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Seattle,WA, USA,5Invitae, San Francisco, CA, USA. intellectualproperty); Modest; Invitae. Rarediseases,suchasmucopolysaccharidosis(MPS)IVA(Morquio A syndrome) and MPS VI (Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome), are often  P04
.058.CExomesequencingcombinedwithRNAsequencing misdiagnosedasothertypesofskeletaldysplasia(SD)ormaygo clariﬁesthemodeofinheritanceofMYH3-associatedspondy- undiagnosed for extended periods, potentially resulting in locarpotarsal syndrome:acase report delayed intervention and irreversible disease progression. Dis- coverDysplasiasTMsponsoredtestingprogramoffersafocusedSD Marija Volk, Karin Writzl, Matevž Jus, Aleš Maver, Helena Jaklič, genepanelforUSandCanadianpatients,withthegoalofhelping Borut Peterlin facilitate timely diagnoses. Eligible patients must have one or more of: skeletal abnormalities suggestive of SD, short stature, Clinical institute of genomic medicine, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, disproportionategrowth,dysmorphicfacialfeaturesorothersigns Slovenia. suggestive of SD. The program uses a panel with 109 genes associatedwithSD.Third-partyreﬂexbiochemicalenzymetesting Introduction: Pathogenic variants in the MYH3 gene have been is offered for inconclusive MPS molecular results. Genetic associated with dominant and recessive Contractures, pterygia, counseling is provided for all patients as part of the program. A and spondylocarpotarsal fusion syndrome, type 1 (CPSF S1
). By total of 850 US patients were tested under the program from combiningexomeandRNAsequencing,weprovideevidencethat December 2019-August 2020. Median age at testing was 7 years MYH3:c.1581+1G>A variant, previously reported in association (range: 0-90). Initial symptom onset was noted prenatally for with apparently recessive CPSF S1
 (PMID:29805041) is likely 22.7% and at birth for 32.9%. Median age at ﬁrst sign among associated witha dominant predisposition toCPSF S1
. patients presenting after birth was 5 years. A genetic diagnosis Materials and methods: A 14-month girl was referred to our wasestablishedin210patients(36genes):amoleculardiagnostic institutewithscoliosis,contractures,ptosis,shortstature,bicuspid yieldof24.7%.OneMPSVIpatientandtwoMPSIVApatientswere aortic valve and suspected skeletal dysplasia. Familial history identiﬁed;thelatterwereconﬁrmedbyreﬂexenzymetesting.Use revealed that the mother has short stature, scoliosis, contracture EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 171 of Vth ﬁnger and ptosis, while maternal uncle and grandfather Laurence Pacot1,2, Dominique Vidaud1,2, Audrey Sabbagh3, Ingrid haveshortstatureandscoliosis.Weperformedexomesequencing Laurendeau2, Audrey Briand-Suleau1,2, Audrey Coustier1, Théodora (ES)and cDNAsequencing of thetargeted MYH3region. Maillard1,CécileBarbance1,PatrickNitschké4,ArnaudJannic5,Salah Results: ES revealed the presence of a heterozygous patho- Ferkal5, Béatrice Parfait1,2, Michel Vidaud1,2, members of the NF genic variant MYH3(NM_002470.4):c.1581+1G>A in the proband. FranceNetwork, Pierre Wolkenstein5, Eric Pasmant1,2 Because this variant was originally reported in association with recessive inheritance, it was not initially considered causative in 1ServicedeGénétiqueetBiologieMoléculaires,HôpitalCochin,DMU heterozygous form. However, segregation analyses revealed that BioPhyGen, AP-HP.Centre-Université de Paris, Paris, France, 2Institut thesimilarlyaffectedmotheralsocarriedtheidentiﬁedvariantas Cochin, Inserm U1016 - CNRS UMR8104 - Université de Paris, affected proband. Expression analysis of mRNA MYH3 transcript CARPEM, Paris, France, 3UMR 261 MERIT, IRD, Université de Paris, showedretentionofintron15,whichwaspredictedtoleadtoan Paris, France, 4Bioinformatics Platform, Imagine Institute, INSERM in-frame insertion of 34 amino-acid sequences. This insertion UMR 1163, Université de Paris, Paris, France, 5Département de possibly leadstoa gain-of-function effect. Dermatologie,AP-HPandUniversitéParis12,HôpitalHenri-Mondor, Conclusion: We demonstrate that MYH3variant c.1581+1G>A Créteil,France. is an in-frame insertion and might also be associated with the dominant type of CPSF S1
. Our case highlights the utility of Background:WholeNF1locusdeletionsareidentiﬁedin5-10%of expression analysis, which is essential for the correct interpreta- patients affected by neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1). Several tion ofsplice-site variants andgenetic counselling. studieshavepreviouslydescribedparticularlysevereformsofthe M.Volk:None.K.Writzl:None.M.Jus:None.A.Maver:None. disease in NF1 patients with NF1 deletion. However, comprehen- H.Jaklič: None.B.Peterlin: None. sive descriptions of large cohorts are still missing to fully characterize this contiguousgene syndrome. Methods: NF1 patients from a large French NF1 cohort were  P04
.059.DMyhreSyndrome:ararecauseofshortstatureand molecularly characterized using next-generation sequencing, osteomuscular pain microsatellites analysis, and MLPA between 2005 and 2020. NF1- deleted patients were enrolled and phenotypically characterized Antonio Miguel Poyatos-Andújar1, Susana García-Linares1, Mar- withastandardizedquestionnaire.ParentaloriginofdenovoNF1 garita Martínez-Atienza2, Francisca Quintana-Luque1, Susana Pedri- deletionswasdeterminedinthirtytriosandthreeduosusingfour naci-Rodríguez2, María Luz Bellido-Díaz2, Matías Pérez-Sánchez2 intragenicand threeextragenic microsatellites in theNF1locus. Results: A deletion of the NF1 gene was detected in 4% (139/ 1HospitalUniversitarioClínicoSanCecilio,Granada,Spain,2Hospital 3479) of molecularly conﬁrmed NF1 index cases. Patients ranged Universitario Virgende las Nieves, Granada, Spain. between 4 months and 69 years old, with a median at 21 years old.Acomprehensiveclinicalassessmentshowedthat93%(116/ Introduction: Myhre syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant 126)ofNF1-deletedpatientsfulﬁlledtheNIHcriteriaforNF1.More connectivetissuedisorderwithmultisysteminvolvementcharacter- than half has café-au-lait spots, skinfold freckling, Lisch nodules, izedbyaclinicalspectrumthatincludesgrowthretardation,skeletal neuroﬁbromas, neurological abnormalities, and cognitive impair- anomalies,muscularhypertrophy,jointstiffness,facialdysmorphism, ment or learning disabilities. Comparison with previously deafness,cardiovasculardisease,learningandsocialchallengesand described “classic” NF1 cohorts showed a signiﬁcantly higher abnormal sexual development. The molecularly conﬁrmed cases proportion of symptomatic spinal neuroﬁbromas, dysmorphism, haveadenovoheterozygousgain-of-functionmutationinSMAD4. learningdisabilities,malignancies,andskeletalandcardiovascular MaterialandMethods:Wepresenta20-years-oldgirlwhowas abnormalities in the NF1-deleted group. Maternal origin of the bornafteradichorionicdiamniotictwinpregnancywithincreased deletionwasconﬁrmed in25cases. nuchal translucency for this fetous. The patient present at birth Conclusions: We described the largest NF1-deleted cohort to low weight and increased pulmonary pressures, during her date and conﬁrmed a more severe phenotype in NF1-deleted development present slow weight gain, muscular weakness, patientswith apredominant maternal originof thedeletions. hearing loss, challenging behavior, scoliosis and menstrual L. Pacot: None. D. Vidaud: None. A. Sabbagh: None. I. dysfunction. All molecular and citomolecular studies performed Laurendeau: None. A. Briand-Suleau: None. A. Coustier: None. during the infancy were normal. We performed a clinical exome T. Maillard: None. C. Barbance: None. P. Nitschké: None. A. sequencing (CES) analysisafter clinicaland familiar evaluations. Jannic:None.S.Ferkal:None.B.Parfait:None.M.Vidaud:None. Results: We found the pathogenic variant c.1486C>T, p. P.Wolkenstein: None. E.Pasmant: None. Arg496Cys in the SMAD4 gene, this variant was determined as de novowiththe segregation analysis. Conclusions: Inourcase,thediagnosiswasdelayedbeyondthe  P04
.061.B Identiﬁcation of rare variants for nonsyndromic secondlifedecade,thisillustratesthedifﬁcultyofcorrectlydiagnosing cleft lip with/without cleft palate in a cohort of multiplex patientswithMyhresyndrome.Thefrequencyofneoplasiainseriesof families casesandendometrialcancerinpatientswithMyhresyndrome,raises thepossibilityofcancersusceptibilityinthesepatients.Itisimportant AnnikaScheer1,FabianBrand2,JuliaFazaal1,NinaIshorst1,PeterM. to alert clinicians to the possibility of detecting this syndrome for a Krawitz2, Elisabeth Mangold1, Kerstin U. Ludwig1 correcttreatmentduringinfancyandsurveillanceduringadultage. A. Poyatos-Andújar: None. S. García-Linares: None. M. 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,SchoolofMedicine Martínez-Atienza: None. F. Quintana-Luque: None. S. Pedri- & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute for Genomic naci-Rodríguez: None. M. Bellido-Díaz: None. M. Pérez-Sán- Statistics and Bioinformatics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, chez:None. Germany. Nonsyndromiccleft with/without cleft palate(nsCL/P) are among  P04
.060.A Large deletions of NF1: phenotypical description themostcommonbirthdefectsandhaveamultifactorialetiology. andparentalorigins ofasevere condition Inthelastyears,genomewideassociationstudieshaveidentiﬁed around 40 common risk regions with small to moderate effect EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 172 sizes,butthecontributionofrarevariantswithhighereffectsizes A. Siewert: None. J. Welzenbach: None. B. Reiz: A. Employ- has beenstudied to a lesser extent. The aim of our study was to ment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CommaSoftAG.E.Mangold: systematically identify potential causal rare variants in 55 None. H. Dickten: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; individuals from 10 multiplex families affected with nsCL/P. Each CommaSoft AG.K.U. Ludwig: None. ofthefamilieshadatleastthreeaffectedfamilymembersoverat leasttwogenerations.Wholegenomesequencingwasperformed using Illumina Truseq Nano DNA Library Prep Kit, and variant  P04
.063.D Search for exonic homozygous/compound hetero- calling was performed according to an in-house pipeline on a zygousvariantsinaffectedsib-pairsidentiﬁesnovelcandidate family-wisebasis.Overall,7,435,742single-nucleotidevariantsand genesfornonsyndromic cleft palate 45,627 structural variants were identiﬁed in the entire cohort, representing a unique resource for the analysis of rare events. In Nina Ishorst1, Helena Shkuro1, Julia Fazaal1, Ann Kathrin Hoebel1, our ﬁrst analysis we focused on the protein-coding regions and Holger Thiele2, Teresa Kruse3, Michael J. Dixon4, Kerstin U. Ludwig1, are currently applying technical, pedigree-based and frequency Elisabeth Mangold1 ﬁltering in each of the families. In family 1, this analysis together with subsequent annotation in the Variant Effect Predictor 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,SchoolofMedicine identiﬁed 66 candidate variants in 65 genes, one of which has & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2University of Cologne, beenpreviouslysuggestedasriskgeneinanindependentexome CologneCenterforGenomicsCCG,Cologne,Germany,3Department sequencingstudy(PLEKHA5,Coxetal.2018).Basedonsingle-cell of Orthodontics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Faculty expression data during mouse embryonic development, addi- ofBiology,Medicine&Health,UniversityofManchester,Manchester, tionalcandidategenes(e.g.MPZ L2
,GP C6
)werealsoidentiﬁed.The United Kingdom. analysis of the remaining nine families is currently ongoing, and results willbe presented attheconference. Nonsyndromiccleftpalateonly(nsCPO)belongstothetypicalforms A. Scheer: None. F. Brand: None. J. Fazaal: None. N. Ishorst: oforofacialcleftsandisacommoncongenitalmalformation.nsCPO None. P.M. Krawitz: None. E. Mangold: None. K.U. Ludwig: is a multifactorial disorder with environmental and genetic factors None. contributing to disease risk. Of note, the genetic contribution is rather high with an estimated heritability of >90%. To date, one common risk locus for nsCPO is conﬁrmed, and nine have been  P04
.062.C Analysis of single-cell based expression variability reportedrecentlybutstillawaitindependentreplication.Epidemio- between candidate genes for syndromic and non-syndromic logical observations and genetic studies suggest that high formsoforofacial clefting penetrancerare/lowfrequencyvariantscontributetonsCPO,which mightbeinheritedinanautosomal-recessivemanner.Inthisstudy, Anna Siewert1, Julia Welzenbach1, Benedikt Reiz2, Elisabeth we focussed on detection of novel nsCPO candidate genes by Mangold1,Henning Dickten2, Kerstin U. Ludwig1 identifying compound heterozygous/homozygous variants. To that end,wereanalyzedwhole-exomesequencingdatafromsixaffected 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,SchoolofMedicine sib-pairs born to unaffected parents. After ﬁltering for population &UniversityHospitalBonn,Bonn,Germany,2FASTGenomics,Comma frequency(MAF<5%)andmanualinspectionofreads,wedetected SoftAG, Bonn, Germany. 169putativecompoundheterozygousand13putativehomozygous variants.Wenextprioritizedthese182variants/80candidategenes Orofacialclefts(OFCs)areamongthemostcommonhumanbirth basedon(1)thefunctionaleffectsattranscriptionallevelandinsilico defects. OFC can occur as an isolated phenotype, or as part of a predictions,(2)intoleranceforacertainclassofrarevariation,and(3) more complex malformation syndrome. In the latter, additional expression in mouse embryonic palatal shelves at embryonic day tissues and organ systems show developmental differences  E13
.5. This resulted in a list of the 32 most promising candidate beyond OFC. We here hypothesized that candidate genes genes,whichincludeonecompoundheterozygoussituationwithin involvedinsyndromicOFC-formsmaybeexpressedinmorecell GRH L3
, which has been implicated in nsCPO, and novel genes types during embryonic development, compared to genes encoding proteins involved in cell migratory processes, such as causing non-syndromic OFC. To study this, we re-analyzed DDR2,abindingpartnerofthegeneproductofthewellestablished recently published single-cell expression data from the Mouse cleftinggeneCDH1. Organogenesis Cell Atlas (Cao et. al 2019), covering the relevant N. Ishorst: None. H. Shkuro: None. J. Fazaal: None. A.K. time period for facial development from embryonic days  E9
.5- Hoebel:None.H.Thiele:None.T.Kruse:None.M.J.Dixon:None.  E13
.5. We downloaded data from 100,000 sampled cells and K.U.Ludwig: None. E.Mangold: None. performeddataanalysesusingtheRpackageSeurat(Stuartet.al 2019)andtheanalyticalecosystemFASTGenomics.Datawassplit by embryonic day to yield a developmental time frame.  P04
.064.A Systematic analysis of non-coding de novo muta- Candidate genes associated with non-syndromic OFCs were tions from whole genome sequence data of triads with non- deﬁned based on data from prior genome-wide association syndromic cleft lipwith/without cleft palate studies, while genes causing established OFC-syndromes (auto- somal dominant (AD) and autosomal recessive) were retrieved Hanna K. Zieger1, Leonie Weinhold2, Axel Schmidt1, Manuel from the literature. At each time point, we extracted the Holtgrewe3, Stefan A. Juranek4, Anna Siewert1, Frederic Thieme1, percentage of cell types expressing the respective gene and Fabian Brand5, Julia Welzenbach1, Dieter Beule3,6, Katrin Paeschke4, compared expression levels between the different groups. Our PeterM.Krawitz2,Kerstin U.Ludwig1 results show that on average, genes underlying AD forms of syndromic OFC are expressed in signiﬁcantly more cell types 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,SchoolofMedicine duringorganogenesiscomparedtoriskgenesfornon-syndromic & University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute for Medical OFC (P-values: 2.02x10-06 for  E9
.5; 1.44x10-04 ( E10
.5); 1.11x10-04 Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University Hospital Bonn, ( E11
.5); 0.002 ( E12
.5); 0.002 ( E13
.5)). This analysis will help to Bonn,Germany,3CoreUnitBioinformatics,BerlinInstituteofHealth, further understand the molecular pathways and etiological Berlin, Germany, 4Department of Oncology, Hematology and differences between syndromic and non-syndromic forms. Rheumatology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 5Institute EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 173 for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University Hospital Bonn, chondrocyte proteome and to parse the shared chondrocyte Bonn,Germany,6MaxDelbrückCenterforMolecularMedicine,Berlin, protein interactomeindisease associated modules. Germany. Results:Chondrocyteproteomeisparsedintofunctionalmodules with well characterized signiﬁcance to the disease, such as core Non-syndromic cleft lip with/without cleft palate (nsCL/P) is a structural components of the cartilage ECM which form a meta- common multifactorial disorder with strong genetic contribu- module with proteins mediating glycolysis. Meta-module protein tion. Here, we systematically investigate the contribution of de abundanceisreducedwhilstproteinsmediatingfocaladhesionand novo mutations (DNMs) to nsCL/P risk, using whole-genome cytoskeletaldynamicsareincreasedinOA.CO L11
A1andTNChave sequence(WGS)datafor211nsCL/Pand284non-cleftreference signiﬁcant associations with OA in the GWAS catalog and are triosfromtheKidsFirstProject.Forthetotalsetof31,490DNMs, members of the ECM module indicating that variants could be overall comparison between cohorts did not show conclusive exerting a detrimental effect in the context of ECM differences,neitherinabsolutenumbersnorwhenweightedfor mechanosensing-basedregulationofchondrocytemetabolism. different functional scores. However, we observed nominally Conclusions: Our systems analysis recapitulates hallmarks of signiﬁcant accumulation of non-coding DNMs at bivalent TSS/ OA and offers new insights into the modular structure of the enhancer chromatin states in nsCL/P during human embryonic protein interactome that is associated with OA chondrocyte face development at Carnegie Stage 15 (p=0.0269), and a biology. Grant: iStemTheOS, Grant No. MIS 5033630/ELK E5876
 nominally signiﬁcant enrichment of non-coding DNMs in fromtheHellenic Foundation forResearch &Innovation. topologically associating domains at two GWAS risk loci, i.e. A. Destouni: None. K.C. Tsolis: None. A. Economou: None. I. 4q28.1(7cases,0controls,p=0.0008)and2p21 (7cases,2 Papathanassiou: None. C.Balis:None. E.Mourmoura: None. A. PKDCC controls, p=0.0161). We ﬁnally used transcription factor (TF) Tsezou: None. binding information to identify TFs with potential key role in nsCL/P etiology. Based on position weight matrices, we predicted TF binding sites for 810 human TFs, and calculated  P04
.066.C A family with Osteochondritis Dissecans and changesofbindingcapacityat28,773DNM-sites.Weobserveda multiplefractures harboringCO L9
A2 andPL S3
Mutations signiﬁcant enrichment of DNM-hits for motif TFA P2
A in nsCL/P, andidentiﬁedATF3,MSCandHE S5
/7aspotentialTFcandidates. Estelle Arnaud Gouttenoire1, Sophie Lang-Andrey2, Françoise Notably, for MSC and ATF3, this ﬁnding was supported by a Lemaire-Girard1, JeanDudler2, Michael Morris1 strong quantitative effect on the predicted binding change, which for MSC is currently validated using in vitro assays. Our 1SYNLAB Switzerland, Department of Genetics, Lausanne, Switzer- studyprovidesnovelinsightsintonsCL/Petiologyandsuggests land, 2HFR Fribourg, Department of Rheumatology, Fribourg, a TF-based approach that can be used to annotate non-coding Switzerland. risk variants from WGS data. H.K. Zieger: None. L. Weinhold: None. A. Schmidt: None. M. A 25-year-old woman consulted in our specialized genetic Holtgrewe: None. S.A. Juranek: None. A. Siewert: None. F. rheumatology clinic, with symptomatology evolving since the age Thieme: None. F. Brand: None. J. Welzenbach: None. D. Beule: of 11, with knee pain and episodes of joint blockage, MRI positive None. K. Paeschke: None. P.M. Krawitz: None. K.U. Ludwig: axialspondyloarthropathyandhyperlaxity.Thediagnosisofbilateral None. osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) was made at the age of 22. She laterdevelopedanklepainalsorelatedtoOCDandspiralfractureof thetibiaandproximalﬁbula,withouttrauma.Theproband’sbrother  P04
.065.BChondrocyte proteinco-expression network analy- had multiple fractures and joint blockage since childhood, and 1 sis reveals a link between ECM mechanosensing and glucose maternal uncle had joint blockage since childhood. The proband’s metabolismin osteoarthritis motherhadpaininchildhoodandhasbeensufferingfrompainin her arms, knees and ankles for 1 year. The maternal grandmother AspasiaDestouni1,KonstantinosC.Tsolis2,AnastassiosEconomou2, haslumbardiscdegenerationandhearingproblem.NGSofa251- Ioanna Papathanassiou3, Charalambos Balis1, Evanthia Mour- gene skeletal dysplasia panel revealed that proband is double- moura1, AspasiaTsezou1,3 heterozygoteforCO L9
A2c.186G>AandPL S3
c.827G>A,p.(Trp276*). PL S3
 mutations causeX-linked osteoporosis with fractures. CO L9
A2 1Laboratory of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of mutations have been associated with AD multiple epiphyseal Medicine, University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece, 2Department of dysplasia, characterized by early onset of pain associated with Microbiology andImmunology, Rega Institutefor Medical Research, OCD in some patients, and also with intervertebral disc disease. KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Department of Biology, Faculty of Interestingly,these2variantssegregateinthefamily.Thisapproach Medicine, University ofThessaly, Larissa, Greece. conﬁrms the importance of genetic consultation in familial rheumatological conditions and reveled the existence of 2 over- Introduction: Knee osteoarthritis (OA) is the second most lappinggeneticconnectivetissuepathologies. common structural OA disorder affecting approximately 22.9% E. Arnaud Gouttenoire: None. S. Lang-Andrey: None. F. of individuals 40 years and over globally. The only currently Lemaire-Girard: None. J.Dudler: None. M. Morris:None. availableeffectivetreatmentistotalkneejointreplacement,which isperformedatthelatestagesofthedisease.Thelackofeffective disease-modifying drugs and preventive tools highlights our  P04
.067.D Atypical type VI Osteogenesis Imperfecta mouse incomplete understanding of the fundamental biological aspects models the intersection of IFITM5 and SERPINF1 pathways in ofosteoarthritis. patients Materialsandmethods:Weperformedlabel-freeshotgunLC- MSinprimary chondrocytes obtained fromthearticular cartilage Gali Guterman Ram1, Ghazal Hedjazi2, Chris Stephan3, Stéphane of10OAand6healthyindividuals.Weimplementedthestatistical Blouin2, Victoria Schemenz4, Wolfgang Wagermaier4, Jochen Zwer- concepts of Weighted Gene Co-expression Network Analysis to ina2,PeterFratzl4,KennethM.Kozloff3,NadjaFratzl-Zelman2,JoanC. reconstruct in an unbiased way the organisation of the Marini1 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 174 1SectiononHeritableDisordersofBoneandExtracellularMatrix,Eunice (p<0.05), with OB from severe patients depositing signiﬁcantly Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human less mineral than from mild patients (p<0.05). RNA-Seq tran- Development,NationalInstitutesofHealth,Bethesda,MD,USA,2Ludwig scriptomics of differentiated osteoblasts showed proteasomal BoltzmannInstituteofOsteologyattheHanuschHospitalofOEGKand protein degradation, autophagy, and vesicle organization path- AUVA Trauma Centre Meidling, 1st Medical Department, Hanusch ways upregulation vs controls, while protein translation was Hospital, Vienna, Austria, 3Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, downregulated. OB from both severe patients have upregulation University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 4Max Planck Institute of of pathways related to ubiquination vs controls. RNA-Seq is ColloidsandInterfaces,Dept.ofBiomaterials,Potsdam,Germany. currently being validated by RT-qPCR and western blot and the functional signiﬁcance of pathways investigated. This study will OsteogenesisImperfecta(OI)isawell-knownskeletaldysplasia.Type lead to novel insights into OI osteoblast differentiation, the V OI, caused by recurrent dominant mutation in IFITM5/BRIL, and respectiverolesofOBandmatrixinphenotypicvariabilityandthe typeVIOI,causedbyrecessivenullmutationsinSERPINF1/PEDF,have effect ofsubstitution positionalongthecollagenhelix. distinct features. IFITM5- S40
L mutations causes severe dominant M.Jovanovic:None.A.Mitra:None.R.Dale:None.J.Marini: atypical type-VI OI (aVI) with phenotype, bone histology and None. decreasedcellularsecretionofPEDFsimilartotypeVIOI. OurobjectiveisunderstandingthepathwaysconnectingIFITM5 andSERPINF1 inbone development.  P04
.069.BBonecellfunctionsinPPIBknockoutmousemodel WegeneratedanIﬁtm5 S42
Lknock-inmousemodel.Newborn fortypeIXosteogenesisimperfectaaredistinctfromclassical Iﬁtm5  S42
L mice, heterozygous(HET) and homozygous(HMZ), are dominantOI non-lethal, have ﬂared rib cage, shoulder and knee dislocations. Radiographically, ≈50% HET mice exhibit fractures and 96% of YingLiu1, Theresa Hefferan2, Nadja Fratzl-Zelman3, JoanMarini1 HMZ incur fractures at multiple ages. Similar to patients, heterozygousmaleshavenormalPEDFlevelandincreasedserum 1Section on Heritable Disorders of Bone and Extracellular Matrix, ALP (p<0.01). Mechanical testing of 2-month HET and HMZ National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, showed reduced stiffness, yield and fracture load, with markedly National Institutes ofHealth, Bethesda, MD, USA, 2Biomaterials and increased brittleness. On μCT, HET mice have decreased Ct.Th, Histomorphometry Core Laboratory, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, increased BV/TV, Tb.N. Whole-body DXA-aBMD was signiﬁcantly USA, 3Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology at the Hanusch decreased,withHMZaremoreseverethanHET(p<0.01).qBEIof Hospital of OEGK and AUVA Trauma Centre Meidling, 1st Medical corticalbonerevealedhypermineralizationin1-and2-monthHET, Department, Hanusch Hospital,Vienna, Austria. with increased CaMean, CaPeak(p<0.05) and CaHigh(p<0.0001, p=0.0027respectively)andincreaseddensityanddecreasedarea Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a collagen-related bone disorder, (both p<0.001) of osteocyte lacunar sections. Second harmonic which is caused by either dominant mutations in collagen, or generation ﬂorescence microscopy revealed HET bones contain recessivedefectsingenesencodingcollagen-interactingproteins. mostly disordered matrix(p<0.0001). Cultured calvarial and long CyclophilinB(CyPB),encodedbyPpib,functionsasaprocollagen bone osteoblasts exhibit differences in differentiation pattern, prolyl 3-hydroxylation complex component ( P3
H1/CRTAP/CyPB) dependenton matingscheme,ageand skeletal site. and independently as the major peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomer- Our murine model with physiologic levels of Iﬁtm5  S42
L ase (PPIase) catalyzing collagen folding. Mutations in Ppib cause expression recapitulates patient phenotype and will be used to recessivetypeIXOI.WereportedpreviouslythatPpib-/-micehave investigate mechanisms and pathways involving Iﬁtm5 and abnormal type I collagen post-translational modiﬁcation and Serpinf1. crosslinks. This study focuses on Ppib-/- bone cell functions, G.GutermanRam:None.G.Hedjazi:None.C.Stephan:None. utilizinghistomorphometryandqBEIanalysisoffemoraltissue,RT- S. Blouin: None. V. Schemenz: None. W. Wagermaier: None. J. PCR and alizarin red staining of osteoblasts, and osteoclast Zwerina: None. P. Fratzl: None. K.M. Kozloff: None. N. Fratzl- differentiation. Histomorphometry of Ppib-/- femora reveals Zelman:None. J.C. Marini: None. reduced trabecular thickness (p<0.05), trabecular number (p< 0.01),bonevolume(p<0.001),andcorticalthickness(p<0.0001). Distinct from high turnover in dominant OI, Ppib-/- osteoblast  P04
.068.A Study of OI patient osteoblasts to investigate numberandsurfacearesigniﬁcantlydecreased(p<0.01;p<0.05). phenotypic variability ofdominant osteogenesis imperfecta Osteoclast number does not differ between KO and WT bone, as well as in vitro osteoclast differentiation. Ppib-/- femora show MilenaJovanovic, ApratimMitra, RyanDale, JoanMarini reduced osteoid volume (p<0.05), MAR (p<0.0001) and BFR/BS (p<0.01) vs WT. Ppib-/- osteoblasts reveal elevated matrix NICHD/NIH, Bethesda,MD, USA. mineralization (p<0.001), consistent with increased expression of late osteoblast differentiation markers Sost, Mepe, Phex, Dmp1, Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a heterogeneous bone disorder vs WT. qBEI analysis yields increased CaMean, CaPeak (both p< characterized by bone fractures, growth deﬁciency and skeletal 0.001) and CaHigh values (p=0.014) in femoral midshaft cortical defects. An important and unexplained feature of OI and many boneofKOvsWT.CyclophilinB/PpibKOmice,modellingtypeIX dominant disorders is phenotypic variability with the same OI, have bone cell functions distinct from classical dominant OI. mutation. We present the ﬁrst comparative study of osteoblast PPIBKObonehasa lowturnover cellular pattern withdecreased differentiation from normal pediatric controls vs OI patients with osteoblastnumberandboneformation,increasedmineralization, phenotypic variability. We focused on CO L1
A1 mutations Gly352- andnormal osteoclast numbers. SerandGly589Ser.Foreachmutationweinvestigatedosteoblasts Y. Liu: None. T. Hefferan: None. N. Fratzl-Zelman: None. J. in two unrelated patients, one with mild and one with severe Marini: None. phenotype.OBcelllayerandsecretedcollagenwereovermodiﬁed inallpatients,shownby3Hsteady-stateassay,indicatingdelayed folding; however, quantitative analysis of hydroxylysines did not  P04
.070.C Genome sequencing discloses a homozygous correlate with patient severity. Alizarin Red staining showed noncodingdeletionof72kbupstreamofSNX10inautosomal patientOBdepositsigniﬁcantlylessmineralinvitrothancontrols recessive osteopetrosis EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 175 Gandham SL Bhavani1, Prajna Udupa1, Neethukrishna Kausthub- Discussion: In a cohort study performed in France 80% of the ham1, Sandip Bartakke2, Katta M. Girisha1 patients with LPI was diagnosed with osteopenia. In a series of29 patients in Finland, 69% of patients had one or more fractures, 1DepartmentofMedicalgenetics,KasturbaMedicalCollege,Manipal, mostlyinchildhood.TheexactmechanismoftheosteoporosisinLPI ManipalAcademyofHigherEducation,Manipal,India,2Department is still not fully understood. The normal initial therapy of patients of Clinical Hematology, Aditya Birla Memorial Hospital, Pune, withLPI(aprotein-restricteddietandsupplementalL-citrulline)does India. notchangethesignsoflowbonemineraldensity.Bisphosphonates canbeusedtotreatosteoporosisinpatientswithLPI. Introduction: Autosomal recessive osteopetrosis (ARO) is a rare J. Draaisma: None. J. Geelen: None. M. de Vries: None. A. genetic disorder of bone resorption caused by defective Dittrich: None. osteoclasts resulting in increased bone density. Other character- istic features of this condition are macrocephaly, visual impair- ment, splenomegaly, and bone marrow failure. The incidence of  P04
.072.A Severe osteosclerosis and early poor outcome in a this disorder is 1 in every 250,000 live births with onset ranging patientwithTCIRG1 mutation fromneonatalstagetoadulthood.Eightgenesareassociatedwith autosomal recessive osteopetrosis. Pathogenic variants in SNX10 Elena Sukarova-Angelovska, Marina Krstevska-Konstantinova, (sortingnexin10)contributetoAROin4%ofcases.SNX10helps NatasaAlulovska, Svetlana Kocheva inosteoclast differentiation by RANKL-stimulation. Materials and methods: We ascertained a four-year old boy PediatricClinic,Skopje,Macedonia,TheFormerYugoslavRepublicof. born to consanguineously married couple. Detailed clinical evaluation and skeletal survey were done. We performed exome Osteopetrosis is a heterogeneous group of disorders of bone sequencing followed by genome sequencing to identify the metabolism triggered by defective osteoclast function. Increased geneticetiology. bonedensityleadstoworseningofmanybodyfunctions.Amongall Results: Proband exhibited macrocephaly, visual impairment, knowngeneticcauses,lossoffunctionmutationinTCIRG1geneis pectus carinatum and hepatosplenomegaly. Increased bone responsibleforthediseasein70%ofthecases.Impairedfunctionof density, sandwich vertebrae and bone-in-bone appearance were α3 subunit V-ATPase leads to inappropriate extracellular acidiﬁca- observedonradiographs.Exomesequencingwasnon-diagnostic. tion, osteoclast proliferation and unossiﬁed osteoid matrix. We Whole genome sequencing identiﬁed a large homozygous indel, present a male neonate that admitted our clinic shortly after birth g.26263639_26335652delinsCAA, which includes ~72kb deletion due tothesuspicionof sepsis.Episodesof multifocalosteomyelitis along with three-nucleotides insertion in the SNX10 gene. This occurred successively. He had several dysmorphic features-macro- deletion encompasses noncoding exon 1, 5’ untranslated region, cephaly, protruded forehead, prominent eyes, receding mandible, thepromoterregion,andupstreamofSNX10.Parentsarecarriers largeears.Severalpainfulswellingswerepresentduetothemultiple ofthis deletion. boneﬁssures.X-rayseriesconﬁrmsclerosisofallbones,appearance Conclusion: The novel ~72kb indel in noncoding region of of dense bone formation, sandwich vertebrae, widened growth SNX10 is the likely cause of autosomal recessive osteopetrosis in plate and calvarial bone thickening. The mutation of TCIRG1 was ourpatient.Weherebyreportthesecondlargehomozygousindel found (G 2415A). Development of side effects occurred within the inSNX10resulting in autosomalrecessive osteopetrosis. ﬁrst several months (metabolic acidosis, hepatosplenomegalia, G.S.Bhavani:None.P.Udupa:None.N.Kausthubham:None. anemia,skeletaldeformities;blindnessanddeafness).Hedeveloped S.Bartakke: None. K.M. Girisha:None. hydrocephalusandconsecutiveseizuresat9monthsanddiedatthe ageof11monthsduetorespiratoryfailure.Althoughthemutations in TCIRG1 gene are frequent cause of AR osteopetrosis, there is a  P04
.071.D The use of bisphosphonates to treat osteoporosis wide heterogeneity of clinical presentation - from moderate to inpatients withLysinuric Protein Intolerance malignant,primarilyduetothedifferentmutationandconsecutive acidiﬁcation error. Genotype-phenotype studies are limited; more- JosDraaisma,Joyce Geelen, Maaike de Vries, AnneDittrich over, the same mutation could give rise to different phenotypes. Furtherinvestigationisneededinordertoelucidateallcontributing Radboudumc Amaliachildren’shospital, Nijmegen,Netherlands. mechanismsthatcanindicatetheseverityofthedisease. E.Sukarova-Angelovska:None.M.Krstevska-Konstantinova: Background: Lysinuric Protein Intolerance (LPI) is an autosomal None.N.Alulovska: None. S.Kocheva: None. metabolic disorder. Patients present with failure to thrive, cytopenia, acute encephalopathy or developmental disability. Longtermcomplicationsincludesalsolowbonemineraldensity.  P04
.074.C Periodontal (formerly type VIII) Ehlers-Danlos In general the treatment is focused on the prevention of syndrome: description of 12 novel cases and expansion of hyperammonemia. The aim of this report is to propose the use the clinical phenotype ofbisphosphonates forosteoporosis inpatients withLPI. Methods: Clinical description of a patient and review of Salima EL CHEHADEH1,2, Anne LEGRAND3,4, Corinne STOETZE L2
, literature. Véronique GEOFFROY2, Clarisse BILLON3,4, Salma ADHAM4, Xavier Results: A 8-year old girl was born to non-consanguineous JEUNEMAITR E3
,4, Roland JAUSSAUD5, Jean Muller2,6, Elise SCHAEFER1, parents. She had a normal course until the age of 6 years. Since Karelle BENISTAN7, Sébastien GAERTNER8,9, Agnès BLOCH- than she had multiple fractures including multiple vertebral ZUPAN10,11,12, Marie-Cécile MANIER E10
,11,12, Catherine PETIT10,11,13, fractures at different occasions due to mild trauma. Further Anne-Claire Bursztejn14,15, Laurence BA L16
, Anthony REYR E17
, Tiffany investigation led to the genetically conﬁrmed diagnosis LPI. The BUSA18,HélèneDOLLFU S1
,2,DanLIPSKER14,19 lumbar Z-score was -3.7. She was treated with intravenous pamidronateandsupplementalcalciumandvitaminD.Nofurther 1ServicedeGénétiqueMédicale,InstitutdeGénétiqueMédicaled’Alsace fractures occurred. After one year the z-score increased to -1.9, (IGMA),HôpitauxUniversitairesdeStrasbourg,HôpitaldeHautepierre, aftertwo year -1.3. Strasbourg, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, UMRS_1112, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 176 Institut de Génétique Médicale d’Alsace (IGMA), Université de  P04
.075.D Comprehensive analysis of the genetic determi- StrasbourgetINSERM,Strasbourg,France,3UniversitédeParis,INSERM, nantsofproportionate short stature by targeted NGS U970,ParisCentredeRechercheCardiovasculaire,Paris,France,4Centre deRéférencedesMaladiesVasculairesRares,AP-HP,Hôpitaleuropéen Angel Campos-Barros1,2, Elena Vallespín1,2, Karen E. Heath1,2, Georges Pompidou, Paris, France, 5Département de médecine interne Angela Del Pozo1,2, Mario Solís1, Isabel González-Casado3, Paula immunologieclinique,CHRUdeNancyetuniversitédeLorraine,Nancy, Casano4,Isabel R.Martínez-Orga1, María Fernández-Elvira1, Victoria France, 6Laboratoire de diagnostic génétique, Nouvel hôpital civil, E.Fernández-Montaño1 HôpitauxUniversitairesde,Strasbourg,France,7Centrederéférencedes syndromesd’Ehlers-Danlosnonvasculaires,HôpitalRaymondPoincaré, 1INGEMM, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, Garches, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Garches, France, 2CIBERdeEnfermedadesRaras(U753),ISCIII,Madrid,Spain,3Dept.of 8Service des Maladies Vasculaires - Hypertension Artérielle, Hôpitaux PediatricEndocrinology,HospitalUniversitarioLaPaz,Madrid,Spain, Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 9INSERM,UMR1260, 4Dept. of Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, RegenerativeNanomedicine,FMTS,Strasbourg,France,10Universitéde Barcelona, Spain. Strasbourg, Faculté de Chirurgie Dentaire, Strasbourg, France, 11HôpitauxUniversitairesdeStrasbourg,PôledeMédecineetChirurgie Proportionateshortstatureisacommoncondition(3%ofgeneral Bucco-Dentaires, Hôpital Civil, Centre de référence des maladies rares population) with a heterogeneous genetic etiology. Despite the orales et dentaires, O-Rares, Filière Santé Maladies rares TETE COU, advances in the understanding of pathophysiological growth European Reference Network ERN CRANIO, Strasbourg, France, regulation,theunderlyinggeneticcausesarestillunderdiagnosed. 12InstitutdeGénétiqueetdeBiologieMoléculaireetCellulaire(IGBMC), Aim and subjects: Molecular genetic screening of a cohort of 201 INSERM U1258, CNRS-UMR7104, Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch- pediatric cases (86 females and 115 males) with proportionate Graffenstaden,France,13INSERM,UMR1260‘OsteoarticularandDental shortstature (height<-2.0SDS) by targeted NGS. Regenerative Nanomedicine’, Faculté de Médecine, Fédération de Methods:GenomicDNAsampleswereanalyzedwithacustom Médecine Translationnelle de Strasbourg (FMTS), Strasbourg, France, panel (Seq-Cap-EZ; Nimblegen, Roche) including 331 known 14Clinique Dermatologique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, genes implicated in the etiology of syndromic and non- Strasbourg, France, 15Service de dermatologie, hôpitaux de Brabois, syndromic proportionate short stature. Variant prioritization was CHUdeNancy,Vandœuvre-lès-Nancy,France,16TimoneAorticCenter, based on sequence quality assessment (Q>30); coverage (mean Timone Hospital, APHM ; Department of Vascular Surgery, Timone >90x; %bp>20x >80%); population frequency (MAF <1% in Hospital, APHM, Marseille, France, 17Service de neuroradiologie gnomADcontrols), variant effect (missense,nonsense, frameshift, interventionnelle, CHU de Marseille, Hôpital La Timone, Marseille, splicing effect) and in silico pathogenicity prediction (CADD_1.4 France, 18Département de génétique médicale, CHU de Marseille, score>20). HôpitalLaTimone,Marseille,France,19FacultédeMédecine,Université Results and discussion: 97 potentially deleterious variants deStrasbourg,Strasbourg,France. were identiﬁed in a total of 84 (41.8%) index cases, of which, 35 (57.3%)ingenesinvolvedinGH-IGF1signaling(i.e.GHRH,GHRHR, Periodontal Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (pEDS) is a rare condition GHR, IGF1R, PTPN11, IGF2R), and 26 (26.8%) in genes regulating causedbyautosomaldominantpathogenicvariantsinthe C1
Rand IGF1 bioavailability (IGF1, IGFALS, IGFB P4
, PAPPA2, PAPPA). The  C1
Sgenes,encodingsubunits C1
Rand C1
Softheﬁrstcomponent remaining variants were in genes: i) associated with syndromic oftheclassicalcomplementpathway.Itispredominantlycharacter- forms of proportional short stature, KDM6A (Kabuki-syndrome; n ized by early-onset severe periodontitis with premature tooth loss, =3),NFKB2(DAVIDsyndrome,n=3),CU L7
(3M-syndrome,n=3), pretibial hyperpigmentation and skin fragility. Rare arterial compli- andBTK(n=1);ii)implicatedinpituitarymorphogenesis,PROKR2 cations have been reported, but venous insufﬁciency is rarely (n=5),IHH(n=5);iii)extracellularmatrixgenes,ACAN(n=11);or described. Here we report twelve novel patients carrying either de iiii)ingenesencodingparacrinefactorsofthegrowthplate,NPPC; novo(4/12)orinherited(8/12)heterozygouspathogenicvariantsin (n=2) and NPR2 (n=3). Targeted NGS analysis signiﬁcantly  C1
Rand C1
S,inordertocharacterizetheirclinicalphenotype,witha improvesthediagnosticrateofproportionateshortstature.Grants focus on the vascular features. All presented with typical pEDS PI12/00649;18/00402 (ISCIII);ENDOSCREEN  S2010
/BMD-2396 clinical signs including severe periodontitis (except the youngest A. Campos-Barros: None. E. Vallespín: None. K.E. Heath: patient aged 3 years) with complete tooth loss in three patients None. A. Del Pozo: None. M. Solís: None. I. González-Casado: beforetheageof30.Threepatientsandonerelativealsodisplayed None.P.Casano:None.I.R.Martínez-Orga:None.M.Fernández- widespread venous insufﬁciency leading to chronic varicose leg Elvira:None. V.E. Fernández-Montaño: None. ulcers.One patient suffered anintracranialaneurysm withvascular complicationsin3relativesincludingthoracicandabdominalaortic aneurism and dissection and intracranial aneurysm rupture. This  P04
.076.APlasmainorganicpyrophosphatelevelscorrelateto workhighlightstheimportanceofearlydiagnosisofpEDStodirect speciﬁc phenotypes and variant archetypes of ABC C6
 in appropriatedentalcareandprecisethegeneticcounselling.Italso pseudoxanthoma elasticum patients conﬁrmsthatvascularcomplicationsarepossible,althoughtheyare notfrequent,whichleadsustoproposetocarryoutaﬁrstcomplete Matthias Van Gils1,2, Justin Depauw1, Shana Verschuere1,2, Lukas vascular evaluation after the diagnosis. Larger case series are Nollet1,2, Olivier M.Vanakker1,2 however needed to precise the frequency of these vascular complications and to improve our understanding of the link 1CenterforMedicalGeneticsGhent,Ghent,Belgium,2Departmentof between complement pathway activation and connective tissue Biomolecular Medicine, GhentUniversity, Ghent, Belgium. alterationsobservedinthesepatients. S.Elchehadeh:None.A.Legrand:None.C.Stoetzel:None.V. Introduction: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is an ectopic Geoffroy:None.C.Billon:None.S.Adham:None.X.Jeunemai- mineralization disease caused by biallelic ABC C6
 mutations. tre:None.R.Jaussaud:None.J.Muller:None.E.Schaefer:None. Decreasedinorganicpyrophosphate(PPi)levelshavebeenlinked K.Benistan:None.S.Gaertner:None.A.Bloch-zupan:None.M. to ectopic mineralization in patients. However, whether correla- Maniere:None.C.Petit:None.A.Bursztejn:None.L.Bal:None. tions exist between PPi levels and the phenotype or ABC C6
 A. Reyre: None. T. Busa: None. H. Dollfus: None. D. Lipsker: genotypeisunknown. None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 177 Methods:PPilevelsof128bloodsamples(92[62patients],22 Theresa Nauth, Laura Isabel Brandenstein, Verena Rickassel, Georg [21 carriers] and 14 [14 controls]) were measured. ABC C6
 Rosenberger pathogenic variants ( C3
- C5
) were considered. PXE phenotypes were assessed using the Phenodex scoring (PS) system at initial University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Institute of Human patientsampling.Two-foldstatisticalanalysiswasperformed:bulk Genetics, Hamburg, Germany. analysisandsingle/ﬁrstsampleanalysis.CorrelationsbetweenPPi, age,sexandPSwereinvestigated.Basedonmutationarchetypes Germline missense mutations in the HRAS gene cause Costello (erroneous mRNA [D], nonsense [N] and missense [M] variants) syndrome (CS), a rare developmental disorder characterized by a and increasingly stringent variant selection genotype-PPi correla- typical facial gestalt, postnatal growth deﬁciency, intellectual tionswereassessed. disability, predisposition to malignancies as well as skeletal, Results:PatientsandcarriershadloweredPPilevels(respectively cardiac and dermatological abnormalities. The molecular patho- ±51% and ±78% of controls; P<0.001) with sample range overlap physiology caused by heterozygous HRAS gain-of-function muta- betweenallgroups.Sex(Bulk:P=0.010;Single:P=0.060)andage tions have been analyzed in various tissues and cell types. (Bulk: P=0.005, r=0.288, Single: P=0.015, r=307) signiﬁcantly However, up to date the molecular basis for cutaneous affected PPi levels only in patients. A signiﬁcant inverse correlation manifestations in CS is largely unknown. To study epidermal betweenPPilevelsandcardiacPSscoreswasidentiﬁed(P=0.041,r pathobiology,wegeneratedpermanenthumankeratinocytecells =-0.263) alongside a weak inverse association between PPi and (HaCaT) stably expressing wild type HRASWT or CS-associated vascularPS(P=0.09).SigniﬁcantdifferencesinPPilevelsbetweenD HRASGly12Ser and screened for keratinocyte-speciﬁc HRAS binding +MandN+Mgenotypeswerefoundinbulkanalysisonly(P<0.05). partners by afﬁnity puriﬁcation and quantitative mass spectro- Conclusions: PPi is reduced in patients and carriers but overlap metry. We identiﬁed and veriﬁed RIN1 (Ras and Rab interactor 1) between groups suggests other pro-mineralization factors are also as most important interaction partner of active HRAS variants in relevant in at least some patients. Correlations between PPi and keratinocytes. By its dual function as an activator of AB L1
/2 and cardio(vascular)phenotypessuggestPPihaspromiseasabiomarker; RAB5A, RIN1 is involved in cytoskeletal remodeling and endoso- genotype-correlationshoweverrequirefurtherconﬁrmation. malsortingofcellsurfacereceptors,suchasintegrins.FACS-based M.VanGils:None.J.Depauw:None.S.Verschuere:None.L. integrinendocytosisassaysshowedaberrantintegrintrafﬁckingin Nollet: None. O.M.Vanakker:None. keratinocytes expressing HRASGly12Ser and application of prima- quine revealed integrin recycling to be essentially affected. By immunocytochemistry, we detected an increase of intracellular  P04
.077.B lncRNA gene variants SPRR2C rs2291979 and vesicularβ1integrinwhichstronglyco-localizedwithRAB5,RAB21 LO C105375120
rs4724102are associated withpsoriasis and EEA1. The altered bioavailability of integrins in keratinocytes expressingHRASGly12Serwasassociatedwithimpairedcellspread- LaimutisKucinskas1,Migle Anilionyte1, VestaKucinskiene2,Skaidra ing. Our data demonstrate that CS-associated HRASGly12Ser Valiukeviciene2 interferes with RIN1-RAB5 mediated endosomal sorting of integrins and, thus, adhesion-dependent processes. We conclude 1Institute of Biological System and Genetic Research, LUHS, Kaunas, that dysregulation of receptor trafﬁcking and cell adhesion are Lithuania, 2Department of Skin and Venereal Diseases, Lithuanian relevant inthepathobiology ofCS. University of HealthSciences (LUHS),Kaunas, Lithuania. T. Nauth: None. L.I. Brandenstein: None. V. Rickassel: None. G.Rosenberger: None. The aim: to determine the signiﬁcance of SNV of genes SPRR2C rs2291979,LO C105375120
 rs4724102andLIN C01698
rs75193730 in the genotypes of psoriasis and control group persons and evaluate  P04
.079.D IRAK2 is associated with rheumatoid arthritis associations between genotype and clinical signs of psoriasis. susceptibility PatientsandMethods.Ninetyﬁvesamplesfrompsoriasispatients’ groupand77samplesfromacontrolgroupofhealthypeoplewere Rim Sghiri1, Hana BenHassine2, Asma Boumiza2, Khadija Bac- examined. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood couche3, Foued Slama2, Adel Almogren1, Zahid Shakoor1, Elyes leukocytesbyDNAsaltingoutprocedure.Genotypingwasperformed Bouajina3, Ramzi Zemni2 by real time polymerase chain reaction and data were analysed by statistical analysis program IBM SPSSstatistics. 1KingSaudUniversity,Riyadh,SaudiArabia,2FacultedeMedecinede Results: SPRR2C SNV rs2291979 frequency of A allele was 7,9 % Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Hopital Farhat Hached de Sousse, Sousse, compare to 1,3 % of control group (p=0,011). LO C105375120
 Tunisia. genotype G/G frequncy was 57,9 % in patient group compare with 28,6%controlgroup(p<0,001)andalleleGfrequencywas77,4%in Objectives: Investigate the association of the single nucleotide patient group (p<0,00001). No statistically signiﬁcant difference was polymorphisms of interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 2 foundbetweenLIN C01698
SNVrs75193730genotypesandalleles. (IRAK2)rs3844283 andrs708035 with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Conclusions:Statisticalysigniﬁcanthigerfrequencywasdetermi- Patients and methods: IRAK2 rs3844283 and rs708035 nated of SNV SPRR2C rs2291979 A allele and LO C105375120
 G/G genotyping was determined by mutagenically separated PCR in genotype and G allele compare with control group. No statistically acohortof222(30men,192women,meanage49years)adultRA signiﬁcantassociationsofclinicalsignsandallelesandgenotypesof patientsand 224 matchedcontrols. genes SNV SPRR2C rs2291979, LO C105375120
 rs4724102 and Results: IRAK2 rs3844283 C allele was detected in 66% of RA LIN C01698
rs75193730 were determinated. patients and 74% of controls. The CC genotype was the most L. Kucinskas: None. M. Anilionyte: None. V. Kucinskiene: frequent genotype in both RA patients (45.5%) and the controls None.S. Valiukeviciene: None. (56.3%). The G allele was found to be associated with RA susceptibility (OR=1.47, 95% CI=1.10-1.96, p=0.008). The GG genotypewasfoundtobeassociatedwithRAintheco-dominant  P04
.078.C The HRAS-RIN1 signaling axis controls integrin and the dominant models (OR=2.03, 95% CI=1.08-3.81, p= trafﬁcking in keratinocytes and its dysregulation contributes 0.042 and OR=1.54, 95% CI=1.06-2.23, p=0.023, respectively). to the epidermal manifestation in Costello Syndrome IRAK2 rs708035 was found not to be in the Hardy-Weinberg EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 178 equilibrium. The hyperfunctional IRAK2 rs708035 A allele was Introduction:Severalgenomewideassociationstudiessuggested morefrequentinRApatientsthanincontrols(69.9versus62.2%, the common IL-17RC gene variants could take part in the respectively, p=0.015). Moreover, IRAK2 rs708035 and IRAK2 pathogenesis of idiopathic scoliosis. The present case-control rs3844283 were in linkage disequilibrium and the GA haplotype study investigated the association between a functional poly- wassigniﬁcantlymorefrequentinRApatientsthanincontrols(p morphism, IL-17RC*rs708567 (G/A), and idiopathic scoliosis in a =0.034). Bulgarianpopulation sample. Conclusion: This study for the ﬁrst time ever reports the association of IRAK2 rs3844283, IRAK2 rs708035, and the MaterialsandMethods:Theassociationstudywasperformed corresponding haplotypes with RA. Functional studies are on127patientsand254controlsafterobtainingwritteninformed recommended to elucidate the risk posed by the GA haplotype consent.ThemeanCobbanglewas53.8°±21.2.Themeanageof forthedevelopment ofRA. patients was 11.2±2.9 years. The cases were divided into R. Sghiri: None. H. BenHassine: None. A. Boumiza: None. K. subgroups based on the age of onset, sex, family history, and Baccouche: None. F. Slama: None. A. Almogren: None. Z. progression. The genotyping was carried out by TaqMan Real- Shakoor: None.E. Bouajina:None. R.Zemni: None. Time PCR method. The statistical analysis was performed by Pearson’sChi-squaredtestandFisher’sExactTestwithp-valueless than0.05asstatistically signiﬁcant.  P04
.080.A A TRAF6 genetic variant is associated with low Results: The frequencies of the variant A allele and AA bonemineral density inrheumatoid arthritis genotype in the total group of patients and in the subgroup of patientswithCobbangleabove40°weresigniﬁcantlyhigherthan RimSghiri1,HanaBenHassine2,NajlaElAmri3,KhadijaBaccouche3, that in the controls (p<0.05). In addition, this case-control study Foued Slama2, Zahid Shakoor4, Adel Almogren4, Elyes Bouajina3, revealed statistically signiﬁcant association between IL- Ramzi Zemni2 17RC*rs708567 (G/A) and primary scoliosis in males, females, adolescents, familialandsporadic cases. 1kingSaudUniversity,Riyadh,SaudiArabia,2FacultedeMedecinede Conclusions: The results conﬁrmed previously reported asso- Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Hopital Farhat Hached de Sousse, Sousse, ciationsbetweenacommonvariantwithinIL-17RCandidiopathic Tunisia, 4KingSaud University, Riyadh, SaudiArabia. scoliosisinCaucasianandAsianpopulationgroupsandsuggested thatthemolecularmarkerrs708567isanindependentpredispos- Objectives:Thisstudywasaimedatinvestigatingtheassociation ing and modifying factor of idiopathic scoliosis in different of the single nucleotide polymorphism of tumor necrosis factor subgroups of Bulgarian patients.This work was supported by receptor associated factor 6 (TRAF6), rs540386, with low bone MEXT/JSPS KAKENHI T20K05260 and Jikoshunyu Kyoinhaibun- mineral density (BMD) among patients with rheumatoid arthritis keihiT5452 funded by SaitamaUniversity. (RA). S.Nikolova: None. M. Dikova:None. A.Loukanov: None. Patients and Methods: TRAF6 rs540386 genotyping was performed by mutagenically separated PCR in a cohort of 188 (23 men, 165 women, median age, 56.2 years) adult RA patients  P04
.082.C Genotype-phenotype correlation of aberrations at and 224 age and gender-matched controls. BMD was measured 7q21.2-q21.3 locus in patients affected with isolated or using dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) (Lunar Prodigy syndromic formofsplit-hand/foot malformation advancescans, GEHealthcare, USA). Results:AmongtheRApatients,64(55women,9men)hadlow Anna Sowińska-Seidler1, Magdalena Socha1, Anna Materna- BMD comprising of 57 patients with osteoporosis and 7 with Kiryluk1,2, Aleksander Jamsheer1,2 osteopenia.WhereasTRAF6rs540386wasnotassociatedwithRA susceptibility,itwashoweverfoundtobeariskfactorforreduced 1Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical lumbarspineZ-scoreintherecessivemodel(OR=3.34,95%CI= Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 2Centers for Medical Genetics GENESIS, (1.01-11.00), p=0.038). This association was conﬁrmed further in Poznań,Poland. the multivariate logistic regression analysis taking into account severalpotentialconfoundingfactors(OR=3.34(1.01-11.00),p= Split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM) refers to the group of 0.048). In addition, mean total femur Z-score was found to be congenital limb malformations characterized by the absence or reduced in TT patients when compared to CC+CT patients (- hypoplasia of the central rays of the autopods. Eight loci are 1.30±1.32versus-0.60±1.05,p=0.034).Noassociationbetween associated with this clinically and genetically heterogeneous TRAF6rs540386and localbone damagewas observed. disorder.SHFMtype1(SHFM1)mapsto7q21.2-q21.3andoccurs Conclusions:Thisstudyfortheﬁrsttimeeverdemonstratedan in an isolated form, associated with other abnormalities, or as a association between a genetic variant of TRAF6 and low BMD part of a congenital anomaly syndrome. In most cases SHFM1 among patients with RA. Further investigations are needed to resultsfromdeletionsencompassingtheDLX5/DLX6genesortheir elucidatetheexact role ofthis variant. regulatory elements. Herein, we report on ﬁve new index cases R. Sghiri: None. H. BenHassine: None. N. El Amri: None. K. harboring7q21.2-q21.3rearrangementsandperformagenotype- Baccouche: None. F. Slama: None. Z. Shakoor: None. A. phenotype correlation for these individuals and two previously Almogren: None.E. Bouajina:None. R.Zemni: None. publishedfamiliesofPolishoriginaffectedwithSHFM1.Chromo- some analysis including conventional GTG banding and array- basedcomparativegenomichybridization(aCGH)wereappliedto  P04
.081.B Association between a functional polymorphism identifythecausativeaberrations.Balancedtranslocations:t(7;12) within the IL-17RC gene and idiopathic scoliosis in Bulgarian (q21.2;q21.3) and t(7;10)(q21.2;q22.2) were identiﬁed in the most population severelyaffectedpatientdiagnosedwithEECanddevelopmental delay,andinapatientwithbilateralectrodactylyofthehandsand SvetlaNikolova1, Milka Dikova2, Alexandre Loukanov3 feet and hearing loss, respectively. Two other sporadic patients affected with isolated ectrodactyly of the feet carried microdele- 1Soﬁa University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Medical University-Soﬁa, Soﬁa, tions spanning less than 200 kb encompassing the limb-speciﬁc Bulgaria, 3Saitama University, Saitama, Japan. enhancerswithinDYN C1
I1.Also,a4.5Mbdeletionofthe7q21.2- EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 179 q21.3 region was identiﬁed in a sporadic patient diagnosed with Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), La Paz University Hospital, Autono- EEC syndrome. We present the spectrum of abnormalities in mousUniversityofMadrid,IdiPAZ,Madrid,Spain,4Skeletaldysplasia SHFM1 cases that depends on the 7q21.2-q21.3 aberrations Multidisciplinary Unit (UMDE), La Paz University Hospital, Madrid, breakpoints, deletion size and its gene/regulatory elements Spain,5CIBERER,ISCIII,Madrid,Spain,6DepartmentsofPediatricsand content. This work was supported by the grants from the Polish Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Infantil Niño Jesús University National Science Centre UMO-2016/21/D/NZ5/00064 to A.S-S., Hospital, Autonomous University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 7La UMO-2016/23/N/NZ2/02362 to M.S. and UMO-2016/22/E/NZ5/ Princesa Research Institute, Madrid, Spain, 8CIBEROBN, Institute of 00270toA.J. Health Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 9Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, A. Sowińska-Seidler: None. M. Socha: None. A. Materna- Paediatric Service of the University Hospital de Jerez, Jerez de la Kiryluk: None. A.Jamsheer: None. Frontera,Cádiz,Spain,10PaediatricDepartment,DonostiaUniversity, Donostia, Gipuzkoa, Spain.  P04
.083.DSHFM3causedbyaduplicationinvolvingBTRCbut Introduction: GNAS, located on 20q13.2, is a highly complex not POLL and with possible modiﬁer variants in FRA S1
 and imprinted locus from which at least four transcripts (NES P55
,  C2
CD3 GNAS,XL-GNASandA/B)aregeneratedand,someofthem,inan allele speciﬁc way. It is well known that heterozygous GNAS Gökhan Nalbant1, AslıhanTolun2 alterationsineitheralleleareassociatedwithgrowthimpairment, pre-andpostnatally.Butlessisknownabouttheeffectofgenetic 1Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Institute of Health alterations at XLαs (eXtra Large Gsα), encoded by and alternative Sciences, Acibadem University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of exon1of thepaternally expressed longformof Gsα. Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul Technical University, Patients and Methods: Three independent families in which Istanbul,Turkey. the probands (P) were referred for short stature (SS) ( P1
) and pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP) or PTH-related protein Introduction: Split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM) involves the signalling disorder type 2 (iPPSD2) ( P2
, P3
) were studied by NGS- centralrays,thephenotypeisverydiverse,andsixlociareknown. custom panels. Variant conﬁrmation and cosegregation studies SHFM3(10q24)displaysdominantinheritance.Causativeduplica- were carried out via Sanger sequencing. Parental origin of the tion includes two genes; BTRC is involved in Wnt signalling allele was tested by allele-speciﬁc RT-PCR ampliﬁcation, and cascade by regulating β-catenin levels in limb development and sequencing. POLL in base excision repair. Whether both genes contribute to Results: Three different heterozygous variants of uncertain the condition has not been elucidated. The disorder varies in signiﬁcance (VUS) were identiﬁed in the XLαs exon (Table 1). severity even among relatives. We investigated a Turkish family Familial studies suggested cosegregation when the variant was afﬂicted withSHFM3. presenton thepaternal allele. Materials and Methods: Exome sequencing for unaffected Conclusion: We describe the ﬁrst three families in whom mother, affected father and two affected daughters was XLαs speciﬁc exon variants on the paternal allele seem to be performed to ﬁnd the causal variant. SNP genotypes were used associatedwithshortstatureandbrachydactyly(BD).Additional to detect the disease gene locus and to investigate for any studies are required. Funding: ESPE RU Grant 2020; ISCIII, deletionorduplication linkedto themalformation. SpanishMinistryofEconomyandCompetitiveness,co-ﬁnanced Results:Linkageanalysisrevealedasinglelocusat10q24.32.All by the European Regional Development Fund (PI20/00950); 7 affected individuals investigated carried a maximal 264 kb University Basque Country UPV/EHU (PIF17/29). heterozygous duplication. Very rare FRA S1
:p. E296
K and  C2
CD3:p. A. Pereda: None. Y. Vado: None. K.E. Heath: None. J. Pozo- A2041Vwerefound indaughtersbut notfather. Roman:None.M.Santos-Mata:None.E.Artola:None.G.Perez Conclusions: We present the smallest duplication causing de Nanclares:None. SHFM3andinvolvingBTRCgeneonly,indicatingthatPOLLdoes not contribute to the condition. Candidate variants detected couldbethegeneticfactorsthataggravatethemalformationin  P04
.085.B Monogenic variants in short stature: use and siblings and are being investigated for possible relations to efﬁciency oftargeted NGSpanelin 300 patients pathways regulated by BTRC. Both FRA S1
- and  C2
CD3-deﬁcit phenotypesincludeautopodmalformations.Wewillalsosearch Caroline Michot1, Pauline Marzin1, Geneviève Baujat1, Coralie formodiﬁersinthesecond-cousin.Modiﬁervariantscouldgive Haudry2, Anne-Laure Tourre2, Julie Steffann2, Sophie Rondeau2, aclueaboutwhythisdisorderexhibitsvariableseverityamong Valérie Cormier-Daire1 kin. Supported by the Research Fund of the Istanbul Technical University (2021-42537). 1Reference Center for skeletal dysplasia, INSERM UMR1163, Paris G.Nalbant: None. A.Tolun: None. Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Imagine Institute, Necker- Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France, 2Molecular Genetic Unit, Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité University, Necker-Enfants  P04
.084.A IsXlαsassociated withshort stature? MaladesHospital, Paris, France. Arrate Pereda1, Yerai Vado1,2, Karen E. Heath3,4,5, Jesus Pozo- Short stature is a frequent reason for paediatric consultations. Roman6,7,8, Maria Angeles Santos-Mata9, Elena Artola10, Guiomar Afterclinical,endocrinologicalandradiologicalexplorations,even Perez de Nanclares1 patients shorter than -2,5 SD remain without diagnosis. Next generation sequencing (NGS) has improved the ability to offer 1Rare Diseases Research Group, Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, testings for heterogeneous conditions. We report the analysis of BioAraba Health Research Institute, OSI Araba, Araba University 300patients with shortstature. Hospital-Txagorritxu, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Araba, Spain, 2NanoBioCel A targeted NGS panel was designed to sequence 150 skeletal Research Group, Laboratory of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical dysplasia genes. Amplicons were captured by a custom Sure- Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of the Basque Country Selectkit(Agilent)andsequencedonHiSeq(Illumina).Annotation UPV/EHU, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Araba, Spain, 3Institute of Medical and and analysis of variants were realized by a homemade interface EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 180 (PolyWeb). Results were discussed with the physicians of the novel insights into the genetic pathways and molecular events referencecenter for SkeletalDysplasias. leadingto theclinicalmanifestation ofSHOX-deﬁciency. Pathogenic variants were identiﬁed in 48 patients (16%) and S. Hoffmann: None. R. Roeth: None. S. Diebold: None. J. variants of unknown signiﬁcance (VOUS) in 18 cases (6%), Gogel:None. S.Just:None. G.A.Rappold: None. involving 8 different genes. Pathogenic variants were identiﬁed in: NPR2 (n=16), ACAN (n=11), FGFR3 (n=8), IHH (n=8) and SHOX (n=5). Patients had neither body disproportion, nor  P04
.087.D Exome analysis of prenatal and postnatal cases Madelungdeformation.X-raysshowednoorminorabnormalities, referredwithskeletal dysplasia suchasboneageanomalies,slightlycurvedradiusorstockylong bones.VOUSvariantsinvolved thesame genes,and also CO L9
A2 Andrea Haworth1, Tessa Homfray2, Suzanne Drury1, Rand Dubis1, (n=1), CO L11
A1 (n=2) and CO L11
A2 (n=2). These last variants Meriel McEntagart2, Katrina Tatton-Brown2, Helen Savage1, John were classiﬁed as class 3, as patients displayed no epiphyseal Filby1, Nicholas J. Lench1, Louisa Ive1, Eva Serra1, Natalie Trump1, dysplasia. Nayana Lahiri2, Janna Kenny2, Frances Elmslie2, Phil Ostrowski2, TargetedNGSallowedmolecularelucidationin16%ofpatients Esther Dempsey2, John Short2, Charlene Crosby2, Christine M. Hall2, with proportionate short stature and minor skeletal features. SaharMansour2 Theseresultshighlighttheimpactofmonogenicvariantsinshort stature patients, involving a few number of genes, and the 1Congenica Limited, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2St George’s efﬁciencyoftargetedNGSinthisindication.Molecularelucidation HospitalNHSTrust, London, United Kingdom. is important for the assessment of therapeutic options for these patients. Skeletal dysplasias (SD) are rare disorders representing approxi- C.Michot:None.P.Marzin:None.G.Baujat:None.C.Haudry: mately 5% of all congenital anomalies. They are highly hetero- None.A.Tourre:None.J.Steffann:None.S.Rondeau:None.V. geneous and clinical ﬁndings are often non-speciﬁc, so accurate Cormier-Daire: None. diagnosis often relies on expert interpretation of radiological ﬁndings. Until recently treatments have been limited but development of new therapeutics has highlighted the need to  P04
.086.CIdentiﬁcationandtissue-speciﬁccharacterizationof provide accurate and timely diagnosis. We describe the genomic novel SHOX-regulated genes highlights SOX family members and phenotypic ﬁndings of SD cases referred to clinical genetics amongother genes overanapproximately2.5-yearperiod.Allcasesunderwentexome sequencing (ES) as part of a service provided by Congenica and SandraHoffmann1,RalphRoeth1,SabrinaDiebold2,JasminGogel1, the South West Thames Regional Genetics Service, London. 53 Steffen Just2, GudrunA. Rappold1 caseswerereferredwithaclinicaldiagnosisofpossibleSDanda molecular diagnosis was obtained in 49% (26/53). A higher 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Clinic for diagnosticyieldwasobservedinprenatal(64%,16/25)ratherthan InternalMedicine II,Molecular Cardiology, Ulm, Germany. postnatal cases (35.7%, 10/28). Causal variants were identiﬁed in 26genes.Varianttypesidentiﬁedincluded thoseimpacting both SHOX-deﬁciencycausesaspectrumofclinicalphenotypesrelated coding and non-coding regions (5’UTR) and CNVs. The molecular to skeletal dysplasia and short stature including Léri Weill diagnosis was not always concordant with the suspected clinical dyschondrosteosis,Langermesomelicdysplasia,Turnersyndrome, diagnosis,particularlyinaprenatalsettingandtheadvantagesof as well as idiopathic short and tall stature. SHOX controls undertakinganalysisofallskeletaldysplasiagenesinthesecases chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation, bone maturation, isillustratedintwocases(SOX9andGNPTAB).Accuratemolecular as well as cellular growth arrest and apoptosis via transcriptional diagnosishasdirectlyinﬂuencedpatientmanagement,including2 regulation of its direct target genes NPPB, FGFR3, and CTGF. caseswithspondylocarpotarsalsynostosiswheresurveillancewas However, our understanding of SHOX-related pathways is still initiated and 1 case of prenatal hypophosphatasia where incomplete. To elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms diagnosis provided appropriate management of pregnancy and and to better understand the broad phenotypic spectrum of accesstotherapeuticintervention.Furthermore,inonefamilythe SHOX-deﬁciency, we analyzed differentially expressed genes in identiﬁcationoftheunderlyingmolecularcausehasexpandedthe humanﬁbroblasts(NHDF),whereSHOXisexpressedatdetectable phenotypic spectrumof disease (cartilage-hairhypoplasia). level.Twenty-threeputativetargetgeneswereselectedforfurther A. Haworth: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; validation by whole-body and tissue-speciﬁc characterization Congenica Limited. T. Homfray: None. S. Drury: A. Employment (head, heart and pectoral ﬁns) in developing shox-deﬁcient (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Congenica Limited. R. Dubis: A. zebraﬁsh embryos. Physiological relevance was conﬁrmed for Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;CongenicaLimited.M. the majority of these genes in pectoral ﬁns and network-based McEntagart: None. K. Tatton-Brown: None. H. Savage: A. analysis showed that 20/23 genes act in a common network. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Congenica Limited. J. Interestingly,severalsoxfamilymembers(sox5,6,8and18)were Filby: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Congenica shown to be signiﬁcantly deregulated in shox-deﬁcient pectoral Limited.N.J.Lench:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; ﬁns among other genes including nppa, nppc; cdkn1a, cdkn1ca, Congenica Limited. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, cyp26b1, cyp26c1, highlighting the important role of gene family patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Congenica members in shox-related growth disorders. Our results provide Limited.L.Ive:None.E.Serra:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); Proband Features Otheraffectedfamily Parental Custompanel XLαs NP_536350.2 ACMG members origin NM_080425.3 1 SS father,paternal Paternal Skeletaldysplasia(385 c.1043G>A p. PM2;B P4
(7vs grandfather genes) (Arg348Gln) 2)VUS 2 SS,BD sister,father(onlySS) Paternal iPPSDandrelateddisorders c.1343A>C p. B P4
(13vs0) (92genes) (Asp448Ala) VUS? 3 none Denovo? c.79G>A p.(Glu27Lys) PM2,B P4
(9vs (ongoing) 4)VUS EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 181 Signiﬁcant; CongenicaLimited.N.Trump:A.Employment(fullor Herning, Denmark, 4Department of Cardiology, Aarhus University part-time); Signiﬁcant; Congenica Limited. N. Lahiri: None. J. Hospital, Aarhus N, Denmark, 5Department of Pediatrics and Kenny:None.F.Elmslie:None.P.Ostrowski:None.E.Dempsey: adolescence,AarhusUniversityHospital,AarhusN,Denmark,6Centre None. J. Short: None. C. Crosby: None. C.M. Hall: None. S. forRareDiseases,DepartmentofPediatricsandAdolescence,Aarhus Mansour: None. University Hospital, Aarhus,Denmark. Introduction: TGFβ-activated kinase 1-binding protein 2 (TAB2)  P04
.088.A What are key parameters for obtaining the most encodes a scaffold protein that forms the TAK1-TAB complex likelyclinicaldiagnosisfromthewidephenotypicspectrumof involvedinproliferation,differentiationandmyocardialhomeostasis. skeletal dysplasia in patients with previously identiﬁed Pathogenic variants are associated with autosomal dominant disease-causing gene variant congenital heart defects (OMIM #614980). We describe a 5-year- old girl and her mother with a previously unreported frameshift Marija Mijovic1, Bojan Bukva2,3, Jelena Ruml Stojanovic1, Aleksan- variant in TAB2 identiﬁed by whole exome sequencing (WES). draMiletic1,BrankicaBosankic1,HristinaPetrovic1,GoranCuturilo1,3 Clinical report: The girl was born by elective caesarean section (gestational age 39+0, birth weight 2594g). She was followed for 1University Children’s Hospital, Department of Clinical Genetics, growth retardation, and at 4.5 years, she was -3SD for height and Belgrade, Serbia, 2University Children’s Hospital, Department of weight. She had mild insufﬁcient dysplastic atrioventricular valves OrthopedicSurgery,Belgrade,Serbia,3FacultyofMedicine,University and joint hypermobility. She was dysmorphic with ﬁfth ﬁnger ofBelgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. clinodactyly, pes planus, mild hypertelorism, epicanthal folds, mild midface hypoplasia, frontal bossing, bulbous nasal tip and broad Introduction: It is known that alteration of several genes mouth. The mother has short stature (-2.5SD), a dysplastic mitral associated with skeletal disorders could lead to multiple, highly valve with mild insufﬁciency, and has previously been treated for variable phenotypes. Aim of present study was to establish the supraventricular tachycardia. Several other family members on the crucial clinical and/or genetic parameters for obtaining the mother’ssidehaveshortstatureandvariablecardiacabnormalities. diagnosis in three patients with previously unclassiﬁed skeletal MethodsandResults:UsingWESperformedonDNAfromthe dysplasia inwhom thecausalgene variantwas identiﬁed. patientandbothparents,weanalyseddataasatriowithfocuson Materials andMethods:Genetictestingwasperformedusing maternally inherited variants and found heterozygosity for a whole exome sequencing (WES). Detailed analysis of genotype- previouslyunreportedmaternallyinheritedclass4variant(ACMG phenotype correlation was performed by the team of geneticist guidelines) inTAB2 (NM_015093.5:c.[604_605dup];[=], p.(Pro203- and child orthopedist. Contribution of following parameters was Hisfs*41)). Segregation analysisinthe familyis ongoing. assessed: speciﬁc radiological and orthopedic signs; existence of Discussion:Ourﬁndings,especiallythepreciseclinicaldescrip- associateddisorders;adultphenotypeinfamilialcases;phenotype tionofan adultperson(the mother)and theextensivepedigree, ofthepatientwiththesamevariantfromtheliteratureifavailable, add to the phenotypic spectrum of a TAB2-related systemic andgene localization ofthe identiﬁed variant. connective tissue disorder with polyvalvular dystrophy, short Results:Case1:Infantwithseverenonfamilialskeletaldysplasia, stature anddysmorphism. withcongenitalarthrogryposisandmultipleassociatedproblems. N.Brix:None. R.Christensen: None.S.W.Grotkjær:None.D. WES result: TRPV4: heterozygous pathogenic missense variant G.Nielsen: None. K.J.Kyng: None. P.A.Gregersen: None. c.806G>A, p.Arg269His. Clinical diagnosis: Metatropic dysplasia. Case2:Childwithfamilialskeletaldysplasiawithshortstatureand coxavara.WESresult:CO L2
A1:heterozygouspathogenicmissense  P04
.090.C Evidence that ciliary genes contribute to non- variant c.1681G>A, p.Gly561Ser. Clinical diagnosis: Spondyloepi- syndromic familial tall stature physeal dysplasia with metatarsal shortening (Czech dysplasia). Case 3: Young child with familial skeletal dysplasia with short BirgitWeiss1,BirgitEberle1,RalphRöth1,ChristiaandeBruin2,Julian stature, joint laxity and other skeletal involvement. WES result: C. Lui3, Katrin Hinderhofer1, Jeffrey Baron3, Jan M. Wit2, Gudrun A. COMP: heterozygous likely pathogenic missense variant Rappold1 c.1293C>A, p.Asp431Glu. Clinical diagnosis: Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (Fairbank type). 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Leiden Uni- Conclusion: Multidisciplinary approach could facilitate the versity Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3National Institute of establishmentofthemostlikelyclinicaldiagnosisinpatientswith health,Bethesda, MD, USA. skeletal disorders with previously identiﬁed causative gene variant. Key parameters for obtaining the clinical diagnosis differ Humangrowthisacomplextrait.Aconsiderablenumberofgene fromgeneto gene. defectshavebeenshowntocauseshortstature,butthereareonly M. Mijovic: None. B. Bukva: None. J. Ruml Stojanovic: None. few examples of genetic causes of non-syndromic tall stature. A. Miletic: None. B. Bosankic: None. H. Petrovic: None. G. Besides rare variants with large effects and common risk alleles Cuturilo: None. with small effect size, oligogenic effects may contribute to this phenotype. Exome sequencing was carried out in a tall male (height3.5SDS)andhis parents.Filtereddamagingvariantswith  P04
.089.B A previously unreported pathogenic variant in highCADDscoreswerevalidatedbySangersequencinginthetrio TAB2 in a patient with polyvalvular heart dystrophy, short and three other affected and one unaffected family members. stature anddysmorphism Network analysis was carried out to assess links between the candidates, and the transcriptome of murine growth plate was Nis Brix1,2, Rikke Christensen1, Susanne W. Grotkjær3, Dorte G. analyzed by microarray as well as RNA Seq. Heterozygous gene Nielsen4, Kasper J.Kyng5, PernilleA. Gregersen1,6 variantsinCE P104
,CROCC,NEK1,TOM1 L2
andTSTD2predictedas damaging were found to be shared between the four tall family 1DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,AarhusUniversityHospital,Aarhus members. Three of the ﬁve genes (CE P104
, CROCC and NEK1) N, Denmark, 2Department of Public Health, Aarhus University, belongtotheciliarygenefamily.Allgenesareexpressedinmouse Aarhus, Denmark, 3Department of Pediatrics, Herning Hospital, growth plate. Pathway and network analysis indicated close EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 182 functionalconnections.Together,thesedataexpandthespectrum (RD), which leads to death within the ﬁrst weeks of life. In the ofgeneswitharoleinlineargrowthandtallstaturephenotypes. present study, a large consanguineous Pakistani family segregat- B. Weiss: None. B. Eberle: None. R. Röth: None. C. de Bruin: ing MADB was recruited for molecular investigation in order to None.J.C.Lui:None.K.Hinderhofer:None.J.Baron:None.J.M. identifytheunderlying genetic cause. Wit:None. G.A.Rappold: None. Materials and Methods: The disease was diagnosed through clinical features of MADB, assisted by radiologic and biochemical tests. For genetic analysis whole exome sequencing (WES) was  P04
.091.D Compound heterozygous mutations in ERC C2
 are performed, followed by homozygosity mapping and variant associated withtrichothiodystrophy type 1 annotationusing VarSeq™v2.2(GoldenHelix,Inc.). Results:WholeexomesequencingrevealedanovelN-terminal Fahrettin Duymus, Deniz Esin, Busra Goksel Tulgar, Nadir Kocak, homozygous frameshift mutation NM_005857:c.28_29insA, p. TulinCora (Leu10Tyrfs*37) in ZMPST E24
 segregating with the disease phenotype. Remarkably, the potential loss-of-function mutation SelcukUniversity, Konya,Turkey. resultsinanon-lethalphenotypeinourpatients.Amorein-depth analysisofthemutationrevealedthattheobservedonebasepair A9-month-oldmalepatientwasadmittedtoourclinicwithsparse insertion creates anovel downstream in-frame start codon. hair, developmental delay and recurrent infections. He was the Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst report of a ﬁrst child of child of non-consanguineous Turkish parents. In the biallelicloss-of-functionmutationnotimplicatedinlethalRD.We patient’s anamnesis, it was learned that there was a rash on her proposearescuemechanisminvolvingtheusageofagainedin- skin at birth.İchthyosis and mild scaling were reported on the frame downstream start codon, which could potentially avoid scalp,trunk,andlowerextremitiesofthepatientfrom1monthof frameshiftandleadtoresidualenzymaticfunction.Theseﬁndings age.Intheevaluationofthepatient,therewereshortbrittlehair, mightbecrucialfortheinterpretationoffarN-terminalmutations dryskin,dystrophictoothstructure,andhyperkeratosisinthefeet. incomplexgenotype-phenotype correlations. Whole exome sequencing analysis was performed from the L. Kaufmann: None. J. Blatterer: None. E. Schaﬂinger: None. patient who had ichthyosis and frequent infections.ERC C2
: A.S.Khan:None.L.Auinger:None.B.Tatrai:None.S.W.Abbasi: c.2164C>T and ERC C2
:c.1867dup heterozygous mutations were None. M.Z. Ali: None. A.A. Abbasi: None. A. Al Kaissi: None. K. detected.Theclinicalﬁndingsofthepatientwerealsocompatible Wagner:None. M.A.Khan: None. C.Windpassinger: None. with trichothiodystrophy (TTD). TTD is a rare genetic disease characterized by brittle hair, ichthyosis, and recurrent infections.  P05
Cardiovascular Disorders MoleculargeneticevaluationisveryusefulinthediagnosisofTTD. ERC C2
: c.2164C> T mutation was previously reported as com-  P05
.001.CSegregationofrs897543876inBM P4
geneinfamily pound heterozygous with pathogenic p. (Arg616Pro) variant in a withnonsyndromic aortic dilatation patient diagnosed with TTD in 1994 by Broughton et al. To the bestofourknowledgetheERC C2
:c.1867dupvarianthasnotbeen Zuzana Capkova1,2, Jana Petrkova1,2, Pavlina Capkova1,2, Lucie previously reported in the literature and is a frame shift-type Punova1,2,Martin Prochazka1,2, Josef Srovnal1,3 variant. it has never been described before that the compound heterozygosity of these mutations causes photosensitive TTD. He wasdiagnosedtohavephotosensitiveTTDtype1andhismother 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Olomouc, and father are the carriers. Genetic counseling was given to the Olomouc,CzechRepublic,2DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Faculty family of the patient. A schedule was prepared for regular clinic of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacký University Olomouc, Olomouc, follow-up ofthepatient. Czech Republic, 3Institute of Molecular and Translational Medicine, F. Duymus: None. D. Esin: None. B. Goksel Tulgar: None. N. Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacký University Olomouc, Kocak: None. T.Cora: None. Olomouc, Czech Republic. Background: Aortic dilatation is the most common pathological  P04
.093.B An exceptional biallelic N-terminal frameshift involvementofthethoracicaorta.Thisaberrationcanarisebyvarious mutation in ZMPST E24
 leads to non-lethal progeria due to causessuchascongenitalconnectivetissuedisorder(CCTD),injuryor utilization ofadownstream alternative startcodon inﬂammation and is accompanied by bicuspid aortic valve, arterial hypertension and atherosclerosis. CCTD were associated with Lukas Kaufmann1, Jasmin Blatterer1, Erich Schaﬂinger1, Aiman S. increase of aortic dilatation but genetics of nonsyndromic aortic Khan2, Lisa Auinger1, Benjamin Tatrai1, Sumra W. Abbasi3, dilatation is still unknown. Case report: Here we report family with Muhammad Z. Ali2, Ansar A. Abbasi4, Ali Al Kaissi5, Klaus Wagner1, aortic dilatation. Proband was genetically tested for CCTD in his 61 MuzammilA. Khan2,Christian Windpassinger1 years. Aortic dilatation was observed and his echocardiography showed bicuspid aortic valve. Hypertension was treated in this 1Diagnostic & Research Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, patient. His brother had aortic dilatation and aortic insufﬁciency. 2Gomal Centre of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, D. I. Khan, Daughterofprobandwasobservedforanxiety.Daughterandsonof Pakistan, 3NUMS Department of Biological Sciences, Rawalpindi, probandwerewithoutaorticdilatation. Pakistan, 4Department of Zoology, Mirpur, Pakistan, 5Ludwig Method and result: Proband was consulted by geneticist and biological materials was collected with his informed consent to Boltzmann Instituteof Osteology, Vienna,Austria. genetictesting.Marfansyndromewasexcludedbysequencingof FBN1. Also DiGeorge syndrome was excluded by multiplex Introduction:MandibuloacraldysplasiawithtypeBlipodystrophy ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA). Moreover MLPA (MADB)isarareautosomalrecessivedisorderofprematureaging, revealedheterozygously deletedoneprobeinBM P4
.Sequencing associated with severe abnormalities in bone, skin and adipose of probe area showed unknown variant rs897543876 tissue. The main underlying genetic cause of MADB are homo- (NM_001202.6:c.-144C>T). Brother and daughter of proband also zygous or compound heterozygous missense mutations in the carriedrs897543876. ZMPST E24
-gene. Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in ZMPST E24
, Discussion and conclusion: rs897543876 is unknown variant however,havebeenassociatedwithlethalrestrictivedermopathy which appears in 0.012 %-0.014 % worldwide and predicted as EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 183 variant with moderate pathogenicity according to prediction tools. arrhythmiasinCASandSCDvictimsaremainlyduetopathogenic Thevariantislocatedin5´UTRandmaydownregulatedexpressionof variants in genes associated with ACM, LQT2, CPVT and LQT3. BM P4
. However, future studies are necessary for conﬁrmation of Supported by Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, grant Nr. rs897543876pathogenicrole.Acknowledgment:MHCZ—DROFNOL NV18-02-00237. 00098892, IGA UP LF_2020_007, IGA UP LF_2020_018, TACR P. Votypka: None. P. Peldova: None. S. Pohlova-Kucerova: TN01000013, No. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16_019/0000868, LM2018132, None.M.Kulvajtova:None.P.Peichl:None.M.Sramko:None.A. A-C-G-T,CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16_026/0008448. Gregorova: None. T. Tavacova: None. J. Petrkova: None. M. Z. Capkova: None. J. Petrkova: None. P. Capkova: None. L. Dobias: None. P. Tomasek: None. V. Vancura: None. M. Macek Punova: None.M. Prochazka: None. J. Srovnal:None. Sr.: None. M. Macek Jr.: None. J. Janousek: None. J. Kautzner: None.A. Krebsova: None.  P05
.002.D Malignant ventricular arrhythmia in a Czech representative cohort of sudden cardiac death (SCD) victims  P05
.004.B Analysis of the effect of periodontopathogens on andcardiacarrestsurvivors(CAS)aged1-65years:resultsof the molecular mechanisms of atherosclerosis. Systematic acandidate gene panel-basedsequencing strategy review Pavel Votypka1, Petra Peldova1, Stepanka Pohlova-Kucerova2, Talia YolandaMarroquin1, SandraGuauque-Olarte2 Marketa Kulvajtova3, Petr Peichl4, Marek Sramko4, Andrea Gregor- ova5, Terezia Tavacova6, Jana Petrkova7, Martin Dobias8, Petr 1Universidad Cooperativa de Colombia, Pasto, Colombia, 2Universi- Tomasek9, Vlastimil Vancura10, Milan Macek Sr.1, Milan Macek Jr.1, dadCooperativa de Colombia, Medellin, Colombia. JanJanousek11, Josef Kautzner4,Alice Krebsova4 Introduction: The role periodontal pathogens in atherosclerosis 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Faculty of hasnot beenfully understood. The aimof this systematic review Medicine, Charles University and Motol University Hospital, Prague, was to describe the effect of periodontopathogens on the Czech Republic, 2Department of Forensic Medicine, University molecular mechanisms involvedinatherosclerosis. Hospital Hradec Kralove, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic, 3Institute Materials and methods: This systematic review followed the for Forensic Medicine, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Cochrane and PRISMA guidelines. Screened databases were Prague, Czech Republic, 4Institute for Clinical and Experimental PubMed, Science Direct, and Lilacs. Original studies published Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Department of Biology and from January 2015 to August 2020 about periodontitis and MedicalGenetics,FacultyHospitalOstrava,Ostrava,CzechRepublic, atherosclerosiswereincluded.Atoolforqualityassessment,based 6Children´s Heart Center, Faculty Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech onSTROBE checklist, wasapplied. Republic, 71st Department of Internal Medicine - Cardiology and Results: A total of 722 records were collected, 33 papers were Laboratory of Cardiogenomics, Faculty Hospital Olomouc and selected for full-text reading. Porphyromonas gingivalis,Tannerella PalackyUniversity,Olomouc,CzechRepublic,811InstituteofForensic forsythia, Fusobacterium nucleatum, and Treponema denticola, were Science and Medical Law, Faculty Hospital Olomouc and Palacký able to disseminate from the oral cavity and invade atherosclerotic University, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 9Department of Forensic plaqueinhumans.Inmicesera,thesebacteriasigniﬁcantlyincreased Medicine, University Hospital Bulovka., 2nd Faculty of Medicine, theexpressionof25genesorproteinsbelongingtoapoptosis,TLR Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 10Department of signalling,TGF-beta,inﬂammation,andangiogenesispathways.Ten Cardiology, Faculty Hospital Pilsen, Pilsen, Czech Republic, 11Chil- papersreportedthatP.gingivalisandEikenellacorrodenssigniﬁcantly dren´sHeartCentre,2ndFacultyofMedicine,CharlesUniversityand increased the expression of 42 biomarkers associated with athero- Motol University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. sclerosisdevelopmentandprogressionpathwayssuchasapoptosis, cytochrome-c, inﬂammation, entdothelin, B cell activation, vascular Introduction: Hereditary cardiomyopathy and arrhythmic syn- endothelial growth factor, cell adhesion, and toll like receptor dromes are associated with an increased risk of malignant pathways, in HAECs, HUVECs, and AoSMCs. Filifactor alocis signiﬁ- ventricular arrhythmia leading to SCD or cardiac arrest. Genetic cantly increased angiogenesis-related biomarkers. P. gingivalis testingconﬁrmsclinical/autopsydiagnosisandenablesstratiﬁed signiﬁcantly decreased the expression biomarkers associated with care. antiapoptoticmechanismsinHCAECs,HASMSs,HUVECs. PatientsandMethods:Altogether166CAS(71femaleand97 Conclusions: Data-analysis revealed the signiﬁcant effect of males) and 76 SCD victims (25 female and 51males) were someperiodontopathogensonproatherogenicmechanisms.Net- analysed. In the CAS group 103 cases have dg. of idiopathic work analysis will be performed on this data. It is important to ventricular arrhythmia (iVF), 34 arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy studytheeffectofotherperiodonthopathogensinatherogenesis. (ACM; of which 27 right -/ 7 left predominant) and 2 have SGO receivedfunding by CONADIand TYMbyMinciencias. hypertrophiccardiomyopathy(HCM).TheSCDgroupcomprises11 T.Y.Marroquin: None. S.Guauque-Olarte: None. cases with post mortem dg. of hypertrophic - (HCM) /dilated- (DCM),16arrhythmic cardiomyopathy (ACM),20suddenarrhyth- micdeath(SADS)and18suddenunexplaineddeathcases(SUD).  P05
.005.C Somatic mosaicism of human coronary artery cells Massively parallel sequencing (MiSeq platform; Illumina.com) inatherosclerosis utilisedacustom-madepanelwith100 candidategenes(SOPHiA Genetics;Switzerland).PresenceofClass4-5variantswasvalidated Aleksei Zarubin,Anton Markov, Maria Nazarenko bySanger sequencing and viafamily segregation analyses. Results: The cumulative detection rate of Class 4-5 variants in Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Research CAS was in 49/166 (30 %) and in SCD victims 18/76 (22 %). The Medical Center,Tomsk, RussianFederation. most commonly affected gene was PK P2
 (12/67 variant-positive cases), followed by KCNH2 (8/67), RYR2 (7/67), TTN (7/67) and Introduction: Accumulation of somatic mutations is usually SCN5A(6/67). associated with aging, and age-associated diseases, e.g., athero- Conclusion: In a representative Czech cohort, cardiac arrest sclerosis. We assessed the scale and cell speciﬁcity of this could be frequently explained by a molecular cause. Malignant EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 184 phenomenon in the human coronary arteries affected by stratiﬁcationanddetermineifPRSscanbeintegratedintoclinical atherosclerosisusingsinglecellRNAsequencing(scRNA-seq)data. practice. Materials and Methods: We used public dataset B.Chalazan: None.C.Lee:None.V. Morrill: None.S.Darbar: (PRJNA544957). Brieﬂy, coronary arteries from four explanted None. A. Ornelas-Loredo: None. A. Sridhar: None. M. Daviglus: heart affected by atherosclerosis were dissociated and used for None.P. Ellinor: None. D.Darbar: None. scRNA-seq. Sample datasets were pooled for clustering and cell type determination. Single cells were genotyped using cellSNP- lite. Total cell genotype served as reference for every sample  P05
.007.A Mendelian randomization suggests a causal effect separately. We counted the number of cells with somatic ofabdominalobesity on postprandial lipemia mutationsin eachcluster. Results: The maximal proportion of mosaic cells was speciﬁc for Malene Revsbech Christiansen1, Torben Hansen1, Thorkild I. A. plasmacells(53.9%).Somaticvariantswerefoundtoagreaterextent Sørensen1,2, Niels Grarup1, Mario García Ureña1, Dmitrii Borisevich1, in genes of HLA receptor family and cytochrome b-245. Smooth Jean-Michel Oppert3, José Alfredo Martínez Hernandéz4,5, Ellen musclecellswerethesecondclusterintermsofsomaticmosaicism Blaak6,Tuomas Oskari Kilpeläinen1 frequency(13.5%).TheyalsocontainedalterationsinHLAgenes,but alsointhegenesofmetallothioneinandapolipoproteinD.Somatic 1Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, heterogeneityofmacrophageswasfoundinactinandtubulingenes, Copenhagen N, Denmark, 2Department of Public Health, Section of inadditiontogenesofpreviouslydescribedcelltypes.Atthesame Epidemiology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, time,theproportionofcellscontainingtwoormoresomaticvariants 3Nutrition Department, Pitie-Salpêtrière Hospital, Assistance Publique among smooth muscle cells was signiﬁcantly less (0.3%) than in Hôpitaux de Paris, Sorbonne University, Paris, France, 4Department of plasmacells(30%). Nutrition,FoodSciences,andPhysiology,CenterforNutritionResearch, Conclusion: We have discovered somatic mosaicism in University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain, 5Centro de Investigación coronary artery cells affected by atherosclerosis. Different cell BiomédicaenRedFisiopatologíadelaObesidadyNutrición,Institutoof typeshave differentlevelsofmosaicism. Atthesametime,there Health Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 6Department of Human Biology, are genetic variants both shared by all cells and speciﬁc for NUTRIMSchoolofNutritionandTranslationalResearchinMetabolism, individual celltypes. MaastrichtUniversity,Maastricht,Netherlands. A.Zarubin: None. A.Markov: None. M. Nazarenko:None. Introduction: High postprandial lipemia is associated with an increasedriskofcardiovasculardisease,independentoffastinglipid  P05
.006.D A Polygenic Risk Score for Atrial Fibrillation in a levels. Abdominal and gluteofemoral fat handle lipoproteins Hispanic/Latino Population differently, which could affect postprandial lipemia and thus cardiovascularrisk.Weaimedtostudythecausalinﬂuencesofbody Brandon Chalazan1, Christina Lee2, Valerie Morrill2, Sara Darbar3, fat distribution on postprandial lipemia after a high fat meal, using Aylin Ornelas-Loredo3, Arvind Sridhar4, Martha Daviglus3, Patrick Mendelianrandomization. Ellinor2, Dawood Darbar3 Materialsandmethods:Atotalof764adultswithobesityfrom seven European countries consumed a liquid high fat meal. 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2Broad Postprandial concentrations of triglycerides, glycerol, free fatty Institute, Boston, MA, USA, 3University of Illinois, Chicago, IL, USA, acids, and the cholesterol component of remnant-like particles 4University of Illinois atChicago, Chicago,IL, USA. (RLP), LDL and HDL were measured for 3 hours. Waist-hip ratio adjusted for BMI (WHR ) was instrumented using a genetic adjBMI Background: Previous genetic studies for atrial ﬁbrillation (AF) score of 442 independent WHR -associated genetic variants. adjBMI have identiﬁed common and rare variants associated with AF. Two-stage least squares regression analyses were used to assess Recently,polygenicriskscores(PRSs)havebeendevelopedforAF causal associations of WHR with postprandial lipid levels. adjBMI almost exclusively in patients of European ancestry. Here, we Linear regression analyses were used to assess associations of performedacandidate singlenucleotide polymorphism (SNP)on waist circumference and hip circumference adjusted for BMI a large cohort of Hispanic/Latino individuals determine the (WC and HC )withpostprandial lipidlevels. adjBMI adjBMI combinedimpactof geneticvariants. Results: Instrumental variable analyses suggested that Purpose: To generate a PRS to estimate the risk of AF in a WHR is causally associated with higher postprandial lipemia adjBMI Hispanic/Latino cohort. after a high fat meal, including higher postprandial levels of Methods: We prospectively enrolled 713 participants from the triglyceride (P=0.044) and RLP cholesterol (P=0.020). WC adjBMI UIC AF Registry and UIC Cohort of Patients, Family and Friends. and HC showed directionally opposite effects: WC was adjBMI adjBMI Thecohortwasgenotypedforthetop9knownAFriskallelesand associated with higher levels of triglyceride and RLP cholesterol aPRSwasdevelopedusingtheseSNPs.Thecohortwasstratiﬁed and HC with lower levels (P for difference=1.67x10-5 and adjBMI into quartiles of low: 0-20%; intermediate: 20-80%; and high: 80- 5.64x10-4,respectively). 100% geneticrisk. Conclusion: Our results suggest that higher abdominal fat Results: The study cohort consisted of 625 Hispanic/Latino depositioniscausallyassociatedwithhigherpostprandiallipemia. subjects with a mean age 46.0±13.5 years and 57% were male. Furthermore,gluteofemoralfatdepositionmayshowtheopposite Patients in the intermediate and high genetic risk group were effect. associatedwitha2.50-fold(oddsratio[OR]2.50;95%conﬁdence Funding:MRC(NNF17SA0031406),TOK(NNF20O C0063707
),DB interval [CI]: 0.92-6.81; P=0.07) and 2.70-fold (OR 2.70; 95% [CI]: (NNF17C C0026760
) 1.13-6.43; P=0.02) increase in AF risk compared to the low risk M.R. Christiansen: None. T. Hansen: None. T.I.A. Sørensen: group. None.N.Grarup:None.M.G.Ureña:None.D.Borisevich:None. Conclusions:WeshowthataPRSiscapableofpredictingand J. Oppert: None. J. Martínez Hernandéz: None. E. Blaak: None. riskstratifyingAFpatientsinHispanic/Latinospopulations.Further T.O.Kilpeläinen: None. studies will explore the impact of additional AF loci on risk EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 185  P05
.008.B A FAIR Brugada Syndrome data repository to Introduction:Brugadasyndrome(BrS)isahereditarydiseasewith facilitate cardiogenetic research high allelic/genetic heterogeneity and associated with the risk of ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. This clinical MartaM.TébarRuiz1,2,DorienDaneels1,3,GudrunPappaert4,Elyssa entityisclassicallydescribedasanarrhythmicconditionoccurring Cannaerts1,ThomydeRavel1,CarlodeAsmundis4,JuanSieira4,Ann in a structurally normal heart, but this assumption has been Nowé2,5, Pedro Brugrada4, Catharina Olsen1,2,3, Tom Lenaerts2,5,6, recently contradicted by several observations, which suggest a SoniaVanDooren1,2,3 linkbetween BrS andstructural cardiomyopathies. Materials andmethods: Westudied acohort of patientswith 1Centre for Medical Genetics, research group Reproduction and spontaneous or drug-induced type 1 EKG pattern, variably Genetics, research cluster Reproduction, Genetics and Regenerative associatedwithsymptomsandapositivefamilyhistorybyaNext Medicine, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) and Universitair Ziekenhuis Generation Sequencing panel approach, including both channe- Brussel (UZ Brussel), Brussels, Belgium, 2Interuniversity Institute of lopathiesand cardiomyopathies genes. Bioinformatics in Brussels (IB)2, Brussels, Belgium, 3Brussels Inter- Results: We identiﬁed in eleven subjects (13.8%) likely university Genomics High Throughput core (BRIGHTcore), VUB-ULB, pathogenic/pathogenicvariantsingenesassociatedwitharrhyth- Brussels, Belgium, 4Heart Rhythm Management Centre, Vrije mogenic (AC) or hypertrophic (HCM) cardiomyopathy. Four Universiteit Brussel (VUB) and Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel (UZ mutationswereidentiﬁedinthetwomajorHCMgenes:missense Brussel), Brussels, Belgium, 5Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Artiﬁcial changesp.Arg783Hisandp.Val1213MetinMYH7,aframeshifting Intelligence Lab Brussels, Brussels, Belgium, 6Machine Learning p.Lys1065Glnfs*12 and a splicing c.1458-1G>A variations in Group, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB),Brussels, Belgium. MYBP C3
. All of these mutations are known being associated to HCM.Nevertheless,onlythepatientcarryingtheMYBP C3
splicing Introduction:BrugadaSyndrome(BS)isararecardiacinheritable mutation showedclinical evidence ofstructural cardiomyopathy. disorder associated with a high-risk of sudden cardiac death, Conclusions:OurstudyshowedgenotypicoverlapbetweenBrS whichmaybetheﬁrstsymptom,makingessentialitsdetectionin andstructuralcardiomyopathies,includingHCM.Thisobservation pre-symptomatic individuals. Drug-induced ECG monitoring and supportsBrugadatype1ECGpatternasapossibleearlysignofan genetictestingprovidepowerfulearly-warningsystems.However, occult structural heart disease, with implications in clinical inapproximately 70%ofthecases nocausative variant(s) canbe management andgenetic counselling. identiﬁed. In addition, comparisons across multiple centres are M. Farnè: None. R. Selvatici: None. C. Balla: None. M. Bifﬁ: currentlydifﬁcultassofar,noregistrywithclinicalinformationand None.E.DeMaria:None.C.Trabanelli:None.A.Margutti:None. causative genetic variants has been made available to the M.Bertini: None.A. Ferlini: None.F. Gualandi: None. research community. In this study we provide a ﬁrst structured repository for BS, following FAIR data principles and data protection regulations, in order to facilitate comparisons and  P05
.010.DCongenitalheartdefectsinNoonansyndromeand further clinical,genetic and AI-drivenresearch. PTPN11 muta□onCongenital heart defects in Noonan syn- Methods and results: Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel (UZB) has drome andPTPN11 mutation collected data for BS families since 1992. We manually curated clinical data of patients who consented further research (157 LauraClaudiaPopa1,NicoletaAndreescu1,2,SimonaFarcas2,Adela individuals). In addition, we (re-)classiﬁed variants for mutations Chirita-Emandi1,2, Maria Puiu1,2 foundintheBSandprimarycardiacarrhythmiaassociatedgenes using Hofman (PMID: 23963746) and ACMG classiﬁcation guide- 1LouisTurcanuChildrenHospital,Timisoara,Romania,2VictorBabes lines (PMID: 25741868), to highlight differences in classiﬁcation University, Timisoara, Romania. algorithmsand validate theused methodology. Conclusions: Combining clinical and genetic data is essential to Background: Noonan syndrome is a common autosomal ﬁnd phenotype-genotype correlations, especially in cases like BS dominant RASopathy disorder clinically characterized by facial where different causative variants may lead to different severity dysmorphism, congenital heart disease, short stature and grades. This new UZB BS repository is intended to boost the molecularly characterized by mutations in most common genes: integrationofdataanalysiscomingfromdifferentgroups,ensuringa PTPN11,SO S1
,RAF1,RIT1,KRAS.MutationsinthePTPN11arethe better understanding and diagnosis of BS patients.This initiative is most frequent causes of Noonan syndrome also the determining supported by IMAGica IRP project grant of the Vrije Universiteit factorofthemostseriousheartdefectswithhighriskofmorbidity. Brussel. Aim: The aim of this study is to identify the congenital heart M.M.TébarRuiz:None.D.Daneels:None.G.Pappaert:None. defects associated with PTPN11 mutations in children from our E.Cannaerts:None.T.deRavel:None.C.deAsmundis:None.J. hospitalinconjunction withtheliterature reports. Sieira:None.A.Nowé:None.P.Brugrada:None.C.Olsen:None. Materialsandmethod:Anumberofsixteenpediatricpatients, T.Lenaerts:None. S.Van Dooren: None. diagnosedwithNoonansyndromewereclinicallyandgenetically investigated at Timisoara Genomic Medicine Centre. The mole- cular testing was performed on MiSeq Illumina platform using  P05
.009.CMutationsinstructuralgenesinBrugadaSyndrome Illumina TruSight Cardio Sequencing Panel kit. From sixteen patients’ cases for which a mutation was identiﬁed, there were MariannaFarnè1,RitaSelvatici1,CristinaBalla2,MauroBifﬁ3,EliaDe twelveinPTPN11andfourinSO S1
.Inthispresentationwefocus Maria4, Cecilia Trabanelli1, Alice Margutti1, Matteo Bertini2, Alessan- onlyontheheterozygous mutations foundin PTPN11. draFerlini1, Francesca Gualandi1 Results:Intheremainingtwelvecases,pulmonaryvalvestenosis was found in seven cases; atrial septal defect was identiﬁed in 3 1UnitofMedicalGenetics,DeparmentofMedicalSciences,University cases, aortic coarctation, aortic regurgitation and hypertrophic ofFerrara,Ferrara,Italy,2CardiologyDepartment,UniversityHospital cardiomyopathy were each identiﬁed in two cases, pulmonary Sant’Anna of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 3Department of Cardiology, regurgitation,heart failure,aorticdysplasia,ventricularseptaldefect University Hospital of Bologna Sant’Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, andcoronarysinusdilatationwereeachidentiﬁedinonecase. 4CardiologyUnit,CarpiRamazziniHospital,Carpi(Modena),Italy. Conclusion: The high incidence of cardiac abnormalities suggests that proper cardiac evaluation is important in genetic EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 186 counseling, case management, and possibly in the identiﬁcation Turkey, 3Department of Pediatric Genetics, Umraniye Teaching and oftheresponsible gene. Research Hospital, University of Health Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey, Key words:cardiac defects, Noonansyndrome,PTPN 11. 4Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Umraniye L.C. Popa: None. N. Andreescu: None. S. Farcas: None. A. Teaching and Research Hospital, University of Health Sciences, Chirita-Emandi: None.M. Puiu: None. İstanbul, Turkey, 5Department of Cardiology, Goztepe Teaching and ResearchHospital,IstanbulMedeniyetUniversity,Istanbul,Turkey.  P05
.011.A Limitations in the interpretation of variants of Apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy(AHCM) involving the distal uncertain signiﬁcance in cardiomyopathies portionoftheleftventricleisarelativelyrareformofhypertrophic cardiomyopathy(HCM) with genetic heterogeneity. Recent mole- Clara Herrero-Forte1,2, María Fenollar-Cortés1,2, Carmen Cotarelo- cular genetics studies have shown that pathogenic mutations in Pérez1,2, Victoria Cañadas-Godoy3,2, María Alejandra Restrepo- genes coding sarcomere/Z-band components, including titin/ Córdoba4,2, Laura Daganzo-Sierro1,2, Emma Soengas-Gonda1,2, connectin and its associate proteins, plays a role in the etiology. RalucaOancea-Ionescu1,2 Amongthesegenes,OBSCNstandsoutasastrongcandidateand encodes the obscurin, a protein associated with titin/connectin. 1Unidad de Genética Clínica. Servicio de Análisis Clínicos. Instituto de Wepresenta58yearsoldfemalepatientwithalikelypathogenic Medicina del Laboratorio, Madrid, Spain, 2Instituto de Investigación (LP) variant in the OBSCN in clinical exome analysis(CES) to Clínico San Carlos (IdISSC). Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, elucidatetheetiologyofAHCM.Next-generationsequencingwas 3Consulta de Cardiopatías Familiares/Unidad de Arritmias. Servicio de performedontheNextSeq500platformusingthevirtualpanelfor Cardiología., Madrid, Spain, 4Unidad de Insuﬁciencia Cardiaca y Apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy(AHCM). We reported a CardiopatíasFamiliares.ServiciodeCardiología.,Madrid,Spain. heterozygous LP variant on OBSCN by attributing PV S1
, PM2 criteria. (NM_001098623 GRCh37:hg19: Chr1:228560464 exon 94 Introduction: Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) in cardiomyopa- c.21989_22002del p. Lys7330Argfs*8).This variation creates a thieshasimprovedthediagnosticyield.However,detectingvariants frameshift and causes an amino acid substitution of lysine to of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS) could be a problem because those arginine at codon 7330(PV S1
). This variant is not present in with high probability of pathogenicity require additional studies in population databases(PM2). There weren`t any other pathogenic ordertodeterminetheirclinicalsigniﬁcance. or likely pathogenic variants associated with HCM. In their MaterialsandMethods:NGSanalysisusingvirtualpanelof50 experimental study, Borisov et al. demonstrated that obscurin genes for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) or dilated cardio- activity varies and is an important mediator during myocardial myopathy(DCM) was performed in102 patients. Sanger sequen- hypertrophy.Althoughthisistheﬁrstcasereportintheliterature cingforcosegregationanalysiswasableinonly6of17VUSwith ofanLPvariationinOBSCNinanapicalHCMpatient,newpatients high probability of pathogenicity. Alpha-galactosidase and lyso- andfunctionalstudiesareneededtoshowitsassociationwiththe GL-3 levels were measured to conﬁrm Fabry disease. Current disease. scientiﬁc evidence wasreviewed. B.Unal:None.N.B.Agaoglu:None.O.AkgunDogan:None.L. Results: 61 patients with HCM: 15 Pathogenic or likely Doganay: None.M. Agirbasli: None. pathogenic variants (25%) and only 9 VUS were considered with high probability of pathogenicity (15%). 41 patients with DCM: 5 Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants (12%) and only 8 VUS  P05
.013.C A novel missense mutation of TNNI3K associated were considered with high probability of pathogenicity (20%). withcardiac conduction disease Cosegregation analysis didn´t allow to conﬁrm the pathogenicity of the 6 VUS with high probability of pathogenicity. An indirect Ilyas Ahmad1,2, Stephanie Tennstedt1,2, Shafaq Ramzan3,1, Shahid functional study of Fabry disease conﬁrmed the pathogenicity in MahmoodBaig3,Jeanette Erdmann1,2 one case. One VUS with high probability of pathogenicity has beenreclassiﬁedtolikelybenignduetoanewscientiﬁcevidence 1Institute for Cardiogenetics, University of Luebeck, Luebeck, publishedby other authors. Germany, 2DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research) Conclusions: Cosegregation studies could be useless in those partnersiteHamburg/Kiel/Luebeck,Luebeck,Germany,3National families with small number of affected relatives. The genetic Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), characteristics of cardiomyopathies, mainly incomplete pene- Faisalabad, Pakistan. trance, alsocontributes toapoor performance of thecosegrega- tion studies. Functional studies are more suitable for Cardiacconduction disease (CCD),whichcauses altered electrical reclassiﬁcation of VUS, although they are not usually accessible impulse propagation in the heart, is a serious life-threatening inhealthcare practice. condition with high morbidity and mortality rates. In majority of C. Herrero-Forte: None. M. Fenollar-Cortés: None. C. Cotar- CCD, the synchronous activity of impulse-generating nodes and elo-Pérez: None. V. Cañadas-Godoy: None. M.A. Restrepo- impulse-conductionisunderminedforthenormalheartbeat.CCD Córdoba: None. L. Daganzo-Sierro: None. E. Soengas-Gonda: exhibitgeneticandclinicalheterogeneitywithdiverseunderlying None.R. Oancea-Ionescu: None. pathomechanisms. In this study, we investigated a consangui- neousPakistanifamilyhavingfouraffectedindividualswithheart arrhythmia followed by ventricular septal defect in only one  P05
.012.BOBSCNasacandidategeneforapicalhypertrophic individual. We applied whole exome sequencing (WES) and co- cardiomyopathy segregationanalysisonDNAsamplesfromallavailableindividuals whichrevealedanovelrecessivebiallelicmutation(NM_015978.2: Busra Unal1,2, Nihat Bugra Agaoglu1,2, Ozlem Akgun Dogan3,2, c.1531T>C: p. S511
P) in the highly conserved kinase domain in LeventDoganay1,2,4, MehmetAgirbasli5 cardiactroponinI-interactingkinase(TNNI3K)gene.Themissense variant was absent from ethnicity matched healthy controls and 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Umraniye Teaching and Research available public databases. The mutated residue is highly Hospital, University of Health Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey, 2GLAB conserved, and its substitution is predicted to be pathogenic by (Genomic Laboratory), Health Directorate of Istanbul, İstanbul, in silico prediction methods. Furthermore, molecular dynamics EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 187 simulation studies of the dimer suggests that p. S511
P has an Cardiacphenotype Familial Syndromic Gene DNAvariant P/ indirect effect on the orientation of the monomers facing each Y/N Y/N LP other, in the direction of a more energetically unfavorable c.2191A>T,p. (Arg731*) orientation. Since the orientation of the monomers with respect CE P290
 c.133_136delCAAG, P to each other plays a crucial role in the function of the protein, p.(Gln45Lysfs*3) therefore, we hypothesize that TNNI3K- S511
P might negatively Truncusarteriosus, N ? GAT6 c.1417_1426del,p. P affect the kinase activity of the protein. In conclusion, this study interruptionofthe (Lys473Glyfs*8) aorticarch reportsanovelrecessivemutationp. S511
PinTNNI3Kandexpands TetralogyofFallot N N FLT4 c.89C>T,p. LP thespectrumof TNNI3Kprotein inthe pathogenicityof CCD. (Pro30Leu) Keywords: CCD, TNNI3K GDF1 c.681C>A,p. P (Cys227*) I. Ahmad: None. S. Tennstedt: None. S. Ramzan: None. S.M. PS,VSD Y Y E P300
 c.3739T>C,p. LP Baig:None. J.Erdmann: None. (Cys1247Arg) Truncusarteriosus N N CRELD1 c.959delA,p. LP (Gln320Argfs*25)  P05
.015.A Diagnostic yield of WES-based gene panels in TetralogyofFallot N Y GLI3 c.642delC,p. LP (Met215*) patients with congenital structural heart defects - a multi- CRELD1 c.1103T>A,p. LP centerstudy (Leu368*) Truncusarteriosus N N HAND1 c.410_411delinsA,p. P Marrit M. Hitzert1, Rosalie L. Neijzen2, Dennis Dooijes2, Yvonne J. (Arg137fs) Vos1,Rosa L. E. vanLoon2, Wilhelmina S.Kerstjens-Frederikse1 PS,VSD N N JAG1 c.1278del,p. P (Cys427fs) AVSD Y Y MYH11 c.4882A>C,p. LP 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, (Lys1628Gln) 2University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,Netherlands. BAV,TAAD Y N GDF1 c.681C>A,p. P (Cys227*) BAV N N FOX C2
 c.1402dupG,p. LP Introduction: Congenital heart defects (CHD) affect 1% of live (Glu468Glyfs*?) births. A monogenetic cause can be identiﬁed in 5% to 10% of HLHS,BAV Y Y PTPN11 c.1505C>T,p. P patients. WES-based gene panels are widely used, while there is (Ser502Leu) noconsensusonwhichgenestoincludeandwhichpatientscould HLHS N Y PTPN11 c.179G>C,p. LP beneﬁt most. We evaluated the diagnostic yield of WES-based (Gly60Ala) ASD Y Y ACT C1
 c.904T>A,p. LP genepanels inCHDpatients. (Ser302Thr) Patients: We retrospectively evaluated the results from WES- HLHS,incomplete Y Y PTPN11 c.1529A>C,p. P based gene panels in CHD patients in the Netherlands at the AVSD,primum (Gln510Pro) septumdefect, University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG) and the University narrowerAoV, Medical Center Utrecht (UMCU). Inclusion lasted from 2013 hypoplasiaaorticarc withCOA (UMCU) and 2017 (UMCG) up until April 2020. We collected HLHSwithmitral N N NOTCH1 c.3177del,p. P clinicaldataincluding phenotype and family history ofCHD. valveatresia, (Val1060fs) Results: A total of 328 patients were included with most hypoplasticaortic arch,PDAASD patientshavingaleft-sided(n=117;35.7%)orconotruncalheart defect (n=94; 28.7%). In 3/117 and 8/94 patients a (likely) pathogenic variant was demonstrated. Total diagnostic yield was M.M.Hitzert:None.R.L.Neijzen:None.D.Dooijes:None.Y.J. comparable between the UMCG and the UMCU (6.2% and 6.0%, Vos: None. R.L.E. van Loon: None. W.S. Kerstjens-Frederikse: respectively) and was higher in syndromic than non-syndromic None. patients(12.5% vs. 5%;P=0.038). Conclusions:OurdiagnosticyieldofCHDgenepanelsasused in clinical practice (6%) is comparable to the previously reported  P05
.017.CCHDbase:ageneticknowledgebaseforcongenital yield in study settings (5% to 10%), and is highest in syndromic heartdisease patients. Cardiacphenotype Familial Syndromic Gene DNAvariant P/ Weizhen Zhou1, Wenke Li1, Ruby W Wang2, Huayan Shen1, Wen Y/N Y/N LP Chen1, Qingyi Zeng1, Hao Wang1, Meng Yuan1, Ziyi Zeng1, Jinhui Leftatrialisomerism, N Y DNAH11 c.5778+1G>A P Cui1, FredY Ye2,Zhou Zhou1 PAH DNAI1 c.48+2dupT P Rightatrial Y Y GDF1 c.681C>A,p. P 1Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Fuwai Hospital, Beijing, isomerism,right- (Cys227*) China, 2School of Information Management, Nanjing University, sidedaorticarch, AVSD,(sub)valvular Nanjing,China. PS GDF1 c.681C>A,p. P Introduction: Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most (Cys227*) common birth defect, affecting nearly 1 per 100 newborns. CHD Dextrocardia,right N Y PKD1 L1
 c.2027C>T,p. LP isomerism, (Pro676Leu) coversbroadstructuralheartmalformationsandshowsacomplex univentricularheart, geneticbasis.Yet,thesusceptibilitygeneswithdifferentstrengths AVSD,TAPVR of evidence are scattered in literature without professional data PKD1 L1
 c.5728C>T,p. LP (Arg1910Trp) integration and comprehensive analyses. The whole picture of TGA,VSD N N GDF1 c.681C>A,p. P CHD genetics and the genotype-phenotype correlations are (Cys227*) unclear. Truncusarteriosus, N N NKX2-6 c.455dupA,p. P Method: A total of 1,150 publications were systemically VSD (Gln153Alafs*?) reviewed. Metadata for each study including sample features, NKX2-6 c.455dupA,p. P (Gln153Alafs*?) experimental design, and statistical results were collected and PLD1 P functional annotations of genes and mutations were performed. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 188 The patterns of CHD genes across various types were analyzed  P05
.019.A Role of xenobiotic biotransformation genes in anda databasewas constructed. genetic predisposition ofcongenital heart diseases Result: We integrated 1,139 genes, 1,022 copy number variations and structural variations, 2,641 single-nucleotide varia- Anna Tsepokina, Svetlana Shmulevich, Anastasia Ponasenko, tions or small insertions/deletions and 36 linkage regions AndreyShabaldin associated with CHD from 1,150 publications. We extracted a corenetworkof164genesusingk-coredecompositionbasedon Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, the protein-protein network and revealed the tissue and devel- Kemerovo,Russian Federation. opmental stage expression patterns, as well as critical biological pathwaysunderlyingCHD.Additionally,wereﬁnedCHDsubtypes Introduction: Congenital heart diseases are one of the most using genotype-phenotype correlations and six subtypes were common multi-factorial fetal abnormalities caused by a complex proposed to be more genetically homogeneous. A MySQL-based ofendo-andexogenousfactors.Anumberofstudieshaveshown online database (http://chddb.fwgenetics.org/) was developed to asigniﬁcantroleofgenesencodingenzymesinvolvedindifferent sharewith theCHDresearchcommunity. phasesofxenobioticmetabolisminthecongenitalheartdiseases Conclusion:ThisgeneticdatabaseofCHDpresentedaclearbig pathogenesis. pictureofCHDgenetics,andtheatlasofCHDgenesandsubtyping Material and Methods: In the presented research, 131 children provided important implications for mechanism research and withcongenitalheartdiseasesand101womenhavingchildrenwith clinicaldiagnosticsandtreatment.Thisworkwassupportedbythe this pathology were included in the study group. In control group, CAMSInitiativeforInnovativeMedicine(2016-I2M-1-016) 103 healthy children and their mothers were included. Single- W.Zhou:None.W.Li:None.R.Wang:None.H.Shen:None.W. nucleotidepolymorphismsinthexenobioticbiotransformationgenes Chen: None. Q.Zeng: None. H.Wang: None. M. Yuan:None. Z. CY P1
A1 (rs1048943), CY P1
A2 (rs762551), GST P1
 (rs6591256, Zeng:None. J. Cui:None. F.Ye: None. Z. Zhou:None. rs1871042 and rs17593068) were detected by the real-time polymerasechainreaction.Gene-geneinteractionsweredetermined usingtheMultifactorDimensionalityReductionmethod.  P05
.018.DMutationburdeninpatientswithsmallunrepaired Results:Thefrequencydistributionofallelesandgenotypesinall atrial septal defects studied groups were corresponded to the theoretically expected according to Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Comparative analysis of Anne Kathrine Møller Nielsen1, Camilla Nyboe2, Anne Sif Lund polymorphisms of CY P1
A1 (rs1048943), CY P1
A2 (rs762551), and Ovesen2, Sebastian Udholm2, Malthe Mølgård Larsen3, Vibeke GST P1
(rs6591256,rs1871042andrs1793068)genesinthestudyand Hjprtdal1,Lars Allan Larsen3 controlgroupsofwomenandtheirchildrendidnotshowstatistically signiﬁcantdifferencesbetweengroups.Weobtainednodifferencein 1Rigshopitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Aarhus University Hospital, thefrequencyofCY P1
A1,CY P1
A2andGST P1
betweenthestudyand Aarhus,Denmark,3UniversityofCopenhagen,Copenhagen,Denmark. control groups. At the same time, the genetic combinations GST P1
 (rs6591256)—GST P1
 (rs1871042) and GST P1
 (rs6591256)—GST P1
 Introduction: In a recent nationwide cohort study, we have (rs1871042)—CY P1
A1(rs1048943)inwomen;andGST P1
(rs1793068) discoveredthatpatientslivingwithanatrialseptaldefect(ASD)have —GST P1
 (rs6591256)—GST P1
 (rs1871042)—CY P1
A1 (rs1048943)— a shorter life expectancy, increased risk of atrial ﬁbrillation, CY P1
A2 (rs762551) in children contribute to the pathogenesis of pneumonia, and psychiatric issues compared to the general congenital heart diseases. This study was supported by basic population. The pathophysiological mechanisms are still unknown. researchproject№0546-2019-0002. Theobjectiveofthisstudyistoinvestigateifthisgroupofpatientsis A. Tsepokina: None. S. Shmulevich: None. A. Ponasenko: burdenedbymutationsingenesassociatedwithASD. None.A. Shabaldin: None. Methods: We included 147 patients with an unrepaired ASD. We curated a list of ASD candidate genes, and patients were analyzed for genetic variants in these genes, using targeted next  P05
.020.BPredictionofcoronaryarterydisease:Doriskfactor generation sequencing. We ﬁltered for protein altering variants genetic riskscores addvalue? (PAVs) with minor allele frequency (MAF) <0.01 and predicted pathogenicityusingtheCombinedAnnotationDependentDeple- Julia Ramírez1, Stefan van Duijvenboden2, William J. Young1, tion(CADD)method.Thenumberofrareandpathogenicvariants Andrew Tinker1, Pier D. Lambiase2, Michele Orini2, Patricia B. incaseswerecomparedwithvariantsidentiﬁedin33,370controls Munroe1 ofEuropean ancestry. Results: We identiﬁed 384 rare (MAF<0.01) PAVsin 59 genes. 1William Harvey Research Institute, London, United Kingdom, ASD patients were signiﬁcantly enriched for very rare (MAF< 2University College London, London, United Kingdom. 0.0001)PAVscomparedtocontrols(P=0.0001).Thefrequencyof PAVs with CADD score ≥ 30 was signiﬁcantly higher in ASD Introduction:Coronaryarterydisease(CAD)isheritableandhasa patients, comparedto controls (P=0.0042). polygenic architecture. Current genetic risk scores (GRS) for CAD Conclusions:Patientswithasmall,unrepairedASDwereenriched predict CAD independent from traditional risk factors, however for rare PAVs within 59 ASD candidate disease genes. Our results these scores may not capture all genetically pre-determined risk. suggest that recurrence risk may be increased for this group of We hypothesised that a score including additional GRSs for patientsandwarrantsfurtherinvestigations.Funding:Thisworkwas multiple cardiovascular risk factors, explaining additional biology supportedbyNovoNordicFoundation(Grantno.NNFSA170030576), underlyingCAD, may improveCAD prediction. Brd. Hartmanns Fond, Kong Christian den Tiendes Fond, Dagmar Methods:Weuseddatafrom52,254participantsinUK-Biobank MarshallsFondandEva&HenryFrænkelsMindefond. without a previous diagnosis of cardiovascular disease. In a A.K.M.Nielsen:None.C.Nyboe:None.A.S.L.Ovesen:None.S. training subset (50%, N=26,127), we identiﬁed the risk factors Udholm: None. M.M. Larsen: None. V. Hjprtdal: None. L.A. signiﬁcantly associated with CAD using Multivariable Cox regres- Larsen:None. sion to build three scores, Sc1 including sex, age and traditional EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 189 risk factors, Sc2 including Sc1 and a GRS for CAD, and Sc3 Carla Olivieri1, Fabio Pagella2,3, Sara Plumitallo1, Uroš Hladnik4, including Sc2, and 26 additional GRSs for traditional and Elisabetta Buscarini5, Elina Matti3, Anna Sbalchiero1, Guido Man- electrocardiogram riskfactors. fredi5, Giuseppe Spinozzi3, Elisabetta De Sando6, Sara Ugolini3, Results: In an independent test subset (50%, N=26,127) for Cesare Danesino1 CAD,Sc2hadahigherareaunderthecurve(AUC)thanSc1(0.757 versus 0.735, P=7.4 x 10-14). The hazard ratios (HRs) (95% 1General Biology and Medical Genetics Unit, Department of conﬁdence interval [CI]) for individuals in the top versus bottom Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2Department 20% of the distribution were 17.2 (10.7 - 27.7) versus 14.9 (9.3 - of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Depart- 23.7). Adding the two GRSs that remained independently ment of Otorhinolaryngology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San associated with CAD, GRSs for low-density lipoprotein and for Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 4Unità di Genetica Istituto per le malattie rare triglycerides, did not signiﬁcantly improve risk stratiﬁcation (AUC "Mauro Baschirotto" - B.I.R.D. Foundation o.n.l.u.s., Costozza di of0.759, P=7.0x10-2,HR [CI] of16.6[10.4 -26.4]). Longare (VI), Italy, 5UOC Gastroenterologia-Centro di riferimento Conclusion: Our results do not support additional beneﬁt for HHT, ASST Ospedale Maggiore di Crema, Crema (CR), Italy, 6Clinica CADpredictionbyaddingseveralindependentGRSsinadditionto Pediatrica, Fondazione IRCCSPoliclinico SanMatteoi, Pavia,Italy. aCAD GRSalone. J. Ramírez: None. S. van Duijvenboden: None. W.J. Young: Introduction: Hereditary Haemorragic Teleangiectasia (HHT) is an None.A.Tinker:None.P.D.Lambiase:None.M.Orini:None.P.B. autosomal dominant disorder affecting 1:5000-8000 individuals Munroe:None. worldwide. Mucocutaneous telangiectases and Arteriovenous mal- formationsininternalorgans(mostlylungs,liverandcentralnervous system) are the disease hallmarks. HHT is caused by pathogenetic  P05
.021.CClinicalimpactofre-evaluatinggenesandvariants variants inENG,ACVR L1
,SMAD4and GDF2,belonging to the TGFβ/ implicated in dilated cardiomyopathy BMPspathway.Wereporttheexperienceofourresearchlaboratory inthelastﬁveyears(2015-2020),focusingonmutationanalysis. Sophie L.V.M. Stroeks L. V. M. Stroeks1, Debby M. E. I. Hellebrekers1, Materials and Methods: Patients’ samples were collected by Ingrid P. C. Krapels1, Godelieve R. F. Claes1, Upsana Tayal2, Els K. HHT reference centres in Pavia and Crema (CR). Index cases’ Vanhoutte1, Artur van den Wijngaard1, Michiel T. H. M. Henkens1, sampleswereanalysedbyNGSsequencingpanelofthefourHHT JamesS.Ware2,StephaneR.B.Heymans1,HanG.Brunner1,JobA.J. causativegenesandMLPA;themolecularinvestigationinpatients’ Verdonschot1 relativeswas performedby Sangersequencing. Results:Wecollected334patients’samples;99/334wereindex 1Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, cases.Results are summarized inthetable below. 2Imperial CollegeLondon, London, United Kingdom. Subjects ACVR L1
 ENG SMAD4 Not In Unaffected Found progress Purpose: Accurate interpretation of variants detected in dilated Indexcase 99 39 26 1(1%) 27 6(6%) - cardiomyopathy (DCM) is crucial for patient care but has proven (39.4%) (26.3%) (27.3%) challenging. We applied a set of proposed reﬁned ACMG/AMP Patient’s 234 86 60 - - 8 80 relatives criteriaforDCM,re-classiﬁedalldetectedvariantsinrobustgenes, Totalpatients 333 125 86 1 28 13 80 andassociated theseresults to patients´ phenotype. Methods: The study included 902 DCM probands from the Maastricht Cardiomyopathy Registry, who underwent genetic Conclusions: Our data conﬁrm that HHT is mostly under- testing.Twogene-panelsizes(extendedn=48;androbustpanel diagnosed;however,thepresenceofareferencecenterenhances n=14) and two standards of variant classiﬁcation (standard the quality of genetic and clinical results. Moreover, we also versustheproposedreﬁnedACMG/AMP criteria)wereapplied to corroboratethepreviousobservationthatinourcountryACVR L1
is comparegenetic yield. the major HHT gene. Not found subjects can harbor variants in Results: A pathogenic variant was found in 17.8% of patients, intronicorregulatoryregionsratherthaninnovelgenes.However, andavariantofuncertainsigniﬁcance(VUS)wasfoundin32.8%of we are collecting WES data to re-analyse these cases. Grant: CO: patients when using method 1 (extended panel (n=48)+stan- ItalianMinistryofEducation,UniversityandResearchtotheDMM- dard ACMG/AMP), compared to respectively 16.9% and 12.9% University ofPavia “Dipartimenti diEccellenza (2018-2022)” when using method 2 (robust panel (n=14)+standard ACMG/ C. Olivieri: None. F. Pagella: None. S. Plumitallo: None. U. AMP), and respectively 14% and 14.5% using method 3 (robust Hladnik:None.E.Buscarini:None.E.Matti:None.A.Sbalchiero: panel (n=14)+reﬁned ACMG/AMP). Patients with pathogenic None.G.Manfredi:None.G.Spinozzi:None.E.DeSando:None. variants had signiﬁcantly lower event-free survival compared to S.Ugolini: None. C.Danesino: None. genotype-negativeDCM patients. Conclusion: Stringent gene selection for DCM genetic testing reducedthenumberofVUSswhilstretainingabilitytodetectsimilar  P05
.023.A Hereditary Haemorrhagic Telangiectasia: evidence pathogenic variants. The number of genes on diagnostic panels ofacommon ancestorin 19families fromNorthern Italy should be limited to genes which have the highest signal to noise ratio. AnnaSbalchiero1,YasminAbuHweij1,TommasoMazza2,Elisabetta S.L.V.M. Stroeks: None. D.M.E.I. Hellebrekers: None. I.P.C. Buscarini3,FabioPagella4,5,ElinaMatti4,GuidoManfredi3,Giuseppe Krapels: None. G.R.F. Claes: None. U. Tayal: None. E.K. Spinozzi4,Sara Ugolini4, Carla Olivieri1 Vanhoutte: None. A. van den Wijngaard: None. M.T.H.M. Henkens: None. J.S. Ware: None. S.R.B. Heymans: None. H.G. 1General Biology and Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Brunner: None. J.A.J.Verdonschot: None. Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2Unit of Bioinformatics, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, SanGiovanniRotondo(FG),Italy,3UOCGastroenterologia-Centrodi  P05
.022.D Experience of an Italian reference laboratory for a riferimento HHT, ASST Ospedale Maggiore di Crema, Crema (CR), raredisease: Hereditary HaemorragicTelangiectasia EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 190 Italy, 4Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Fondazione IRCCS Moreover, changes in the levels of 4 exosomes-miRNAs were Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 5Department of Otorhinolar- validated in a conﬁrmation cohort and found associated with yngology, University of Pavia,Pavia, Italy. albuminuria. In particular, miR-26a, major regulator of TGF-β signaling, was found downregulated in both type of exosomes Introduction:HereditaryHaemorrhagicTelangiectasia(HHT)isan when compared with healthy controls and to hypertension autosomal dominant vascular disorder affecting 1:5000-8000 normoalbuminurics (P<0.01). Similarly, decreased miR-26a levels individuals worldwide. The genes associated with HHT (ENG, werefoundinpodocyte-derived exosomes after TGF-βstress. ACVR L1
, SMAD4, GDF2) belong to the TGF-β signalling pathway. Conclusions: Our results revealed an exosomes miRNA Evidencefora“FounderEffect”wasdemonstratedonlyfewtimes signatureassociatedtoalbuminuriainhypertension.Inparticular, intheHHTliterature.Wefound19HHTunrelatedfamilies,coming exosomesmiR-26aseemedtoplayakeyroleintheregulationof fromtheregionaroundBergamo(NorthernItaly)andsharingthe TGF-β, a relevant effector in podocyte damage. These ﬁndings same pathogenetic variant: the ACVR L1
 in-frame deletion support the use of exosomes miRNAs as biomarkers of c.289_294del (p.H97-N98). Here we suggest the presence of a cardiovascular risk progression and therapeutic tools in early common ancestor in whom this variant arose and date its origin kidney damage. Funding from Carlos III Health Institute (PI12/ about200 years ago. 02615,PI19/01796 PI18/01405, CD18/00166and with ERDF. Materials and Methods: We analysed 88 subjects from 19 A. Ortega: None. J. Perez-Hernandez: None. O. Martinez- families: 66 disease-variant carriers and 22 unaffected. We used Arroyo:None.A.L.Riffo-Ramos:None.B.Sanchez-Garcia:None. eight microsatellite markers spanning 3.7Mb surrounding the D. Perez-Gil: None. F. Martinez: None. F. Chaves: None. J. ACVR L1
 locus. After haplotype reconstruction, the pathogenetic Redon:None. R.Cortes: None. variant’s age estimation was carried out with the DMLE+2.3 software package. Results: We observed a common disease haplotype in 16/19  P05
.025.C Identiﬁcation of a novel TPM1 variant causing families.Threefamiliesshowedevidenceofrecombinationaround hypertrophic cardiomyopathy inan Indian family the ACVR L1
 locus. Subsequent analyses suggested that the mutation occurred about 8 (95% credible set: 6-11) generations Prabodh Kumar1, Ganesh Paramasivam2, Tom Devasia2, Mukund ago,corresponding toabout 203 (165-265) yearsago. Prabhu2, Maneesh K. Rai3, Prakashini K4, Sandeep Mallya5, Dinesh Conclusions: We hypothesise for the ﬁrst time a “founder Reghunathan1,Krishnananda Nayak6,Rajasekhar Moka1 effect”foraHHTpathogeneticvariantinItaly.Thisinformationis also useful to notify the Bergamo Local Health Authority of a 1Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Manipal School of Life higher incidence of a rare, underdiagnosed disease. This will Sciences, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India, increase HHT patients’ awareness and offer them better clinical 2Department of Cardiology, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal care and genetic diagnosis. Grant: CO: Italian Ministry of Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India, 3Department of Education, University and Research to the DMM-University of Cardiology, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of Higher Pavia“Dipartimenti diEccellenza (2018-2022)” Education, Mangalore, India, 4Department of Radiodiagnosis and A. Sbalchiero: None. Y. Abu Hweij: None. T. Mazza: None. E. Imaging, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of Higher Buscarini: None. F. Pagella: None. E. Matti: None. G. Manfredi: Education,Manipal,India,5DepartmentofBioinformatics,Schoolof None.G. Spinozzi: None.S. Ugolini:None. C.Olivieri: None. LifeSciences,ManipalAcademyofHigherEducation,Manipal,India, 6Department of Cardiovascular Technology, Manipal College of Health Profession, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal,  P05
.024.B Exosomal microRNA biosignature related with India. hypertension-associated kidney disease Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an inherited cardiovas- Ana Ortega1, Javier Perez-Hernandez2, Olga Martinez-Arroyo1, cular disorder characterized by unexplained left ventricular Angela L. Riffo-Ramos3, Belen Sanchez-Garcia1, Daniel Perez-Gil4, hypertrophy. It affects about 20 million people globally, and its FernandoMartinez5, Felipe Chaves1, Josep Redon1,Raquel Cortes1 prevalenceisestimatedtobemorethan1in500inthegeneral population. We report a case of an Indian family with clinically 1Biomedical Research Institute Clinic Hospital - INCLIVA, Valencia, deﬁned HCM. Genetic analysis was performed using a targeted Spain,2INSERM,U1016,I,CochinInstitute,Paris,France,3Universidad amplicon panel containing 28 genes on a semiconductor next- de La Frontera, Temuco, Chile, 4Genomics England, Dawson Hall, generation sequencer. An autosomal dominant; heterozygous Charterhouse Square, London, United Kingdom, 5Medical Research mutation in the TPM1 gene (α-tropomyosin), NM_001018005.2: InstituteLaFeHospital, Valencia, Spain. c.203A>G, p.Gln68Arg, was identiﬁed and validated by Sanger sequencinginallaffectedmembersofthefamilybutwasabsent Introduction: Urinary albumin excretion (UAE) is a marker of intheunaffectedfamilymember.Thisvariantwasnotreported cardiovascularriskandrenaldamageinhypertension.MicroRNAs in the literature in HCM cases nor described in the general (miRNAs)packagedintoexosomesfunctionasparacrineeffectors population databases. We did not detect any other known in cell communication and the kidney is not exempt. This study pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in other genes. α- aimed to state an exosomal miRNA signature related to tropomyosinisanα-helicalcoiled-coildimerthatspanstheactin hypertension-associated kidney disease. ﬁlament’s length as a co-polymer. It plays a critical role in Material and Methods: Exosome samples from patients with sarcomeric contractile regulation by stabilizing the actin hypertension with/without UAE were isolated and characterized. ﬁlaments and interacting with other actin-binding proteins. ThreeuniquesmallRNAlibrariesfromeachsubjectwereprepared HCM causing TPM1 mutations act in a dominant-negative, (total plasma, urinary, and plasma-derived exosomes) for next- poison polypeptide mechanism, altering this delicate balance generation sequencing proﬁling. Differentially expressed miRNAs and increasing the myoﬁlament’s calcium sensitivity causing were over-represented in KEGG pathways, and selected miRNAs hypercontraction and hypertrophy. Our ﬁnding adds to the werevalidatedby RT-qPCRin aconﬁrmation cohort. mutational spectrum of TPM1, which is an uncommon cause of Results:Asignatureof29dysregulatedcirculatingmiRNAswas HCM.IdentiﬁcationofnovelvariantsorgenescausingHCMcan identiﬁed in UAE hypertensive subjects, regulating 21 pathways. unraveltheclinicalandgeneticheterogeneityinHCM.Thiswork EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 191 was supported by DST-SERBgrant(EEQ/2019/000477),CSIR-SRF Faculty ofMedicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand. grant (09/1165(0010)/2019-EMR-I), TIFAC and DST-FIST. P.Kumar:None.G.Paramasivam:None.T.Devasia:None.M. Introduction:Hypertrophiccardiomyopathy(HCM)andidiopathic Prabhu: None. M.K. Rai: None. P. K: None. S. Mallya: None. D. dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) are the most common referral in Reghunathan: None.K. Nayak: None. R.Moka:None. Inherited Cardiovascular Condition (ICC) Genetics Service. Several issues have to be discussed with patients and families during genetic consultation session, including the option for genetic  P05
.026.D Comprehensive genetic study in a young patient testingand cardiovascular surveillanceinfamily members. withcardiac interventricular septal hypertrophy Materials and Methods: Next-Generation Sequencing data of allpatientsaffectedbyHCMandidiopathicDCMinICCclinicwere TsenkaBoneva1,KalinaBelemezova2,IvanGruev3,IvankaDimova4 analysedusingtargetgenepaneltoclassifyvariantpathogenicity. Allsubjectswereaskedtocontacttheirasymptomaticﬁrst-degree 1UMHAT Alexandrovska, Cardiology clinic, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Genetic relatives for genetic counselling about their risk and to initiate Laboratory, SAGBAL “ Dr Shterev”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Multidisciplinary cardiovascularsurveillance. Transport Hospital "Tsar Boris III" – Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4Depart- Results: Sixty subjects (30-HCM and 30-DCM) were enrolled mentofMedicalgenetics,MedicalUniversitySoﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria. during1January 2014– 31December2020. Molecular detection frequencywas53.33%(33.33%pathogenic/likelypathogenic,20% An isolated hypertrophy of the basal segment of the interven- VUS) for HCM and 20% (10% pathogenic/likely pathogenic, 10% tricular septum protruding into the outﬂow tract of the left VUS) for DCM. The most prevalent gene attributing to HCM was ventriclemaybedifﬁculttodistinguishfromgenetichypertrophic MYBP C3
(30%).Theotherswereidentiﬁedinoneofthesegenes- cardiomyopathy (HCM). Because of potential life-threatening ACTN2, MY L2
, MYH7, TNNI3, TPM1, TTR and VCL (3.33% each). complications associated with a diagnosis of HCM, careful Amongst DCM, the variants were detected in TTN truncating investigations of patients are needed, including genetic analysis. variant(6.67%),MYH7(6.67%),MYBP C3
(3.33%)andSCN5A(3.33%). We report here a 16-years old patient, diagnosed with septal Following clinical surveillance in family members, the detection hypertrophy (>11 mm thickness) and slight tricuspid valve frequencyofnewpre-symptomaticcaseswas9.09%forHCMand regurgitation. There was family history for heart-related mortality 7.14%forDCM. from both paternal and maternal side. Next generation sequen- Conclusions: In our cohort, MYBP C3
 was the most prevalent cing was performed to analyze point mutations and deletions/ gene related to HCM. Amongst idiopathic DCM, TTN and MYH7 duplications in 125 genes associated with Arrhythmia, Cardio- were the most common. Additionally, our genetics service was myopathies and Sudden Cardiac Death. We detected variants of able to detect new cases approximately 1/10 of asymptomatic unknown signiﬁcance (VOUS) with the population frequency of family members. Grants: Thailand Research Fund and Thailand lessthan0.1% in4genes- listed attheTablebelow. Centreof Excellenceof LifeScience. O.Trachoo:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest;Samitivej Gene Genetic OMIMdisease Inheritance Srinakarin Hospital, Phyathai 2 Hospital, Bumrungrad Hospital, variant Jetanin IVF, Panthupark Genetics Clinic. A. Employment (full or BAG3 c.1673C>T Dominantdilatedcardiomyopathy, Paternal part-time); Signiﬁcant; Samitivej Sukhumvit Hospital. C. Other (p. Myoﬁbrillarymyopathy6,Charcot- Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other Ala558Val) Marie-Toothtype2 in-kind support); Signiﬁcant; 3billion, Inc. D. Speakers Bureau/ DSP c.5062G>A Autosomaldominantarrhythmogenic Maternal (p. rightventricularcardiomyopathy, Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Ala1688Thr) dilatedcardiomyopathywithsparse Modest;PTTPublicCompanyLimited.E.OwnershipInterest(stock, hair,keratodermaandagenesisofthe stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; teeth,autosomalrecessiveDC GenomeStar,Co.,Ltd.,LeaderMedicalGeneticsandGenomics,Co., JUP c.1379G>A Autosomaldominantarrhythmogenic Maternal Ltd., Soﬁva Genomics Bangkok, Co., Ltd.. F. Consultant/Advisory (p. rightventricularcardiomyopathyand Board; Modest; Biomolecular Laboratory, Co., Ltd., Vejthani Arg460His) autosomalrecessiveNaxosdisease Hospital. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Signiﬁcant; Thonburi SCN10A c.724T>A(p. Autosomal-dominantneuropathyand Paternal Bumrungmuang Hospital. T. Yingchoncharoen: A. Employment Ser242Thr) Brugadasyndrome (full or part-time); Modest; Bumrungrad Hospital. T. Ngernsritra- kul: None. N. Iemwimangsa: None. B. Panthan: A. Employment AllVOUSwereinheritedfromclinicallyhealthyparents-2from (fullorpart-time);Modest;GenomeStar,Co.,Ltd..S.Klumsathien: the mother and 2 from the father. This points to a probable None.S.Srisukh:None.A.Mukdadilok:None.S.Phusanti:None. polygenic etiology of the disease, in which the severity of the A. Charoenyingwattana: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock disease cannot be accurately determined. Regular assessment of options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Leader cardiac function is recommended, along with decreasing in high MedicalGeneticsandGenomics,Co.,Ltd.T.Chareonsirisutthigul: intensitysport activity. A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Panthupark Genetics T. Boneva: None. K. Belemezova: None. I. Gruev: None. I. Clinic.W.Chantratita:None.T.Tangcharoen:None. Dimova: None.  P05
.028.B If double is the trouble, the triple is undoable: a  P05
.027.A Molecular genetic testing for hypertrophic and fatal association of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (MYH7 dilatedcardiomyopathyininheritedcardiovascularcondition pArg719Trp), Heterozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia geneticsservice: lessonsfrom aThai cohort (LDLR pGlu343Lys) andSARSCoV-2 infection ObjoonTrachoo,TeerapatYingchoncharoen,TawaiNgernsritrakul, Nicola Marziliano1,2, Alessandro Medoro2, Roberto Ottaviano1, Nareenart Iemwimangsa, Bhakbhoom Panthan, Sommon Klum- Donatella Mignogna2, MarianoIntrieri2, Giuseppe Giuliani1 sathien, Sasima Srisukh, Anucha Mukdadilok, Sitthakom Phusanti, Angkana Charoenyingwattana, Takol Chareonsirisutthigul, Wasun 1ASST-Rhodense, Rho, Italy, 2University of Molise, Department of Chantratita, Tarinee Tangcharoen Medicineand HealthSciences, Campobasso, Italy. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 192 Introduction:HypertrophicCardiomyopathy(HCM;MIM#192600) our patients had clear HCM phenotype. Moreover, we identiﬁed and Heterozygous Familial Hypercholesterolemia (HeFH; MIM several rare (<1% in GnomAD) nonsynonymous variants which #144010)arethemostcommongeneticcardiovasculardisorders. were estimated as benign, likely benign or of uncertain BothHCMandHeFHcanleadtosevereheartfailureandsudden signiﬁcance. In particular, more than one patient had these rare cardiac death. In this report, we describe a case of a young man variants in the LDB3, DSP, TMEM43 genes which are known as whosuddenlydiedafterafatalarrythmiaandadditionallyresulted genesforARVDand/or dilated cardiomyopathy. positiveforSARS-CoV-2 virus with hightiter inmyocardium. Conclusion: Accumulation of rare variants in the ARVC genes has been found in patients with HCM that requires further Methods and Results: The proband is a young man (32-year- investigation. These results highlight the idea of genetic old)whosuddenlydiedduringphysicalexercise.Autopsyﬁndings continuum fordifferent cardiomyopathy phenotypes. showed increased wall thickness of interventricular septum (IVS; Thisstudy was supported by Grant of the President of Russian 18 mm) and left posterior wall (LPW; 20 mm) with patchy FederationМК-1093.2020.7. myocardial disarray. Non-obstructive diffuse coronary artery R.R. Salakhov: None. M.V. Golubenko: None. A.A. Zarubin: disease (CAD) was also observed. Furthermore, the presence of None. E.N. Pavlyukova: None. A.F. Kanev: None. O.S. Glotov: pulmonary thromboembolism with lymphocytic myocarditis None.D.A.Alaverdian:None.V.V.Tsay:None.N.R.Valiakhme- prompted the search of cardiotropic viruses within the myocar- tov:None. M.S.Nazarenko: None. dium. Real-Time PCR (RT-PCR) tested positive for a high concentration of SARS-CoV-2. Molecular autopsy identiﬁed two genetic variants classiﬁed as pathogenic in the MYH7 (p.  P05
.030.D MYH7 p.(Arg1712Gln) is a founder pathogenic Arg719Trp)andLDLR(p.Glu343Lys)genes.Co-segregationanalysis variant in an international large cohort of hypertrophic via Sanger sequencing within the family (N=22) showed that cardiomyopathy patients LDLR mutation was maternally inherited, while MYH7 genetic lesionwas de novo. Luisa Marsili1,2,3, Francesco Russo2, Flavie Ader4,5,6, Marie-Line Conclusion: Electrical remodeling associated with a genetic Bichon7,8, Laurence Faivre9, Arjan C. Houweling2, Bertrand Isidor7,8, substrate and a concomitant presence of diffuse CAD and SARS- Ronald H. Lekanne Deprez2, Benoit Mazel9, Sandra Mercier7,8, Gilles CoV-2-inducedmyocarditismighttriggerafatalarrhythmia.Thisis Millat10,11,12, JanG. Post13, Pascale Richard4,5,14, Irma van de Beek2, ofparamountimportancefortheﬁrst-orsecond-degreerelatives AlexaM.C.Vermeer2,LudolfG.Boven15,JanD.H.Jongbloed15,Peter in which the identiﬁcation of the pathogenic substrate, that vanTintelen2,13 renders them vulnerable to an increased risk for life-threatening cardiacevents,includingsuddendeath,mightpromptforclinical 1Univ. Lille, Lille, France, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Amster- andtailored treatments. damUMC,UniversityofAmsterdam,Amsterdam,Netherlands,3CHU N.Marziliano:None.A.Medoro:None.R.Ottaviano:None.D. Lille, Clinique de Génétique, Lille, France, 4HU Pitié Salpêtrière- Mignogna: None. M.Intrieri: None.G. Giuliani: None. Charles-Foix,DMUBioGem,ServicedeBiochimieMétabolique,UFde cardiogénétique et myogénétique moléculaire et cellullaire, Paris, France, 5Sorbonne Université, UMR S1166
 Equipe 1, Paris, France,  P05
.029.C ‘Sequencing of cardiomyopathy genes in patients 6UFRPharmacie,FacultédeSanté,UniversitédeParis,Paris,France, with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy reveals enrichment for 7CHU de Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, Nantes, France, rarevariantsinthegenesforarrhythmogenicrightventricular 8L’institut du thorax, INSERM, CNRS, UNIV Nantes, Nantes, France, cardiomyopathy’ 9Centre de génétique et FHU TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 10Laboratoire de Cardiogénétique Moléculaire, Centre de Biologie et Ramil Rinatovich Salakhov1, Maria V. Golubenko1, Alexey A. Pathologie Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 11Institut Zarubin1,ElenaN.Pavlyukova2,AlexanderF.Kanev2,OlegS.Glotov3, NeuroMyoGène, CNRS UMR 5310, INSERM U1217, Université Claude DianaA.Alaverdian3,ViktoriiaV.Tsay3,NailR.Valiakhmetov1,Maria Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France, 12Université de Lyon, Lyon, France, S.Nazarenko1 13Department of Genetics, University of Utrecht, University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 14APHP, Centre de référence pour les 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, maladies cardiaques héréditaires, Hôpitaux Universitaires Pitié- 2Cardiology Research Institute, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3City Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 15University of Groningen, University HospitalNo. 40, SaintPetersburg, RussianFederation. Medical Center Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands. Introduction: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is caused presumably by mutations in the cardiac sarcomere genes. Introduction: The MYH7 c.5135G>A p.(Arg1712Gln) variant has However, mutations in other genes can be causal, and some been identiﬁed in several hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) modifyinglociaresuggested.Insomegenes,mutationscanlead patients worldwide and it is classiﬁed as likely pathogenic on to different phenotypes, and more than one mutation can be ClinVar.Usingdatafromalargeinternationalcohort,wedelineate identiﬁedin thepatient. its associated phenotype, gain more evidence for its pathogeni- Materialsandmethods:Westudied46cardiomyopathygenes city, and evaluateitsfounder effect. with NGS panel “TruSight Cardiomyopathy” (Illumina) in 12 Materials and Methods: We retrospectively collected clinical patients with HCM. The effects of the identiﬁed variants were and genetic data of 22 probands and 74 family members. To assessedaccording theACMG guideline. determine the founder status, haplotypes were reconstructed for Results: 6 pathogenic / probably pathogenic variations in the 42patients. cardiac sarcomeregenes(MYH7, MYBP C3
,TNNT2, ACTNA, MYOZ2) Results:Fifty-threeindividualscarriedtheMYH7p.(Arg1712Gln) were found, including 3 novel variants. One patient had variant, 38 (72%) were diagnosed with HCM. The mean age of pathogenic variant in the gene for Danon disease (LAM P2
). In HCM diagnosis was 48.8 years (SD 18.1; range 8-74). The clinical addition, one patient had premature termination variant in the presentation ranged from asymptomatic left ventricular hyper- PK P2
, and the patient with the TNNT2 mutation had additional trophy to arrhythmias (atrial ﬁbrillation as well as malignant frameshift variant in the DS C2
. Mutations in these genes cause ventricular arrhythmias). Aborted sudden cardiac death (SCD) arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVС), while leadingtoHCMdiagnosisoccurredinoneprobandattheageof EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 193 68,andfamilyhistoryofSCDwasreportedbyﬁve(39%)probands. of Molecular Genetics of National Research Centre «Kurchatov Noheartfailuredeathnorhearttransplantwerereported.Women Institute».B.ResearchGrant(principalinvestigator,collaboratoror had a generally later-onset disease with 14% of female carriers consultantandpendinggrantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived); diagnosed with HCM at age 50, compared with 54% of male Signiﬁcant;RussianScienceFoundation.M.Shadrina:A.Employ- carriers,andpenetrancereaching95%and92%atage70inmen ment(fullorpart-time);Modest;InstituteofMolecularGeneticsof and women, respectively. The disease was fully penetrant at age NationalResearch Centre«Kurchatov Institute». 75 in both sexes. Haplotype analysis showed a founder origin in themajority of patients. Conclusions: Our data showed that MYH7 p.(Arg1712Gln) is a  P05
.032.BTheexpressionlevelofcytokinegenesinthecases pathogenic founder variant in HCM and that cardiac screening ofnativeheart valvesin infectious endocarditis should be pursued after the seventh decade in healthy carriers, especiallywomen. Maxim Sinitsky, Anna Tsepokina, Maria Khutornaya, Anastasia L. Marsili: None. F. Russo: None. F. Ader: None. M. Bichon: Ponasenko None.L.Faivre:None.A.C.Houweling:None.B.Isidor:None.R. H.LekanneDeprez:None.B.Mazel:None.S.Mercier:None.G. Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, Millat:None.J.G.Post:None.P.Richard:None.I.vande Beek: Kemerovo,Russian Federation. None. A.M.C. Vermeer: None. L.G. Boven: None. J.D.H. Jong- bloed:None. P. van Tintelen: None. Introduction:Infectiveendocarditis(IE)isasepticinﬂammationof the endocardium generally caused by bacteria. Recognition of microbial patterns, cytokine and acute phase responses, hemos-  P05
.031.A A new perspective in the study of genetic basis of tasisfeaturesandalterationsinplasmalipidandcalciumproﬁleall hypertrophic cardiomyopathy have been reported to affect pathogenesis and clinical course of IE. Elena V. Filatova1, Natalia S. Krylova2, Ivan Vlasov1, Maria Material and Methods: The expression level of I L1
B, I L6
, I L8
, Maslova2,Natalia Poteshkina2, PetrA. Slominsky1, Maria Shadrina1 I L10
, I L12
A, I L12
B, I L18
, I L23
, I L33
, CC L2
, and I L1
R L1
 has been investigated using biopsies of native mitral, aortic, and tricuspid 1InstituteofMolecularGeneticsofNationalResearchCentre«Kurchatov valvesobtainedduringsurgicalcorrectionofacquireddefectfrom Institute», Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Pirogov Russian National 25 patients with infectious endocarditis. Biopsies of native mitral ResearchMedicalUniversity,Moscow,RussianFederation. and aortic valve cusps from 12 patients who underwent surgical correction of acquired heart disease of non-infectious etiology Introduction: It is now generally accepted that the exact genetic were used as control. We used quantitative PCR with ﬂuorescent causeofhypertrophiccardiomyopathy(HCM)isunknowninatleast dyeSYBRGreenfordeterminationofthecytokinegeneexpression 25% of hereditary cases. To date, a causal relationship with the level. developmentofHCMhasbeenestablishedfor10genes;foranother Results: This study revealed that genes could be subdivided 20genes,therearedataonindividualclinicalcasesindicatingsucha into three groups: (i) genes with increased expression (I L1
B, I L6
 relationship.However,thefullrangeofpathogenicvariants,leadingto andI L8
); (ii)geneswith reducedexpression (I L33
 and I L1
R L1
); (iii) thedevelopmentofHCM,hasnotyetbeendescribed.Inthisregard, geneswithunchangedexpression(I L12
A,I L18
,I L23
andCC L2
).The theaimofourstudywastosearchfornewgenes,pathogenicvariants I L8
 gene expression was characterized by the most pronounced inwhichmaybepotentiallyinvolvedinthepathogenesisofHCM. increase (9.83 times versus control), while the I L1
R L1
 gene Materials and Methods: The study included 98 non-related demonstrated the most pronounced decrease in its expression patients with HCM. NGS of exons of 4800 genes associated with (4.17times).ExpressionI L10
andI L12
Bgeneswasnegligibleinall the development of various diseases was carried out, and samples. This study was supported by basic research project bioinformatic analysis was performed to predict the potential №0546-2019-0002. pathogenicityof variants. M.Sinitsky:None.A.Tsepokina:None.M.Khutornaya:None. Results: The analysis identiﬁed 73 potentially pathogenic A.Ponasenko: None. variants in 43 genes, for which a connection with the develop- mentofHCMwasnotpreviouslyshown,butwhichareinvolvedin the development of other pathologies of the cardiovascular  P05
.033.C Diagnostic yield of cardiac gene panel testing in system. Most of the genes identiﬁed are involved in the inherited cardiac conditions patients in the Republic of functioning of the heart in general and the sarcomere in Ireland particular. Conclusion: Thus, we were able to identify new variants and Jane L. Murphy1, Claire W. Kirk1, Terri P. McVeigh2, Luke Kelly3, genes that may lead to the development of HCM or may be Joseph Galvin4, Deirdre Ward5, Terence Prendiville6, Catherine involved in the pathogenesis of the disease. This work was McGorrian4, Margaret Gallagher4, Helen Connaughton5, Sally Ann supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grants Lynch7 no.19-015-00343)andtheRussianScienceFoundation(grantsno. 21-75-20120). 1University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland, 2The Royal Marsden E.V. Filatova: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3Royal College of Institute of Molecular Genetics of National Research Centre SurgeonsinIreland,Dublin2,Ireland,4MaterMisericordiaeUniversity «Kurchatov Institute». B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Hospital, Dublin 7, Ireland, 5Tallaght University Hospital, Dublin 24, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants Ireland, 6Children’s Health Ireland at Crumlin, Dublin 12, Ireland, already received); Signiﬁcant; Russian Foundation for Basic 7Children’sHealth Irelandat Crumlin,Dublin 24, Ireland. Research, Russian Science Foundation. N.S. Krylova: None. I. Vlasov: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Institute of Background: Inherited cardiac conditions (ICC), comprising Molecular Genetics of National Research Centre «Kurchatov primarily cardiomyopathies and cardiac ion channelopathies, Institute». M. Maslova: None. N. Poteshkina: None. P.A. predispose to sudden cardiac death. Aim: Investigate the Slominsky:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Institute diagnostic yield from cardiac gene panel testing undertaken in EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 194 patients (including molecular autopsy in deceased patients) Conclusions: Our results suggest that variants in the KCNA5 referred tothreenational ICC clinics from2002to 2020. gene might be associated with an increased risk of VF in AMI Methods:Datawascollectedbyinterrogationofdepartmental leading to SD, concurring with previous reports. Thus, it is databases, family charts, and review of molecular genetic essentialtouseanambitiousstrategy,includingallgenesrelated diagnosticreports. tocardiacexcitability,toclarifythepathophysiologicalbasisofVF Results: We evaluated molecular genetic results from 835 inAMI. individuals (461 males, 374 females) from 824 families, including Funding acknowledgements: This work was supported by a 58 deceased patients who underwent molecular autopsy. Three grant from Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI18/01737)-FEDER funds hundred and ﬁfty patients (42%) carried a single variant; 68 anda non-conditional grantfromAbbott Vascular. patients (8%) were found to have multiple variants (up to a R. Pan-Lizcano: None. L. Núñez: None. P. Piñón: None. X. maximumoffour).Thediagnosticyieldofatleastoneactionable Flores:None.G.Aldama:None.R.Calviño:None.J.M.Vázquez- variant(pathogenic/likelypathogenic)was28%,whileatleastone Rodríguez: None. M.Hermida-Prieto: None. variantofuncertainsigniﬁcance(VUS)wasdetectedin27%ofthe cohort.Weobservedasigniﬁcantassociationbetweenfemalesex and detection of an actionable variant. The yield of actionable  P05
.035.A Breakpoints of two duplications in the LDL- variantsvariedbydecadeofage,rangingfrom0%(≥80years)to receptor genein the Czech Republic 41% (0-9 years). Actionable variants were most frequent in those undergoing a cardiomyopathy panel (35%) and least frequent in KaterinaKonecna,Lukas Tichy those tested for Brugada syndrome genes (14%). Molecular autopsy yielded an actionable variant in 10% of patients, while Center of Molecular Biology and Genetics, University Hospital Brno, 30%ofthe subcohort carried atleast oneVUS. Brno,Czech Republic. Conclusion: Actionable variants were more likely to be detected in females in our cohort. Despite recent gene curation Introduction:Familialhypercholesterolemia(FH)isanautosomal efforts,thehighburdenofVUSremainsaconsiderablechallenge dominant disorder associated with elevated levels of low density inICCmanagement. lipoproteincholesterol,leadingtoincreasedriskofcardiovascular J.L. Murphy: None. C.W. Kirk: None. T.P. McVeigh: None. L. disease.ThemostcommoncauseofFHintheCzechRepublic(CR) Kelly: None. J. Galvin: None. D. Ward: None. T. Prendiville: isamutationinthelowdensitylipoproteinreceptorgene(LDLR). None. C. McGorrian: None. M. Gallagher: None. H. Connaugh- The LDLR gene contains a highnumber of Alu repeats, making it ton:None. S.Lynch: None. prone to Alu-mediated rearrangements. As a result, out of all CzechprobandswithaLDLRmutation,almost10%arecarriersof adeletion/duplicationspanningwholeexons.Themostcommon  P05
.034.D Novel missense variant in KCNA5 gene, p. rearrangement of the LDLR gene in the CR is a duplication of Gly183Arg, associated to ventricular ﬁbrillation during acute exons 2-6 (exon2_6dup), which is also the sixth most common myocardial infarction LDLR mutation in the CR. Duplication of exons 16-18 (exon16_18dup) is the fourth most common rearrangement of RicardoPan-Lizcano1,LuciaNúñez1,P.Piñón2,XFlores2,GAldama2,R theLDLRgene intheCR. Calviño2,JM.Vázquez-Rodríguez3,ManuelHermida-Prieto1 MaterialsandMethods:Sequencesurroundingthebreakpoint wasanalyzedbySangersequencingin26outof27knownCzech 1CardiologyResearchGroup,InstitutodeInvestigaciónBiomédicade families with exon2_6dup and all 8 known Czech probands A Coruña (INIBIC)-CHUAC-UDC, A Coruña, Spain, 2Department of carryingexon16_18dup. Cardiology, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de A Coruna Results: All analyzed families with exon2_6dup carried the (CHUAC)-INIBIC, A Coruña, Spain, 3Department of Cardiology, breakpoint c.67+3545_940+917dup. All known Czech families ComplexoHospitalarioUniversitariodeACoruña(CHUAC)-CIBERCV, with exon16_18dup carried the breakpoint c.2312- Instituto de Investigación Biomédica de A Coruña (INIBIC), Uni- 2067_*1216dup. All breakpoints were located inside an Alu versidad de ACoruña (UDC),A Coruña,Spain. element. Conclusion: Duplications of exons 2-6 and 16-18 of the LDLR Introduction: Sudden death (SD) due to ventricular ﬁbrillation geneintheCzechpopulationlikelyarisefromonemutationevent. (VF)duringacutemyocardialinfarction(AMI)isoneoftheleading It remains to be determined if this is the case for other causesofdeathworldwide.Ithasbeensuggestedthattheriskof rearrangements of the LDLR gene in the CR. Supported by the SD due to VF in AMI has a multifactorial base, where genetic MinistryofHealth,CzechRepublic,grantnumberNU20-02-00261. factorsplayanimportantrole.Ithasbeenproposedthatvariants K.Konecna: None. L.Tichy: None. cardiac excitability genes could play an important role in VF duringAMI. Methods: Rare genetic variants in 36 genes encoded proteins  P05
.036.B Genetic proﬁle of left ventricular non-compaction relatedtopathwaysinvolvedwereanalyzedbyNGSin12patients cardiomyopathy - experience of the Polish reference paedia- withFVduringAMI.Thevisualizationofthevariantwasperformed triccentre usingIGVandthebioinformaticanalysisofitspossibleeffectwas performedwithMutationTester,SNA P2
,SIFT2,PolyphenandPhD- Dorota Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, Agata Paszkowska1, Elżbieta SNP. Ciara1, Kamila Frączak1, Małgorzata Rydzanicz2, Agnieszka Pollak2, Results:Thevariantp.Gly183ArginKCNA5genewasidentiﬁed Piotr Stawiński2, Alicja Mirecka-Rola1, Lukasz Mazurkiewicz3, Mar- in a 68 years old male. The amino acid substitution c.547G>C in zena Gawlik1, Dorota Siestrzykowska1, Rafał Płoski2, Krystyna KCNA5 gene produces the variant p.Gly183Arg in the Kv1.5 Chrzanowska1,Dorota Wicher1, LidiaZiółkowska1 channel, a voltage-gated potassium channel responsible for the ultrarapid delayed rectiﬁer potassium current. All bioinformatic 1Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Warsaw tools used suggested deleterious function of the protein that Medical University, Warsaw, Poland, 3National Institute of Cardiol- presentthe variant. ogy,Warsaw, Poland. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 195 Introduction: Genetically and clinically heterogeneous left LQTSinallfourpatients.Thesecasessuggesttheclinicalrelevance ventricular non-compaction (LVNC) is the third most frequent of drug interactions in patient harboring SCN5A heterozygous cardiomyopathyinthepediatricpopulation.Clinicalmanifestation mutations. In such patients, the risk of adverse drug reactions variesfrommildtoseveresymptomsofheartfailure,thromboem- towards common psychiatric drugs might be muchhigher than in bolic events and arrhythmias. Despite important clinical observa- generalpopulation,requiringfurtherstudies. tions from over the last 25 years, LVNC etiology still remains C. Rutigliani: None. G. Ciconte: None. E. Micaglio: None. M. unknown in 30-50% of cases. We present a series of patients Monasky:None.S.Benedetti:None.G.Casari:None.E.T.Locati: diagnosedwithLVNC(mostlyisolatedatthetimeofexamination) None.C. Pappone: None. inthe2003-2020periodinthePolishreferencepaediatriccentre. Materials and Methods: Thirty-two children, mean age 11.2 years were enrolled in this study. Clinical evaluation included:  P05
.039.A CELSR1mutations inprimary lymphedema echocardiography, cardiovascular magnetic resonance, NYHA class, ECG, 24-hour Holter ECG and family history. Next- Murat Alpaslan1, Sandrine Mestre-Godin2, Isabelle Quere2, Guido generation sequencing (targeted panel of 25 genes) was Giacalone1,3, PascalBrouillard1, MiikkaVikkula1 performedinallcases. RESULTS: Pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in LVNC 1deDuveInstitute,UniversityofLouvain,Brussels,Belgium,2CHUde associated genes were detected in 57% of patients. Recurrent Montpellier–HôpitalSaint-Eloi,Montpellier,France,3Departmentof autosomal dominant defects were identiﬁed in HCN4, MYH7, LymphaticSurgery,AZSint‐MaartenHospital,Mechelen,Belgium. RBM20andTTNgenes.Additionaldefectsweredetectedinsingle families in: ACT C1
, ACTN2, DES, EYA4, HCCS, KCNQ1, PRDM16 and Introduction: Developmental and functional defects in the TAZ genes (Barth syndrome). Heart failure, ventricular/supraven- lymphatic system are responsible for the occurrence of primary tricular arrhythmias, third degree atrioventricular block, WPW lymphedema(PLE).PLEisachronicdebilitatingdiseasecausedby syndrome and sinus bradycardia were the most common clinical increasedaccumulationofinterstitialﬂuidmostcommonlyinthe symptoms. lowerextremities.Thereisnocure,onlysymptomatictreatment.A CONCLUSIONS: Genetic evaluation (testing and counseling) is numberofgenes(n=29)havebeenlinkedtoPLEsofar,among recommended in each patient with isolated or syndromic LVNC. which CELSR1, in which seven probands and their families have The high genetic yield resulted in explanation of molecular loss-of-function mutations. Previous publications suggest female- etiology in over half of the studied children and collection of limitedpenetrance. valuable genotype-phenotype data. The study was partially Materials and Methods: We investigated 755 index patients foundedby CMHIgrant S177
/2018. from our PLE-cohort for variants in CELSR1, using whole-exome D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk: None. A. Paszkowska: None. E. sequencing (WES), and performed co-segregation studies for Ciara: None. K. Frączak: None. M. Rydzanicz: None. A. Pollak: availablefamily members. None. P. Stawiński: None. A. Mirecka-Rola: None. L. Mazurkie- Results: We identiﬁed 6 mutations predicted to cause loss-of- wicz: None. M. Gawlik: None. D. Siestrzykowska: None. R. function(nonsense,frameshiftorsplice-sitealterations)(0.81%of Płoski: None. K. Chrzanowska: None. D. Wicher: None. L. cohort), as well as 30 missense variants predicted to be Ziółkowska: None. pathogenic (4.63% of cohort) in CELSR1. All index patients with predictedloss-of-functionmutationswerefemaleandhadPLEon lower extremities. Among all the affected individuals with any of  P05
.037.C Clinical relevance of SCN5A heterozygous muta- the CELSR1 variants predicted to be pathogenic, 29 were female tionsin drug-related QTprolongation and 10 were male. Eight females and nine males were asymptomatic carriers of a CELSR1 variant. Two families with CarolaRutigliani1,GiuseppeCiconte2,EmanueleMicaglio2,Michelle CELSR1mutationscausingaprematurestopcodonweretestedon Monasky2,SaraBenedetti3,GiorgioNevioCasari3,EmanuelaTeresina mRNA level without detecting nonsense mediated mRNA decay. Locati2,Carlo Pappone2 Thus, theyrather encodea truncated protein. Conclusions: CELSR1 variants may explain about 1-5% of PLE. 1San Raffaele Medical University, Milan, Italy, 2IRCCS Policlinico San Yet, many missense variants need functional validation. Our data Donato, San Donato Milanese, Italy, 3IRCCS San Raffaele Hospital, underscore the notion that CELSR1 loss-of-function mutations Milan, Italy. haveahigherpenetranceinfemalesthaninmales(83%versus0% inour series). Drug - related Q -T trait prolongation is a common problem in M.Alpaslan:None.S.Mestre-Godin:None.I.Quere:None.G. several clinical settings: the admnistration of many drugs, ranging Giacalone:None. P. Brouillard: None.M. Vikkula: None. fromantidepressantstomoodmodulatingdrugs,canberesponsible forsuchphenotype,accordingtocurrentknowledge.Inspiteofthis frequency,mostphysiciansusuallydonotinvestigatethemolecular  P05
.040.B Pathogenic variants affecting the TB5 domain of mechanism underlying this phenotype but instead just halt ﬁbrillin-1 protein in Marfan syndrome and Geleophysic/ administration of the culprit drug upon EKG ﬁndings. We describe Acromicric Dysplasia patients: fromtallto short 4 patients from two unrelated italian families with acute bipolar depressioninwhichFluoxetine+Olanzapineadministrationcaused Pauline Arnaud1,2,3, Nadine Hanna1,2,3, Zakaria Mougin3, Geneviève Q-T prolongation. Due to Holter ECG results, a genetic testing for Baujat4, Valérie Drouin-Garraud5, Salima El Chehadeh6, Laurent suspectedLongQ-Tsyndrome(LQTS)hasbeenperformed.Ineach Gouya2,SylvieOdent7,GuillaumeJondeau2,3,8,CatherineBoileau1,2,3, family a heterozygous SCN5A mutation has been identiﬁed from CarineLe Goff3 peripheral blood extracted genomic DNA. In particular, in the ﬁrst family the c.5089T>C hasbeen demonstrated,while inthe second 1AP-HP, Hôpital Bichat, Département de Génétique, Paris, France, familythec.655C>Theterzygousmutationhasbeenidentiﬁed,both 2AP-HP, Hôpital Bichat, CRMR Syndrome de Marfan et pathologies without mutations in other LQTS genes. In all patients both drugs apparentées,Paris,France,3UniversitédeParis,LVTS,InsermU1148, have been withdrawn and effectively replaced with Duloxetine in Paris, France, 4AP-HP, Hôpital Necker, Département de Génétique, monotherapy;thesubsquentclinicalworkupledtothediagnosisof Paris, France, 5CHU Rouen, Service de Génétique, Rouen, France, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 196 6CHUStrasbourg,ServicedeGénétiqueMédicale,Strasbourg,France, Conclusions: This underestimated ﬁnding should not be 7CHURennes,ServicedeGénétiqueclinique,Rennes,France,8AP-HP, overlooked in the molecular diagnosis of MFS patients and Hôpital Bichat,Service de Cardiologie, Paris,France. warrants an adaptation of the parameters used in bioinformatics analyses. The ﬁve present cases of symptomatic MFS probands Introduction:Themostlyknownﬁbrillinopathy,Marfansyndrome harboringamosaicFBN1pathogenicvariantreinforcethefactthat (MFS), is a multisystem disease with a unique combination of apparentlyasymptomaticmosaicparentsshouldhaveacomplete skeletal, cardiovascular and ocular features. The geleophysic/ clinical examination and a regular cardiovascular follow-up. We acromicricdysplasia(GD/AD),characterizedbyshortstature,short advise that individuals with a typical MFS for whom no single extremitiesandjointlimitationaredescribedas“themirrorimage” nucleotide pathogenic variant or exons deletion/duplication was of MFS. The numerous FBN1 mutations identiﬁed in MFS are identiﬁedshouldbetestedbyNGScapturepanelwithanadapted located all along the gene, leading to the same pathogenetic variantcalling analysis. mechanism. Interestingly, in the GD/AD patients, the nineteen P.Arnaud:None.H.Morel:None.O.Milleron:None.L.Gouya: heterozygousFBN1mutationsallaffecttheTGFβ-bindingprotein- None.C.Francannet:None.A.DaCosta:None.C.LeGoff:None. likedomain5 (TB5). G.Jondeau:None. C.Boileau: None. N.Hanna: None. Materialandmethods:Between1996and2021,bloodsamples were obtained for more than 5000 consecutive probands referred nationwide to our laboratory for molecular diagnosis of suspected  P05
.042.D Genotoxic stress in endotheliocytes is associated MFS.TheFBN1genewasoriginallyscreenedbybidirectionalSanger with endothelial dysfunction: results of gene expression sequencingandlaterbyNGScustomcapturearray. analysis Results: We identiﬁed 5 MFS probands carrying 5 distinct heterozygous mutations affecting the TB5 domain of FBN1. The MaximSinitsky, Anna Tsepokina, Anton Kutikhin, Daria Shishkova, clinicaldataforthese5probandsandtheir7relativesshowedthat Anastasia Ponasenko all the probands displayed a classical form of MFS, with the involvement of skeletal, cardiovascular, and/or ophthalmological Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, systems. At the molecular level, the variants were 3 missense Kemerovo,Russian Federation. variants and 2 small in-frame deletions. Strikingly, one missense variantaffectsanaminoacidthatwaspreviously involvedinGD. Introduction: It is known that genotoxic stress can induce Conclusions:Surprisingly,mutationsintheTB5domainofFBN1 endothelial dysfunction and atherogenesis. The aim of this can lead to two opposite phenotypes: GD/AD or MFS suggesting research was to study the gene expression signature in theinvolvementoftissuespeciﬁcitymechanismand/oramodiﬁer endothelial cells exposed to alkylating mutagen mitomycin C gene. Further functional studies are ongoing to determine the (MMC). preciseroleofthisdomaininthephysiopathologyofeachdisease. Materials and Methods: Primary human coronary- (HCAEC) P.Arnaud:None.N.Hanna:None.Z.Mougin:None.G.Baujat: and internal thoracic artery endothelial cells (HITAEC) exposed None. V. Drouin-Garraud: None. S. El Chehadeh: None. L. to 500 ng/ml MMC (experimental group) and nonexposed Gouya: None. S. Odent: None. G. Jondeau: None. C. Boileau: control were used in this research. Expression of DDB1, None.C.Le Goff: None. ERC C4
, ERC C5
, VCAM1, ICAM1, PECAM1, SELE, SELP, CDH2, CDH5, CD34, LOX1, SCARF1,CD36,LDLR,VLDR,NO S3
,PXDN,CAT,SOD1, SNAI1, SNAI2, TWIST1, GATA4, KLF4, HEY2, ZEB1 genes was  P05
.041.D Unsuspected somatic mosaicism for FBN1 gene evaluated by RT-qPCR immediately after 6 hours of cell contributes to Marfan syndrome incubation with MMC and 24 hours after elimination of MMC from cell cultures. Pauline Arnaud1,2,3, Hélène Morel1,4, Olivier Milleron2,3, Laurent Results: Immediately after 6 hours of MMC exposure we Gouya3, Christine Francannet5, Antoine Da Costa6, Carine Le Goff2, detected the downregulation of the majority of studied genes Guillaume Jondeau2,3, Catherine Boileau1,2,3, Nadine Hanna1,2 excluding SNAI2 in the experimental group compared to control. After elimination of MMC from the cell cultures the increased 1AP-HP - Hôpital Bichat - Département de Génétique, Paris, France, expression of leucocyte adhesion (VCAM1, ICAM1, SELE), 2Université de Paris - LVTS - Inserm U1148, Paris, France, 3AP-HP - endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (SNAI2), endothelial Hôpital Bichat - CRMR syndrome de Marfan et les pathologies mechanotransduction (KLF4) genes, and the decreased mRNA apparentées, Paris, France, 4APHP - Hôpital Saint-Louis - Service de level of endothelial differentiation (PECAM1, CDH5, CD34), Génétique Moléculaire Neuro-Vasculaire, Paris, France, 5CHU endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition (ZEB1) genes was discov- Clermont-Ferrand-ServicedeGénétiqueMédicale,Clermont-Ferrand, ered both in HCAEC and HITAEC. Additionally, HITAEC was France, 6CHU Saint-Etienne - Service de Cardiologie, Saint-Etienne, characterizedbydownregulationofoxidativestress(SOD1,PXDN), France. endothelial mechanotransduction (CDH2) molecules, scavenger receptors (SCARF1, CD36) and upregulation endothelial-to- Introduction: Individuals with mosaic pathogenic variants in the mesenchymal transition genes (SNAI1, TWIST1). In HCAEC, the FBN1 gene are mainly described in the course of familial increasedlevelofscavengerreceptors(LDLR,VLDLR)wasdetected. screening. In the literature, almost all these mosaic individuals This work was supported by a grant from the President of the are asymptomatic. In this study, we report the experience of our Russian Federation for young scientists - candidates of science teamon morethan5000 Marfansyndrome (MFS) probands. МК-1228.2021.1.4. MaterialsandMethods:NGScapturetechnologyallowedusto M.Sinitsky:None.A.Tsepokina:None.A.Kutikhin:None.D. identify ﬁve cases of MFS probands who harbored a mosaic Shishkova: None.A. Ponasenko: None. pathogenic variantin theFBN1gene. Results: These 5 sporadic mosaic probands displayed classical features usually seen in Marfan syndrome. Combined with the  P05
.043.A Mutation spectrum in Kazakhstani sudden cardiac resultsoftheliterature,theserareﬁndingsconcernedbothsingle death victims revealed by targeted next-generation sequen- nucleotidevariants andcopy numbervariations. cingof96 genesassociated withcardiac diseases EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 197 AinurR.Akilzhanova1,SauleE.Rakhimova1,UlanA.Kozhamkulov1, abdominal aortic wall was carried out. Next-Generation Sequen- Ulykbek Kairov1, Gulbanu Akilzhanova2, Ayaulym Chamoieva3, cing (NGS) using a panel of 17 genes for aortic aneurysms was TolkynZ.Zhakupova4 performed. Cosegregation studies using Sanger sequencing and microsatellitewerenecessaryforthecorrectinterpretationofNGS 1Center for life sciences, National Laboratory Astana, Nazarbayev results. University, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan, 2Semey Medical University, Results: No pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were Pavlodar Branch, Pavlodar, Kazakhstan, 3L. N. Gumilyov Eurasian detected in the NGS. However, NGS revealed a loss of hetero- National University, Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan, 4Medical University zygosity on chromosome 5 that include the LOX gene. Sanger Astana,Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan. sequencingdetectedavariantofuncertainsigniﬁcancec.773A>T in apparent homozygosity in LOX gene.The cosegregation study Introduction:Suddencardiacdeath(SCD)isanunexpecteddeath carriedoutinhismotherdidnotdetectthevariant.Althoughthe occurring within the ﬁrst hour of the onset of symptoms. SCD study of the father was not possible, the study of microsatellites most commonly occurs in patients with coronary heart disease, revealed a paternal uniparental isodisomy of chromosome 5. whereas inherited cardiomyopathies and primary electrical Histopathological analysis showed myxoid degenerative changes disorders prevail in younger SCD victims (up to 30% of all SCD oftheabdominal aortic tissue. in the young). The purpose of the study was to elucidate the Conclusions:Pathogenicprotein-truncatingvariantshavebeen mutationalspectruminKazakhstaniSCDvictimsrevealedbynext- widely reported in heterozygosity manner, in adult-onset aneur- generationsequencing(NGS)of96genesassociatedwithcardiac ysms. This is the ﬁrst case with homozygous missense variant in diseases. LOX gene who presents an early onset aneurysm, which is Methods: We screened 37 suspected SCD cases (<50 years) uncommon for this gene. Taking into account that the current using the customized HaloPlex Target Enrichment System knowledge about the phenotype-genotype correlation in this (Agilent) and NGS for 96 genes associated with inherited cardiac pathology is insufﬁcient, the functional study of this variant is syndromes and cardiomyopathies. 27 cases had non-diagnostic necessary for the correct interpretation of these results and structural cardiac abnormalities and 10 cases, diagnosed with a geneticcounselling. cardiomyopathy post-mortem. ACMG/AMP guidelines were C. Cotarelo-Pérez: None. R. Oancea-Ionescu: None. C. appliedfor variant interpretation of clinicalsigniﬁcance. Herrero-Forte: None. J. Rodríguez-Alarcón: None. D. López- Results: 31 rare variants were identiﬁed in 17 (63%) of the de-Lara:None. M. Fenollar-Cortés: None. deceased individuals with non-diagnostic structural cardiac abnormalities.AmongthempathogenicvariantsinKCNQ1,KCNJ2, SCN5A,RYR2geneswereidentiﬁed.Thecorrespondingfrequency  P05
.047.A Novel TRAF2 variant and KDR deletion are indeceasedindividualswithcardiomyopathieswas35%.Themost implicated in the pathogenesis of pulmonary arterial abundant mutations observed in MYBP C3
, LAMA2, MYH6 and hypertension GAA. Conclusion: Genetic screening revealed variants with likely NataliaGallego1,ShaunPienkos2,DavidCondon2,AlejandroCruz3, functionaleffectsathighrates,in63%and35%oftheSCDcases Nuria Ochoa3, Julián Nevado1, Pedro Arias1, Stuti Agarwal2, Hiral withnon-diagnosticanddiagnosticcardiacabnormalities,respec- Patel2, Ananya Chakraborty2, Pablo Lapunzina1, Pilar Escribano3, tively.TargetedNGSscreeningcansupporttheforensicinvestiga- Viniciode Jesús2, Jair Tenorio1 tion and help the cardiologist’s decision to offer counselling and clinical evaluation to relatives of young SCD victims. Study was 1MedicalandMolecularGeneticsInstitute(INGEMM),IdiPaz,Hospital supported by a grant from the Ministry Education and Science, Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Division of Pulmonary and Republicof Kazakhstan(A P09563474
). Critical Care Medicine and Department of Medicine, Stanford A.R. Akilzhanova: None. S.E. Rakhimova: None. U.A. Koz- University, Stanford, CA, USA, 3Pulmonary Hypertension Unit, hamkulov: None. U. Kairov: None. G. Akilzhanova: None. A. Department of Cardiology, Hospital Universitario Doce de Octubre, Chamoieva: None. T.Z.Zhakupova: None. Madrid,Spain. Background: Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a rare  P05
.046.DFirstcaseofhomozygousvariantsinLOXgenedue disorderassociatedwithelevationofpulmonarypressuresthat,if to a paternal isodisomy in a child with an acute abdominal untreated, leads to heart failure and death. Speciﬁc genetic aortic aneurysm variantsincrease theincidenceof PAH. Methods:Wholeexomesequencing(WES)wascarriedoutina Carmen Cotarelo-Pérez1,2, Raluca Oancea-Ionescu1,2, Clara probandwithPAHandprimarybiliarycirrhosis.Acustompipeline Herrero-Forte1,2,JaimeRodríguez-Alarcón3,2,DiegoLópez-de-Lara4,2, for variant prioritization was carried out to obtain candidate Maria Fenollar-Cortés1,2 variants and Copy Number Variants (CNVs). To determine the impactofTRAF2incellproliferation,weperformedanMTSassay 1UnidaddeGenéticaClínica,ServiciodeAnálisisClínicos,Institutode on healthy lung pericytes transfected with siRNA speciﬁc for Medicina del Laboratorio, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital Clinico San TRAF2. To measure the effect of loss of TRAF2 on NF-kappa-beta Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 3Servicio de Cirugía Pediátrica, Instituto del (NF-κB) activity, we measured levels of Phospho-p65-NF-κB in Niño y Adolescente, Madrid, Spain, 4Unidad de Endocrinología siRNA-transfected pericytes using western immunoblotting. Pediátrica, Instituto del Niñoydel Adolescente, Madrid, Spain. Results: WES revealed a de novo variant in TRAF2 and a deletion which encompasses 52 genes, including KDR. TRAF2 Introduction: Non-syndromic aortic aneurysms are a heteroge- encode for immunomodulatory protein that regulate NF-κB neous group of pathologies that present phenotypic variability. activation. The knockdown of TRAF2 increased NF-κB activity in Predisposing genetic factors are suspected, although current healthy lung pericytes, which correlated with a signiﬁcant geneticknowledge ofthese pathologies isscarce. increase in proliferation. Variants in KDR gene has been MaterialandMethods:A14-year-oldmanunderwentsurgery previously described in PAH associated with interstitial lung for type B aortic dissection due to sporadic and nonsyndromic disease but as far as we know, no CNVs that include KDR has abdominal aortic aneurysm. The histopathological analysis of the been detected in PAH patients. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 198 Conclusions: We have identiﬁed a variant in TRAF2 and a Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain, 2Department of Internal Medicine, deletionwhichincludeKDR.Wespeculatethatlossoffunctionin Hospital de la Princesa, Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain, 3Internal TRAF2promotespulmonaryvascularremodelingbyoveractivation Medicine Service, Hospital Carlos III, HULP, Madrid, Spain., Madrid, oftheNF-κBsignalingactivity,however,thedeletioncanalsoplay Spain, 4Next Generation Sequencing Section. Genetics Department, a role in the clinical manifestation, suggesting a digenic Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain, contribution to the PAH phenotype. Grants: PI18/01233, FCHP 5NextGenerationSequencingSection.GeneticsDepartment,Hospital unrestricted grant. Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain.of dislipemias of genetic N.Gallego:None.S.Pienkos:None.D.Condon:None.A.Cruz: originandmetabolicdiseases, IdiPAZ, HospitalUniversitario LaPaz, None. N. Ochoa: None. J. Nevado: None. P. Arias: None. S. Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain, 6Preanalytic Section. Genetics Agarwal: None. H. Patel: None. A. Chakraborty: None. P. Department, Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain., Lapunzina: None. P. Escribano: None. V. de Jesús: None. J. Madrid, Spain, 7Bioinformatics Section. Genetics Department, Tenorio:None. Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain. CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid,Spain., Madrid,Spain.  P05
.048.B RP L3
L is a novel disease-causing gene in Dilated Introduction: Autosomal-dominant hypercholesterolemia (FH, Cardiomyopathy dCardiomyopathy OMIM#143890) is a common genetic disorder (1:250-1:500)1. Molecular diagnosis can be conﬁrmed by the presence of MariaSabaterMolina1,JoaquinaMariaPanPerez-Villalobos2,Elisa pathogenic variants in LDLR (low density lipoprotein receptor, Nicolas Rocamora1, Mari Carmen Olmo Conesa1, David López OMIM#606945), APOB (apolipoprotein B, OMIM#107730) and Cuenca1, Moises Sorli2, Francisco J. Castro2, Juan Ramon Gimeno PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilisin/ kexin, OMIM#607786). Blanes1 Recent studies suggested the STA P1
 (signal transducing adaptor family member 1, OMIM#604298) as fourth FH gene2. Our 1Inherited Cardiac Disease Unit. Universitary Hospital Virgen de la objective was to identify variants in STA P1
 in FH patients and Arrixaca., Murcia, Spain, 2Department of Paediatric Cardiology, thereby improve the genetic diagnosis of FH. Patients and Universitary Hospital Virgende la Arrixaca., Murcia, Spain. Methods:The study population included 750DNA samples from indexpatientsclinicallyclassiﬁedashavingprobableordeﬁnitive Background:Thegeneticcauseofdilatedcardiomyopathy(DCM) FH. The samples were analyzed by Next Generation Sequencing remains unexplained in a substantial proportion of cases. RP L3
L (NGS)usingacustomizedpanelof436genes.Variantsofinterest encodes the 60S ribosomal protein  L3
-like protein that is highly wereconﬁrmedbySangerSequencing.Bioinformaticanalysiswas expressedinskeletalmuscleandheart.PediatricDCMisagenetic performedusingalgorithmsdevelopedbyourbioinformaticunit. heterogeneous disorder and the yield of the genetic test still Results: Three variants previously reported were found in remainstoolow.Ouraimwastodeterminetherelationbetween heterozygous in three patients in STA P1
 two of them with RP L3
Lmutations and thedevelopment ofDCM. frequency<0.03%.TheSTA P1
:NM_012108.3:c.35G>A:p.(Arg12His), Methods: RP L3
L was sequenced by Sanger technology in 79 was conserved, and the in silico predictors showed damage. The DCM probands; all of them with severe DCM. We analyzed the STA P1
:NM_012108.3:c.526C>T:p.(Pro176Ser), wasconservedandin cosegregationofRP L3
Lvariantsinthefamilywhenrelativeswere silico predictors showed damage. The STA P1
:NM_012108.3:c.120 available. +6T>C,did not showimpact accordingto splicingpredictors. Results: We identiﬁed RP L3
L variants in 8 affected patients (7 Conclusions: There is controversy about the role of STA P1
 in (87.5%) females) from 6 families. Frequency was signiﬁcantly FH3. Some studies have showed lack of cosegregation in some higher in DCM probands (6 of 79 [8.9%]) than in gnomAD and variants found in STA P1
 in FH patients4. In this study we found 1000G database. 5 patients were carriers in compound hetero- three variants previously described in patients with hypercholes- cigosisand4ofthemwerediagnosticatﬁrstyearoflifeandcould terolemia.Furtherstudiesofcosegregationandfunctionalstudies be studied the cosegregation. The fourth was 64 years and shouldbeperformedinordertoconﬁrmtheroleofSTA P1
inFH. present dimorphic features. The rest of patients with one RP L3
L C. Rodriguez Jimenez: None. J. Sanguino: None. I. García- mutation werediagnosedat agefrom0 to9years. Polo: None. J. Mostaza: None. E. Sevilla: None. A. Herranz- Conclusions: RP L3
L is a novel disease causing gene in DCM Cecilia:None.A.Carazo:None.N.Gallego:None.V.Gómezdel accounting for at least 8% of neonatal cases. The RP L3
L gene Pozo: None. L. García-Fernández: None. M. Solís: None. S. should be routinely included in dilated cardiomyopathy genetic Rodríguez-Nóvoa: None. testingpanels.Table1.Clinicalcharacteristicsinaffectedcarriersof RP L3
Lvariants. M. Sabater Molina: None. J. Pan Perez-Villalobos: None. E.  P05
.050.D Genetic inﬂuences on functional outcome after Nicolas Rocamora: None. M. Olmo Conesa: None. D. López stroke Cuenca: None. M. Sorli: None. F.J. Castro: None. J. Gimeno Blanes:None. Estefanía Alcaide1, Nuria Martínez-Gil1, Geòrgia Escaramís2, Uxue Lazcano3, Marina Mola-Caminal3, Caty Carrera4, Cristòfol Vives- Bauza5, Jordi Jiménez-Conde3, Israel Fernández-Cadenas4, Raquel  P05
.049.C Low frequency variants in STA P1
 associated with Rabionet1 Familial Hypercholesterolemia 1Departament de Genètica, Microbiologia i Estadística, Facultat de Carmen Rodriguez Jimenez1, Javier Sanguino1, Iluminada García- Biologia, IBUB, IRSJD and CIBERER, University of Barcelona, Polo2, J.M. Mostaza3, E. Sevilla1, A. Herranz-Cecilia1, A. Carazo1, N. Barcelona,Spain,2CIBERESP,Departament deBiomedicina,Facultat Gallego4, V. Gómez del Pozo5, L. García-Fernández6, M. Solís7, S. de Medicina i Ciències de la Salut, Institut de Neurociències, Rodríguez-Nóvoa1 Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Servei de Neurologia, Hospital Del Mar, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital de la Santa Creu i de 1Metabolic Disease Laboratory, Genetic Department. Hospital Uni- SantPau,Barcelona,Spain,5DepartamentdeBiologia,Universitatde versitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. Group of dislipemias of genetic lesIlles Balears,Palma de Mallorca, Spain. originandmetabolicdiseases, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario LaPaz, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 199 ID SEX AGEAT PHENOTYPE TREATMENT VARIANT VARIANT CURRENT DIAGNOSIS 1 2 SITUATION 1 Female 2months DCM Pharmacological R4W A94T LVEF46% 2 Male 2weeks DCM Pharmacological R161W G27D Exitus 3 Female 1.5months DCM Pharmacological R161W G27D Transplanted 4 Female 2weeks DCM PharmacologicalTransplant R242W D308N Notransplant rejection 5 Female 65years DCM>LVNCShortstature, Pharmacological A256T M168V LVEF20-27% kyphoscoliosis 6 Female 9years LVNC>DCM Pharmacological D308N LVEF50% 7 Female 9years LVNC>DCM Pharmacological D308N LVEF58% 8 Female 1month DCM>LVNC Ventricularassistdevice c.618C>T Transplantwaitlist Introduction:Strokeisaleadingcauseofadultdisability.Thereis Materials and Methods: A post-mortem negative, blood alargevariabilityinthefunctionaloutcomeafterastroke,partially sample of a clinically healthy, 19-year-old male with no regulated by genetic factors. GWAS results highlighted the arrhythmogenicity family history was referred for investigation involvement of common or low-frequency variants in P P1
 and of potential genetic background of SCD. Clinical exome sequen- PATJ;however,theroleofrarevariantsinstrokerecoveryremains cing was performed on DNA extracted from the sample, using unsolved. Sophia Genetics’ Clinical Exome Solution v2. Following prepara- MaterialsandMethods:Weperformedapilotstudyanalyzing tionsaccordingtothemanufacturer’sprotocol,DNAlibrarieswere exomes of 90 ischemic stroke cases with extreme functional sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq-500 genetic analyser. Data recoveryscoresthreemonthsafterstroke (modiﬁedRankinScale processing, variant calling and pre-classiﬁcation were conducted (mRS)0-1vs4-5),matchedbyage,genderandstrokeseverity,to by SOPHiA DDM® bioinformatics pipelines. Multiplex Ligation- selecttargetgenesinvolvedinfunctionaloutcome.Thesetargets, dependentProbeAmpliﬁcation(MLPA)wasperformedtoconﬁrm aswellasselectedregionsbasedonpreviousGWASresults,were results andinvestigate family members. included in a capture assay, and sequenced in 700 additional Results:Thelackofanymedicalhistoryintheprobanddidnot ischemic stroke cases from our hospitals. Rare variants with a allow targeted genetic investigation, thus a virtual gene panel CADDscore>15(coding)orafunseq2score>1.5(regulatory)were consisting of 134 genes related to SCD was analyzed for SNVs/ selected for further analysis with a Bayesian-based rare variant Indels/CNVs. Copy number variation analysis revealed a hetero- associationtest(BATI)usingthediscretemRsscores(0-6,where6 zygousKCNH2exon14-15deletion,furtherdeﬁnedandconﬁrmed indicatesdeath) asoutcome. byMLPAasexon 14-16deletion.Parental MLPAanalysisshowed Results: The pilot study highlighted genes involved in paternal inheritance. Six apparently healthy paternal relatives angiogenesis, immune system and synaptogenesis, such as TEK weretestedby MLPA, 3werefound tobe deletioncarriers. or ANGPT2. Targeted resequencing found association of rare Conclusions: Mutations in KCNH2 are related to longQT2 and exonicvariantsinCNTN5withworsefunctionaloutcome(p<0.02, shortQT1 syndromes and SCD. Although there was a benign 100 permutations). Interestingly, the 18 cases carrying CNTN5 medical history, this ﬁnding led to retrospective re-evaluation of missensevariantsarehighlyenrichedformRS=6(p-val<0.0001). ECGswhereconsistentaberrationswererecognized.Thegenomic One of CNTN5’s functions is related to synaptogenesis during analysis, not only deciphered the SCD, it led to high-risk family nervous system development; nevertheless, further functional member discovery thus allowing proper counseling and pre- experiments are needed to understand how CNTN5 mutations ventivemeasures inthepatients’best interest. leadto differences inrecovery. G. Christopoulou: None. S. Samara: None. A. Oikonomaki: Funding:Fundació La Marató (Proj.201726) None.E.Katsoni:None.A.Miliou:None.E.Oikonomou:None.C. E. Alcaide: None. N. Martínez-Gil: None. G. Escaramís: None. Vlachopoulos: None. P. Constantoulakis: None. U.Lazcano:None.M.Mola-Caminal:None.C.Carrera:None.C. Vives-Bauza: None. J. Jiménez-Conde: None. I. Fernández- Cadenas:None. R. Rabionet: None.  P05
.052.B Sudden death: Bioinformatic analysis of genetic variants  P05
.051.AThevalueofnewandoldtechnologiestodecipher Marisol Delea1, Guillermo Corró2, Leonela Luce3, Monica C. Fabbro4, asudden cardiac death case MicaelaGalain4,JorgeE.Kolomenski5,CeciliaS.Fernandez4,MonicaP. Bellazzi2, Tania Castro1, Viviana R. Consentino6, Liliana Francipane7, GeorgiaChristopoulou1,StavroulaSamara1,AikateriniOikonomaki1, SebastianMenazzi7,FlorenciaGiliberto3,GustavoOntiveros8,LilianaB. Eleni Katsoni1, Antigoni Miliou2, Evangelos Oikonomou2, Charalam- Dain1,CarlosD.Bruque2 bos Vlachopoulos2,Pantelis Constantoulakis1 1Centro Nacional de Genética Médica - ANLIS- Malbrán., CABA, 1Genotypos MSA, Athens, Greece, 21st Department of Cardiology, Argentina, 2Hospital de Alta Complejidad- SAMIC - El Calafate, El HippokrationHospital,National&KapodistrianUniversityofAthens, Calafate, Santa Cruz, Argentina, 3INIGEM, CONICET / Cátedra de Athens,Greece. Genética y Biología Molecular, Universidad de Buenos Aires, CABA, Argentina, 4CEGYR, Medicina Reproductiva y genética, CABA, Introduction: We present a sudden cardiac death (SCD) case Argentina,5DepartamentodeFisiología,BiologíaMolecularyCelular. resolved by post mortem genotyping through clinical-laboratory Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales,Universidad de Buenos geneticists’collaborationemployingnewandtraditionalgenomic Aires, CABA, Argentina, 6Departamento de Neonatología, Hospital technologies. Gandulfo, El Calafate, Santa Cruz, Argentina, 7División de Genética, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 200 Hospital de Clínicas "José de San Martín", Universidad de Buenos (p.Leu209fs) and c.1965delG(p.Arg656fs) in LTB P3
(latent TGFβ Aires,CABA,Argentina,8FundaciónparalaPrevencióndelaMuerte (transforming growthfactor β)-bindingproteins-3) werefound. Súbita, CABA,Argentina. Conclusion:WefoundonecasewheremutationsinLTB P3
can cause thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection, which can Introduction: Sudden death in patients over 40 years old is demonstrate that LTB P3
 is associated with thoracic aortic commonlyaresultofasterocleroticocclusionofcoronaryarteries. aneurysm and dissection. It provides a view for the expansion of Ontheotherhand,theseeventsinyoungpatients(<35years)are gene spectrum associated with thoracic aortic aneurysms and usually caused by familial/hereditary genetic diseases (cardiac dissections, which will be helpful for the clinical diagnosis and channelopathy,cardiomyopathies oraortopathy). clinicalintervention. Material and Methods: Patients were tested using exome Z.G.Yan: None. sequencing or targeted gene sequencing. The identiﬁed variants were evaluated in molecular homology models generated with the Modeller 9.22 software and stability programs were used to  P05
.054.D Telomere length in the pre- and postoperative predictΔΔG causedby residuechanges. periodofcoronary artery disease patients Results:Threefamilieswithpathogenicvariantswerereported inthiswork.Thevariant(c345G>C)intheACTA2genewasfound Maxim Aidarovich Asanov, Alena Olegovna Poddubnyak, Anasta- inanindexpatientwithaorticrootdilation.Theindexcaseofthe siaValerievna Ponasenko second family was diagnosed with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia and bears three different mutations: TNNT2 Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, (c.842A>T), MYBP C3
 (c.2429G>A) and SCN5A (c.5408C>G). The Kemerovo,Russian Federation. last index patient, diagnosed with arrhythmia, carried the variant (c.1308C>A) in the TRPM4 gene. Changes in protein stability and Cardiovasculardiseasesaretheleadingcauseofdeathworldwide. protein surface charges were observed by modelling, suggesting Decreased or lost function of myocardial cells or blood vessels is that these mutations may be directly related to the clinical thecauseofcoronaryheartdisease.Telomeresarelocatedatthe outcomes describedforeach patient. ends of chromosomes and consist of tandem repeats TTAGGG. Conclusion:Variantswereanalyzedbymeansofaglobalstudy Currently, there are many conﬂicting research results on the of genetic variants in several databases, protein structure and importanceoftelomerelength(TL)inthedevelopmentofCAD.It protein stability to determine their possible effects and their is important to assess the role of changes and restoration of correlation with patients’ phenotypes. The joint analysis of the leukocyte telomere length in CAD patients before and after familiesandthebioinformaticapproachenabledustodetermine surgery.Thestudyincluded60(59y.o.)patientswithCADand52 possible effectsfor geneticvariants. (54 y.o.) healthy people. DNA isolation was carried out using the M. Delea: None. G. Corró: None. L. Luce: None. M.C.Fabbro: standardphenol-chloroformextractionmethod.TherewasaqPCR None.M. Galain: None. J.E.Kolomenski: None. C.S. Fernandez: for measuring TL. The results of the study showed that the TL in None. M.P. Bellazzi: None. T. Castro: None. V.R. Consentino: patients with coronary artery disease before surgery and after 5 None.L.Francipane:None.S.Menazzi:None.F.Giliberto:None. years statistically signiﬁcantly differed from the TL of healthy G.Ontiveros: None. L.B.Dain:None. C.D. Bruque:None. people by 7 times (p < 0.05). TL did not differ between patients beforesurgeryandafter5yearsofrehabilitation.Theeffectiveness of measuring telomere length as a marker in the pathology of  P05
.053.C Thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections are atherogenesis,inparticularischemicheartdisease,isconﬁrmedby associated with LTB P3
 mutations: individual case and litera- theresultsoftheROCanalysis.TheareaundertheROC-curveAUC turereview =0.998±0.002. During inﬂammation, the rate of telomere short- ening is accelerated by increased cell division and increased ZhuGuo Yan oxidativestress,leadingtocellularsenescence.Thisphenomenon contributes to aging of the arteries, which in turn further PUMC&CAMS Fuwaihospital, Beijing, China. exacerbates inﬂammation. Foundation for the Support of Young Scientists intheFieldofBiomedical Sciences 2021-1 Normal07.8磅02falsefalsefalseEN-USZH-CNX-NONE/*Style M.A. Asanov: None. A.O. Poddubnyak: None. A.V. Pona- Deﬁnitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style-name:普通表格; senko:None. mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso-tstyle-colband-size:0; mso-style- noshow:yes; mso-style-priority:99; mso-style-parent:""; mso-pad- ding-alt:0cm 5.4pt 0cm 5.4pt; mso-para-margin:0cm; mso-para-  P05
.055.A Genotypic characterization of an Italian cohort of margin-bottom:.0001pt; mso-pagination:widow-orphan; font- patients withhereditary transthyretin-related amyloidosis size:10.0pt; font-family:"Times NewRoman",serif;} Background: With the rapid development of genetic testing Mariabeatrice Sanchini1, Marianna Farnè1, Laura Tonelli1, Alice technology, more and more HTAAD (Heritable thoracic aortic Margutti1, Rachele Rossi1, Paola Rimessi1, Marcella Neri1, Claudio aneurysmanddissection)-relatedmutationshavebeenidentiﬁed. Rapezzi2,3,Francesca Gualandi1,Alessandra Ferlini1 However, many patients with obvious genetic predispositions have still failed to ﬁnd pathogenic mutations in known genes 1MedicalGeneticsUnit,DepartmentofMedicalSciences,Universityof associatedwithaorticdisease.Hence,weneedtoupdateTAAD’s Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 2Cardiological Center, S. Anna University listofdisease-relatedgenes,whichcanhelptodeﬁnitecausesand HospitalofFerrara,Ferrara,Italy,3MariaCeciliaHospital,GVMCare pathogenesis of undiagnosed patients and screen the family &Research,Cotignola, Italy. members ofthepatients. Methods:Thepatientwhohadnohistoryofhypertensionwas Introduction: Hereditary amyloidosis transthyretin-related rehospitalized after surgery for aortic dissection, he presented (hATTR) is a rare, late-onset, autosomal dominant disease due to withaorticrootaneurysmandaortadilatesinmanypartswithno pathogenicvariations,almostinvariablymissense,intheTTRgene. otherabnormalsigns.Thepatientwasﬁrsttestedwithanegative Materials and Methods: From 2016 to 2020, hATTR was panel for aortic disease, then we performed the whole exome genetically identiﬁed in 95/534 (detection rate 17.8%) patients sequencing (WES)test on the patient, two mutations,c.625dupC EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 201 coming from Northern and Central Italy Centers. The analyses thus uncovering other factors inﬂuencing severity of the disease. were performed by Sanger sequencing. The 63.2% (60/95) of This work was supported by the Slovak National Agency VEGA patients were males while 36.8% (35/95) were females. In 33.7% (grantNo. 02/0040/20). (32/95)theanalysiswasrequestedasapresymptomatictestingin A. Zatkova: None. A. Soltysova: None. R. Imrich: None. H. familieswith already identiﬁed TTRmutations. Glasova:None.B.Olsson:None.M.Alsbou:None.L.Ranganath: Results: We identiﬁed 5 known pathogenic/likely pathogenic None. missense variation types: p.Ile88Leu (77.9%, N=74), p.Val50Met (12.6%, N=12), p.Thr139Met (3.2%, N=3), p.Phe84Leu (3.2%, N =3),p.Val142Ile(N=1).Wealsodetectedthemissensevariantp.  P06
.003.DDifﬁculties in diagnosingalpha-mannosidosis Val114Leuinonepatient,whichisnovel,thoughthecodon114is alreadyknownasasiteofanothermissensevariation,p.Val114Ala, GabrielaCsereoka1, Camelia Alkhzouz2,1, Vasilica Plaiasu3 classiﬁed as pathogenic. Many known polymorphisms were also found in 15 out of 95 positive patients, namely p.Gly26Ser (10 1Children’s Emergency Hospital, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2“Iuliu patients), p.Thr25Thr (1), c.337-18G>C (2), c.201-31G>A (1), c.70- Hatieganu” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, 7C>T (1). Finally, we found a novel intronic variant of uncertain Romania, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, INSMC “Alessandru signiﬁcancec.201-76T>A. Rusescu”, Bucharest, Romania. Conclusions: p.Ile88Leu (77.9%) is the most frequent TTR pathogenicvariantwehaveidentiﬁedanditismainlyassociated Introduction: Alpha-mannosidosis is a rare inherited lysosomal with a cardiac phenotype. Notably, also the novel variant p. storage disorder caused by mutations in the gene encoding for Val114Leu is associated with a hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, thelysosomal alpha-d-mannosidase, MAN2B1. underlining the importance of the cardiac phenotype in hATTR. Materials and Methods: We report two cases of nonrelative Lastly, we observed an increase requests for TTR genetic testing, pediatricpatients,aged17and4years,presentingmoderateform whichmightberelatedtotheapprovalofthenovelorphandrugs ofalpha-mannosidosis, whowereadmittedtoour departmentin (Patisiran and Inotersen). order to initiate the enzyme replacement therapy. Clinical M. Sanchini: None. M. Farnè: None. L. Tonelli: None. A. examinationwasperformed,followedbybloodsamplecollection Margutti:None.R.Rossi:None.P.Rimessi:None.M.Neri:None. for biochemical, immunological and hematological analysis and C.Rapezzi: None. F.Gualandi: None.A. Ferlini: None. alsoimagisticexamination.Theactivityofalphamannosidase,the identiﬁcation of pathogenic variants in MAN2B1 by next- generation sequencing, and the mannose-rich oligosaccharides  P06
 Metabolic andMitochondrial Disorders urinary levelweredeterminedby external laboratories. Results: Both patients show the main clinical features of the  P06
.001.B Analysis of the phenotype differences in sibs with disorder.Theyoungerpatientpresentednormalenzymeactivity,a alkaptonuria heterozygouspathogenicvariantandalsoaheterozygousvariant ofuncertainsigniﬁcance,identiﬁedintheMAN2B1gene,associat- Andrea Zatkova1, Andrea Soltysova1,2, Richard Imrich1,3, Helena ing a high level of urinary secretion of mannose -rich oligosac- Glasova4, Birgitta Olsson5, Mohammed Alsbou6, Lakshminarayan charides. The older patient has low level of alpha mannosidase Ranganath7 activity.Twovariantsofuncertainsigniﬁcance(homozygous)were identiﬁed inMAN2B1 gene. 1BiomedicalResearchCenter,SlovakAcademyofSciences,Bratislava, Conclusions: It is difﬁcult to predict genotype/phenotype Slovakia, 2Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural relationshipinpatientsaffectedbyalpha-mannosidose.Achild’s Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3National Insti- coarse facial features, hearing difﬁculties, recurrent infections, tute of Rheumatic Diseases, Piestany, Slovakia, 4Pharmacology and skeletal abnormalities, affected motor skills and intellectual Clinical Pharmacology, Slovak Medical University, Bratislava, Slova- disability should prompt the physician to investigate the kia, 5Clinical Development, Swedish Orphan Biovitrum, Stockholm, possibility of a lysosomal storage disease, including alpha- Sweden, 6Faculty of Medicine, Mutah University, Karak, Jordan, mannosidosis. This leads to an earlier diagnosis and initiation of 7Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Metabolism, Royal Liver- therapy, with thepossibility of geneticcounseling. poolUniversity Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom. G.Csereoka: None. C.Alkhzouz: None. V.Plaiasu: None. Alkaptonuria (AKU) is a rare metabolic disorder caused by mutationswithinagenecodingforhomogentisate1,2-dioxygen-  P06
.004.A Mild forms of hypophosphatasia in Northwest ase (HGD). Our recent study demonstrated that nitisinone is Russia,update suitable for treatment of AKU and also allowed collecting of a detailedbaselineclinicaldataforthelargestcohortof139patients MikhailFedyakov,Y.Eismont,T.Ivaschenko,I.Sosnina,Y.Snegova, with this rare disease. We performed also the ﬁrst genotype- S.Scherbak, Y.Barbitoff, A.Shikov, O.Glotov phenotypecorrelationstudyinthiscohort,whichshowedasmall butstatisticallysigniﬁcantdifferenceinurinaryhomogentisicacid City Hospital 40, Saint-Petersburg, Russia, Saint-Petersburg, Russian (HGA) excretion (corrected for dietary protein intake) between Federation. variantsleading to1% (G161R) or>30% (M368V, A122V)residual HGD activity. However, there was no difference in serum HGA Introduction: Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a rare heritable meta- levelsorabsoluteurinaryexcretionofHGA,orinthetestedclinical bolic disorder characterized by defective mineralization of bone symptoms.Takentogether,ourdataindicatedthatproteinintake and/orteethinthepresenceofreducedactivityofunfractionated during the life is more important in respect of the patients serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP). The overall prevalence of phenotype than direct effect of different HGD variants on the severe HPP is range from 1/100 000 to 1/300 000. Mild forms of functionalityofHGDprotein.Inthisstudy,wepresentanalysisof HPP are more frequent than severe forms - expected prevalence theclinicaldatafocusingonthemanifestationofthediseaseinsib can reach 1/6000 in Western populations. Russian prevalence of pairs present in the cohort, in order to evaluate phenotypical mild and severe HPP is still unknown. Genetic analysis provides differences between patients carrying the same genetic variants, determining ofdiagnosisin caseswith suspected HPP. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 202 Materials and Methods: We analyzed genomic DNA samples M.Daou:None.M.Souaid:None.T.Yammine:None.A.Nemr: from 259 unrelated individuals with suspected HPP (inclusion None.I.Khneisser:None.N.Salem:None.M.Rizkallah:None.M. criteria: low and/or recurrent low levels of ALP, low growth, Mezher: None.A. Moukarzel: None. C.Farra: None. recurrent fractures and others). Primers’ system for Sanger sequencing was designed and validated for coding 2-12 exons ofALPLgene.Exomedataof353ofunrelatedindividuals(in-house  P06
.006.C a successful treatment withuridine in CAD related controlgroup)wasusedforestimationofprevalenceinNorthwest disorders Russia. Results:Detectionratewas13,5%:28inheterozygousand7in AlaaAlAyed,Mohammed Almannai compound-heterozygous.7novelmutationsweredetected.Most frequent pathogenic variant was p. E191
K in exon 6. The SectionofMedicalGenetics,Children’sHospital,KingFahadMedical prevalence of this mutation was: 2.9% in suspected HPP group City,Riyadh,Saudi Arabia. (15/518), 0.28% (2/706 chromosome) in home controls, 0.25% in gnomAD. CAD related developmental and epileptic encephalopathy is an Conclusions: Mild forms of HPP predominate in Northwest autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder caused by RussianpatientswithsuspectedHPP.Mutationp. E191
Kinexon6 mutation in CAD gene that encode a multifunctional enzyme is 12 times common in patients with low levels of ALP compare involved in the initial steps of pyrimidine synthesis. This disorder generalpopulation. wasrecentlyreported,andevidencesuggestsapositiveresponse M.Fedyakov:None.Y.Eismont:None.T.Ivaschenko:None.I. to treatment with oral uridine. Exome sequencing in one family Sosnina: None. Y. Snegova: None. S. Scherbak: None. Y. identiﬁed a homozygous, novel and pathogenic variants in CAD Barbitoff: None. A.Shikov: None. O.Glotov: None. gene in two siblings who presented with developmental regression after seizure onset. In this report we demonstrated a successful treatment with oral uridine in term of mobility,  P06
.005.B Screening of AS S1
 gene in seven families from consciousness,communication,andcessationofseizurerendering Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, Kurdistan with citrullinemia type 1 thisdisorderasoneofthefewtreatableneurometabolicdiseases. identiﬁesrareandnovel variant A.AlAyed: None. M.Almannai: None. Melissa Daou1, Mirna Souaid1, Tony Yammine1, Anthony Nemr1, Issam Khneisser1, Nabiha Salem1, Maya Rizkallah1, Manal Mezher1,  P06
.007.D Clinical, biochemical, and genetic features of Adib Moukarzel2,Chantal Farra1,3 patients withcongenital disorders ofglycosylation in Japan 1MedicalGeneticsUnit,FacultyofMedicine,Saint-Joseph University, NobuhikoOkamoto,Yoshinao Wada Beirut, Lebanon, 2Department of Pediatrics, Hotel-Dieu de France University Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon, 3Department of Medical Osaka Women’sandChildren’s Hospital,Izumi, Osaka, Japan. Genetics, Hotel-Dieu de France University Hospital, Beirut, Leba- non. Congenitaldisordersofglycosylationareheterogeneousdiseases causedbydefectsinvariousstepsinglycosylationpathways.More Introduction: Citrullinemia is a rare autosomal recessive urea than 100 genetic defects are known in humans. Many of these cycle disorder caused by argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS) defects lead to multi-systemic manifestations, commonly invol- deﬁciency. First classiﬁed into three types (types I, II, and III) vingthecentralnervoussystem.Alteredproteinglycosylationare basedonbiochemicalmanifestations,itwaslaterreclassiﬁedinto classiﬁed into N-glycosylation defects, O-glycosylation defects, typesI(CTLN1,MIM#215700)andII(CTLN2,MIM#603471)based and combined defects. A type 1 pattern of N-glycosylation onmolecularpathogenesis.ItisduetovariationintheAS S1
gene disorders (CDG-I) is a glycan assembly defect, a type 2 pattern located on chromosome 9q43.11. Incidence of variants differs (CDG-II)isaglycanremodelingdefect.Mosteffectiveapproachto across populations and ethnic groups. A genotype-phenotype identifying these N-glycosylation disorders is mass spectrometry correlationhas beenestablished,although not clearly outlined. (MS)usingeitherreleasedglycans,intactglycoproteinsorproteolytic Materials and methods: A total of seven families with peptidesasanalytes.Amongthese,matrix-assistedlaserdesorption/ citrullinemia type 1, four of Lebanese origins, and three others ionization (MALDI) MS of tryptic peptides derived from transferrin of Syrian, Iraqi, and Kurdish origins were included in our study. can be used to reliably identify signature peptides that are Upon informed consent, genomic DNA was isolated from characteristic of CDG-I and II. Additionally, we introduced MS to peripheralbloodsamples and analysisofAS S1
was carriedout. theO-glycoformproﬁlingofapoCIII.Inthepresentstudy,MALDI-MS Results: A novel variant c.286C>A, in exon 5 was described in was applied to N- and O-glycosylation disorders. Patients with one Lebanese family with early-onset and severe clinical multisystemdiseaseofunknownetiologyfromalloverJapanwere presentation. Two other homozygous missense variants included in this study. The genetic diagnosis was made before or c.535T>C, in exon 8 and c.787G>A, in exon 10 were identiﬁed in after identifying the glycoform abnormality in this screening. two Lebanese families each presenting with late-onset and mild Glycosylation defects were revealed in 50 samples including manifestations. In the third Lebanese family, c.535T>C and PMM2-CDG, ALG1-CDG, ALG9-CDG, ALG12-CDG, ALG13-CDG, c.787G>Awerebothpresentasheterozygouscompositevariants. B4GALT1-CDG, SL C35
A2-CDG, AT P6
V0A2-CDG, TRAPP C11
-CDG, In the Syrian, Iraqi, and Kurdish families, the homozygous NU S1
-CDG, and MAN1B1-CDG. Urinary excretion of Hex4 corre- c.847G>A, in exon 13 was identiﬁed and associated with an sponding to Glc3Man was conﬁrmed in MOGS-CDG. A predomi- early-onsetand severeclinicalpresentation. nance of PMM2-CDG was detected as in other countries. Some Conclusions: A novel variant and three previously reported patients with glycoform abnormality have none of the known variants were identiﬁed in seven Middle Eastern families, further moleculardefects.Furtherstudieswithexomeanalysisareongoing. delineatingthemolecularbasisandgenotype-phenotypecorrela- N.Okamoto: None. Y.Wada: None. tion ofcitrullinemia type 1. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 203  P06
.008.A Genetics and prevalence of Chronic Progressive years)wereobservedwithoutinsulin.Genotypingwasperformed External Ophtalmoplegia (CPEO) in the Italian region Emilia- using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragments length Romagna polymorphismanalysis(PCR-RFLP).Allstatisticalcalculationswere donein SPS S22
.0 software. Leonardo Caporali1, Maria Lucia Valentino1,2, Cristina Fonti1, Results: Using binary logistic regression it was found the Chiara La Morgia1, Rocco Liguori1,2, Roberto D’Alessandro1, Valerio reducedriskofinsulinprescriptionforC-allelecarriersundercrude Carelli1,2, ER-Mito study group dominant (Pc=0.016; ORc=0.423; 95%CI=0.21-0.85), over- dominant (Pc=0.006; ORc=0.335; 95%CI=0.153-0.736) and 1IRCCS Institute of Neurological Sciences of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, additive (Pc=0.006; ORc=0.33; 95%CI=0.149-0.732) models of 2University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. inheritance.Moreover,theassociationsremainedsigniﬁcantunder dominant (Pa=0.018; ORa=0.405; 95%CI=0.192-0.854), over- Introduction:Ptosiswithorwithoutchronicprogressiveexternal dominant (Pa=0.002; ORa=0.271; 95%CI=0.117-0.627) and ophthalmoplegia (CPEO) is the most common manifestation of additive (Pa=0.003; ORa=0.279; 95%CI=0.12-0.652) models mitochondrialmyopathy,withmaintenanceofmitochondrialDNA aftertheadjustmentforage,sex,BMI,smoking,andthepresence (mtDNA) defect as disease marker. This defect may lead to ofarterial hypertension. qualitative alterations in the form of accumulation of mtDNA Conclusions:ItwasfoundthatBGLAPHindIIIpolymorphismis multiple deletions in post-mitotic tissues, or quantitative altera- associated with decreased risk of insulin treatment in Ukrainians tions in the form of mtDNA depletion, which may be organ or withT2DM. tissue-speciﬁc, secondary to nuclear DNA (nDNA) mutations in Y. Harbuzova: None. Y. Chumachenko: None. O. Obukhova: genes involved in the replisome machinery, the nucleotide None.V. Harbuzova: None. balanceand themitochondrial dynamics. MaterialsandMethods:86patientswithCPEOwererecruited: 53patientswerescreenedfornucleargeneassociatedwithCPEO  P06
.010.C Study of tumor-supressor genes’ DNA methylation and 46 for mtDNA rearrangements (single or multiple deletions); inpatients withtype 2diabetesmellitus 59 skeletal muscle biopsies were available for mtDNA molecular investigations.WeevaluatedmtDNAdeletionsbylongrangePCR PavlinaGateva1,Ivelina Mihaleva2, Ivanka Dimova3 and ddPCR, with characterization of deletion breakpoints, and mtDNAcopynumber by qPCR. 1Deaprtment of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical University - Results: The CPEO prevalence in Emilia-Romagna was 2.32/ Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria,2DepartmentofPharmacologyandToxicology, 100.000, reaching 5.07 in Bologna province. Single deletion was Medical University - Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Department of Medical found in 37.7% (common deletion in 41.1%), whereas multiple Genetics, Medical University - Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria. deletions in 8.4%. Genetic defect was detected in 27.9%, being TWNKthemostfrequentgene(44.4%),followedbyPOLG(20.8%), Introduction: The epidemiological data represent a signiﬁcantly OPA1 (16.6%), DNA2 (8.3%), DGUOK (4.1%), MGM E1
 (4.1%), increased risk of various cancer forms in patients with diabetes. RNASEH1 (4.1%), RRM2B (4.1%); 6.7 % showed mtDNA depletion, Type2diabetesmellitus(T2DM)andcancerhavemanycommon while30.5% ahigheramount, especially insingle deletioncases. risk factors, but the potential biological link between the two Conclusions: Our results provide the ﬁrst estimates of minimum sociallysigniﬁcantdiseaseshasnotbeenstudied.Whenexamined prevalenceofCPEO,revealingsinglemtDNAdeletionandthemtDNA atthecellularlevel,bothdiabetesandcanceraregeneticdiseases elicase(TWNK)asmajorgeneticcause.Supportedby“Programmadi causedbyalteredgeneexpressionprograms.DNAmethylationis ricercarRegione-Università2010-2012”(PRUa1RI-2012-008) associated with cancer development. The data are mainly L. Caporali: None. M. Valentino: None. C. Fonti: None. C. La epidemiological and histological, and they do not explain the Morgia: None. R. Liguori: None. R. D’Alessandro: None. V. causes and molecular mechanisms. One possible explanation is Carelli:None. the inﬂuence of epigenetic modiﬁcations in genes, important for oncogenesis. Materials and methods: We have performed analysis for  P06
.009.B Positive association between BGLAP Hind III promotermethylationof8tumorsuppressorgenes(ATM,BRCA1, polymorphism and insulin treatment in type 2 diabetes CDKN1a,Mlh1,Msh2,Rara,Tp53,Xpc)inbloodsamplesofpatients mellitus with T2DM compared with controls with normal glucose tolerance.Brieﬂy,weusedHumanStress&ToxicityPathwayFinder Yelizaveta Harbuzova, Yaroslav Chumachenko, Olha Obukhova, EpiTectMethyl IISignaturePCR Array(QiagenSciences Inc.). ViktoriiaHarbuzova Results: The highest increase of methylated DNA fraction (by more than 10 times) was detected for promoter methylation of Sumystate university Medical institute, Sumy, Ukraine. BRCA1 (increase by 18 times), Msh2 gene (increase by 12 times), andCDKN1a(increaseby10times).Theﬁrsttwogenespredispose Introduction: According to the current data, bone-derived tobreast/ovarian andcolon/endometrial cancer. undercarboxylated protein osteocalcin (OCN) performs the func- Conclusion:Itisconsideredthatthereisastronglinkbetween tion of a hormone regulating the systemic glucose metabolism. aberrantmethylationoftheBRCA1inwhitebloodcellsandbreast OCN enhances insulin expression and increases its sensitivity in cancer-related molecular changes that indicate the potential peripheral tissues. Therefore, the aim of the research was to predisposition of BRCA1 dysmethylation for developing breast investigatetheassociationbetweenBGLAPHindIIIpolymorphism cancerindiabetic patients. andtheneedforinsulintherapyinpatientswithtype2diabetes Acknowledgment: BSNF,Contract NoКП-06-Н33/10,2019. mellitus(T2DM). P. Gateva:None. I.Mihaleva: None. I. Dimova: None. MaterialsandMethods:Venousbloodof153Ukrainianswith diagnosed T2DM was collected for the study. During the treatment, 66 patients (mean age±SD 63.5±8.03 years) were  P06
.011.D Assessing pathogenicity of novel mitochondrial prescribed insulin preparations and 87 patients (65.55±8.27 DNAvariants EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 204 AndreaWinkler1,UweAhting1,BettinaLorenz-Depiereux1,Riccardo  P06
.012.A Urinary extracellular vesicles and their molecular Berutti1, Johannes A. Mayr2, Ralf A. Husain3, Andreas Hahn4, Leila cargo aspossible biomarkers ofFabry nephropathy Scholle5, Angela Rosenbohm6, Jasmin Lisfeld7, Maja Hempel7, WolfgangMüller-Felber8,ClaudiaCatarino9,TimM.Strom1,Thomas Tina Levstek1, Teo Mlinšek1, Marija Holcar1, Katja Goričar1, Metka Meitinger1,ThomasKlopstock9,DavidThorburn10,11,12,JohnChristo- Lenassi1, Vita Dolžan1, Bojan Vujkovac2, Katarina Trebušak doulou10,11,12, Holger Prokisch1,13, Saskia Wortmann1,2,14, Matias Podkrajšek1,3 Wagner1,13 1Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of 1Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Technical Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Centre for University München, Munich, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics, Fabry Disease, General Hospital Slovenj Gradec, Slovenj Gradec, UniversityHospitalSalzburg,ParacelsusMedicalUniversitySalzburg, Slovenia, 3Clinical Institute for Special Laboratory Diagnostics, Salzburg, Austria, 3Department of Neuropediatrics, Jena University University Children’s Hospital, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Hospital,Jena,Germany,4DepartmentofChildNeurology,University Ljubljana, Slovenia. ofGiessen, Giessen, Germany, 5Department of Neurology, University ofHalle/S.,Halle,Germany,6DepartmentofNeurology,Universityof Introduction: Fabry nephropathy (FN) has an important impact Ulm,Ulm,Germany,7InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityMedical on morbidity and mortality in Fabry disease (FD). Current Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 8Department of biomarkers are associated with late signs of kidney damage, but Neuropediatrics, Developmental Neurology and Social Pediatrics, they do not predict FN progression. Urinary extracellular vesicles LMU-Campus Innenstadt, University of Munich, Munich, Germany, (uEVs) are secreted by cells lining the urinary tract and have not 9Department of Neurology, Friedrich Baur Institute, University beenstudiedinFDsofar.Ouraimwastoevaluatetheassociation Hospital of the Ludwig- Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, ofuEVs andtheir cargoaspossible early biomarkers of FN. Germany, 10Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Royal Children’s Methods: Small uEVs were isolated by size exclusion chroma- Hospital, Victoria, Australia, 11Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The tographyfromtwourinesamplesperFDpatient(n=21)obtained University of Queensland, Queensland, Australia, 12Victorian Clinical 5yearsapart.Weusednanoparticletrackinganalysistodetermine Genetics Services, Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Royal uEVssizeandconcentration.Weanalysedtheexpressionofseven Children’s Hospital, Victoria, Australia, 13Institute of Neurogenomics, uEVs miRNAs using miRCURY LNA miRNA PCR Assays, two of Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, 14Radboud Center whichservedfor normalisation. for Mitochondrial Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Amalia Results: uEVs concentration, size, and expression of miR- Children’s Hospital,Radboudumc, Nijmegen,Netherlands. 200a-3p, miR-29a-3p, miR-30b-5p, miR-23a-3p, and miR-34a-5p did not differ signiﬁcantly between patients with and without Introduction: Diagnostics for suspected mitochondrial diseases FN at last follow-up. However, expression of uEVs miR-200a-3p can be challenging due to the extremely broad genetic and and miR-29a-3p differed signiﬁcantly between chronological phenotypic spectrum as well as disease genes on both nuclear samples (p=0.013 and p=0.011, respectively). These differ- and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Whereas most mtDNA variants ences were no longer signiﬁcant among patients without FN. are well known with undoubted pathogenicity the growing However,whenanalysingonlypatientswithFN,theconcentra- facilitation of next-generation sequencing technologies identiﬁes tion of EVs was signiﬁcantly different (p=0.015) in addition to anincreasingnumberofvariantsofuncertainsigniﬁcance(VUS)in the above miRNAs (p=0.021 and p=0.028, respectively). In the mtDNA. In the present study, we aim to assess the patients with FN, uEVs concentration decreased, while the pathogenicityof mtDNAvariants ofuncertain signiﬁcance. relativeexpressionofmiR-200a-3pandmiR-29a-3pincreasedin Materials and Methods: We cumulated mtDNA variants the 5-year period. reportedasvariantsofuncertainsigniﬁcanceinroutinediagnostic Conclusion: uEVs miR-200a-3p and miR-29a-3p may represent exomesequencingandtargetedmtDNAnextgenerationsequen- candidate biomarkers of renal function in FD. Further studies are cing. Clinical data of the individual patients, such as symptoms neededtoconﬁrm this association. andMRIabnormalities,werereviewed.Anupdatedscoringsystem T. Levstek: None. T. Mlinšek: None. M. Holcar: None. K. as proposed by Yarham et al. as well as the ACMG criteria were Goričar:None.M.Lenassi:None.V.Dolžan:None.B.Vujkovac: used toassess thevariant’s pathogenicity. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and Results: 36 variants were collected of which 19 are listed as expert witness); Modest; Sanoﬁ Genzyme, Shire (now part of “reported”inMITOMAPand17arenovel.Ofthe19variantswhich Takeda), and Greenovation Biotech GmbH. K. Trebušak Podkra- have been reported before seven could be reclassiﬁed to “likely jšek: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, pathogenic”, nine to “likely benign” and three remained VUS. Of andexpert witness);Modest; Takeda. the17novelvariantssevenwereclassiﬁedas“likelypathogenic”, four as“likely benign”and sixremained VUS. Conclusions: We provide evidence for pathogenicity of 14  P06
.013.B Genetic study of MTHFR and LPA in patients with mtDNA variants and describe six novel variants with potential familial hypercholesterolemia causal association. The reevaluation of previously collected data provides important evidence for assigning pathogenicity. Colla- Elena Sevilla1,2, Carmen Rodríguez-Jiménez1,2, Francisco Arrieta3,4,5, boratively combining data between institutes allows better JavierSanguino1,2,AmandaHerranz-Cecilia1,2,AnaCarazo1,2,Itsaso understandingofmtDNAvariantsandisvaluablefordistinguish- Losantos-García6,JM.Montejo-Gadea7,VE.Montaño-Fernández8,M ingpathogenic from benignvariants. E.Rubio-Martín8, ÁngelaDel Pozo9,10, SoniaRodríguez-Nóvoa1,2 A. Winkler: None. U. Ahting: None. B. Lorenz-Depiereux: None. R. Berutti: None. J.A. Mayr: None. R.A. Husain: None. A. 1Metabolic Disease Laboratory, Genetic Department. Hospital Uni- Hahn: None. L. Scholle: None. A. Rosenbohm: None. J. Lisfeld: versitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Group of dislipemias of genetic None. M. Hempel: None. W. Müller-Felber: None. C. Catarino: originandmetabolicdiseases, IdiPAZ, HospitalUniversitario LaPaz, None.T.M.Strom:None.T.Meitinger:None.T.Klopstock:None. Madrid,Spain,3DepartmentofEndocrinologyandNutrition,Ramón D.Thorburn: None. J. Christodoulou: None. H.Prokisch: None. y Cajal University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 4Ramón y Cajal Health S.Wortmann: None.M. Wagner: None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 205 ResearchInstitute(IRYCIS),Madrid,Spain,5CIBERofPathophysiology Materials and Methods: Five families including 10 subjects of Obesity and Nutrition (CIBEROBN), Madrid, Spain, 6Biostatistics withFMLandtwohealthyfamilymemberswererecruited.Atrio- Unit. Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain, 7Pre- or single based whole genome sequencing (WGS) (Illumina analyticSection.GeneticsDepartment,HospitalUniversitarioLaPaz, NovaSeq 6000 platform) approach, and a standard karyotyping IdiPAZ,Madrid,Spain,8NextGenerationSequencingSection.Genetics wereundertakenanalyzingDNAfromperipheralblood.Aclinical Department, Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain, interview, physical examination and biochemical analyses of the 9Bioinformatics Section. Genetics Service, Hospital Universitario La patients, and histopathological analyses of lipomas were Paz,IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain,10CIBERER,ISCIII, Madrid,Spain. performed. Results: The patients presented clinical features compatible Introduction: High levels of plasma Lipoprotein A [Lp(a)] and withFMLpresentingfewtoseveralhundredconﬂuentlipomasof homocysteineareconsideredcardiovasculardiseaseriskfactors1,2. 3-4 mm to 14 cm in diameter. Histopathological analyses In patients with Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH), increases in demonstrated both lipomas and angiolipomas. No patients had Lp(a)andhomocysteinelevelscouldcontributetothecumulative diabetes or ischemic heart disease. Biochemical proﬁles showed burden of risk factors for atherosclerotic-cardiovascular disease2. marginally elevated levels of lipids in four patients, p-LDL Herein,weanalyzerelationofLp(a)andhomocysteinelevelsand cholesterol: 3.8-4.4 mmol/L (ref: <3 mmol/L). No mutual disease- geneticpolymorphismsinLPAandMTHFRgenesinpatientswith causinggenewasidentiﬁedhowever,candidategenesinvolvedin FH. preadipocyte differentiation (ATF2, CTSB, AKT2), adipogenesis PatientsandMethods:Atotalof212patientswithprobableor (CDH13),tumoursuppressorgenes(PRDM2),andcellproliferation deﬁnitiveFHwereincluded.MTHFRandLPAgeneswereanalyzed (PTPRZ1, TRIM24), were identiﬁed in single families. In addition, byNextGenerationSequence(NGS)usingacustomizedpanelof normalkaryotype wasobserved inallprobands. 287genes. Conclusions: In four families with FML we did not uncover a Results:Thegeneticanalysisshowed22variantsofinterest:5in single mutual genetic background. Ongoing studies, including MTHFR and 17 in LPA. Patients with the variant additionalin-vitrostudiesofadipocytedifferentiationandlipoma MTHFR_NM_005957.4:c.665C>T;p.(Ala222Val) showed higher gene expression, may discover altered signalling pathways and homocysteine levels compared with patients without it (p= detail theeffectsof candidategenes. 0.004); patients carry LPA_NM_005577.2:c.4114C>G:p.(Lys1372Val), J.Bjerrelund: None. M.J.Larsen: None. H.D.Schrøder: None. LPA_NM_005577.2:c.4072C>G:p.(Lys1358Val) showed lower levels M. Frost: None. M. Kassem: None. L.B. Ousager: None. A.L. of Lp(a) (p=0.010). The variant LPA_NM_005577.2:c.5673A>G:p. Frederiksen: None. (Ile1891Met)wasobservedinsixpatientswithhighlevelsofLp(a). Conclusions: In this study we found that MTHFR p.(Ala222Val) and LPA p.(Lys1372Val) and p.(Lys1358Val) variants were asso-  P06
.016.AMutationalspectrumandfunctionalanalysisofthe ciated with homocysteine and Lp(a) levels in patients with HGD gene variants identiﬁed in large Russian cohort of hypercholesterolemia. The study of variants in MTHFR and LPA patients withalkaptonuria could help to better predict the cardiovascular events since homocystinuriaandLp(a)plasmalevelshavebeenconsideredas Igor Bychkov, Andrey Nekrasov, Elena Kamenets, Marina Kurkina, cardiovascularrisk factors. Georgiy Rychkov, Alexandra Ilyushkina, Aleksandra Filatova, Darya E. Sevilla: None. C. Rodríguez-Jiménez: None. F. Arrieta: Guseva, Galina Baydakova, Aleksandr Cheblokov, Mikhail Skoblov, None. J. Sanguino: None. A. Herranz-Cecilia: None. A. Carazo: Ekaterina Zakharova None.I.Losantos-García:None.J.M.Montejo-Gadea:None.V.E. Montaño-Fernández: None. M.E. Rubio-Martín: None. Á. Del Researchcentreformedicalgenetics,Moscow,RussianFederation. Pozo: None. S.Rodríguez-Nóvoa: None. Background: Alkaptonuria (AKU) is a very rare genetic disease causedbymutationsinthehomogentisate1,2-dioxygenasegene  P06
.014.C Familial Multiple Lipomatosis - analyses of genetic HGD. Deﬁcient activity of this enzyme leads to accumulation of etiologybywholegenomesequencinganddelineationofthe homogentisicacid(HGA)andochronosis,thedarkeningoftissues. clinical phenotype 49patientsfromunrelatedfamiliesweresuspectedforAKU,based on characteristic clinical and biochemical (the elevated level of Julie Bjerrelund1,2, Martin J. Larsen1,3, Henrik D. Schrøder4, Morten urine HGA) symptoms and werereferred forgenetic testing. Frost2, Moustapha Kassem2, Lilian B. Ousager1,3, Anja L. Results: The homozygous and compound heterozygous Frederiksen5,6 variants in HGD were found in all patients. c.481G>A; p. (Gly161Arg) mutation was found in 45 of 49 patients and 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, comprised 72.4% of identiﬁed alleles, which is probably the Odense,Denmark,2MolecularEndocrinologyUnit(KMEB),University highest frequency of this mutation worldwide. 9 novel variants of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark, 3Department of Clinical werefound: 6 missense, 2 splicingand 1 loss of start-codon. The Research,FacultyofHealth,UniversityofSouthernDenmark,Odense, bioinformatic analysis, protein 3D-modeling and molecular Denmark, 4Department of Pathology, Odense University Hospital, dynamics simulation were performed for the missense variants Odense, Denmark, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, Aalborg and strongly suggest their pathogenic effect. Rare synonymous University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark, 6Clinical Institute, Aalborg c.753C>T(p.Gly251=)variantwasfoundin3cases.cDNAanalysis University, Aalborg, Denmark. and minigene assay demonstrated that c.753C>T is spliceogenic variant, which causes cryptic splice site activation and 23 b.p. Introduction: Familial Multiple Lipomatosis (FML) is a rare frameshifting deletion in vast majority of corresponding mRNA condition, with an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, molecules. characterized by multiple subcutaneous lipomas. However, the Conclusion: The analysis of the largest Russian cohort of AKU genetic background remains to be identiﬁed. In this study we i) patients allowed us to established the peculiar mutational evaluated the clinical phenotypes including histopathological spectrum, characterized by signiﬁcant prevalence of c.481G>A; analysesandbiochemicalparametersandii)performedextensive p.(Gly161Arg)mutation.Theﬁrstpathogenic synonymousvariant geneticanalyses. inHGDwasfunctionallycharacterized,whichdrawstheattention EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 206 of researchers to this type of mutations. After the detailed Spain, 7Bioinformatics Section. Genetics Department, Hospital functional analysis and application of ACMG guidelines 9 novel Universitario La Paz,IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain, 8CIBERER, ISCIII,Madrid, HGDvariants wereclassiﬁed aspathogenic or likely pathogenic. Spain. I.Bychkov:None.A.Nekrasov:None.E.Kamenets:None.M. Kurkina: None. G. Rychkov: None. A. Ilyushkina: None. A. Introduction:TheGlycogenstoragedisease (GSD)typeIXisdue Filatova: None. D. Guseva: None. G. Baydakova: None. A. toadeﬁciencyinphosphorylasekinase(PHK,E.C.2.7.1.38)activity Cheblokov: None. M. Skoblov: None. E.Zakharova: None. which incidence is 1:100,000 births being responsible for 25% of all GSD cases. It is classiﬁed into two types: liver PHK deﬁciency andmusclePHKdeﬁciency,andiscausedbymutationsinPHKA1,  P06
.017.B Glycogen Storage Disease diagnosis with Clinical PHKA2, PHKB and PHKG2 genes. The liver PHK deﬁciency is the ExomeSequencing that has CNV detection capabilities most common, pathogenic variants in the PHKA2 gene are responsible forup to75% ofallcases ofGSDIX. BülentUyanık1,Melike Ersoy2, Sezin Canbek3 Materials and Methods: A 22-month-old male with clinical suspicion of glycogenosis type VI or IX was referred to our 1Bezmialem Vakif University Faculty of Medicine Medical Genetics laboratory for genetic study of candidate genes by next Department,Istanbul,Turkey,2BakirkoyDrSadiKonukResearchand generation sequencing (NGS). The child presented giant hepato- Education Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Umraniye Research and megaly,increaseintransaminases(AST1740IU/L[<95]andALAT Training Hospital Medical Genetics, Fatih,Turkey. 960 IU/L [<35], hypertriglyceridemia, hypoglycemia, liver biopsy withmassivedepositofPAS-positivematerial,special“fatcheeks” Introduction: Glycogen Storage Diseases arise from an inherited phenotype anddelayed walking(19 months). defectinoneoftheenzymesresponsibleforformingglycogenor Results: A novel hemizygous deletion extends from exon 1 to for releasing glucose from glycogen as it is needed by the body 12ofPHKA2genewasfoundbyNGS.Thisdeletionisdelimitedby during activity and/or between meals. Disruptions in glycogen sanger sequencing, showing a 62.7Kb deletion in X-chromosome metabolismusuallyresultinsomelevelofdysfunctionintheliver, (NC_000023.11:g.18947453_19010180del hg:19), which affects muscle, heart,kidneyand/orbrain.Furthermore, thespectrumof exons 1 to 12 of the PHKA2 gene and extends upstream to the symptoms observed is very broad, depending on the affected promoter regionand theadjacentgene(ADGRG2). enzyme. There are around 16 variants of GSD, plus sub-variants, Conclusions: The novel deletion identiﬁed is the ﬁrst partial making about 25 in total. A glycogen storage disorder occurs in deletion that affects the ﬁrst exons and promoter region of the aboutonein20,000to25,000babies.Thefutureofgenetherapy PHKA2gene.DeletionsinPHKA2arenotfrequent,buttheirstudy appears promising for the GSDs, promising to provide more isnecessaryforthecompletecharacterizationofgenevariantsin efﬁcacious therapy for these disorders intheforeseeablefuture. patientswith glycogenosis. Method: We made clinical exome sequencing that con- A. Herranz-Cecilia: None. C. Rodríguez-Jimémez: None. C. tains4493 genes using Illumina NextSeq-500 sequencer with Camarena:None.J.Sanguino:None.R.RosasAlonso:None.A. Sophia Genetics Clinical Exome Solution (CES) kit version-2. All Carazo: None. J. Montejo-Gadea: None. Á. Del Pozo: None. S. singlenucleotidevariations(SNV)andalsocopynumbervariations RodríguezNóvoa: None. (CNV) have analyzed by Sophia DDM® Software with ﬁltering GlycogenStorage Diseasesrelated genes. Results:In16patientsCESrevealedhomozygotesSNVandone  P06
.019.D Diagnosis of GM1-Gangliosidosis Type II by WES homozygote exonic deletions. In 3 patients have compound analysis heterozygote SNV. One patient has a hemizygous mutation on X linked inherited PHKA1 gene. 6 patients who have GSD Laura Tonelli1, Elena Procopio2, Flavia Tubili2, Mariabeatrice preliminarydiagnosisbutCESmadethecleardeﬁnitivediagnosis Sanchini1,Alessandra Ferlini1,Alberta Leon3,Stefania Bigoni1 asdifferent:In4caseshasSNV,remain2hashomozygousexonic deletionson FB P1
and LPIN1 genes. 1MedicalGeneticsUnit,DepartmentofMedicalSciences,Universityof Conclusion: CES analysis with CNV capability is efﬁcient and Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 2Metabolic and Muscular Unit, Clinic of can be recommended as ﬁrst-tier method for GlycogenStorage Pediatric Neurology, Meyer Children’s Hospital, Florence, Italy, Diseasesuspection. 3Research &Innovation SRL,Genetic Laboratory, Padua, Italy. B.Uyanık:None.M. Ersoy: None. S.Canbek: None. Introduction: GM1-Gangliosidosis is an autosomal recessive sphyngolipidoses due to deﬁciency of lysosomal enzyme  P06
.018.CNovel deletion in PHKA2gene in glycogen storage β-galactosidase, encoded by GLB1. The disease is characterized diseasetype IXa by variable degrees of neurodegeneration and skeletal abnorm- alities. Three clinical forms displaying different severity and AmandaHerranz-Cecilia1,2,CarmenRodríguez-Jimémez1,2,Carmen variable residual beta-galactosidase activity are known: Type I Camarena3,JavierSanguino1,2,RocíoRosasAlonso4,5,AnaCarazo1,2, (infantile), Type II (late infantile/juvenile) and Type III (adult). To Juan Manuel Montejo-Gadea6, Ángela Del Pozo7,8, Sonia Rodríguez date, Miglustat, approved for the treatment of other lysosomal Nóvoa1,2 storagedisorders,isusedasoff-labeldruginGM1-TypeIIanditis theonlytreatmentknowntostabilize/slowdowntheneurological 1Metabolic Disease Laboratory, Genetic Department, Hospital Uni- progression. versitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Group of “Dislipemias of Genetic MaterialsandMethods:Theprobandwasa6year-oldfemale originandMetabolicDiseases”,IdiPAZ,HospitalUniversitarioLaPaz, with a normal psychomotor development until age 3, when she Madrid,Spain,3PaediatricHepatologyService,HospitalUniversitario began to show language regression, slight impairment of eye LaPaz,Madrid,Spain,4PharmacogeneticUnit,GeneticDepartment, contact and motor skills. Biochemical/hematological tests, HospitalUniversitarioLaPaz,Madrid,Spain,5ExperimentalTherapies ophthalmologic evaluation, abdominal ultrasound examination andnovel biomarkers incancer, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria and brain MRI were all normal. FMR1 and MEC P2
 molecular del Hospital La Paz (IdiPAZ), Madrid, Spain, 6Preanalytic Section. analysis, Array-CGH analysis were all negative. The presence of a Genetics Department, Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPAZ, Madrid, psychomotorregressionpromptedustoproceedwithWES(HiSeq EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 207 2500 Illumina) for intellectual disabilities in silico gene panel 1LaboratoryofGeneticsinOphthalmology(LGO),INSERMUMR1163, testing. InstituteofGeneticDiseases,ImagineandParisDescartesUniversity, Results: A GLB1 compound heterozygous genotype for the 75015 Paris, France., PARIS, France, 2Unité Ophtalmologie, Hôpital missense pathogenic variants c.152T>A (p.I51N), inherited from EuropéenGeorges-PompidouHEGP,75015Paris,France&Centrede her mother, and c.602G>A (p.R201H), inherited from her father, RéférencedesMaladies Rares enOphtalmologie (OPHTARA).Service wasdetected.Bothvariantswerealreadyreportedinpatientswith d’ophtalmologie, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, 75015 Paris, GM1-Type II, leading to 3-5% of residual enzyme activity. The France.,PARIS, France. proband was referred to the speciﬁc Center for drug administra- tion options. Pathologicvariantsinthemalonyl-CoA-acylcarrierproteintransacy- Conclusions: WES allowed an early diagnosis of GM1- lase (MCAT) a nuclear gene encoding a mitochondrial protein Gangliosidosis which is compulsory for clinical trial enrollment involved in fatty acid biogenesis have been reported in a unique and for allowing therapeutic approach as the off-label use of family from China including two siblings affected with an insidious Miglustat. optic nerve degeneration in childhood, leading to blindness in the L. Tonelli: None. E. Procopio: None. F. Tubili: None. M. ﬁrst decade of life. Here, analyzing 51 families with negative Sanchini:None.A.Ferlini:None.A.Leon:None.S.Bigoni:None. molecular diagnosis tests from a cohort of 200 families with hereditary optic neuropathy (HON), we identiﬁed two novel MCAT mutations in a female patient who presented with acute, sudden,  P06
.020.A Recurrent hydrops fetalis, a long journey to bilateral, yet asymmetric, central visual loss at the age of 20-years. diagnosis This phenotype is reminiscent of the maternally-inherited Leber hereditaryopticneuropathy(LHON),theexistenceofwhichhasbeen Sana Skouri1, Ines Ouertani1, Soumeya Bekri2, Catherine Caillaud3, describedonlyveryrecentlyalongwithcausativevariantsinNDUF S2
 RidhaM’rad1 and DNAJ C30
, respectively. Our ﬁnding expands the phenotypic presentation of MCAT mutations and the genetic heterogeneity of 1Departement of Medical Genetics, Charles Nicolle Hopistal, Tunis, nuclear LHON-like phenotypes. Although MCAT pathologic variants Tunisia, 2Department of Metabolic Biochemistry, Rouen University are very uncommon, this gene should be investigated in HON Hospital, Rouen, France, 3Biochemical, Metabolomic, and Proteomic patients,irrespectiveofthediseasepresentation. Department, Necker University HospitalGroup, Paris,France. S.Gerber:None.C.Orssaud:None.J.Kaplan:None.J.I.Rozet: None. Introduction: Hydrops fetalis affects 1/1700 to 1/3000 pregnan- cies. It is mainly a non-immune hydrops fetalis (NIHF). Inborn errors of metabolism account for 1.3% of affected individuals.  P06
.022.C Biallelic variants in SPART cause a mitochondrial Lysosomalstorageareincriminatedinupto29.6%ofNIHFcases. dysfunction andcell cyclearrest inTroyer Syndrome We report the history of a family with recurrent hydrops fetalis revealinga mucopolysaccharidosis typeVII (MPSVII). ChiaraDiquigiovanni1,AntjeKampmeier2,ElisabettaCuna3,Nicola MaterialsandMethods:Theperformedanalysiswere:electro- Rizzardi3, Irene Liparulo3, Francesca Bianco4, T. G. Haack5, M. phoresis of glycoaminoglycans in amniotic ﬂuid, ß-D-glucuroni- Bertrand5, K Khuller2, A. Kuechler2, Christian Bergamini3, Elena dase activity in chorionic villus and GUSB gene sequencing in Bonora4 chorionicvillus samples andinmaternal blood. Results: This is the case of a consanguineous couple with the 1UniversityofBologna,DepartmentofMedicalandSurgicalSciences, historyof an unclassiﬁed NIHF. DIMEC, Bologna, Italy, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Essen, Germany, A ﬁrst prenatal diagnosis was performed for a second case of 3DepartmentofPharmacyandBiotechnology(FaBit),Bologna,Italy, fetalis hydrops. The glycoaminoglycans proﬁle in the amniotic 4DepartmentofMedicalandSurgicalSciences,DIMEC,Bologna,Italy, liquidwasabnormal,thoughnotspeciﬁcofaparticularMPS.The 5Institut für Medizinische Genetik und Angewandte Genomik, fetopathological examinationwas strongly suggestive of MPSVII. Tübingen, Germany. An increased nuchal translucency motivated a second prenatal diagnosis, showing an accumulation of dermatan sulfate and Mutations in SPART (OMIM *607111) cause Troyer syndrome chondroitinsulfate.Thecombinationoftheseﬁndingssupported (OMIM#275900),arecessiveformofspasticparaplegiaresultingin thehypothesisofanunderlyingMPSVII.Thisdiagnosiswasﬁnally lower extremity spasticity and weakness, degeneration of conﬁrmed, in another case of NIHF, by the absence of beta-D- corticospinal tract axons, short stature, and cognitive defects. glucuronidase activityin theamnioticﬂuid. SPARTencodesforSpartin,amultifunctionalproteinconsistingof For the last pregnancy, molecular analysis revealed a novel an N-terminal domain, interacting with microtubules for protein variantintheexon7oftheGUSBgene,c.1157A>G(p.Tyr386Cys) trafﬁcking, and a C-terminal senescence domain. We previously predictedto be deleterious. foundthataloss-of-functionmutationinSPARTcausedmitochon- Conclusion:Thiscasehighlightshowchallenginginvestigating drial dysfunctions characterized by Complex I impairment and NIHF etiology could be. Accurate diagnosis of lysosomal storage altered pyruvate metabolism. Performing whole-exome sequen- disorders like MPS VII is essential to give the family an adequate cing two novel compound heterozygous missense variants were geneticcounselling. identiﬁedinSPART,inapatientpresentingmuscleweaknessand S.Skouri:None.I.Ouertani:None.S.Bekri:None.C.Caillaud: short stature. The patient’s ﬁbroblasts showed an altered None.R. M’rad: None. mitochondrial network, decreased OXPHOS activity, increased mitochondrial ROS production and mitochondrial membrane potential, vs. control ﬁbroblasts. Consistent with Complex I  P06
.021.BMutationsinMCATcauseanuclearLHON-likeoptic impairment, an increase in NADH levels, extracellular pyruvate neuropathy and glycolytic metabolism was observed in mutant cells. Since SpartininteractswithGR P75
,modulatingtheimportofmitochon- Sylvie Gerber1, Christophe Orssaud2, Josseline Kaplan1, Jean-Michel drialproteins,weperformedco-immunoprecipitationassayinthe Institut ImagineRozet1 patient’s ﬁbroblasts, and found that there was no interaction EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 208 between GR P75
 and the mutant SPART. Immunoﬂuorescence originandmetabolicdiseases, IdiPAZ, HospitalUniversitario LaPaz, stainingincontrolandpatient-derivedﬁbroblastsrevealedalsoa Madrid,Spain,3Groupofdislipemiasofgeneticoriginandmetabolic markednuclearlocalizationofSpartininthemutantcells,whereas diseases, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, in controls it was evenly distributed in the cells. Noticeably, cell 4Internal Medicine Service, Hospital Carlos III, HULP, Madrid, Spain, cycleanalysisrevealedthatpatient’sﬁbroblastswereretainedinS 5Epigenetics laboratory, INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La PAZ, phase. In summary, we report that biallelic missense variants in Madrid, Spain, 6Experimental Therapies and novel biomarkers in SPARTleadtoadifferentcellulardistributionoftheprotein,might cancer, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital La Paz alter import and assembly of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial (IdiPAZ), Madrid,Spain. proteins,and converge ina severemitochondrial dysfunction. C.Diquigiovanni:None.A.Kampmeier:None.E.Cuna:None. Introduction: Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH;MIM#143890) is N.Rizzardi:None.I.Liparulo:None.F.Bianco:None.T.G.Haack: mainly caused by pathogenic variants in LDLR gene (>90% of None.M.Bertrand:None.K.Khuller:None.A.Kuechler:None.C. cases1) and variants in APOB, PCSK9 and LDLRA P1
 (10% of cases). Bergamini: None. E.Bonora: None. However, variants in these genes are only found in 60-80% of patients with a deﬁnitive diagnosis of FH2. Most of variants are located in exonic regions. In this study, we selected and  P06
.023.D<FunctionalanalysisofnovelHNF1Avariantsfound performed in vitro characterization of variants in non-coding inMODY patients in Slovakia> region 3’UTR of LDLR, a non-canonical region not screened in routineand that could contribute to geneticdiagnostic. Terezia Valkovicova1, Zuzana Dobiasova1, Juraj Stanik2,1, Martina Materials and methods: Analysis of the region 3´UTR LDLR of Skopkova1, DanielaGasperikova1 patients remitted to our center was performed by NGS using a customized panel of 198 genes. Variants with population 1SlovakAcademyofSciences,Bratislava,Slovakia,22ndDepartment frequency less 0,5%, were selected for in vitro characterization. ofPediatrics,NationalInstituteofChildren’sDiseasesandFacultyof The3’UTRLDLRvariantsweregenerateintotheexpressionvector Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. LDLR_NM_000527-Human-cDNA-luciferase reporter by site- directed-mutagenesis and transfected in cell line HepG2. 3’UTR HNF1A-MODY is a type of monogenic diabetes caused by LDLRexpression wasquantiﬁed by luminescence assay3. heterozygous pathogenic mutations in the transcription factor Results: Five 3’UTR LDLR variants were selected for character- HNF1α. Due to the increased number of novel variants in the ization. The variant at LDLR, c.*653G>C showed a 40% less HNF1Agene,thefunctionalcharacterisationofvariantsonprotein luciferase activity than WT. LDLR, c.*19G>A, c.*503C>T, c.*517C>A levelis necessary for better prediction of theirpathogenicity. We and c.*1227C>T did not show signiﬁcant differences in luciferase performed functional analysis of 6 novel variants and 2 variants activitywith respect to wildtype (WT). previously described as VUS identiﬁed in 9 Slovak families. Conclusions: In this study, we found that c.*653G>C variant Transactivation activity using luciferase assay, DNA-binding using reduce the expression of LDLR being probably the cause of the EMSA, and nuclear localisation using immunoﬂuorescence of hypercholesterolemia in our patient. The 3’UTR region of LDLR mutatedHNF1αwerecomparedwiththewild-typeHNF1αanda gene should be explored in order to ﬁnd variants with the setofpositiveandnegativecontrols.Fourvariants(p.Tyr163Asn, potential for reducing the expression of LDLR. Further studies p.Pro224Leu,p.Leu232Pro,andp.Asn270Ser)locatedintheDNA should beperformed toclarify theinvolved mechanism. bindingdomain(DBD)ofHNF1αrevealedsigniﬁcantlyreduced< J. Sanguino: None. C. Rodríguez-Jiménez: None. J. Mostaza: 40%transactivationactivityoftheWT-HNF1α.OneDBD-variant(p. None. E. Sevilla: None. A. Herranz-Cecilia: None. A. Carazo: Asn140Asp)hadactivitydecreasedonlyto~61%andall3tested None. O. Pernía: None. C. Rodríguez-Antolín: None. I. Ibáñez: variants located in the transactivation domain (p. His469Tyr, p. None.S. Rodríguez-Nóvoa: None. His483Arg, p. Gln541His) retained more than 80% activity compared to the WT-HNF1α. Three DBD-variants had decreased DNA binding ability (<40% of the WT-HNF1α), only the p.  P06
.025.B The rs113883650 variant of SL C7
A5 (LAT1) gene Pro224Leu variant had ~100% binding. Nuclear localisation was mayalter brain vulnerability to hyperphenylalaninemia notsigniﬁcantlyalteredinanyofexaminedmutatedproteins.We have conﬁrmed the pathogenicity of four novel HNF1A variants Miroslaw Bik-Multanowski, Kinga Bik-Multanowska, Iwona Betka, located in the region encoding HNF1α-DBD domain using Anna Madetko-Talowska functional studies. In three cases, decreased transactivation activity could be explained by decreased DNA binding. None of Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland. the tested variants located in the transactivation domain were found to have effect on the HNF1α activity. Supported by: VEGA Introduction: In the individuals diagnosed with phenylketonuria 0211/18, VEGA0131/21 (PKU) brain damage can be caused by the absence of effective T.Valkovicova:None.Z.Dobiasova:None.J.Stanik:None.M. dietary treatment. Nevertheless, several reports exist describing Skopkova: None. D.Gasperikova: None. interindividual differences of the brain vulnerability to the toxic inﬂuence of hyperphenylalaninemia. This might result from alteration of the kinetics of phenylalanine across the blood-brain  P06
.024.AFunctionalcharacterization of3’UTRLDLR variants barrier, whichis regulated by theLAT1transporter. inFamilial Hypercholesterolemia PatientsandMethods:Weassessedtheeffectofcarriershipof the common variant rs113883650 of the SL C7
A5 (LAT1) gene on Javier Sanguino1,2, Carmen Rodríguez-Jiménez1,3, Jose María brain phenylalanine content. We used magnetic resonance Mostaza4,ElenaSevilla1,2,AmandaHerranz-Cecilia1,2,AnaCarazo1,2, spectroscopytomeasuretheintensityofthebrainphenylalanine Olga Pernía5,6, Carlos Rodríguez-Antolín5,6, Inmaculada Ibáñez5,6, signal in a group of 30 PKU patients aged 12-25 years. Next, we SoniaRodríguez-Nóvoa1,2 compared the results obtained in carriers of the rs113883650 variantwith thewild-typeindividuals. 1Metabolic Disease Laboratory, Genetic Department. Hospital Uni- Results: Genotyping of the SL C7
A5 (LAT1) gene identiﬁed 17 versitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Group of dislipemias of genetic wildtypeindividuals,12heterozygotesandonehomozygotewith EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 209 regard to the rs113883650 variant. On the day of magnetic  P06
.027.DNovelmissensevariantintheINSRgeneinRussian resonance spectroscopy examination, all the patients revealed patientwithmetabolic condition: correction ofthediagnosis very high blood phenylalanine concentration that is typical foruntreatedPKU.Themeanintensityofthebrainphenylalanine Natalya V. Tarasenko1,2, Nadezda P. Babushkina1, Tatiyana V. signal was signiﬁcantly higher in the carriers of the rs113883650 Saprina2,TatiyanaA.Milovanova2,KseniyaV.Trubchenko2,MariaV. variantcompared tothe wild-typeindividuals (p=0.0022). Golubenko1,Maria S.Nazarenko1 Conclusions: Our ﬁndings show that carriership of the rs113883650 variant of the SL C7
A5 gene has a potential to 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk National Research increasetheconcentrationofbrainphenylalanineinPKUpatients MedicalCenteroftheRussianAcademy ofSciences,Tomsk,Russian with severe hyperphenylalaninemia. This could to some extent Federation, 2Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian explain the unusually mild clinical course in some untreated Federation. patients.ThestudywassponsoredbytheNationalScienceCentre, Poland(project number2018/29/B/NZ5/01215). Introduction:Wehaveperformedclinicalexomesequencingina M. Bik-Multanowski: None. K. Bik-Multanowska: None. I. patient with preliminary diagnosis of maturity onset diabetes of Betka: None. A.Madetko-Talowska: None. the young subtype 2 (MODY2, OMIM 125851). Onset of the disease occurred at the age of 36 with episodes of hyper- and hypo-glycaemia.  P06
.026.C ZOEMBA: combining metabolomics and genomics Materials and Methods: DNA was extracted from the blood data to solvethe unsolved leucocytes of the patient. Massive parallel sequencing was performed on NextSeq550 (Illumina) with Clinical Exome Solu- Machteld M. Oud1, Saskia N. van der Crabben2, Elise A. Ferreira2, tion™exomepanel(SOPHiAGENETICS).Dataanalysisandvariant MarielleAlders2,JudithJ.Jans3,NandaM.Verhoeven3,KarlienL.M. annotations were done with SOPHiA AI™ and SOPHiA DDM™ Coene1, Leo A. J. Kluijtmans1, Udo F. H. Engelke1, Eduard Struys2, (SOPHiAGENETICS). Lisenka E. L. M. Vissers1, Saskia B. Wortmann1, Hans R. Waterham2, Results: No pathogenic mutations were revealed in the genes MirjamLangeveld2,Clara D. M.van Karnebeek1 which are casual for MODY subtypes (OMIM 606391 - HNF4A, HNF1A, GCK, PDX1, HNF1B, NEUROD1, KLF11, CEL, PAX4, INS, BLK, 1Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Amsterdam UMC, Amster- ABC C8
, KCNJ11, APP L1
, PCBD1, TRMT10A). However, there were dam, Netherlands, 3University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, severalvariantsinothergenesthatrequirefurtherinvestigation.In Netherlands. particular, heterozygousnonsynonymoussubstitution intheINSR gene (GRCh37/hg19, chr19 (19p13.2):7174702, c.DNA: c.1015T>C, Introduction: Inherited metabolic disorders (IMD) are rare protein: p.Cys339Arg) was identiﬁed, and it was conﬁrmed by disorders caused by defects in biochemical processes. Early Sanger sequencing. This substitution is absent in ExAc database diagnosis of IMDs is key as many are amenable to treatment. and has been classiﬁed as variant with uncertain signiﬁcance. To Despite diagnostic advances, ~50% of patients remain undiag- conﬁrm absence of the variant in the populations, we have nosed. ZOEMBA is a Dutch multicenter study of our UMD genotyped population samples of European origin (N=327) and consortiumthataimstoestablishadiagnosisin500IMDpatients of Asian origin (Tuvinians and Yakuts, N=224) consisting of viaintegrated multi-omicsanalysis. peoples living in Siberia. There were no occurrence of this MaterialsandMethods:Patientinclusioncriteriaare:clinicalor substitution in thesamples. biochemicalsuspicionofanIMDandnodiagnosisafterextensive Conclusion:ItisknownthatINSRmutationsmaycauseseveral genetic and metabolic work-up. Deep phenotyping, WES re- geneticsyndromes.HeterozygousstatusfortheCys339Argvariant analysis, WGS analysis and untargeted metabolomics will be together with clinical symptoms suggests that the patient has performed.Leadsresultingfrommetabolomicsarecheckedinthe autosomaldominantfamilialhyperinsulinemichypoglycemiatype genomics dataset and vice versa to pinpoint the underlying 5(OMIM 609968). pathophysiology. N.V. Tarasenko: None. N.P. Babushkina: None. T.V. Saprina: Results: In the ﬁrst year, we enrolled 21 patients with a None. T.A. Milovanova: None. K.V. Trubchenko: None. M.V. carefully characterized IMD phenotype for whom WES re- Golubenko: None.M.S. Nazarenko: None. analysis and untargeted metabolomics was performed. Re- analysisofWESdatahasyieldedadiagnosisintwopatients.Ina girlwithneuroregression,WESre-analysisrevealedtwobi-allelic  P06
.028.A Pancreatic expression of genes connected to variantsinarecentlyidentiﬁeddiseasegeneTMPRS S9
.Secondly, glucosemetabolism -nutrigenetic regulation WESre-analysisforanadultmalehasrevealedtwohomozygous variantsinApoEthatmostlikelyexplainthepatient’sphenotype. Ivelina Mihaleva, Margarita Strokova, Eliana Dimova, Pavlina Conclusions: We were able to show the beneﬁt of deep Gateva,Ivanka Dimova phenotypingandWESre-analysiswithayieldof10%.Weaimto enroll 500 patients and complete the dataset with WGS and Medical University of Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria. metabolomics data to explore the added value of these technologies. Altogether, this will enable us to discover novel Background: Ketogenic diet (KD) is low-carbohydrate, high-fat genes, phenotypes and evaluate the usefulness of integrated dietusedfordifferenthealth-relatedeffects.Ithaspositiveeffects multi-omicsdatain clinicalpractice. on cardiovascular parameters, affects body adiposity and M.M. Oud: None. S.N. van der Crabben: None. E.A. Ferreira: improves features of metabolic syndrome in humans. Although None. M. Alders: None. J.J. Jans: None. N.M. Verhoeven: None. studies evaluating the efﬁcacy and metabolic effects of KD have K.L.M. Coene: None. L.A.J. Kluijtmans: None. U.F.H. Engelke: increased recently, the effects of macronutrient-controlled diets None. E. Struys: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. S.B. Wortmann: remain controversial. The objective of our study was to analyze None. H.R. Waterham: None. M. Langeveld: None. C.D.M. van the expression levels of genes related to glucose metabolism/ Karnebeek: None. insulin action, in pancreas of mice fed with KD with and without VitaminDfor 1month compared tomice on normaldiet. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 210 Materialsandmethods:Separationoftwogroupsofmiceofat performed with a customized panel including 500 genes related leastn=10onastandarddietandonaKD+/-VitaminD.After1 withmetabolic diseases. month, RNA was isolated from pancreas and after reverse Results:AheterozygousmissensepathogenicvariantinPPARG, transcription, the following genes were analyzed by real-time NM_015869.4:c.452A>G,p.(Tyr151Cys),previouslyassociatedwith PCR:INS,GCK,ABC C8
and KCNJ11. FPLDtype 3, wasidentiﬁed. Results:Weestablishedasigniﬁcantdecreaseinthepancreatic Conclusion: Patients with PPARG mutations may develop expressionlevels forallgenes, especially Insulingene, afterKD. lipodystrophy due to defective adipocyte differentiation. In previous studies, the p.(Tyr151Cys) PPARG variant showed Gene Relativepancreaticexpression(RQ) impairedDNA-bindingcapacityandhencereducedtranscriptional Ins1 0.1 activity.AlthoughFPLDisararecondition,itshouldbetakeninto ABC C8
 0.21 consideration in patients with severe hypertriglyceridemia and recurrentpancreatitis. KCNJ11 0.32 S. Rodriguez-Novoa: None. C. Rodríguez Jiménez: None. J. Gck 0.54 Sanguino: None. A. Viejo-LLorente: None. A. Kerguelén- Fuentes: None. D. Hernández-Maraver: None. A. Barros- Campos:None. P. Martínez-Hernández: None. AfterKDwithVitaminD,werevealedanincreaseinpancreatic expression of Insulin gene compared to group of KD only (RQ=  P06
.031.D The utility of reverse phenotyping: A case of 0.35),not reaching thelevelincontrols. Conclusion: KD signiﬁcantly reduces the insulin expression in lysinuric protein intolerance presented with childhood osteoporosis the pancreas, which could be increased by administration of VitaminD. Acknowledgement:BSNF, Contract NoКП-06-Н33/10, 2019. Enise Avci Durmusalioglu1, Esra Isik1, Durdugul Ayyildiz Emecen1, Damla Goksen Simsek2, Samim Ozen2, Huseyin Onay3, Melis Kose1, I. Mihaleva: None. M. Strokova: None. E. Dimova: None. P. Tahir Atik1,Sukran Darcan2,Ozgur Cogulu1, Ferda Ozkinay1 Gateva:None. I.Dimova: None. 1Pediatric Genetics Subdivision, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of  P06
.030.CThe Chylomicronemia Syndrome: acase offamilial Medicine, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatric partial lipodystrophy type 3 associated with a pathogenic Endocrinology and Diabetes, Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, variantin PPARG Izmir,Turkey,33DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,FacultyofMedicine, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey. Sonia Rodriguez-Novoa1, Carmen Rodríguez Jiménez1, Javier San- guino1, A. Viejo-LLorente2, A.E. Kerguelén-Fuentes2, D. Hernández- Introduction:Childhoodosteoporosisisoftenaconsequenceofa Maraver2,A. Barros-Campos3,P. Martínez-Hernández4 chronicdiseaseoritstreatment.Lysinuricproteinintolerance(LPI), a rare secondary cause of the osteoporosis, is an autosomal 1Metabolic Disease Laboratory, Genetic Department. Hospital Uni- recessive disorder with clinical features ranging from nearly normal growth with minimal protein intolerance to severe versitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. Group of dislipemias of genetic multisystemic involvement. This disorder is caused by biallelic originandmetabolicdiseases, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario LaPaz, Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain, 2Apheresis Unit, Hematology Depart- mutationsintheSL C7
A7gene.Duetotheclinicalvariabilityofthe disease, diagnosis can be difﬁcult; with misdiagnosis also a ment, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, Madrid, Spain, 3Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics, IdiPAZ, Hospital possibility. We report a case diagnosed to have LPI using a Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) panel and evaluate the utility of Universitario La Paz /& CIBERER, Unit 753, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain., Madrid, Spain, 4Internal Medicine, Hospital Universitario La Paz, reversephenotyping. CaseReport:Aﬁfteen-year-old-boywithaninitialdiagnosisof Madrid,Spain., Madrid,Spain. osteogenesis imperfecta, was referred to our clinic due to a numberofatypicalﬁndingsaccompanyingtoosteoprosissuchas Introduction: The Chylomicronemia Syndrome (QS) is character- splenomegaly and bicytopenia, He was the ﬁrst child of izedbyseverehypertriglyceridemia(>1000mg/dLor>11.3mmol/ nonconsanguineous parents; however, his parents originated L), abdominal pain, recurrent acute pancreatitis, eruptive xantho- from the same village. On physical examination, he had asthenic mas, and lipemia retinalis. Its causes are variable including body build and splenomegaly. His laboratory tests showed secondary forms of hypertriglyceridemia, (multifactorial chylomi- cronemiasyndrome-MFCS);LPLdeﬁciency(familialchylomicrone- leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, elevated serum lactate dehydro- genase and ferritin levels. Bone marrow aspiration revealed a mia syndrome, FCS), or familial partial lipodystrophy (FPLD). We hemophagocytosis.ANGSpanel(TruSightOneSequencingPanel) present the case of a patient with QS associated with FPLD. wasperformedandanovelhomozygousmutationofc.257G>A(p. Patient and methods: A 22-years-old African American female, Gly86Glu) in SL C7
A7 gene (NM_001126106.2) was detected. A was referred due to severe hypertriglyceridemia and eleven episodes of acute pancreatitis (the ﬁrst one at age 15 yrs), with reevaluation of patient’s past medical history and phenotypic features revealed that he avoided eating protein-rich food while highestandlowesttriglycerideslevelsof6009mg/dl(67.9mmol/ experiencingrecurrentdiarrheaattacksduringinfancy.Laboratory L)and129mg/dL(1.46mmol/L),respectively.Shehadgeneralized tests showed excess urinary excretion of cationic amino acids acanthosis nigricans(neck, axillae, elbows, groins and knees), BMI supporting lysinuric protein intolerance. 21.38kg/m2, and reduced fat in the face, upper and lower extremities. She was treated with low-fat diet, insulin, ﬁbrates, Conclusion:Reversephenotypingusingatargetedgenepanel shortensthediagnosticprocessinpatientswithmildphenotypes. omega-3 fatty-acids and several sessions of apheresis during E. Avci Durmusalioglu: None. E. Isik: None. D. Ayyildiz pancreatitis episodes. Adherence to diet was irregular, she drank Emecen: None. D. Goksen Simsek: None. S. Ozen: None. H. beer intermittently, and during the last year she also used oral contraceptives for six months. Targeted NGS analysis was EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 211 Onay: None. M. Kose: None. T. Atik: None. S. Darcan: None. O. Materials and Methods: A clinical case of methylmalonic Cogulu: None.F. Ozkinay: None. acidemia. Routine and modern biochemical diagnostic methods (tandemmassspectrometry(TMS),gaschromatography(GC),high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)) were used to  P06
.032.A Extended phenotype studies in carriers and establishthediagnosis; molecular geneticresearch. potentiallyaffectedindividualsofselectedlysosomalstorage Results: An 18-month-old girl was referred to a geneticist. diseases amongthe participants ofthe Estonian Biobank Preliminary diagnosis "Metabolic disorders of unclear genesis, ketoacidotic syndrome, neuroarthritic constitution, anemia of the Ellen Rebecca Kruuse1, Marili Palover1, Margit Nõukas1, Tiit ﬁrst degree." The girl underwent a comprehensive examination, Nikopensius1,Neeme Tõnisson1,2 which included determination of the proﬁle of blood acylcarni- tinesbyTMS,bloodaminoacidsbyHPLC;determinationofrenal 1Estonian Biobank, Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, excretion of organic acids by GC; determination of the level of Estonia,2DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,UnitedLaboratories,Tartu lactate, blood ammonia, glycemic proﬁle; molecular genetic University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. research. An increase in the concentration of propionylcarnitine, glycine, cystine and Proline was detected in the blood; the Background: Lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs) are individually presenceofmethylmalonicacidintheurine.Amoleculargenetic rare, but collectively constitute a considerable part of hereditary studywasperformed,amutationinc.655A>T(p.Asn219Tyr)ofthe metabolic diseases. Due to low prevalence and phenotypic MUTgenewasdetected.Finaldiagnosis:Methylmalonicacidemia variability of individual LSDs, they may be underdiagnosed or vitaminB12-intact form. misdiagnosed, especially inatypic late onsetcases. Conclusions:DiagnosisofMMApresentscertaindifﬁcultiesdue WehaveselectedasubsetofLSDsbasedontheavailability of to the clinical heterogeneity of symptoms and nonspeciﬁc speciﬁcenzymereplacementtherapy:Pompedisease(GAAgene), manifestationofthedisease.ForthediagnosisofMMA,themost Fabry disease (GLA gene), Gaucher disease (GBA gene) and informativearethedataoftheproﬁleofbloodacylcarnitinesand Mucopolysaccharidosis TypeI(IDUAgene). thedeterminationofthepresenceofMMCintheurine.Theﬁnal Theaimofthisstudyisto:i)identifyindividualswithapossible diagnosisisbased ontheresults of molecular geneticstudies. geneticriskforLSDs,ii)assessthephenotypebyenzymeanalysis V. Antsupova: None. I. Lastivka: None. L. Sheiko: None. L. in biobank participants and iii) to disclose relevant ﬁndings to Brisevac:None. I. Ushko:None. V. Davydiuk: None. individualsat geneticrisk for LSDs. Results: By using ’genotype-ﬁrst’ approach, we screened the cohort of Estonian Biobank (n=150K) for pathogenic or  P06
.036.A A novel homozygous missense mutation in UQCR- potentially pathogenic variants in the respective genes. We  C2
associated withsevere encephalomyopathy, mitochondrial identiﬁed 11 individuals with potentially clinically relevant complex III assembly defect and activation of mitochondrial ﬁndings: 1 compound heterozygote and 5 alternative homo- proteinquality control zygotesfortheGAA,1alternativehomozygotefortheGBAand4 hemizygotesfor theGLAgene. Daniela Burska1, Lukas Stiburek1, Jana Krizova1, Marie Vanisova1, Conclusions: We have set up a framework for re-contacting Vaclav Martinek2, Tomas Honzik1, Jiri Zeman1, Hana Hansikova1, biobank participants, in order to determine the phenotype by MarketaTesarova1 clinical diagnoses and enzyme activity analyses and return of genetic information upon consent. LSDs are a heterogenous 1Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, First Faculty of group of diseases, that would beneﬁt from further studies using Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in thebiobankdata. Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 22Department of Biochemistry, ThisworkwassupportedbyEUproject2014-2020.4.01.15-0012,by Faculty ofScience, Charles University, Prague 2,Czech Republic. Estonian Research Council (PUT PRG555 to NT) and by S P1
GI18534 grantfrom SanoﬁAventis Ltd. The mitochondrial respiratory chain (MRC) complex III (CIII) E. Kruuse: None. M. Palover: None. M. Nõukas: None. T. associates with complexes I and IV (CI and CIV) into super- Nikopensius: None. N. Tõnisson: B. Research Grant (principal complexes.Weidentiﬁedanovelhomozygousmissensemutation investigator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell (c.665G>C; p.Gly222Ala) in UQCR C2
 coding for structural subunit asgrantsalready received); Signiﬁcant;SanoﬁAventisLtd. Core2inapatientwithsevereencephalomyopathy.Thestructural data suggest that the Gly222Ala exchange might result in an alteredspatialarrangementinpartoftheUQCR C2
subunit,which  P06
.035.DModernapproachestothediagnosisofMethylma- couldimpactspeciﬁcprotein-proteininteractions.Accordingly,we lonic academia/aciduria have found decreased levels of CIII and accumulation of CIII- speciﬁcsubassembliesdevoidofUQCR C1
,UQCR C2
,andUQCRF S1
 VitaAntsupova1,IrynaLastivka2,LarysaSheiko3,LjudmilaBrisevac3, subunitsinthepatient’sﬁbroblasts.ThelackofUQCR C1
subunit- IanaUshko1, Volodymyr Davydiuk4 containing subassemblies could result from an impaired interac- tionwithmutantUQCR C2
Gly222Alaandsubsequentdegradationof 1BohomoletsNational medicaluniversity,Kyiv,Ukraine,2Bukovinian both subunits by mitochondrial proteases. Observed elevated State Medical University, Chernivtsi, Ukraine, 3Shupyk National amount of matrix CLPP protease suggests the activation of the Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Kyiv, Ukraine, mitochondrial protein quality control machinery in UQCR C2
- 4National Pirogov MemorialMedical University, Vinnitsa, Ukraine. Gly222Ala ﬁbroblasts. Data revealed a rate-limiting character of CIIIavailabilityforthesupercomplexformation,accompaniedbya Introduction: Methylmalonic acidemia/aciduria (MMA) is a diminished amount of CI. Furthermore, we found impaired genetically heterogeneous inherited disease from the group of electronﬂuxbetweenCIandCIIIinskeletalmuscleandﬁbroblasts organic acidemias. Clinically manifests metabolic ketoacidosis, of the patient. The ectopic expression of wild-type UQCR C2
 in mental and physical retardation. Differential molecular diagnosis patientcellsrescuedmaximalrespirationrate,demonstratingthe ofMMAis importantfor thechoiceof treatment tactics. deleteriouseffectofthemutationonMRC.Ourstudyexpandsthe phenotypic spectrum of CIII Core protein deﬁciency, provides EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 212 insightintotheassemblypathwayofhumanCIII,andsupportsthe 1Emergency Clinical County Hospital “Pius Branzeu”, Timisoara, requirementofassembledCIIIforaproperaccumulationofCI.This Romania, 2Center of Genomic Medicine, University of Medicine and workwassupportedbytheMinistryofHealthoftheCzechRepublic Pharmacy“VictorBabes”,RegionalCenterofMedicalGeneticsTimis, (grantsAZV17-30965A, NV19-07-00149, RVOVFN 64165). ClinicalEmergencyHospitalforChildren“LouisTurcanu”,partofERN D. Burska: None. L. Stiburek: None. J. Krizova: None. M. ITHACA, Timisoara, Romania, 3Center of Genomic Medicine, Uni- Vanisova:None.V.Martinek:None.T.Honzik:None.J.Zeman: versity of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, 4. Department of None.H.Hansikova: None. M. Tesarova:None. Automation and Applied Informatics Politehnica University, Timi- soara,Romania.  P06
.037.BPrevalenceandclinicalpredictionofmitochondrial Introduction: Mitochondrial diseases are a group of heteroge- disordersin alarge neuropediatric cohort neous inherited metabolic diseases, caused by a dysfunction of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Mitochondria is an intracel- Amelie T. van der Ven1, Jessika Johannsen1, Matias Wagner2, lular organelle, which produce the energy molecule storage Konstantinos Tsiakas1, Tatjana Bierhals1, Fanny Kortüm1, Davor adenosine triphosphate. We aim to present a novel pathogenic Lessel1,TheresiaHerget1,KatjaKloth1,JasminLisfeld1,TasjaScholz1, variantinPD P1
 genein apediatric patient. NadiaObi1,SaskiaWortmann2,HolgerProkisch2,ChristianKubisch1, Materialandmethods:A2-year-oldfemalepatientpresented Jonas Denecke1, René Santer1, Maja Hempel1 two episodes of coma due to metabolic acidosis associated with high level of lactic acid, hyperglycemia, hypothermia, without 1UKE Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 2TUM Munich, inﬂammatorysyndrome.Acylcarnitineproﬁleswerealteredinthe Munich,Germany. patient. Biological sample (blood) was collected and Next Generation Sequencing was performed, using Illumina TruSight Introduction: Mitochondriopathies constitute a clinically impor- Onesequencing panel, whichincludes 4813genes. tantsubgroupof(neuro-)pediatricdisorders.Earlyidentiﬁcationof Results: Next generation sequencing analysis revealed a homo- mitochondriopathiesisdesirableduetoapotentiallyrapidclinical zygous missense variant NM_001161780.1 (PD P1
):c.1288C>T. The decline and the availability of treatment options in selected stopgainvariantispreviouslyunreported,hasverylowfrequencyin conditions.Identiﬁedpatientsshouldpreferentiallybeselectedfor populationandcreatesaprematurestopcodonNP_001155252.1:p. expeditedgeneticdiagnosticsyieldingmoleculardiagnosiswithin (Arg430Ter),thushasbeenclassiﬁedaspathogenic. afewdaysincomparisontoseveralweeks whenconducted ina Conclusion: PD P1
 gene encodes pyruvate dehydrogenase routine clinical setting. We here determined the prevalence of phosphatase (PD P1
), which is one of the two PDP isoforms. The molecularly conﬁrmed mitochondriopathies in a large cohort of role of this gene is to regulate the activity of the mitochondrial undiagnosed neuropediatric patients and compared an estab- multienzyme pyruvate dehydrogenases complex (PDC). Pyruvate lished clinical rating tool (MDC) as well as a newly composed, dehydrogenase phosphatase deﬁciency (PDHPD), caused by simpliﬁedversionoftheexistingtool(MDC-NP)inregardtotheir homozygous mutation in the PD P1
 gene, is characterized by predictivecapabilities. neonatal/infantile and childhood lactic acidosis, elevated plasma Methods: 491 unrelated children with neurological symptoms alanine,delayedpsychomotordevelopment,epilepticencephalo- underwentacomprehensivediagnosticwork-upincludingexome pathy and hypotonia. There are few case reports suggesting the sequencing.Identiﬁeddisease-genesweredichotomizeddepend- importance of this enzyme complex malfunction as triggers for ing on relevance to mitochondrial function. Rating tools were lactic acidemia with elevated serum lactate levels. The homo- applied using standardized phenotype information collected for zygousstopgainvariantidentiﬁedinPD P1
gene,isanovelcause eachpatient. associated withpyruvate dehydrogenasecomplex deﬁciency. Results:Themolecularsolveratewithinourcohortwas51%.In F. Szekely: None. A. Chirita-Emandi: None. C. Zimbru: None. 12% of solved cases, a mitochondriopathy-associated gene was N.Andreescu: None. M.Puiu: None. found to harbor the disease-causing variant. The MDC score predictedtheunderlyingmitochondriopathy-associatedgenotype withasensitivityof0.59(0.41-0.75)andaspeciﬁcityof0.99(0.96-  P06
.039.D Novel FAR S2
 variants in patients with early onset 1.00).Thenewlycomposed MDC-NP-tool,incontrast, exhibited a encephalopathywithorwithoutepilepsyassociatedwithlong signiﬁcantlyhighersensitivity(0.83;0.65-0.93)andaspeciﬁcityof survival 0.96(0.92-0.98). Conclusion: Mitochondriopathies constitute a numerically Giulia Barcia, Marlene Rio, Zahra Assouline, Coralie Zangarelli, signiﬁcant subgroup of neuropediatric patients. We introduce Charles-Joris Roux, Pascale de Lonlay, Julie Steffann, Isabelle the MDC-NP score as simpliﬁed and sensitive bedside screening Desguerre,ArnoldMunnich,Jean-PaulBonnefont,NathalieBoddaert, toolforrapididentiﬁcationofchildrenwithmitochondriopathies. AgnèsRötig, Metodi D. Metodiev, Benedetta Ruzzenente Exome Sequencing was partially funded by BMBF and GENOMIT (mitoNET01GM1113C and01GM1207 to H.P.). InstituteImagine, Paris, France. A.T. van der Ven: None. J. Johannsen: None. M. Wagner: None. K. Tsiakas: None. T. Bierhals: None. F. Kortüm: None. D. Mitochondrial translation is essential for the biogenesis of the Lessel:None.T.Herget:None.K.Kloth:None.J.Lisfeld:None.T. mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation system (OXPHOS) that Scholz: None. N. Obi: None. S. Wortmann: None. H. Prokisch: synthesizesthebulkofATPforthecell.Hypomorphicandloss-of- None. C. Kubisch: None. J. Denecke: None. R. Santer: None. M. functionvariantsineithermitochondrialDNAorinnucleargenes Hempel:None. that encode mitochondrial translation factors can result in impaired OXPHOS biogenesis and mitochondrial diseases with variable clinical presentations. Compound heterozygous or  P06
.038.CAnovelmutationofPD P1
geneinapediatricpatient homozygousmissenseandframeshiftvariantsintheFAR S2
gene, thatencodesthemitochondrialphenylalanyl-tRNAsynthetase,are Flavia Anne-Elise Szekely1, Adela Chirita-Emandi2, Cristian Zim- commonly linked to either early-onset epileptic mitochondrial bru3, NicoletaAndreescu2,Maria Puiu2 encephalopathy or spastic paraplegia. Here, we expand the genetic spectrum of FAR S2
-linked disease with three patients EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 213 carrying novel compound heterozygous variants in the FAR S2
 1UniversityofExeterMedicalSchool,Exeter,UnitedKingdom,2Royal geneandpresentingwithspastictetraparesis,axialhypotoniaand Devon&Exeter NHSfoundation trust, Exeter,United Kingdom. myoclonic epilepsy intwo cases. GrantNumbers:AFM-TELETHON,nr.19876,nr.22529,nr.22251; Introduction:Sequencing dataforlargecontrolpopulationsand ANR,GENOMITANR-15-RAR3-0012-07 diseasecohortsareneededtoaccuratelyassessthepathogenicity G. Barcia: None. M. Rio: None. Z. Assouline: None. C. of genes causing rare monogenic disorders. Concern has been Zangarelli:None.C.Roux:None.P.deLonlay:None.J.Steffann: raised for BLK, KLF11 and PAX4 as causes of MODY - a dominant None. I. Desguerre: None. A. Munnich: None. J. Bonnefont: form of monogenic diabetes. In this study we re-evaluated None.N.Boddaert:None.A.Rötig:None.M.D.Metodiev:None. whetherBLK,KLF11 and PAX4cause MODY. B.Ruzzenente: None. Materials and methods: We examined case level genetic evidence (variant frequency in population and co-segregation with diabetes) for all published variants in BLK, KLF11 and PAX4.  P06
.040.A Mitochondrial bioenergetics and cardiolipin re- Weperformedageneburdentestforultra-rarenon-synonymous modeling deregulation in mitochondrial trifunctional protein variants (MAC=1) in 1227 probands with MODY and 185,898 (TFP) deﬁciency control individuals from the population-based UKBiobank study. We also assessed HNF1A and HNF4A variants (well-established EduardoVieiraNeto1,2,MeichengWang1,2,YudongWang1,2,Tamil causes of MODY) and conducted multiple sensitivity analysis S.Anthonymuthu1,3,4,5,Hülya Bayir1,3,4,5,Jerry Vockley1,6 (different control cohorts, synonymous variant enrichment) to validateour results. 1UniversityofPittsburgh,Pittsburgh,PA,USA,2UPMCChildren’sHospital Results: The published variants showed poor co-segregation of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 3Children’s Neuroscience Institute, with diabetes (combined LOD scores: BLK 1.16, KLF11 1.2, PAX4 UPMC Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 4Safar <1.2) in contrast to well established genes (HNF1A 9.63, HNF4A Center for Resuscitation Research, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 15.05).Theearlypublishedvariantsinthesegenesarecommonin PA,USA,5CenterforFreeRadicalandAntioxidantHealth,Universityof gnomADv2.1.1:9/11variantsabovethedisease prevalence(1.08 Pittsburgh,Pittsburgh,PA,USA,6CenterforRareDiseaseTherapy,UPMC in10,000).Ultra-rarenon-synonymousvariantswerenotenriched Children’sHospitalofPittsburgh,Pittsburgh,PA,USA. in a MODY cohort compared to the UKbiobank cohort (PTVs P>0.05, missense P>0.1 for all three genes) in contrast to well Introduction: Mitochondrial trifunctional protein (TFP) catalyzes establishedgenes(P<2.79E-06forHNF1AandHNF4A).Sensitivity three steps in fatty acid β-oxidation. Mutations in α (HADHA) or β analysesusingdifferentcontrolcohortsandsynonymousvariants (HADHB) subunits can result in general TFP deﬁciency, while the supportedour results. HADHA p.Glu510Gln mutation accounts for isolated 3-hydroxyacyl- Conclusions:RarevariantsinBLK,KLF11andPAX4donotcause CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deﬁciency. The α subunit has also MODYandshouldnotbeincludedindiagnostictestingforMODY. monolysocardiolipin acyltransferase activity required for cardiolipin T.W. Laver: None. M.N. Wakeling: None. O. Knox: None. K. (CL) re-modeling. This study aimed to characterize mitochondrial Colclough: None. C. Wright: None. S. Ellard: None. A.T. bioenergetics and CL content in ﬁbroblasts from TFP/LCHAD Hattersley: None. M.N. Weedon:None. K.A. Patel: None. deﬁciencypatients. Materials and Methods: Mitochondrial bioenergetics were assessed by oxygen consumption rate with a Seahorse XFe96  P06
.042.C Mitochondrial Membrane Protein - Associated ExtracellularFluxAnalyzer.Mitochondriaphospholipids(including Neurodegeneration: ararevariant andadifﬁcultdiagnosis CL) were measured by LC-MS/MS. Acylcarnitine proﬁles were determinedby ESI-MS/MS. Alexandru Caramizaru1, Mihai Cucu2, Cristina Durac1, Raluca Results: All patient ﬁbroblasts had lower rates of maximal Tutunaru1, Andrada Gheorghe1, Bianca Petre-Mandache1, Amelia respiration, and spare respiratory capacity, while basal and ATP- Dobrescu2 linkedrespirationrateswerevariable,comparedtocontrols.Levels of mature CLs in mitochondria were decreased, while those of 1CRGM Dolj, Craiova, Romania, 2CRGM Dolj, UMF Craiova, Craiova, monolyso-CLswereincreased.ThechangesinCLsandmonolyso- Romania. CLs differed among cells. All mutant cells had higher levels than controlof theacylcarnitinemarker  C16
-OH. Introduction: Mitochondrial Membrane Protein-Associated Neu- Conclusions: There was a clear reduction of mitochondrial rodegeneration(MPAN)isoneofthemajorformsofNBIA,withan respiration in patient ﬁbroblasts, although some were able to estimated worldwide prevalence of about 1/1,000,000 (less than meet their baseline energy demand. Isolated LCHAD deﬁciency 80 cases reported to date). MPAN is caused by mutations in the ﬁbroblastshadanabnormalCLproﬁleasdidtwoothercells-one  C19
orf12gene(19q13.11).Afoundermutation(c.204_214del11;p. with a splicing mutation in HADHA, and the other with a small Gly69ArgfsX10) hasbeendescribed inEastern Europe. deletion in HADHB leading to shift in reading frame. This study Materials and Methods: We aim to present the case of a 22 indicates that there is a correlation between CL proﬁles and year old male patient who initially presented with walking mitochondrial bioenergetics in cells with HADHA and HADHB difﬁculties, trauma caused by falling and bilateral optic atrophy. mutations,aﬁndingthatoffersnewpotentialtherapeuticoptions The onset was around 13-14 years of age. Progressively, the forpatients. symptomatology also included equilibrium problems, moderate E. Vieira Neto: None. M. Wang: None. Y. Wang: None. T.S. spasticity, distal amiotroﬁc motor deﬁcit of the upper and lower Anthonymuthu:None. H.Bayir: None. J.Vockley: None. limbs,bilateralamiotrophyofthequadricepsmuscle,bilateralpes cavus,mildscoliosis,posturaltremorandwritingdifﬁculties.EMG showed a motor axonal neuropathy and MRI revealed a  P06
.041.BRe-evaluation ofgene pathogenicity forMODY hypodense aspect of the grey nuclei. Furthermore, molecular analyses wereperformed. Thomas W. Laver1, Matthew N. Wakeling1, Olivia Knox1, Kevin Results:AnNGSpanelforCMTgenesandHSPB1,BSC L2
,GARS Colclough2, Caroline Wright1, Sian Ellard1, Andrew T. Hattersley1, and REE P1
 was negative. A homozygous variant (nonsense MichaelN. Weedon1,Kashyap A.Patel1 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 214 substitution) in the  C19
orf12 gene, (p.Leu72) Chr19(GRCh37): 1National Specialise Children Hospital, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2P.L. Shupyk g.30193863A>C, wasidentiﬁed through WES. NationalMedicalAcademyofPostgraduateEducation,Kyiv,Ukraine, Conclusions: When approaching a neurodegenerative pathol- 3Instituteof Geneticand Regenerative Medicine, Kyiv, Ukraine. ogy characterized by a non-speciﬁc combination of signs and symptoms, the association of particularities such as optical Background: Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II) is one of a atrophy and hypodensity of grey nuclei could be a key for the group of hereditary metabolic diseases. Hunter syndrome a diagnosis, and could further prevent long and expensive genetic genetically associated to the deﬁciency of the iduronate tests. The identiﬁcation of an unreported  C19
orf12 homozygous 2-sulfatase enzyme (IDS). It is an X-linked recessive disorder and mutation (c.215T>G) in a patient without any family history of occurs predominantly in males. IDS is responsible for the consanguinity suggests the possibility of a novel variant breakdown of glycosaminoglycans. Decreased activity of IDS characteristic tothe population inthis region. results accumulation of heparan sulfate and dermatan sulfate in A. Caramizaru: None. M. Cucu: None. C. Durac: None. R. multiple organs of the body.Manifestations of the MPS II in girls Tutunaru:None.A.Gheorghe:None.B.Petre-Mandache:None. areextremelyrareandareassociatedwiththeinactivationofone A.Dobrescu: None. chromosome (Lyonization effect).Case Report: Herein we present an 3,5 years old girl admitted with mental and speech developmentaldisorders,behavioraldisorders,changesinappear-  P06
.043.D Mitochondrial DNA mutations do not impact early ance, contractures of the joints, umbilical hernia, scoliosis, short humanembryonic development stature, hepatosplenomegaly. Examination revealed bilateral secretory otitis, conductive deafness, tunnel syndrome. This girl Kalliopi Chatzovoulou1, Anne Mayeur2, Nadine Gigarel1, Fabienne istheﬁrstinthefamily.Shehasayoungerhealthybrother.From1 Jabot-Hanin1, Laetitia Hesters2, Arnold Munnich1, Nelly Frydman2, month old it was observed by doctors with macrocephaly, Jean-Paul Bonnefont1, Julie Steffann1 umbilicalhernia.Attheageof8m,stiffnessofjointswasalready observed. Developmental delay was at 1,5 years old. The 1ImagineInstitute,Paris,France,2AntoineBeclereHospital,Clamart, examination revealed a signiﬁcant increase in the excretion of France. glycosaminoglycans with dermatan sulfate in urine. Iduronate sulfatase activity is absent.Molecular genetic work-up heterozy- Introduction: mtDNA mutations are a frequent cause of gous c.797_798del gene IDS (p.(Pro266Leufs*75). No gene devastating metabolic disorders. Their presence might induce mutationswere detectedin themotheror father. fertilization defects or embryo development failure in oocytes or Discussion:Mucopolysaccharidosistype2canoccuringirls.In preimplantation embryos, respectively. Whether a metabolic the presence of speciﬁc symptoms should not forget about rescuethroughanincreaseofmtDNAamountinmutantembryos additional diagnosis and exclusion of this type of MPS. The girl takes place during cleavage-stage human embryonic develop- wasdiagnosedwith a newmutation for thefamily. mentremained unclear. N.Samonenko: None. N. Troﬁmova: None. N. Mytcyk: None. Materials and Methods: Preimplantation genetic testing was S.Kormoz:None.I.Gregul:None.N.Olhovich:None.N.Pichkur: performedfor55couples.Intotal,165embryosatriskofcarrying None.O. Okhotnikova: None. N.Gorovenko: None. a non-metabolic, non-mitochondrial genetic disorder (control group), and 16 embryos at risk of carrying a mtDNA mutation (mitochondrial group), were included. mtDNA amount was  P06
.046.CRevisitingclinicalpresentationofEgyptianpatients quantiﬁedonDNAfromblastomeresbyreal-timePCR.Embryonic withmucopolysaccharidoses quality was evaluated at day-3 and day-4/5. Embryonic viability was deﬁned as the ability of an embryo to implant and give a SolafElsayed1,RabahShawky1,WalaaYousef2,AbdullahAbdullah1 viablepregnancy. Results: Maternal age and antral follicle count were similar 1Medical Genetics Department, Faculty of medicine, Ain Shams between control and mitochondrial groups, except from anti- University,Cairo,Egypt,2PediatricsDepartment,Facultyofmedicine, Müllerianhormonelevels.Maternalagewasnotcorrelatedtothe AinShams University, Cairo, Egypt. blastomere mtDNA copy number. No signiﬁcant difference in either quality or viability between control and mitochondrial Introduction: Early recognition of red- ﬂag symptoms and signs embryoswasfound.AsigniﬁcantvariabilityofthemtDNAamount of potential patients with Mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) is between sister blastomeres was observed in both embryonic mandatory for timely diagnosis and management. Cultural groups. No modiﬁcation of the blastomere mtDNA amount was differences could have an impact of which symptom trigger the found when the mother carried a mtDNA mutation. Finally, patient to seek medical advice. The aim of the study was to mtDNAcopynumber wasnot correlated to mutantloads. highlightearlysymptomsandsignsinEgyptianpatientswithMPS Conclusions: A pathogenic mtDNA mutation does not modify and to assess their main clinical features. Patients and methods: the mtDNA metabolism in human cleavage-stage embryos, Data were retrieved from MPS patients’ ﬁles and recent clinical suggesting the absence of negative selection at this stage. examinationand investigations werealso done. Funding: This work was supported by the “Association Française Results: The study included 40 patients (27 male and 13 contreles Myopathies”. females)from32families. Theiragerangedbetweenoneand30 K.Chatzovoulou:None.A.Mayeur:None.N.Gigarel:None.F. yearswithmedianageof7years.Themostcommontypefound Jabot-Hanin: None. L. Hesters: None. A. Munnich: None. N. wasMPStypeIII(37.5%).Medianageofdiagnosiswas3.8years± Frydman:None. J. Bonnefont:None. J. Steffann:None. 2.03. Mean diagnostic delay was 1.71±1.53 years (signiﬁcantly longerintypeIVpatients).Hepatomegalywasthemostcommon presentation in type I and VI while “rachitic” like bones was the  P06
.045.BA case ofMucopolysaccharidosis type 2in agirl main presentation in type IV. Speech delay and behavioral changes was the presenting symptom in type III patients while Nataliia Samonenko1,2, Nataliia Troﬁmova1, Nataliia Mytcyk1, behavioral changes and snoring was most common in type II. Svetlana Kormoz1, Irina Gregul1, Nataliia Olhovich1, Nataliia Previousaffectedsiblingwasthetriggertoseekmedicaladvicein Pichkur1, OlenaOkhotnikova2,Nataliia Gorovenko3 30%ofpatients with type II. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 215 Conclusion: Red-ﬂags symptoms and signs may differ in clinvar/) to make them publicly available. Mutation updates are relation to culture believes and fears. Unlike previous studies, essentialforthecorrectmoleculardiagnoses,geneticcounselling, hepatomegalywasamainconcerninourpatientsduetothehigh anddisease management for MPSIVA. prevalence ofviral hepatitis whileskeletal deformities are not! as A.Zanetti:None.F.D’Avanzo:None.M.AlSayed:D.Speakers childhoodrickets is notrare inEgyptian population. Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert wit- S. Elsayed: None. R. Shawky: None. W. Yousef: None. A. ness); Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Shire, Sanoﬁ Gen- Abdullah: None. zyme. Other; Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Shire, Sanoﬁ Genzyme.A.Brusius-Facchin:None.Y.Chien:B.ResearchGrant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending  P06
.047.D Molecular basis of Mucopolysaccharidosis IVA grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Sanoﬁ. D. (MorquioA syndrome): a review and classiﬁcation of GALNS Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and gene variants andreporting of68novel variants expert witness); Modest; Biogen, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Novartis, Sanoﬁ, Takeda. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Alessandra Zanetti1, Francesca D’Avanzo1, Moeenaldeen AlSayed2, Amicus, Sanoﬁ. R. Giugliani: B. Research Grant (principal Ana Carolina Brusius-Facchin3, Yin-Hsiu Chien4, Roberto Giugliani5, investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as Emanuela Izzo6, David Kasper7, Hsiang-Yu Lin8, Shuan-Pei Lin8, well as grants already received); Modest; Allevex, Idorsia, JCR, Laura Pollard9, Akashdeep Singh6, Rodolfo Tonin10, Tim Wood9, Lysogene, Orphan Disease Center, Sanoﬁ, Takeda, Ultragenyx. D. AmeliaMorrone10, Rosella Tomanin1 Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Amicus, BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, 1Laboratory of Diagnosis and Therapy of Lysosomal Disorders, JCR, RegenXBio, Sanoﬁ, Takeda, Ultragenyx, Janssen, Novartis. F. DepartmentofWomen’sandChildren’sHealth,UniversityofPadova; Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Amicus, BioMarin Pharma- Fondazione Istituto di Ricerca Pediatrica Città della Speranza, ceutical Inc, Orphan Disease Center, Sanoﬁ, Sobi, Takeda, Padova, Italy, 2King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre; Ultragenyx, Denali, Inventiva, JCR, RegenXBio, Sigilon. Other; Faculty of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Sanoﬁ, JCR, Takeda, Ultra- 3Medical Genetics Service/HCPA, DR BRASIL Research Group/HCPA, genyx.E.Izzo:None.D.Kasper:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); andINAGEMP,PortoAlegre,Brazil,4DepartmentofMedicalGenetics Signiﬁcant; ARCHIMED Life Science GmbH. E. Ownership Interest and Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); 5DepartmentofGenetics/UFRGS, MedicalGeneticsService/HCPA,DR Signiﬁcant; ARCHIMED Life Science GmbH. H. Lin: B. Research BRASIL Research Group/HCPA, and INAGEMP, Porto Alegre, Brazil, Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and 6BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Novato, CA, USA, 7ARCHIMED Life pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; ScienceGmbH,Leberstraße20,Vienna,Austria,8DivisionofGenetics BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Sanoﬁ-Genzyme, Takeda. D. Speak- and Metabolism, Departments of Pediatrics and Medical Research, ers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert MacKayMemorialHospital,Taipei,Taiwan,9BiochemicalDiagnostic witness); Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Sanoﬁ-Genzyme, Laboratory, Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, USA, Takeda. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; BioMarin Pharma- 10Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, Pediatric Neurology Unit ceutical Inc, Sanoﬁ-Genzyme, Takeda. Other; Modest; BioMarin andLaboratories, Meyer Children’sHospital;Department ofNeuros- PharmaceuticalInc,Sanoﬁ,Takeda.S.Lin:None.L.Pollard:None. ciences, Psychology, Pharmacology and Child Health, University of A. Singh: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; BioMarin Florence, Florence, Italy. Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; BioMarin Pharma- MucopolysaccharidosisIVA(MorquiosyndrometypeA,MPSIVA)is ceutical Inc. R. Tonin: None. T. Wood: F. Consultant/Advisory a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder caused by Board;Modest;Amicus-Fabry.A.Morrone:None.R.Tomanin:B. mutationsintheN-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfatase(GALNS)gene. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant Reduced/absent GALNS enzyme activity causes impaired degra- and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; dation of chondroitin-6-sulfate and keratan sulfate and their BioMarinPharmaceutical Inc. accumulation in tissues. MPS IVA is a clinically heterogeneous disorder, whose presentation varies from a classical rapidly progressing to a nonclassical form. Delayed diagnosis and late  P06
.048.BNiacintherapyimprovesclinicaloutcomeswiththe introductionofappropriatemanagementarecommon.Thestudy normalization of metabolic abnormalities in a patient with objective was to collect, analyze, and uniformly summarize all partial NAXDdeﬁciency publishedGALNSgenevariants,thusupdatingthepreviousreview (Morrone A. et al. Hum Mutat. 2014;35(11):1271-1279). Moreover, JoshuaManor previouslyunpublishedgenotypes,communicatedby7reference laboratories worldwide were included in the analysis. Data were BCM,Houston, TX,USA. analyzed with respect to most common alleles, geographic distribution, level of homozygosity, and genotype-phenotype Introduction: Inﬂammation, the driving force behind chronic correlation. All variants were classiﬁed according to their diseases in humans, is both initiated and repressed by enzymes pathogenicity as suggested by the ACMG/AMP. Including those that utilize NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H. The highly conserved 2-enzyme previously published, we identiﬁed 446 unique variants, among NAD(P)+ repair pathway eliminates toxic NAD(P)HX metabolites which 68 were novel, in 1190 subjects (including newborn thataccumulateininﬂammatorystress.DeﬁciencyofeitherNAXD screening positive subjects). Variants distribution included mis- or NAXE depletes the NAD+ pool and results in fever-triggered sense (65.0%), nonsense (8.1%), splicing (7.2%), small deletions fatal encephalopathic crises (MIM 618321 and 617186, (del)/insertions(ins) (7.0%), intronic (4.0%), and large del/ins and respectively). complexrearrangements(3.8%).Half(50.4%)ofthepatientswere Casepresentation:Anadolescentwithearly-onsetprogressive homozygous, 37.1% were compound heterozygous, and 10.7% weakness was admitted for exacerbation of symptoms and had only 1 variant detected. In silico analyses were performed to psychosisfollowingfever.Atpresentationhecouldnotambulate, evaluate the pathogenicity of novel variants. All variants were requiredpositivepressureventilationassistance,couldnothandle submittedtotheClinVardatabase(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ oral secretions or extend his neck. Chromosomal microarray EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 216 showed a microdeletion of NAXD exons 1-2, and exome Pharmaceutical Inc. R. Truty: A. Employment (full or part-time); sequencing revealed a novel NAXD SNV predicted to affect both Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, a splice donor site and the mitochondrial pre-sequence tag but patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Invitae. D.A. leaving the NAXD endoplasmic reticulum and cytosolic isoforms McKnight: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. intact. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Results: At time of acute illness, plasma clinical untargeted intellectualproperty);Modest;Invitae.B.Johnson:A.Employment metabolomics from our patient showed signiﬁcant alterations in (fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Invitae.E.OwnershipInterest(stock, nicotinamide/NAD+metabolism(zscorenegative4-6),alongwith stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; a footprint of peroxisomal-mitochondrial axis dysfunction: altera- Invitae.A.Morales:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; tions of TCA cycle metabolites, branched chain amino acids (z Invitae.E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions,patentorother score negative 2-3), plasmalogens, phospholipids, and lysopho- intellectual property); Modest; Invitae. S.L. Bristow: A. Employ- spholipids (z score negative 2-4). Supportive care and niacin ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest supplementation resulted in normal ambulation and muscle (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); strength, no respiratory support, complete normalization of Modest; Invitae. E. Izzo: A. Employment (full or part-time); metabolic abnormalities and decrease in creatine kinase from Signiﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership Interest 17,000to 700U/L. (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Conclusions: Defects in cofactor repair are likely underdiag- Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. G. Seratti: A. Employment nosed. Niacin supplementation can reduce inﬂammatory stress (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E. and provide preventative therapy to reduce morbidity and Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other mortality associated with NAD+ depletion in NAD(P)HX repair intellectual property); Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. S. pathway deﬁciency. Koh:F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest;BioMarinPharmaceu- J.Manor: None. tical Inc. E.C. Wirrell: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. J.J. Millichap: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending  P06
.049.B Clinical utility of a sponsored gene panel testing grants as well as grants already received); Modest; UCB Pharma, program for pediatric epilepsy and CLN2 disease diagnosis: Mallinkrodt, Xenon, NIH, Citizens United for Research in Epilepsy, Resultsfrom10,853 tests Disruptive Nutrition. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; American Tiffany Yar Pang1, Rebecca Truty Truty2, Dianalee A. McKnight2, Academy of Neurology, Up-To-Date, Mallinkrodt, BioMarin Phar- Britt Johnson2, Ana Morales2, Sara L. Bristow2, Emanuela Izzo1, maceutical Inc, Greenwich, Sunovian. F. Consultant/Advisory Guillermo Seratti1, Sookyong Koh3, Elaine C. Wirrell4, John J. Board; Modest; UCB Pharma, Esai, Xenon, Ionis, Upsher-Smith, Millichap5,Swaroop Aradhya2 Praxis, Sarepta, Disruptive Nutrition. S. Aradhya: A. Employment (fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Invitae.E.OwnershipInterest(stock, 1BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc, Novato, CA, USA, 2Invitae, San stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Francisco, CA, USA, 3Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Invitae. GA,USA,4MayoClinic,Rochester,MN,USA,5AnnandRobertH.Lurie Children’s Hospital,Chicago, IL,USA.  P06
.050.C Diagnostic yield and clinical utility of genetic Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 2 (CLN2 disease) is a rare, testing in children with seizure onset after two years of age: inherited, neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorder caused update over3-year program inEurope andMiddle East by deﬁcient TP P1
 activity. CLN2 disease often presents with epilepsybetween2and4yearsofage,accompaniedbyhistoryof Akashdeep Singh1, Kimberly Gall2, Emanuela Izzo1, Kirsi Alakurtti2, language delay; however, diagnostic delays are common. Behind Eija H. Seppala2, Lotta Koskinen2, Juha Koskenvuo2, Tero-Pekka the Seizure® (BTS) is a US-based, sponsored testing program for Alastalo2 childrenwithsuspectedgeneticepilepsy,initiatedwiththegoalto help lower the age of CLN2 disease diagnosis. Individuals were 1BioMarinPharmaceuticalInc,Novato,CA,USA,2BlueprintGenetics, eligible for testing through BTS if they were aged 24-60 months SanFrancisco, CA, USA. withunprovokedseizureonsetat/after24months(Dec2016-Feb 2019) or, following program expansion, aged 0-60 months (Feb Neurologic and metabolic disorders with epileptic seizures are 2019-Jan2020)or0-108months(Jan-Nov2020)withunprovoked among the most common genetic disorders presenting in seizuresonsetatanyage.BetweenDec2016andNov2020,atotal childhood. A molecular diagnosis for patients with epilepsy may of 10,853 tests were conducted through BTS. The molecular allow for etiologically based treatment and management. This diagnostic yield was 13.7% overall (n=1485; 102 genes) and programoffersgenetictestingtopatientswithepilepsyinEurope 0.18%forTP P1
(n=20).Inthesubsetofindividualstestedthrough andtheMiddleEast.Thegoalsoftheprogramaretodetermine,in BTSwhowereaged24-60monthswithseizureonsetatorafter24 pediatric epilepsy patients between 2-5 years of age, molecular months (n=3,263), the molecular diagnostic yield was 7.9% diagnostic yield and the impact on diagnosing neuronal ceroid- overall (n=259) and 0.61% for TP P1
 (n=20). Mean age at CLN2 lipofuscinosistype2(CLN2).CLN2isasevere,rapidly-progressive diseasediagnosisthroughtheBTSprogramwas3.64years,which neurodegenerativediseasewithseizureonsetatorafter2yearsof isearlierthanthenaturalhistoryreportedaverageof5years.TP P1
 age.AnNGS-basedepilepsypanelincludingCopynumbervariant was the highest positive yield gene for autosomal recessive (CNV) detection was used. Variant interpretation was performed disorders. These ﬁndings demonstrate that the use of broad accordingtoACMGguidelines.Theresultsfrom748patientswith epilepsy gene panel tests can facilitate the earlier diagnosis of ﬁrst seizure at or after 24 months, and one additional clinical CLN2disease,andsimultaneouslyidentifyothergeneticcausesof ﬁndingarereported.Medianageattestingwas38monthswhile epilepsy. themedianageatﬁrstseizurewas27months.Theaveragedelay T.Y. Pang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; from ﬁrst seizure to genetic testing was 9 months. A genetic BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock diagnosis was established in 146 patients for a molecular options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; BioMarin diagnostic yield of 19.5%. CNVs were reported in 15% of EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 217 diagnosed patients and 32% of the CNVs identiﬁed were M. Paulin: None. M. Ben Amor: None. L. Ryan: None. M. intragenic. The frequent molecular diagnoses included SCN1A (n Mallet:None. M. Cormier:None. =17), MEC P2
 (n=13) and TP P1
 (CLN2) (n=12). CLN2 cases received a molecular diagnosis at an average age of 3 years 11 months, 1-2 years earlier than natural history data. At least 93  P06
.053.B Expanding the clinical spectrum of primary coen- (63.6%) of diagnosed patients had a disorder that has targeted zyme Q10 deﬁciency type 6: the ﬁrst case with treatment,evidenceforoptimizingtreatment,oron-goingclinical cardiomyopathy trials. A. Singh: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; LisetteLeeuwen,Charlotte M.A. Lubout,Hessel P. Nijenhuis, Linda BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock C.Meiners,Yvonne J. Vos,Johanna C.Herkert options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. K. Gall: A. Employment (full or part-time); UMCG,Groningen, Netherlands. Signiﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics.E.Izzo:A.Employment(fullorpart- time); Signiﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. E. Ownership Introduction:PrimarycoenzymeQ10 deﬁciency(primary COQ10 Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual deﬁciency)isamitochondrialrespiratorychaindiseasecausedby property); Signiﬁcant; BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc. K. Alakurtti: biallelic variants in: COQ2, COQ4, COQ6, COQ7, COQ8A, COQ8B, A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. COQ9, PDS S1
 or PDS S2
. The clinical manifestations and age at E.H. Seppala: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; onsetarehighlyvariable.PrimarycoenzymeQ10deﬁciencytype6 BlueprintGenetics.L.Koskinen:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); (primary COQ10 deﬁciency-6,MIM#614650) is characterized by Signiﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics.J.Koskenvuo:A.Employment(full steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome and sensorineural deafness. or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. T. Alastalo: A. Methods: We included a 19-month-old patient with dilated Employment (fullor part-time); Signiﬁcant; BlueprintGenetics. cardiomyopathy. Clinical data of the patient were collected from the medical record. Copy-number variation analysis was per- formed using SNP-array. Exome sequencing (ES) was performed  P06
.051.D Mild neurocognitive and psychosocial outcome using a parent-offspring trio approach. Literature search was despite late-diagnosis of classical phenylketonuria (case performed(Pubmed). report) Results: Our patient presented with cardiorespiratory insufﬁ- ciency due to dilated cardiomyopathy at age 19 months. Marie-Claire Paulin1, Mouna Ben Amor2,3, Lynn Ryan2, Mathieu Additionally, she was found to have proteinuria, microcephaly Mallet2, Marie-Eve Cormier2 and mild developmental delay. There was no history of hearing loss, vision problems, movement disorder, or epilepsy. Parents 1Stan Cassidy Rehabilitation Centre, Horizon Health Network, were consanguineous (second cousins). Family history was Fredericton, NB, Canada, 2Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dr.- negative for cardiac diseases. SNP-array was normal. Whole ES Georges-L.-Dumont,RéseaudeSantéVitalité,Moncton,NB,Canada, revealed a homozygous pathogenic variant, c.763G>A,p. 3CentredeFormationMédicaleduNouveau-Brunswick,Universitéde (Gly255Arg),inCOQ6,forwhichbothparentswereheterozygous. Moncton,Moncton, NB,Canada. Primary COQ10 deﬁciency-6 has previously been reported in 29 patientsbutcardiomyopathyhasnotbeenreported.Althoughnot Introduction: Classical phenylketonuria (PKU) is a genetic reported in primary COQ10 deﬁciency-6, cardiomyopathy has condition that impairs the metabolism of phenylalanine and beendescribedin26patientswithothertypesofprimaryCOQ10 requireslifelongdietarytreatmentfornormaldevelopment.PKUis deﬁciency. known to cause brain damage and impairment, including Conclusions:Thiscaseexpandstheclinicalspectrumofprimary moderatetosevereintellectualdisability,ifnottreatedpromptly. COQ10deﬁciency-6andunderscorestheimportanceofscreening Here, we present the case of a late PKU-diagnosed 40-year-old formultiplesystemdisease,includingcardiacevaluation,inthese college-educated woman who has mild neurocognitive patients. Genes involved in primary COQ10 deﬁciency, including impairments. COQ6, should be included in gene panels for pediatric MaterialsandMethods:SinglegeneanalysisforthePAHgene cardiomyopathy. was performed by Next Generation Sequencing. Regular blood- L. Leeuwen: None. C.M.A. Lubout: None. H.P. Nijenhuis: phenylalanine analyses as well as objective and subjective None.L.C. Meiners: None. Y.J. Vos: None.J.C. Herkert: None. psychometric assessments of intellectual potential, executive functionand mental health wereconducted. Results: Genetic analyses revealed compound heterozygous  P06
.054.C Rare types of the mutations cause pyruvate mutations (IV S1
+5g>T and p. P281
L) in the PAH gene. This carboxylasedeﬁciency in 2patients genotype has been previously reported in patients with classic PKU.Bloodphenylalaninelevelsinourpatientrangedfrom896to Polina Tsygankova1, Nikita Beskorovainiy1, Marina Minzhenkova1, 2257 μmol/L since diagnosis at the age of 30 (except during her VyacheslavTabakov1,LyudmilaBessonova1,VeraZarubina2,Natalia secondpregnancy).Despitesuchtoxiclevels,thispatientonlyhas Pechatnikova2, Marina Kurkina1, Igor Bychkov1, Ekaterina mildneurocognitiveandpsychosocialimpairments.Shedoesnot Zakharova1 meetthecriteria for evenamild intellectual disability. Conclusion: Increasingly more cases of untreated or late- 1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, diagnosed PKU patients with no major cognitive impairment are 2Morozov Children’s City Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federa- reportedintheliterature.Whilelate-diagnosedPKUisunusual,the tion. diagnosis should be considered in cases of unexplained learning challenges, psychiatric symptoms, or neurocognitive impairment, Introduction: Pathogenic variants in pyruvate carboxylase (PC) evenifmild,especiallyifthepatientwasbornduringaperiodor gene cause a wide spectrum of recessive phenotypes, ranging place where neonatal PKU screening was not systematically from the early fatal encephalopathy to the adult benign form. conducted. More research is needed to explain the variability in Clinicalpresentation ofthePC-deﬁciencyisnot speciﬁc,frequent theseverityof cognitive impairment incertain PKU patients. mutations are not described for the PC gene, thus, the whole EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 218 exome (WES) and genome (WGS) sequencing could help to ﬁnd dysfunction as a central cause of pathology. Finally, this disorder rarecases ofthis metabolic disease. shouldbeincludedinthedifferentialdiagnosisofanypatientwith Results: Two patients were suspected for having pyruvate unexplained motor and speech delay, recurrent encephalopathy metabolismdisorderbasedontheurineorganicacidsproﬁleand withmetabolic acidosis, intermittent orpersistent dystonia,lactic clinical picture. In a patient 1, 6 y.o. o boy with ataxia, acidosis,and basal ganglia lesions. hypoglycemia, episodes of lactic acidosis WGS showed hetero- M.S.Aldosary:None.S.Baselm:None.M.Abdulrahim:None. zygousmissensevariantc.1372A>G;p.(Asn458Asp)inthePCgene R. Al-Mass: None. M. Alsagob: None. Z. AlMasseri: None. R. and the loss of heterozygosity on PC cDNA. Additional bioinfor- Huma: None. L. AlQuait: None. T. Al-Shidi: None. E. Al-Obeid: matic analysis with Manta tool revealed soft-clipped reads None. A. AlBakheet: None. B. Alahideb: None. L. Alahaideb: mapped to chromosomes 11 and 1, so a reciprocal translocation None. A. Qari: None. R. Taylor: None. D. Colak: None. M. whichdisruptsthe5’primeendofthePCgeneincludingexons1 AlSayed: None.N.Kaya: None. and 2 was proposed. The translocation was validated via FISH- analysis and PCR with ﬂanking primers. The segregation was conﬁrmed. The second patient, 13 y.o. girl with psychomotor  P06
.056.A A recessive mutation in TFAM causes mtDNA delay, hepatopathy, episodes of lactic acidosis, ketonuria, had depletion associated with primary ovarian insufﬁciency, novel homozygous intronic variant c.1983-116C>T revealed on seizures,and hearingloss WES. The cDNA analysis from blood cells established three aberrant mRNA isoforms due to exonization of intron 17 FaridUllah1,2,WaqarRauf1,KamalKhan2,SherazKhan1,VOliveira3, sequencesin thevast majority ofPCtranscripts. K Bell4, M Tariq1, S Bakhshalizadeh4, T Philippe5, A Sinclair4, E Conclusion:Afterroutinegenesequencingincaseofsuspicion Tucker4,SHe6, SM.Baig1, E E. Davis7 of PC-deﬁciency WES and WGS with deep bioinformatic analysis could beneeded. 1National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering P. Tsygankova: None. N. Beskorovainiy: None. M. Minzhen- (NIBGE-C),Faisalabad;PakistanInstituteofEngineeringandApplied kova: None. V. Tabakov: None. L. Bessonova: None. V. Sciences (PIEAS), Islamabad, Pakistan, 2Stanley Manne Children’s Zarubina: None. N. Pechatnikova: None. M. Kurkina: None. I. Research Institute, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Bychkov: None. E.Zakharova: None. Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA, Chicago, IL, USA, 3Department of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Animal Science and Food Engineer- ing, University of São Paulo, Pirassununga, São Paulo, Brazil,  P06
.055.D SL C25
A42-associated mitochondrial encephalo- 4Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Royal Children’s Hospital myopathy report of additional founder cases and functional and Department of Pediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne characterization ofanovel deletion VIC, Melbourne, Australia, 5Department of endocrinology and reproductive medicine, center for rare endocrine and gynecological Mazhor Salem Aldosary1, Shahad Baselm1, Maha Abdulrahim1, diseases,SorbonneUniversitéPitiéSalpétrièreHospital,Paris,France, Rawan Al-Mass1, Maysoon Alsagob2, Zainab AlMasseri1, Rozeena 6BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China, 7Stanley Manne Children’s Huma1, Laila AlQuait1, Tarfa Al-Shidi1, Eman Al-Obeid1, Albandary Research Institute, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of AlBakheet1,BasmaAlahideb1,LujaneAlahaideb1,AlyaQari1,Robert Chicago,Chicago, Chicago,IL,USA. Taylor3,Dilek Colak1,Moeenaldeen AlSayed1,Namik Kaya1 Mitochondrial diseases are common, genetically heterogeneous 1King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi disordersinbothpediatricandadultpopulations.Theyarecaused Arabia, 2King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, Riyadh, by defects in the processes of oxidative phosphorylation, SaudiArabia,3WellcomeCentreforMitochondrialResearch,Riyadh, apoptosis, and failure of essential bioenergetic supply to SaudiArabia. mitochondria. TFAM (transcription factor A, mitochondrial) is a key component of the mitochondrial replisome machinery that SL C25
A42isthemaintransporterofCoenzymeAintomitochon- maintains mtDNA transcription and replication. Here, we present dria.Todate,15subjectsarereportedduetooneoftwo,bi-allelic two affected individuals from a consanguineous Pakistani homozygous missense variants in the SL C25
A42 as a cause of pedigree that presented with primary ovarian insufﬁciency (POI) mitochondrialencephalomyopathy;14subjectsareofSaudiorigin andseizures.Weperformedwholeexomesequencingonparents and share the same founder variant, c.871A>G:p.Asn291Asp. The and affected siblings and found a recessive missense variant in remaining singleton is German carrying a variant at canonical TFAM, c.694C>T (p.Arg232Cys), that segregated with disease. splice site, c.380+2T>A. In this study, we describe the clinical Notably, this DNA change is identical to a recently reported manifestations and disease course in an additional six Saudi sporadic case of similar ethnic origin who displays POI, seizures, patients whose blood samples were assessed by Affymetrix’s andsensorineuralhearingloss.Inpatientderivedskinﬁbroblasts, axiomautozygositymapping,andwholeexomesequencing.After weobserveddepletionofmtDNAandsigniﬁcantalterationinthe acomprehensiveﬁlteringprocess,twovariantsofSL C25
A42were respiratory function and morphology of mitochondria. Moreover, conﬁrmed with Sanger sequencing and fully segregated in the we observed reduced numbers of nucleoids with signiﬁcant testedfamilymembers.WhileﬁvepatientshavetheSaudifounder changes in nucleoid size or shape in patient cells compared to p.Asn291Aspvariant,onesubjecthasanoveldeletion.Functional matchedcontrols.Next,weinvestigatedtheeffectoftfamlossina analyses on ﬁbroblasts obtained from this patient revealed that zebraﬁshmodel.Knockout(KO)mutantsrecapitulatethemtDNA the deletion causes signiﬁcant decrease in mitochondrial oxygen depletion and ovarian dysgenesis reminiscent of patient pheno- consumption and ATP production compared to healthy indivi- types. Together, our genetic and functional data indicate that duals. Moreover, extracellular acidiﬁcation rate revealed signiﬁ- TFAMplaysapivotalroleinthedevelopmentofgonads.Thus,our cantly reduced glycolysis, glycolytic capacity, and glycolytic ﬁndingsexpandthelistofmitochondrialdiseasephenotypesand reserve as compared to controls. There were no changes in the helpsguide disease management and diagnosis mitochondrialDNAcontentofpatientﬁbroblasts.Immunoblotting F.Ullah:None.W.Rauf:None.K.Khan:None.S.Khan:None. revealed signiﬁcantly diminished protein expression due to the V. Oliveira: None. K. Bell: None. M. Tariq: None. S. Bakhshali- deletion. Our study expands the molecular spectrum of this zadeh: None. T. Philippe: None. A. Sinclair: None. E. Tucker: condition and provides further evidence of mitochondrial None.S. He:None. S.M. Baig:None. E.E.Davis: None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 219  P06
.057.BCirculatingDNAmethylationbiomarkersfortype2 disability. He had an elder sister with laryngomalacia requiring diabetesdiagnosis fromsaliva tracheostomy in childhood, and late-onset epilepsy; and a younger brother with cerebral palsy after cardiac arrest at 3 Manuela Hofner1, Ulrike Kegler1, Klemens Vierlinger1, Anja Buh- months, hypotonia, and hyperlactacidemia. They both had mann1, Michael Leutner2, Walter Pulverer1, Alexandra Kautzky- hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), which resolved sponta- Willer2, ChristaNoehammer1 neously. All three siblings had bilateral basal ganglia calciﬁca- tions.Family 2: A female neonate, with a prenatal diagnosis of 1AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH, Molecular Diagnostics HCM, died at 40 days from hyperlactacidemia and severe HCM. Unit,Vienna,Austria,2MedicalUniversityofVienna,ClinicalDivision She was the ﬁrst child of non-consanguineous parents. Her ofEndocrinology and Metabolism, Vienna, Austria. motherwasagainpregnant,andafetalechocardiogramhadbeen suggestiveofright ventricular hypertrophy. Introduction: Saliva is a readily and repeatedly available body Results: Reanalysis of WES data from case 1 revealed two ﬂuid,whichcanbeobtainedvianon-invasive,painlesscollection. compoundlikelypathogenicheterozygousvariantsinVAR S2
gene: The aim of this study was to deﬁne salivary extracellular vesicle- c.1258G>A,p.(Ala420Thr)andc.1100C>T,p.(Thr367Ile).Combined derived epigenetic biomarkers suitable for type 2 diabetes heterozygosityfortwovariantsinVAR S2
wasalsoidentiﬁedincase diagnosis. 2 by clinical exome sequencing: c.1258G>A, p.(Ala420Thr) and Methods: After evaluation of several isolation kits for saliva- c.1079C>T, p.(Ala369Val). Targeted analysis conﬁrmed the fetus derived extracellular vesicles we performed a proof of principle wasaffected. study, comparing DNA methylation proﬁles in saliva and serum Conclusions:Thesecasesillustratetheintra- andextra-familial extracellular vesicles from healthy individuals. For our type 2 spectrum of variability associated with VAR S2
 variants, including diabetes DNA methylation discovery study cell-free saliva was milderphenotypesthatcomplicategeneticcounselling,especially collected from a diabetic patient cohort (type 2 diabetes, pre- intheprenatal setting. diabetes, gestational diabetes, healthy) and extracellular vesicles R.Gouveia:None.M.Rodrigues:None.O.Moldovan:None.A. thereof prepared. Genome-wide DNA methylation proﬁling was B.Sousa:None. performed using extracellular vesicle-derived DNA on Illumina EPIC arrays.  P06
.059.D Functional analysis of the PCCA and PCCB genes Results: After having identiﬁed the best suited method for variants,predicted to affect splicing extracellular vesicle isolation from saliva we could successfully showthefeasibilityofusingsalivaasapotentialdiagnosticmatrix Igor Bychkov, Artur Galushkin, Aleksandra Filatova, Andrey in our comparative proﬁling study, as the DNA methylation Nekrasov, Marina Kurkina, Galina Baydakova, Alexandra Ilyushkina, proﬁles in healthy probands showed a big overlap between MikhailSkoblov, Ekaterina Zakharova serum- and saliva-derived extracellular vesicles. In addition, we wereabletosuccessfullyrunatype2diabetesgenome-wideDNA Researchcentreformedicalgenetics,Moscow,RussianFederation. methylation discovery study from salivary extracellular vesicle- derived DNA and identiﬁed potential DNA-methylation based Introduction: Mutations in the PCCA and PCCB genes result in candidatebiomarkers. propionic acidemia (PA) - rare autosomal recessive metabolic Conclusions:Thisstudyoncemoredemonstratedsalivatobea disease. In most cases the symptoms of PA manifest in the early most promising sample matrix for disease diagnostics. Further- more genome-wide proﬁling technologies such as methylation neonatal period and without treatment quickly become life- bead arrays could be successfully applied to cell-free body ﬂuids threatening.Thus,thefastandpropergeneticdiagnosisplaysan important role in patients` management. During the analysis of despitelow amounts ofcirculating DNA present there. public repositories of PA mutations, we faced the problem of Funding: The presented research was supported by the incorrect classiﬁcation of splicing variants, which is inconsistent Austrian researchpromotion agency(FFG project 849816). with ACMG/AMP recommendations. Also, there is a part of M. Hofner: None. U. Kegler: None. K. Vierlinger: None. A. variants,whichareclassiﬁedasmissenseorsynonymousvariants Buhmann: None. M. Leutner: None. W. Pulverer: None. A. ofuncertain signiﬁcance, beinghighly spliceogenic. Kautzky-Willer: None.C. Noehammer: None. Materialsandmethods:AfteranalyzingofClinVarandHGMD databases for PA mutations 23 variants were selected, some of which were located in splicing sites, but lack the functional  P06
.058.CVAR S2
-linkedmitochondrialdisease-anemerging characterizationatmRNAlevelandthose,classiﬁedasmissenseor phenotypic spectrum synonymous,butwerebioinformaticalypredictedasspliceogenic. To characterize the effect of these variants at mRNA level the Raquel Gouveia, Márcia Rodrigues, Oana Moldovan, Ana Berta minigeneassaywas performed. Sousa Results:Wecharacterizedthesplicingalterationsfor14variants (PCCA:c.183+4del4, с.468+1G>A, c.717-2A>G, c.1187T>G; (p. Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Val396Gly), с.1284+2dup, c.1353+5delG, c.1353+5_1353+9del, Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisboa, Portugal. c.1643+1_1643+2dup, c.1899+2_1899+3insCT, c.2040G>A; (p. Ala680=), c.2119-9A>G; PCCB: c.543G>C; (p.Leu181=), c.655- Introduction: Bi-allelic variants in VAR S2
, a nuclear gene coding 2A>G, c.1091-8_1091-3del). For the cases where the splicing for valyl-tRNA synthetase, cause autosomal recessive combined outcomedidn’tdisruptthemRNAreadingframe,wecharacterized oxidative phosphorylation deﬁciency type 20 (MIM#609060), theaffectedstructures ona protein level. characterized by a variable combination of mitochondrial Conclusion: The performed functional analysis allowed us to encephalopathy,developmentaldelay,hypotonia,epilepsy,cardi- characterizethesplicingoutcomefor14PAvariantsandreclassify omyopathyandstructuralbrainanomalies,usuallywithaneonatal them accordingto ACMG/AMPguidelines. onsetand severedisease course. I. Bychkov: None. A. Galushkin: None. A. Filatova: None. A. Case Report: Family 1: A 23-year-old man, who was healthy Nekrasov: None. M. Kurkina: None. G. Baydakova: None. A. until age 11, presented with generalized tonic-clonic seizures, Ilyushkina: None. M.Skoblov: None.E. Zakharova: None. evolving with persistent intentional tremor, and mild learning EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 220  P07
Immunology andHematopoietic System Conclusion: This highlights the importance of a genetic diagnosis, which can positively inﬂuence patient management  P07
.001.A Molecular basis of thalassemia in Dobrogea, and also signiﬁcantly inﬂuences family planning discussions for Romania thepatient and theirfamilies. H.L.Titheradge: None. E.Al-Abadi: None. AncaMitroi1,2,CostelBrinzan1,2,MarianaAschie1,AdrianaApostol1, Gerogeta Cozaru1,2  P07
.004.D Diagnostic performance of NGS panel genetic 1Emergency Clinical County Hospital of Constanta, Constanta, testinginpatientssuspectedforautoinﬂammatorysyndrome Romania,2Ovidius University, Constanta, Romania. Gorjan Milanovski1, Meri Kirijas1, Boban Dobrevski1, Teodora Brnjarchevska Blazevska1, Olivija Eﬁnska Mladenovska1, Olgica Introduction: Thalassemia is a group of hemoglobin disease Sibinovska1,TodorArsov1,KatarinaStavrikj2,KristinaMironska2,Beti causedbyareductionorabsenceinthesynthesisofbetaoralpha Gjurkova2,Aleksandar Petlichkovski1 globins chain that results in a group of hereditary anemia of varyingclinicalseverity. Material and methods: 71 patients laboratory suspected with 1Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine- thalassemia were studied for characterization with as either Skopje, Institute of Immunobiology and Human Genetics, Skopje, heterozygous or homozygous for beta and alpha thalassemia. Macedonia,TheFormerYugoslavRepublicof,2Ss.CyrilandMethodius Molecular analysis was done by PCR and reverse-hybridization in UniversityinSkopje,FacultyofMedicine-Skopje,PHIUniversityClinicfor order to detect 22 of mutations most commonly associated with childdiseases,Skopje,Macedonia,TheFormerYugoslavRepublicof. beta-thalassemia(Mediterraneantype)and21ofmutationcover- ing>90%of α-globin defect. Introduction: Autoinﬂammatory syndrome (AIS) constitutes a Results:28%ofcaseshavemutationsofalphaorbetaglobins heterogenous group of disorders deﬁned by recurrent episodes of gene and only 4% of cases have concomitant mutation in alpha systemicinﬂammationintheabsenceofpathogens,autoantibodies and beta globins gene. 13% of patients have mutation for alpha and/or self-reactive lymphocytes. We report initial results from our thalassemia represented by: -α3.7gene deletion (6%), ααα3.7 gene experiencewithNGSgenepaneltestingforAIS. triplication (6%) and α2polyA-2(1%). Only one patient was Materials and methods: Nineteen pediatric and four adult homozygous for -α3.7gene deletion. 19% of patient of patients patients with clinical suspicion of AIS were referred for genetic have mutation for beta thalassemia represented by: IV S1
.100 testing. DNA samples were analyzed on Ion Torrent platform, [G>A] (6%), IVS 2.745[C>G] (6%), IVS 1.6[T>C] (4%), cd8[-AA](2%) using an AmpliSeq AIS gene panel, which included 34 genes and IV S2
.1[G>A](1%). Only one patient was homozygous for IVS (ASAH1, CARD14, DDX58, ELANE, IFIH1, I L10
RA, I L10
RB, I L1
RN, 1.6[T>C]. I L36
RN, LPIN2, MEFV, NLR C4
, NLR P12
, NLR P3
, NOD2, MVK, PLCG2, Conclusion: In our study the most frequent mutation for beta PSMB8, SAMHD1, RBCK1, SL C29
A3, RNASEH2B, ADAR, RNASEH2A, thalassemia was IV S1
.100 [G>A] and IVS 2.745[C>G] similar with RNASEH2C, TNFAI P3
, TNFRSF11A, TNFRSF1A, NLR P1
, OTULIN, other studies. The mutations cd8[-AA] and IV S2
.1[G>A] were not TMEM173,HAX1,PSTPI P1
,TREX1).Variantcallingandinterpretation identiﬁed in former studies. Regarding mutation responsible for of pathogenicity was performed using the IonReporter v.5.14 alpha thalassemis there are not other published studies in variantanalysis software and theACMG criteria. Romania. Results:Thediagnosticyieldofourgenepanelin23unrelated A. Mitroi: None. C. Brinzan: None. M. Aschie: None. A. patients was about 10% - 2/23 patients had a likely pathogenic Apostol: None. G.Cozaru: None. variant, both in the MEFV gene (c.2084A>G and c.2282G>A) associated with familial Mediterranean fever. A “signiﬁcant” VUS variant in a gene consistent with the clinical phenotype was  P07
.003.CGeneticdiagnosesinpaediatricrheumatologyclinic identiﬁed in additional 10% of cases, one in NLR P12
 gene (c.1054C>T) and TNFRSF1A (c.434A>G). HannahL. Titheradge, EslamAl-Abadi Conclusion:Theseﬁndingsarecomparablewiththosefromthe literatureandsupporttheuseofthistypeofgenetictestinginAIS, Birmingham Women’s and Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, as it helps in establishing the diagnosis of these difﬁcult to diagnoseand rare conditions. Birmingham, United Kingdom. G.Milanovski:None.M.Kirijas:None.B.Dobrevski:None.T. BrnjarchevskaBlazevska:None.O.EﬁnskaMladenovska:None. Introduction: Patients within paediatric rheumatology clinics commonly have features of systemic inﬂammatory disease. This O. Sibinovska: None. T. Arsov: None. K. Stavrikj: None. K. Mironska: None. B.Gjurkova:None. A.Petlichkovski: None. is more commonly multifactorial in nature, however increasingly monogenic diagnoses are made. An accurate diagnosis is importantto optimisepatient management. Method: We review the outcomes from the ﬁrst 3 years of a  P07
.005.A Relationship between BCR-AB L1
 FISH patterns, clonal evolution, and response in CML patients in Bosnia newly formed paediatric rheumatology and genetic multi- andHerzegovina disciplinaryclinic.Whereindicatedgenomictestingwasperformed to try to identify a monogenic cause for the patient’s clinical Erna Islamagic1, Sabira Kurtovic2, Azra Hasic1, Amina Kurtovic- problems. Patients seen had diagnoses of SLE, periodic fever Kozaric3 syndromeandatypicaljuvenileidiopathicarthritisinthemain. Results: Wereviewthe diagnoses madefrom genomic testing in this patient group and the impact on management. Patient 1FacultyofScience,Sarajevo,BosniaandHerzegovina,2Hematology diagnoses have included monogenic auto-inﬂammatory disease, Clinic, Clinical Center of the University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia complement deﬁciency, Fabry disease, XXX syndrome, andHerzegovina,3ClinicalPathology,CytologyandHumanGenetics, camptodactyly-arthropathy-coxa vara-pericarditis syndrome and Clinical Center of the University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and arthropathysecondary to tuftingenteropathy. Herzegovina. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 221 Introduction: BCR-AB L1
 FISH was part of routine diagnostic the panel, 66 genes associated with CHA were evaluated procedureforchronicmyeloidleukaemia(CML)patients;however, concerning diagnostic compatibility with the patients’ clinical prognostic impact of the various signal patterns has not been andlaboratory presentation. widely analysed. The aim of the study was to correlate different Results: The molecular diagnostic rate of this targeted NGS BCR-AB L1
FISHpatterntypestosurvivalprobabilitiesandresponse panelof66geneswas62%(54of87cases).Inthe54caseshaving inCMLpatients. a molecular diagnosis, 57.4% (n=31) were diagnosed with red Materials and Methods: In this study, FISH results and clinical cell membrane protein defects and 42.6% (n=23) with enzyme dataforCML-CPpatients(n=83)treatedintheperiod08/2005-12/ deﬁciencies.Wefound48differentdisease-causingvariantsin12 2019intheFederationofBosniaandHerzegovinawereevaluated. genes (ANK1, SPTB, SPTA1, SL C4
A1, EPB41, ABCB6, AK1, BPGM, Patients were categorised based on the pattern type into Group1 G6PD,HK1, andPKLR). Twenty-three ofthe variantswerenovel. (single patterns 1R1G2F, 1R1G1F, 2R1G1F, 1R2G1F, n=71) and Conclusion: In this study, we achieved a high molecular Group2(complexpatterns,n=12).Patients’variablesincludedTKI diagnostic rate. A targeted NGS panel provides a correct and treatment (imatinib and/or nilotinib), OS, cytogenetic (CCyR) and deﬁnitive diagnosis of patients with CHA. It is essential for the molecular responses (MMR, MR4, and MR5). Survival probabilities appropriate treatment ofthose patients. wereestimatedusingtheKaplan-Meiermethod(log-ranktest). T. Atik: None. E. Isik: None. Y. Aydinok: None. M. Orhan: Results:Weanalysed83patientswithmedianfollow-upof76.5 None. Y. Oymak: None. Z. Karakas: None. N. Sarper: None. C. months. Patients with single and complex patterns were on Albayrak:None.N.Karadas:None.I.Eker:None.S.Unal:None. imatinib (45% vs. 33%), nilotinib (20% vs. 8%), switched from O.Cogulu: None. F.Ozkinay: None. imatinibtonilotinib(24%vs.59%),ordidnotreceiveTKItherapy (11%vs.0%).At60months,OSwassigniﬁcantlydifferentbetween Group1andGroup2(83%vs.25%,p=0.012).Additionally,CCyR  P07
.010.B NGS-based diagnosis of congenital erythrocytosis: rates at 60 months were 76% vs. 0% (p=0.013) and MMR rates extendedtargetedNGSandidentiﬁcationofnovelcandidate were 72% vs. 0% (p=0.042). No signiﬁcant differences were genes found in achievement of MR4 or MR5 in analysed groups (p= 0.107and p=0.256, respectively). Aleša Kristan1, Jana Tomc1,2, Tadeja Režen2, Tanja Kunej3, Rok Conclusions: Our study showed that complex BCR-AB L1
 FISH Količ4, Andrej Vuga4, Martina Fink5, Saša Anžej Doma5, Irena patternswereassociatedwithworseresponseandprogressionin PreložnikZupan5,6,Tadej Pajič5,7, NatašaDebeljak1 CMLpatients inBosnia. E. Islamagic: None. S. Kurtovic: None. A. Hasic: None. A. 1Medical Centre for Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry, Kurtovic-Kozaric: None. Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Centre for Functional Genomics and Bio-Chips, Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana,  P07
.007.C Identiﬁcation of the molecular etiology in con- Slovenia, 3Department of Animal Science, Biotechnical Faculty, genitalhemolyticanemiasbeyondhemoglobinopathiesusing University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4Kemomed Research atargetednext-generation sequencing panel and Development, Kemomed Ltd, Kranj, Slovenia, 5Clinical Depart- mentofHematology,UniversityMedicalCentreLjubljana,Ljubljana, TahirAtik1,EsraIsik1,YesimAydinok1,MehmetFatihOrhan2,Yesim Slovenia, 6Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Oymak3, Zeynep Karakas4, Nazan Sarper5, Canan Albayrak6, Nihal University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 7Clinical Institute of Karadas1, Ibrahim Eker7, Selma Unal8, Ozgur Cogulu1, Ferda Genomic Medicine, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Ozkinay1 Slovenia. 1EgeUniversityFacultyofMedicine,Department ofPediatrics,Izmir, Introduction: Congenital erythrocytosis is a rare haematological Turkey, 2Sakarya University Faculty of Medicine, Department of disorderwithabnormallyhigherythrocytecount.Thediagnostics Pediatrics, Sakarya, Turkey, 3Dr. Behcet Uz Children’s Hospital, ishighlychallengingduetotheheterogenicgeneticbackground. Division of Pediatric Hematology, Izmir, Turkey, 4Istanbul University Patientsareusuallyscreenedforvariantsinninegenesinvolvedin Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul, Turkey, erythropoiesis and oxygen homeostasis regulation, however in 5Kocaeli University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, only 30% the genetic cause is identiﬁed. Our aim was to extend Kocaeli, Turkey, 6Ondokuz Mayis University Faculty of Medicine, current genetic testing of patients with idiopathic erythrocytosis Department of Pediatrics, Samsun, Turkey, 7Afyon Kocatepe andto discover newdisease-driven pathways andgenes. University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Afyon, Material and Methods: Targeted NGS covering 24 erythrocy- Turkey, 8Mersin University Faculty of Medicine, Department of tosis and15 haemochromatosis-associated geneswas performed Pediatrics,Mersin, Turkey. on 40 patients, selected based on the national diagnostic algorithm for erythrocytosis. Additional disease-driven mechan- Aim:Congenitalhemolyticanemias(CHA)areagroupofdisorders ismswereexploredthroughareviewoftheliteratureandseveral showing genetic heterogeneity caused by mutations in genes tools, including Reactome, String and GeneCards. encoding proteins involved in the production or structure of Results:TargetedNGSidentiﬁedthepathogenicvariantinone erythrocytes. Despite advances in next generation sequencing patient, c.1609G>A (p.Gly537Arg) in the EPA S1
 gene, responsible technologies, approximately 60% of patients with CHA can be for the development of hereditary erythrocytosis type 4. Genetic molecularlydiagnosed.Thisstudyaimstoevaluatetheutilityofa screeningofotherpatientsrevealedseveralVUSbelow1%inthe targeted NGSpanelinCHA. European population, that could be the single cause for Method: Eighty-seven CHA cases from 84 families referred to erythrocytosis or could have a combine effect. In silico we our center for molecular analysis were enrolled in the study. identiﬁed several new pathways, containing genes involved in Participating physicians recorded patients’ demographics, family epigenetic modiﬁcations, sumoylation and nuclear-cytoplasmic history, and laboratory test results onto the database after shuttling, which might inﬂuence the mechanisms of disease receiving informed consent from the patients/legal representa- development. tives. Molecular analysis was performed using an NGS panel Conclusion:TargetedNGSrevealedonepathogenicvariantand including4811genes(TruSightOneDisease®PanelbyIllumina).In severalVUS,thatrequirefurtherfunctionalassessment. However, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 222 the inclusion of novel genes in current diagnostic solutions or Medical Center, Tbilisi, Georgia, 7Center of Medical Genetics and broaderapproaches,likeWGSorWES,areneededforpromptand PrimaryHealth Care,Yerevan, Armenia. accurate diagnosis of congenital erythrocytosis. ARRS grant  L3
- 9279, P1
-0390 and Young Researcherfunding. Introduction:FamilialMediterraneanFever(FMF)isanautosomal A. Kristan: None. J. Tomc: None. T. Režen: None. T. Kunej: recessive hereditary disorder caused by mutation in MEFV gene. None. R. Količ: None. A. Vuga: None. M. Fink: None. S. Anžej Higher prevalence has been estimated in populations with Doma: None. I. Preložnik Zupan: None. T. Pajič: None. N. Mediterranean ancestry (Armenian, Arab, Italian, Jewish, Greek Debeljak:None. and Turkish). Prevalence of FMF has not been assessed in Georgian population; however, it is estimated to be high since Georgia borders Turkey and Armenia. The study aims to analyze  P07
.011.C A case report of an atypical FI P1
L1 -PDGFRA fusion thefrequencyofMEFVmutationsinindividualssuspectedforFMF inapatient withhypereosinophilia and determination of SAA1 polymorphism in diagnosed patients, inorderto estimateFMFprevalence inGeorgia. Sadiye Ekinci1, Güldane Cengiz Seval2, Halil Gürhan Karabulut1, Materialandmethods:118Georgianindividualssuspectedfor Arzu Vicdan1, Seher Yüksel3, Işınsu Kuzu3, Günhan Gürman2, Timur FMF were screened for MEFV gene mutation variants M694V, Tuncalı1 V726A, M680I(G/C), M680I(G/A), F479L, 
E148 Q, M694I, R761H, 
P369 S, 1692del, K695R, A744S using PCR methods. SAA1 1Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara University Faculty of polymorphism wasanalyzedin conﬁrmedpatients. Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 2Department of Hematology, Ankara Results: From 118 patients, FMF cases were conﬁrmed in 45 University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 3Department of (38.1%),while22(18.6%)carriedasingleMEFVmutation.From112 Pathology,AnkaraUniversityFacultyofMedicine,Ankara,Turkey. alleles with detected mutations, frequency distribution of MEFV mutations is as follows: M694V 56.3%, M680I(G/C) 11.6%, V726A Introduction: FI
P1 L1
-PDGFRA fusion, which originates from an 10.7%,  E148
Q 7.1%, R761H 6.3%, M694I 3.6%, F479L 2.7%, K695R interstitial deletion in 4q12, is observed in diverse eosinophilia- 1.8%.4variants(M680I(G/A), P369
S,1692delandA744S)werenot associated hematologic disorders. In FI P1
L1 -PDGFRA fusion detected. From affected 45 individuals, homozygous forms were protein, the JM domain of PDGFRA that is known to serve as an detectedin33.3%(M694V31.1%,M680I(G/C)2.2%)ofthecases.5 autoinhibitory function is deleted and the tyrosine kinase region affected individuals (11.1%) showed α/α polymorphism of SAA1 comes under the control of FI
P1 L1
 promoter causing a gene. constitutive kinase activation. Here, we present a case with Conclusion: Based on study results the most frequent MEFV hypereosinophilia in whom an atypical FI P1
L1 -PDGFRA fusion genemutationisM694V.MutationfrequencydistributionofMEFV pattern in bone marrow specimen was detected. The case was a gene in Georgian patients is similar to Armenian and Turkish 77 years-old-male with hypereosinophilia for four years and with populations. This suggests the importance of prevalence analysis mild cutaneous symptoms. In pathological examination, it was ofFMFinGeorgian population. conﬁrmedthattherewasnobonemarrowinﬁltrationthat might D. Agladze: None. L. Margvelashvili: None. S. Iordanishvili: be seen in secondary eosinophilia and in other hematological None. M. Ioseliani: None. T. Mikeladze: None. H. Hayrapetyan: neoplasms.Twopreviousanalysesfromperipheralbloodsamples None.T.Sarkisian: None.O. Kvlividze: None. failedtoshow theexistenceof FI
P1 L1
-PDGFRA fusion. Materials and Methods: Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used for the detection of FI P1
L1 - 
P07 .014.B A novel variant in SERPING1 is associated with a PDGFRA rearrangement and the result was conﬁrmed by sanger recessiveformofhereditaryangioedemainaconsanguineous sequencing. Brazilian family Results:DirectsequencingoftheRT-PCRproductrevealedthat normally spliced FI
P1 L1
 exon 10 fused with PDGFRA sequence Luana Sella Motta Maia1, Fernanda Leonel Nunes2, Marina following the genomic breakpoint within PDGFRA exon 12. Mendonça Dias2, L.Karla Arruda2, Bettina Burger1, Sven Cichon1,3 Interestingly,an-inframedeepintronicsequenceof30bpderived fromFI P1
L1 intron10wasobservedbetweenthetwogenesinthe 1UniversityofBaselandUniversityHospitalBasel,Basel,Switzerland, fusiontranscript. 2University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 3Institute of Conclusions:Forcasesinwhichthefusioncannotbedetected Neuroscience andMedicine (INM-1), Jülich, Germany. from the peripheral blood, bone marrow analysing should be considered, given the fact that patients with FI
P1 L1
-PDGFRA Introduction: Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is characterized by fusionbeneﬁtfrom imatinibtreatment. recurrentepisodesofsevereandoftenlife-threatening,non-pruritic S.Ekinci:None.G.CengizSeval:None.H.G.Karabulut:None. subcutaneousandsubmucosaledema.Differentclinicalandgenetic A. Vicdan: None. S. Yüksel: None. I. Kuzu: None. G. Gürman: subtypes exist, and the most common forms (HAE types I/II) are None.T.Tuncalı:None. causedbydominantvariantsintheSERPING1gene,resultingin C1
- inhibitor ( C1
-INH) deﬁciency.  C1
-INH is a multifunctional serine protease inhibitor (serpin) that controls proteases in multiple  P07
.012.D MEFV gene mutation frequency in Georgian FMF importantplasmaticpathwaysincludinginﬂammation.Itsdeﬁciency patients leads to uncontrolled activation of the kinin-kallikrein system resultinginanextendedgenerationofbradykinin. Dodo Agladze1,2,3, Lali Margvelashvili2, Saba Iordanishvili4, Maka Materials and Methods: Two sisters from consanguineous, Ioseliani5, Teimuraz Mikeladze6, Hasmik Hayrapetyan7, Tamara unaffected parents were severely affected by HAE since adoles- Sarkisian7, Oleg Kvlividze3 cence(13yrs.)andyoungadulthood(28yrs.).Noothermemberof this large, Brazilian family presented any symptoms of HAE. We 1Research Institute of Clinical Medicine, Tbilisi, Georgia, 2Pediatric extracted gDNA from whole blood of 34 family members and Surgery Center KidCo, Tbilisi, Georgia, 3School of Medicine, New sequenced thecoding regionof theSERPING1gene. Vision University, Tbilisi, Georgia, 4Petre Shotadze Tbilisi Medical Results: In both symptomatic sisters, we found a homozygous Academy,Tbilisi,Georgia,5NewHospitals,Tbilisi,Georgia,6Caucasus missensevariantinexon6(c.964G>A),resultinginanaminoacid EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 223 exchange(p.Val322Met).Fourteenfamilymembers(includingthe SouthernFederal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation. sisters’parents)wereheterozygouscarriersofthevariant.Careful clinical re-examination of these individuals excluded any HAE Background:Featuresoftheclinicalcourseandthepersistenceof symptoms. herpesvirusinfectionsareassociatedwithboththeheterogeneity Conclusions: HAE I/II typically is an autosomal dominant of the pathogen and the person immune status. Cytokine genes conditioncausedby morethan600describedSERPING1variants, andtheirSNPsaffecttheresistancetoherpesvirusinfectionsand and there are only very few reports of HAE variants acting in a features of the viral persistence. In the current work, we recessivefashion.Thenovelrecessivevariantidentiﬁedinseveral investigated the SNPs of the I L10
, I L2
 and their association with members of our Brazilian family gives us the unique opportunity theimmunestatusofrecurrentrespiratoryinfection(RRI)children. tostudythefunctionaleffectofthe C1
-INHp.Val322Metvarianton Material and methods: DNA samples isolated from the thecontrolof thekinin-kallikrein system. peripheral blood of 76 RRI children were used. ELISA was used L. Sella Motta Maia: None. F. Leonel Nunes: None. M. fordetectionofIgGtoCMVandEBV.Allele-speciﬁcPCRwasused Mendonça Dias: None. L. Arruda: None. B. Burger: None. S. to analyze the rs2069762 and rs1800896. The method of ﬂow Cichon:None. cytometrywasusedtodeterminedifferenttypesoflymphocytes. Results:Signiﬁcantdifferencesinthefrequenciesofgenotypes for the polymorphism -1082G>A of the I L10
 gene between  P07
.015.C Two new cases diagnosed with Hermansky-Pudlak seronegative children and children with IgG to EBV were found. Syndrome The genotype -1082AA I L10
 was dominated in group of seronegative children. A direct correlation was established Ceren Alavanda1, Esra Arslan Ates2, Bilgen Bilge Geckinli1, Senol between the number of B cells and the GG genotype of the Demir2, Hamza Polat1, Fatma Uguzdogan1, Mehmet Ali Soylemez1, I L10
 gene in children with EBV and CMV (<0,05). The inverse PinarAta1,Ahmet Arman1 correlationwasfoundbetweentheGGgenotypeandthenumber ofNKcells inchildren withEBVand CMV (<0,05). 1Marmara University School of Medicine, Medical Genetics Depart- Conclusion: Features of the genotype for cytokine genes can ment, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Marmara University Pendik Research and affecttheratioofdifferentclassesoftheimmunesystemcellsand, Training Hospital, Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul, Turkey. accordingly, the formation of immunity to herpes viruses. This studywasfundedbytheMinistryofScienceandHigherEducation Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS) is a rare autosomal recessive oftheRussian Federation #0852-2020-0028. pleiotropic disease. Its predicted prevalence is 1-9/1.000.000. It is Y. Makarova: None. A. Alexandrova: None. E. Mashkina: characterized with oculocutaneous albinism(OCA), bleeding dia- None.O. Lyangasova: None. thesis(BD), and inﬂammatory bowel disease(IBD). Among ten different subtypes, HPS-1 is the most common and severe form. Pulmonary ﬁbrosis can be seen in HPS-1, HPS-2, and HPS-4  P07
.017.A Retrospective review of genetic testing for inher- patients. HPS-related gene products take part in BLOCs (biogen- itedbone marrow failuresyndromes esis of lysosome-related organelle complexes) and are important forbiogenesisofmelanosomeandplateletdensegranules.Thirty- Elina Hirvonen1, Päivi Kokkonen1, Emma Mårtensson1, Hatice seven and fourty-nine-year-old unrelated male patients with the Duzkale1, Joe Jacher2, Alicia Scocchia2, Kim Gall2, Zoe Powis2, Inka clinicaldiagnosisofHPSwerereferredtoourclinic.Theirparents Saarinen1, Johanna Sistonen1, Juha Koskenvuo1, Lotta Koskinen1, both had consanguineous marriages. Younger patient had OCA, Tero-Pekka P.Alastalo2 BD, nystagmus and IBD. Additionally, he had mental retardation (MR) and renal failure. He had no history of lung disease. A-CGH 1Blueprint Genetics, a Quest Diagnostics Company, Espoo, Finland, wasperformedduetoMR,whichisanunexpectedﬁndinginHPS, 2Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest Diagnostics Company, Seattle, WA, and was found to be normal. Older patient also had OCA, BD, USA. nystagmus and IBD. Unlike the ﬁrst patient, this patient had normalintelligenceandwasdiagnosedwithpulmonaryﬁbrosisat Introduction: Inherited bone marrow failure syndromes (IBMFS) the age of 44. HPS-related genes were sequenced at are characterized by aplastic anemia, congenital malformations, Illumina NovaSeq Platform. Homozygous c.972delC (p. and increased risk to develop malignancies. Determining the Met325Trpfs*6) and c.1189delC (p.Gln397Serfs*2) mutations in molecular etiology allows for personalized patient management, the HP S1
 gene were detected in the ﬁrst and second patient, surveillance, and recurrence risk estimation. Next-generation respectively.Bothwererecurrentmutations,previouslyassociated sequencing (NGS) panel testing is a powerful diagnostic tool. withHPStype1.Hereinwereportclinicalandgeneticﬁndingsof Broad inclusion of genes associated with IBMFS along with copy two patients with HPS. Although HPS is rare syndrome clinical number variation (CNV) analysis is expected to signiﬁcantly ﬁndings are typical for diagnosis. Identifying the subtype with contribute to diagnosticyield. molecularstudiesisimportantforpatient’sfollow-up.Ourpatients Materials and Methods: To determine the diagnostic efﬁcacy will contribute the phenotype-genotype correlations in this of a broad panel test, we reviewed results from IBMFS patients syndrome. whounderwentBoneMarrowFailureSyndromepaneltesting.The C.Alavanda:None.E.ArslanAtes:None.B.Geckinli:None.S. 135-gene test included sequence variant, CNV, and targeted Demir: None. H. Polat: None. F. Uguzdogan: None. M. noncoding variant analysis. CNV analysis included a proprietary Soylemez: None.P. Ata: None.A. Arman:None. method for exon-level CNVs. Variant interpretation followed ACMGguidelines. Results:Moleculardiagnosiswasestablishedin18.6%(82/442)of  P07
.016.D Analysis of I L2
, I L10
 genes polymorphisms in patients.CNVscontributedtothediagnosisof17.1%patients;64.3% seronegativetoherpesviruseschildrenwithrecurrentrespira- of CNVs were intragenic. Diagnostic variants were identiﬁed in 34 toryinfection genes, with 44% identiﬁed in a single patient. The most common genesindiagnosticreportsincludedFANCA(20.7%)associatedwith Yulia Makarova, Angela Alexandrova, Elena Mashkina, Olga Fanconi anemia and SBDS (14.6%) associated with Shwachman- Lyangasova Diamond syndrome. Although variant calling in the SBDS gene is EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 224 complicated by segmental duplication, sequence variants were also induces distinct changes in the antiviral proﬁle of each identiﬁedandconﬁdentlymappedtotheSBDSgene. individual cellline. Conclusions: This study demonstrates that NGS panel testing KP(grantnumber130622),DCandNG(grantnumber122000) withCNVdetectioncontributestothediagnosticyieldamongIBMFS aresupported by theNationalResearch Foundation. patients.Pathogenic variants in SBDS were a commonﬁnding and D.A.Cosser:None.K.C.Perumal:None.A.O.Kama:None.N.L. testing of this gene should be considered when ordering genetic Gentle:None. testingonindividualswith,orsuspectedtohave,anIBMFS. E. Hirvonen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; BlueprintGenetics,aQuestDiagnosticsCompany.P.Kokkonen:  P07
.019.C Two diseases, one patient. The importance of A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics, cytogenetic andFISH inHematology a Quest Diagnostics Company. E. Mårtensson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics, a Quest Filipa Seixas, Pedro Sousa, Regina Arantes, Marta Souto, Patricia Diagnostics Company. H. Duzkale: A. Employment (full or Ferraz,Osvaldo Moutinho, Manuel Cunha,Rosário PintoLeite part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics, a Quest Diagnostics Company. J. Jacher: A. Employment (full or part-time); CentroHospitalarTrásosMonteseAltoDouro,VilaReal,Portugal. Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest Diagnostics Com- pany.A.Scocchia:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; Myelodysplastic syndrome is an inefﬁcient cellular process of BlueprintGeneticsInc,aQuestDiagnosticsCompany.K.Gall:A. hematopoiesis. It is a syndrome of cellular proliferation and Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics apoptosis, and it’s manifested by a hypercellular bone marrow Inc,aQuestDiagnosticsCompany.Z.Powis:A.Employment(full with cytopenias and affects multiple lineages. This syndrome or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest starts with a genetic mutation in a multipotent hematopoietic Diagnostics Company. I. Saarinen: A. Employment (full or progenitorcell.Thisclinicalreportisaboutafemale,82yearsold, part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics, a Quest Diagnostics without relevant personal history, who has normochromic Company. J. Sistonen: A. Employment (full or part-time); normocyticanemiawithhemoglobinof8.2g/dL.Theendoscopic Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics, a Quest Diagnostics Company. study with a biopsy of duodenal polyp, showed a follicular J. Koskenvuo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; lymphoma. To study follicular lymphoma we performed a bone Blueprint Genetics,aQuest Diagnostics Company.L. Koskinen: marrow study to rule out the presence of atypical lymphocytes A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics, and bone marrow involvement. Through the morphology, a Quest Diagnostics Company. T.P. Alastalo: A. Employment cytogenetics and FISH studies, myelodysplastic syndrome was (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest diagnosed. Also, the t(14;18) was executed, which is specif for Diagnostics Company. follicular lymphoma.In conclusion, this patient had one clone of del(11)(q22q35) and another with del(5)(q12q33) conﬁrmed by FISH.TheFISHanalysistot(14;18)wasnegative.Isolateddeletion  P07
.018.BPMAinducesbothcommonanddistinctgenesand of chromosome 5q (frequency 72%) or del11q (represent 4% of pathwaysacross heterogeneous promonocytic celllines cases)bothhaveagoodprognosis.Intheliterature,thesepatients have been treated with 5q- isolated syndrome, therefore the Duncan A. Cosser, Kelda C. Perumal, Asavela O. Kama, Nikki L. patient was proposed to start treatment with Lenalidomide.The Gentle presenceofthesetwodistinctdiseasesisanuncommonsituation. Cytogenetics plays a signiﬁcant role in supporting hemato- University of theWitwatersrand, Johannesburg, SouthAfrica. oncology allowing an accurate diagnosis and consequently targeted therapy Introduction: Monocytes and monocyte-derived macrophages F. Seixas: None. P. Sousa:None. R.Arantes: None. M. Souto: exhibit extensive heterogeneity with respect to their phenotypes None. P. Ferraz: None. O. Moutinho: None. M. Cunha: None. R. and functions. This is mirrored in vitro by the promonocytic cell PintoLeite: None. lines commonly used to study the monocyte-to-macrophage transition. We therefore sought to characterise the RNA abun- dance proﬁles of three such cell lines, in order to identify genes  P07
.020.DImmunologicalproﬁlingofpatientswithrareshort and pathways core to this process, as well as those uniquely stature,opticnerveatrophy,andPelger-Huetanomaly(SOPH) involvedin eachcellline. syndrome Materials and Methods: RNA sequencing data was obtained across three time points to examine differences in the RNA Leonid Zhozhikov1, Ayaan Ivanov1, Roza Ivanova1,2, Aitalina abundance proﬁles of H L60
, U937, and THP-1 cells treated with Sukhomyasova1,2, Filipp Vasilev1,Nadezda Maksimova1 and without phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) to induce differentiationtoamacrophagestate.Differentialgeneexpression 1Laboratory of Molecular Medicine and Human Genetics, North- analysis across time points was performed using DESeq2 v1.30.0 Eastern Federal University (NEFU), Yakutsk, Russian Federation, andpathwayanalysisofdifferentiallyexpressedgeneswithineach 2Republican Hospital #1,Yakutsk, Russian Federation. celllinewas performedusing clusterProﬁler v3.18.1. Results:Weidentifygenesuniquelyexpressedwithinboththe Introduction:Pathogenicvariantintheneuroblastomaampliﬁed differentiatedandundifferentiatedstatesofeachcellline,aswell sequence(NBAS)genewasdescribedintheYakutpopulationasa as a core set of genes that characterise the change in RNA cause of short stature, optic-nerve atrophy, and the Pelger-Huet abundance associated with PMA-induced monocyte-to- anomaly of granulocytes (SOPH) syndrome with autosomal macrophage differentiation. Pathway analysis of these gene sets recessive inheritance (OMIM #614800). Other mutations in NBAS reveals the transcription factors and chromatin remodelers genehavebeenreportedtocausemultisystemicdisorderswitha involvedin thisprocess. wide range of phenotypes including recurrent acute liver failure, Conclusions: A core RNA abundance signature is associated skeletal dysplasia, eyes pathologies and immunological abnorm- with PMA-induced differentiation of promonocytic cell lines to a alities. Although SOPH patients developed a frequent respiratory macrophage state. However, differentiation of different cell lines infection,immunological parameters werenotexamined. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 225 Materials and Methods: Sampling was carried out from Switzerland, 4Precision Medicine Unit, Lausanne University Hospital unrelated Yakut patients with SOPH syndrome and healthy andUniversity of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. individuals. The percent and number of immunocompetent cells were determined by ﬂow cytometry. Immunoglobulin serum Introduction - Several human pathogens are able to establish levelsweredeterminedusingELISAkits.Inexperiments,weused chronic, sometimes life-long infections. Even if they are consid- theequipment ofNEFU’s Center forCollectiveUse. ered latent in the majority of cases, these infections can trigger Results: Serum immunoglobulins (IgA, IgM, IgG, IgE) were somedegreeoflocalorsystemicimmuneresponse,resultingina signiﬁcantly reduced in SOPH patients in comparison with chronic state of low-grade inﬂammation. There remains an controls, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells amounts were unremarkable. incomplete understanding of the potential contribution of the Patients with SOPH syndrome were characterized by low interactions between persistent infections and human genetic percentage and number of CD16+CD56+ NK cells and slightly variationon chronic low-grade inﬂammation. lower levelsof CD19+Bcells. Materialandmethods-Wesearchedforpotentialassociations Conclusions:Wesuggestthatimpairedimmunologicalfeatures betweenseropositivityforatotalof24persistentpathogensand contributetorecurrentinfectionsinSOPHpatients.Wewouldlike the plasma levels of the inﬂammatory biomarker C-reactive to emphasize that physicians should pay attention to immuno- protein (CRP), using data collected in the context of the UK deﬁciency in SOPH patients to start appropriate treatment. Biobank and the CoLaus Study, two large population-based Functional analysis of the mutational impact on immunocompe- cohorts of European ancestry. We performed linear model tentcellsisessentialtounderstandthepathophysiologyofNBAS analyses for each antigen, including as covariates the demo- disorders. Grant references: This work was supported by the graphic and clinical factors associated with CRP as well as Ministry of Education and Science of Russian Federation (Project polygenic risk scores for CRP (PRS-CRP), calculated separately on No.FSRG-2020-0014). eachcohort. L. Zhozhikov: None. A. Ivanov: None. R. Ivanova: None. A. Results: We observed increased CRP levels with each increase Sukhomyasova: None.F. Vasilev: None. N.Maksimova: None. inPRS-CRPquartiles.Wealsofoundevidenceforaninvolvement of Chlamydia trachomatis (p=0.004), Helicobacter pylori (p= 0.018), Cytomegalovirus (p=0.025) and Kaposi’s sarcoma-  P07
.021.A Epidemiological of Nosocomial Infection and associated herpesvirus (p=0.041) infection in the determination antimicrobial resistance pattern among different groups of ofincreased plasmalevels of CRP. bacteria isolated fromsomehospitals Jeddah, KSA Conclusions - The results of this study improve our under- standing of the relationship between chronic, subclinical infec- Molook Al-Ghamdi1, Effat Al-Judaibi1, Mohammed Al-Rashede2, tions and human health. These could lead to better disease AwatifAl-Judaibi1 prediction models and to the identiﬁcation of potential novel targets for diagnostic or therapeutic development. Grant refer- 1universityofjeddah,Jeddah,SaudiArabia,2MaternityandChildren ence:#175603(Swiss NationalScience Foundation) HospitalAlmosadya, Jeddah,Saudi Arabia. F. Hodel: None. O. Naret: None. P. Marques-Vidal: None. P. Vollenweider:None. J. Fellay: None. Nosocomialinfectionscanbedescribedasthosethatoccurwithin 48 hours of entry to hospital, 3 days of discharge or 30 days of surgery. These infections lead to high morbidity and mortality,  P07
.023.C Identiﬁcation of copy number variants relevant to prolonged hospital stays, increased use of antibiotics, and primaryimmunodeﬁciency from exome sequencingdata increased costs of healing process. Our study was aim to investigate the prevalence, distribution, and antimicrobial sus- Rensheng Wan1, Maximilian Schieck1, Winfried Hofmann1, Philipp ceptibility rates of MDR bacteria in patients with NI from some H.B.Knopf1,MicheleProietti2,1,AndresCaballeroGarciadeOteyza2, hospitals in Jeddah city. Bacterial identiﬁcation and susceptibility Thomas Illig1, BodoGrimbacher2,1, Doris Steinemann1 testing were performed using modern methods from the microbiology section. The results revealed that based on the 1Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2University of percentage distribution ofthe specimens,thehighest number of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. isolates for E. coli, K. pneumoniae and S. aureus. Was from urine and HVS for E. coli, from urine and blood for K. pneumoniae and Introduction: Primary antibody deﬁciencies (PADs) comprise a fromHVSandwoundforS.aureus.Inordertocontrolandreduce group of heterogeneous disorders with defects in B cell the prevalence of these infection within healthcare settings. we development or function. A genetic cause is often suspected, recommend for the importance of surveillance and effective howeverpathogenicsequencevariantsaretypicallyfoundinless infection control strategies to be implemented among the than 30% of PAD patients. This study focuses on copy number hospitals andhealthcare facilities inSaudi Arabia. variants (CNVs) and whether the diagnostic yield might be M. Al-Ghamdi: None. E. Al-Judaibi: None. M. Al-Rashede: improved by routineCNV detection. None.A. Al-Judaibi: None. Materials and Methods: Potential CNVs were called with the ClinCNV algorithm from whole exome sequencing (WES) data from 200 PAD patients. Stringent ﬁltering based on 430 loci  P07
.022.B The impact of persistent infections and human related to PID, internal quality control parameters, and the genetic variation on chronicinﬂammation database of genomic variants. Independent validation of CNVs wasdone bySNP-array. Flavia Hodel1,2, Olivier Naret1,2, Pedro Marques-Vidal3, Peter Results: A total of 24 CNVs in 23 patients were validated. This Vollenweider3,Jacques Fellay1,2,4 suggests presence of potentially clinically meaningful CNVs in 11.5% of this PAD cohort. Two patients had heterozygous 1Global Health Institute, School of Life Sciences, Lausanne, Switzer- microdeletions in chromosome 22q11.2. Abnormal lymphocyte land, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, proliferation, hypogammaglobulinemia, and autoimmune hemo- 3Service of Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, Lausanne lytic anemia observed in both patients seem accountable to University Hospital and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 22q11.2microdeletion.Twopatientshadhomozygousdeletionsof EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 226 ICOS exons 2 and 3, representing a known founder variant. cartilage and bone. RA is considered as a multifactorial disease Consistent with ICOS deﬁciency, patients had hypogammaglobu- triggered by a genetic predisposition and environmental factors. linemia, splenomegaly, and thrombocytopenia. Another 19 Unfavorable alleles of various genes have a relatively small patients had CNVs in a broad range of PID-related genes, e.g. inﬂuenceonthediseaseriskwhentheyappearindividually,butin LRBA,TNFAI P3
, PSTPI P1
,MEFV,FANCA, TYK2,and IKBKG. combination,they predisposean individual to RAdevelopment. Conclusions: CNV analysis from WES data has potential to Materialsandmethods:Genotypingof85SNPsand6complete increase the diagnostic yield in the PAD cohort substantially. geneswasperformedusingNGSonatargetpanel(IAD177464_185) Functional analysis of newly identiﬁed CNVs needs to follow. in 125 patients with RA. The allele frequencies from the GnomAD Grants: Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under Ger- base for Caucasian were used as control. Statistical analysis was many’s Excellence Strategy - EXC 2155 - Projektnummer performed by STATISTICA version 13.5.0. The result values were 390874280.R.Wanholds aDAAD scholarship. correctedusingtheBenjamini-Hochbergmethod. R. Wan: None. M. Schieck: None. W. Hofmann: None. P.H.B. Results: According to our data, the alleles HLA-DRB1*04, HLA- Knopf:None.M.Proietti:None.A.CaballeroGarciadeOteyza: DRB1*01, HLA-B27, PTPN22 (rs2476601), TNF (rs1800629), TPMT None.T.Illig:None.B.Grimbacher:None.D.Steinemann:None. (rs2842934), I L4
 (rs2243250) and genotypes HLA-DRB1*04*04, HLA-DRB1*01*16, PTPN22 (rs2476601), TPMT (rs2842934) were signiﬁcantly associated with the development of the disease in  P07
.024.D PADI4 and PADI2 enhance collagen-initiated patients. We investigated of associations with clinical criteria inﬂammatoryresponses (DA S28
-CRP, HAQ-DI, CDAI) and biochemical factors (ACPA formation, RF, CRP). We have shown that the PADI4 genotypes AkariSuzuki, TakumiShibuya, Kazuhiko Yamamoto (rs11203367, rs2240340, rs11203366, rs874881) are signiﬁcantly associated with the baseline levels of DA S28
-CRP, HAQ-DI, CDAI, RIKEN,Yokohama, Japan. genotypes I L23
R (rs7530511), TNFRSF1A (rs748004, rs2228144) withthelevelofACPA,thegenotypesDHODH(rs3213422),MTHFR Previously, peptidylarginine deiminase type 4 (PADI4) was (rs180113) with the concentration of CRP, and the genotypes identiﬁed as a susceptibility gene for Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) I L2
RA (rs2104286), IRAK3 (rs11541076) and I L4
R (rs1801275) with bygenome-wideassociationstudies.Peptidylcitrullineisatarget thelevelofRF. antigenof anti-citrullinated peptide antibodies(ACPAs), and only Conclusions:ApplicationoftargetedNGSpanelcontributesto PADs (translated protein from PADI genes) can provide peptidyl expanded genotyping to identify risk groups among Russian citrulline via modiﬁcation of protein substrates. Also the distribu- patientswith RA. tionofPADI4andPADI2hasoverlapinimmunecells.Theaimof E.A. Vetchinkina: None. D.S. Mikhaylenko: A. Employment this study is to investigate the relationship between PADI4 gene (full or part-time); Modest; Ministry of Science and Higher and PADI2 gene in the progression of RA. To clarify the EducationoftheRussianFederation,Ref.No.RFMEFI60518X0003. physiological function of PADI4 and PADI2 in RA, we used E.B. Kuznetsova: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; collagen-inducedarthritis(CIA),knownasaRAmodelmouse.We Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian examined that localization of PAD4 and PAD2 protein was Federation, Ref. No. RFMEFI60518X0003. E.A. Alekseeva: A. indicated by immunohistochemistry in CIA mice. We also Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Ministry of Science and measured expression of Padi genes and various inﬂammatory Higher Education of the Russian Federation, Ref. No. RFME- cytokines in immune cells by real-time TaqMan assay and ELISA, FI60518X0003. I.V. Bure: A. Employment (full or part-time); respectively. We generated PADI4−/− and PADI2−/− mice and Modest; Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian performed experimental arthritis. We demonstrated that the Federation, Ref. No. RFMEFI60518X0003. B. Research Grant clinical disease score was signiﬁcantly decreased in PADI4−/− (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending mice and PADI4 expression was induced by CII immunization. In grantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;Grantfromthe PADI4−/−micesera,serumanti-typeIIcollagen(CII)IgM,IgG,and Russian Science Foundation, Ref. No. 20-75-10117. M.V. Nemt- inﬂammatory cytokine levels were also signiﬁcantly decreased sova: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Ministry of compared with those in wild-type mice sera. Interestingly, PADI2 Scienceand Higher Educationof theRussian Federation, Ref. No. expression was compensationally induced in CD11b+ cells of RFMEFI60518X0003. PADI4-/-mice.WeexaminedthattheclinicaldiseasescoreofCIA mimceandexpressionlevelsofPadigenesinPADI2−/−CIAmice. It appears that PADI4 and PADI2 enhance collagen-initiated  P07
.026.B A very rare case of immunodeﬁciency with inﬂammatory responses. We are currently working on a double autoinﬂammation knockout mouse. A.Suzuki: None. T.Shibuya:None. K. Yamamoto: None. Mihaela T. Bataneant1, Adela Chirita-Emandi2, Estera Boeriu2, Mihaela Baica2, Andreea Beloia2,Patricia Urtila2  P07
.025.A Genotyping of Russian patients with RA using the 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Victor Babes", Romania, targetedNGS panel Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Victor Babes", Timisoara,Romania. Ekaterina A. Vetchinkina1, Dmitriy S. Mikhaylenko1,2, Ekaterina B. Kuznetsova1,2, Ekaterina A. Alekseeva1, Irina V. Bure1, Marina V. Introduction: Infection with recurrent fever is very suggestive for Nemtsova1,2 primary immunodeﬁciency, but immunodeﬁciency associated with autoinﬂammationisveryrarerecognized.Casepresentation.A1year 1First Moscow State Medical University named I.M. Sechenov, old female, from non-consanguineous parents and no signiﬁcant Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Center for Medical Genetic, familyhistorywasadmittedforsuspicionofimmunodeﬁciency.Since Moscow, RussianFederation. 3 months of age, after the vaccination, she presented at each 2-3 weeks fever, vomiting and diarrhea for 5-10 days. Clinical exam Introduction:Rheumatoidarthritis(RA)isasystemicautoimmune revealed a Down sd. like face, psychomotor delay, microcephaly. diseasecharacterizedbysynovialinﬂammationanddestructionof Laboratory tests showed a microcytic hypochromic anemia with EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 227 normal ferritin conﬁrmed as sideroblastic anemia by bone marrow O. Martinez-Arroyo: None. A. Ortega: None. J. Perez- aspiration, variable leucocyte(2200 - 8000/μL), neutrophil(630-4500/ Hernandez:None.A.Flores:None.J.Redon:None.M.J.Forner: μL) and lymphocyte count(1180-3500/μL), negative coprocultures None.R. Cortes:None. and coproantigenes, hypogammaglobulinemia(1,7%), a C reactive protein>100mg/L.Downsd.,celiacdisease,hypothyroidism,cystic ﬁbrosis,Schwachmann-Diamondsd,IBDwereexcluded.Immunolo-  P07
.028.D Association toll-like receptor TLR2 and TLR9 gene gical explorations showed low IgA, IgG and IgM, poor response to polymorphism and carriage of Staphylococcus aureus in vaccination,BlymphopeniaandlowswitchedmemoryBcells.Taking children withrecurrentrespiratory infections in account the early onset, hypogammaglobulinemia and periodic fever with the similar picture we performed WES that revealed InnaPokudina, Elizaveta Peshehodko doubleheterozigousc.608+1G>T/c.1246A>Gmissensemutation in TRNT1 gene causing SIFD (sideroblastic anemia with B cell SouthernFederal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation. immunodeﬁciency, periodic fever and developmental delay). She started immunoglobulin substitution. Due to severe prognosis and Introduction: Recurrent respiratory infections (RRI) in children because2patientsweresuccessfullybonemarrowtransplantatedwe representasocialissue.RRIaremainlycausedbyviruses,however, takeindiscussiontoperformBMTinthiscase. their course is often complicated by Staphylococcus aureus Conclusion: SIFD is a very rare immunodeﬁciency, 33 patients infections. Toll-like receptors play an important role in the beingreporteduntilpresent.Itmustbesuspectedineachcaseof activation of the immune system by regulating the production periodic fever with the similar picture associated with hypogam- of antimicrobial peptides and inﬂammatory cytokines. This study maglobulinemia and developmental delay, genetic exploration aimed to explore the association between the gene polymorph- beingcrucial. isms of TLR2, TLR9 and the nasopharyngeal carriage of Staphylo- M.T. Bataneant: None. A. Chirita-Emandi: None. E. Boeriu: coccusaureus inchildren with RRI. None.M. Baica: None.A. Beloia: None. P.Urtila: None. Material and methods: The polymorphisms TLR2 (Arg753Gln) and TLR9 (T-1237C) were genotyped in 48 children with RRI (≥4 episodesintheyear)2-10yearsold.20childrenwerewithknown  P07
.027.C Biological miR-146a-TRAF6 axis is associated with S.aureusnasopharyngealcarrierstatusand18noncarriers(control lupus ﬂaresandrenal ﬁbrosis progression group). Genomic DNA was extracted from blood of participants, genotyping wasperformedusing RT-PCR. OlgaMartinez-Arroyo1,AnaOrtega1,JavierPerez-Hernandez2,Ana Results: No differences were found between carriers and Flores1, Josep Redon3,Maria J.Forner3, RaquelCortes1 noncarriers regarding the allelic (χ2=0,84; р=0,358) and geno- type (χ2=0,926; р=0,63) distribution of the TLR2. For the 1Biomedical Research Institute Clinic Hospital - INCLIVA, Valencia, polymorphism of TLR9, statistically signiﬁcant differences were Spain,2INSERM,U1016,I,CochinInstitute,Paris,France,3Universitary found in the distribution of allele (χ2=8.161; p=0.005) and ClinicHospital, Valencia, Spain. genotypes (χ2=7.538; p=0.024) frequencies. Сarriage of domi- nanthomozygousТ/ТTLR9traitincreasesthelikelihoodtoprotect Introduction: Urinary exosomes, especially microRNAs (miRNAs) againstS.aureus(OR=0,11;95%CI0,02-0,63),heterozygousТ/С packaged within, are ideal sources of renal damage markers. We increases therisk (OR=5,85; 95%CI1,03-32,79). investigated the association between exosomal miR-146a, (anti- Conclusion: Our study indicated the potential role the inﬂammatory regulator) and disease activity, proteinuria and polymorphisms TLR9 (T-1237C) as the genetic marker of predis- systemiclupuserythematosus(SLE)ﬂaresovera36-monthfollow- positiontoStaphylococcusaureuscarriage.Thisstudywasfunded upperiod. by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Methods: We isolated urinary exosomes from 41 SLE patients, Federation#0852-2020-0028. 27withlupusnephritis(LN)and20healthycontrols,andexosomal I.Pokudina: None. E.Peshehodko: None. miR-146a, quantiﬁed by the real-time quantitative polymerase chainreaction(RT-qPCR),wascorrelatedwithhistologicalfeatures in13renalbiopsies.Wealsoanalysedtheassociationbetweenthe  P07
.029.A Molecular spectrum of Von Willebrand Disease exosomal miR-146a and TNF receptor associated factor 6 (TRAF6 Type 3 axis). Results:ExosomalmiR-146ashowedaninverseassociationwith Esra Isik1, Durdugul Ayyildiz Emecen1, Kaan Kavakli1, Fahri Sahin1, circulating  C3
 and  C4
 complement components, proteinuria, and Enise Avci Durmusalioglu1, Canan Albayrak2, Melike Evim3, Ekrem withhistologicalfeaturessuchaschronicityindex.Thismarkerwas Unal4, Fatma B. Belen5, Neslihan Karakurt6, Ozgur Cogulu1, Ferda abletoidentifyLNwithanAUCof0.82(p=0.001).Basalexosomal Ozkinay1, Tahir Atik1 miR-146a was associated with disease activity and proteinuria changes and was an independent marker of 36-month follow-up 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ondokuz Mayıs ﬂares (OR 7.08, p=0.02). Pathway analysis identiﬁed IRAK1 and University Faculty of Medicine, Samsun, Turkey, 3Uludağ University TRAF6 as miR-146a target genes. Finally, in vitro experiments Faculty of Medicine, Bursa, Turkey, 4Erciyes University Faculty of suggested that miR-146a exerts a protective effect through Medicine, Kayseri, Turkey, 5Başkent University Faculty of Medicine, negative regulation of inﬂammation by suppressing IRAK1 and Ankara, Turkey, 6Sancaktepe Prof. Dr. İlhan Varank Training and TRAF6. Research Hospital,İstanbul, Turkey. Conclusions: Urinary exosomal miR-146a levels are correlated withlupus activity, proteinuria and histological features, discrimi- Aim: Von Willebrand disease (VWD) is the most common inherited natingpatientswithLNandbeingagoodbaselinemarkerofSLE bleeding disorder caused by patogenic variants in VWF gene. The ﬂares. We have identiﬁed a relevant biological miR-146a-TRAF6 prevalence of VWD is reported between 0.1-1%. The disease is axis association in LN renal ﬁbrosis progression. Funding from classiﬁed into 3 subtypes due to the qualitative or quantitative CarlosIIIHealthInstitute(PI18/01405,CD18/00166)andwithERDF. disorder of von Willebrand factor. Pathogenic variants can be EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 228 detectedviaaVWFsequenceanalysis,in65%ofType1and80%of carryoutprenataldiagnosisofX-linkeddiseaseinthefetusduring Type3patients.Inthisstudy,molecularspectrumof29patientsfrom thenextpregnancy,andsiblingshavehaveimportantinformation 28differentfamiliesfollowedupwithVWDtype3wasevaluated. forplanningtheir familiesin thefuture. Material and Method: 29 patients from 28 different families S.Deryabina: None.E. Vlasova:None. I. Tusankina: None. with a pre-diagnosis of VWD were included in the study. The clinicalfeaturesandlaboratoryﬁndingsofpatientswereobtained  P08
Intellectual Disability fromtheirhospitalrecords.TheVWFgenewassequencedbythe nextgenerationsequenceanalysismethod.Thedetectedvariants  P08
.001.C Increasing the diagnostic yield of copy number wereinvestigatedinHGMD(HumanGenomeMutationDatabase) variation usinganexonic aCGH andEAHAD-CFDB(EAHADCoagulationFactorVariantDatabases). ACMGcriteriawereusedtoevaluatethepathogenicityofvariants. NeusBaena,Elisabeth Gabau,NúriaCapdevila,JuanPabloTrujillo, Results: In our study, 17 of the patients were female. In VWF CarmenMata, Anna Ruiz, NinoSpataro, MiriamGuitart geneanalysis,21differentvariantsassociatedwiththeVWDtype 3wereidentiﬁedandnineofthemwereframeshift,ﬁvemissense, ﬁve nonsense and two splice site mutation. Seven (c.3533delC, Corporació Sanitària ParcTaulí, SABADELL, Spain. c.1898G>A, c.6589delG, c.1486G>T, c.6239delA, c.480delG, c.2733dupT) of the variants had not been previously reported in Introduction:TheincreaseinresolutionandcoverageofaCGHis theliterature. of particular importance for genes implicated in neurodevelop- Conclusion: By deﬁning seven novel mutations, this study mentaldisordersthataresubjecttocopynumbervariation(CNV). enriched to the molecular spectrum of VWD type 3, while also The aim is to evaluate the diagnostic yield achieved using an providing afurther insight for geneticcounselling. exonicaCGHplatformandtodeterminetherateofmissedcases E. Isik: None. D. Ayyildiz Emecen: None. K. Kavakli: None. F. betweentwo differentplatforms. Sahin: None. E. Avci Durmusalioglu: None. C. Albayrak: None. Material and Methods: An 60k aCGH (Agilent Technologies) M. Evim: None. E. Unal: None. F.B. Belen: None. N. Karakurt: wasﬁrstusedasaﬁrsttiertestforneurodevelopmentaldisorders None.O. Cogulu: None.F. Ozkinay: None. T.Atik: None. from 2013 to 2019. In 2020 we have incorporated a high- resolutionexontargetedaCGHof180k(OxfordGeneTechnology, OGT).  P07
.030.BNew"ural"variantsofBTK-geneinRussianpatients Results: Using the OGT technology aCGH the diagnostic yield withagammaglobulinemia increased from 10.6% to 15%. A 3.4% of cases would not have beendiagnosedusingthelowdensityplatform.Itcorrespondsto SvetlanaDeryabina1,2,3, Elena Vlasova4, IrinaTusankina1,2 14cases(11deletionsand3duplication).ThesizeofCNVranges between 2.2 kb to 243 kb. All these case were conﬁrmed using 1The Ural Institute of Immunology and physiology, Ekaterinburg, customized MLPA. Among those cases, some are of particular Russian Federation, 2Federal State Autonomous Educational Institu- interest:exon45deletioninDMDgene,exon2deletionofTMLHE anddownstream CN5-ECR1-CN9 enhancers deletionofSHOX. tion of Higher Education «Ural Federal University named after the ﬁrstPresidentofRussiaB.N.Yeltsin,Ekaterinburg,RussianFederation, Conclusions:IncreasingaCGHresolutiontosingleexonsledto 3Medical Center “Health Care of Mother and Child”, Ekaterinburg, detectionofsmallCNVsinknowndiseasegenes,someintragenic Russian Federation, 4Sverdlovsk Regional Children Clinical Hospital, CNVs can easily be missed using a lower resolution array. Our ﬁndings highlight the importance of high-resolution aCGH and Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation. the critical analysis of aCGH data surrounding genes that are involvedby genomic variation. Background:X-linkedagammaglobulinemiaisaprimarydisorder ofhumoralimmunity,themainsymptomofwhichisadeﬁciency N. Baena: None. E. Gabau: None. N. Capdevila: None. J. Trujillo: None. C. Mata: None. A. Ruiz: None. N. Spataro: None. ofBcells.TheBTKgeneassociatedwithpathologyhasmorethan M.Guitart: None. 500 mutations, including single base pair substitutions, splicing defects, and small deletions and insertions. Since 2014 seven patients with a deﬁciency of the B-cell were received molecular genetic conﬁrmation for this congenital error of immunity. One  P08
.002.D Reﬁning the phenotype and expanding the child was diagnosed in ﬁrst year of life, two children were genotype ofXia-Gibbs Syndrome(OMIM #615829) examined at 2 years old, another 4 at the age of 5 years. Ana Teresa Serrano Antón1,2, María José Sánchez Soler1,2, Mary Periodically respiratory diseases occurred in childhood of this Ballesta Martínez1,2, Vanesa López González1,2, Lidia Rodríguez babiesdidnotalertdistrictdoctors,onlyacuteclinicalmanifesta- Peña1,2, EncarnaGuillén Navarro1,2 tionsof thedisease theyweresent acase to immunologist. Results: We identiﬁed 7 causative genetic variants by the targeted sequencing of the BTK-gene. Four mutations previously 1SeccióndeGenéticaMédica.HospitalClínicoUniversitarioVirgende reportedintheBTKdatabaseandthreevariantsoutof7detected laArrixaca,IMIB-Arrixaca,Murcia,Spain,2GrupoClínicoVinculadoal are new*. Table 1. Results of the molecular genetic study of Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras patientswith XLA (CIBERER),Instituto deSalud Carlos III(ISCIII),Madrid, Spain. No.patient NewvariantofBTK-gene(GRCh38,NM_000061) Introduction: Xia-Gibbs syndrome (XGS, OMIM#615829) results 1 c.1051_1052insA(p.Gln297AlafsTer26)* from de novo truncating variants within the AHD C1
 gene. About 100 patients worldwide have been identiﬁed. The spectrum of 2 c.928_929insA(p.Ser310LysfsTer13)* manifestations comprises hypotonia, developmental delay, intel- 3 c.64_76del13(delCCTCTAAACTTCA),(p. P22
fsTer28)* lectual impairment, brain structural anomalies, sleep difﬁculties, growth/feeding issues and dysmorphic facial features. The Conclusion.Sevenpatientshasamolecularveriﬁcationforthe phenotype isstill expanding. diagnosisX-linkedagammaglobulinemia.Fourfamilies(4mothers, Material and Methods: Retrospective descriptive study of 1aunt, 2siblings)wereissued aconclusiononthefamilyvariant patientswithXGSdiagnosisatclinicalgeneticsserviceofSpanish of the pathology inheritance. This information allow parents to tertiary-level hospital. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 229 Results:Wedescribefourmales,agesbetween7and24years, Conclusion: We studied the largest cohort of AS in Tunisia. A born to healthy non-consanguineous parents. During pregnancy, better knowledge of AS clinical features will allow an earlier structuralultrasoundswerenormal.Allpresentedwithhypotonia, diagnosis and an adapted care.The determination of the genetic developmentaldelay(2/4absentexpressivespeech)andvariable mechanismreﬁnes thegenetic counselling. intellectual disability. All show stereotypic demeanor, three with H. Fredj: None. A. Azaza: None. L. Kraoua: None. A. Achour: behavior disorder. Brain structural anomalies were demonstrated None. H. Klaa: None. I. Kraoua: None. M. Trigui: None. R. in everyone by MRI: cortical dysplasia, asymmetric ventriculome- Meddeb: None. I. Ouertani: None. N. Belghith: None. F. galy,hydrocephalyandfossaposterioranomalies.Wholepatients Maazoul: None. R.Mrad: None.M. Trabelsi: None. withstrabismus,tworefractiveerroradded.Cryptorchidismin3/4. Two exhibit patellar subluxations. One manifested feeding difﬁculties with growth failure at infancy and nocturnal snoring.  P08
.004.B Haploinsufﬁency of ARFGEF1 is associated with Facial features, nonspeciﬁc, in all: depressed nasal bridge, thin developmentaldelay,intellectualdisabilityandepilepsywith upper lip and horizontal eyebrows. Whole exome sequencing variable expressivity (WES) revealed de novo heterozygous truncating variants at AHD C1
 gene: two nonsense (c.2260C>T and c.2062C>T) and two Quentin Thomas1,2,3, Thierry Gauthier4, Dana Maraﬁ5,6, Thomas frameshit (c.2641_2644dupGCCC and c.2565delT), none of them Bernard7,8, Marjolaine Willems9, Sébastien Moutton1,3, Bertrand previously reported. Isidor7,8, Benjamin Cogné8,7, Solène Conrad7,8, Romano Tenconi10, Conclusions: We report on four new cases of XGS. Hypotonia, Maria Iascone10, Arthur Sorlin1,3,11, Alice Masurel1,3, Tabib Dabir12, intellectual impairment, stereotypic demeanor, brain structural Adam Jackson13, Siddharth Banka13,14, Julian Delanne1, James R. anomalies and strabismus compose their phenotype. Sleep/ Lupski5,15,16,NebalW.Saadi17,18,FowzanS.Alkuraya19,20,FatemaAl feeding difﬁculties appear in only one. Moreover, dysmorphism Zahrani19,PankajB.Agrawal21,22,EleinaEngland23,JillA.Madden24, do not demonstrate a recognizable pattern. This emphasize WES Jennifer E. Posey5, Lydie Burglen25,26, Diana Rodriguez27, Martin to identify new cases and to provide additional clinical and Chevarin3, Sylvie Nguyen28, Frédéric Tran Mau-Them3,28, Yannis molecular data. Duffourd3, Philippine Garret3, Ange-Line Bruel3, Patrick Callier3,28, A.SerranoAntón:None.M.SánchezSoler:None.M.Ballesta Nathalie Marle3, Anne-Sophie Denomme-Pichon3,28, Laurence Martínez: None. V. López González: None. L. Rodríguez Peña: Duplomb3,28, Christophe Philippe28,3, Christel Thauvin-Robinet1,1,29, None.E. Guillén Navarro: None. Jérôme Govin4,Laurence Faivre1,3,30,Antonio Vitobello3,28 1Genetics Center, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon Bourgogne University  P08
.003.AClinicalandmolecularcharacteristicsof44Tunisian Hospital,Dijon,France,2DepartmentofNeurology,DijonBourgogne patients withAngelman Syndrome University Hospital, Dijon, France, 3Inserm UMR1231 team GAD, UniversityofBurgundyandFranche-Comté,Dijon,France,4Institute Hana Fredj1, Asma Azaza2, Lilia Kraoua1, Ahlem Achour1, Hedia forAdvancedBiology,CentredeRechercheUGA,INSERMU1209CNRS Klaa3, Ichraf Kraoua3, Melek Trigui1, Rym Meddeb1, Ines Ouertani1, UMR5309,SiteSanté,LaTronche,France,5DepartmentofMolecular Neila Belghith1, Faouzi Maazoul1, RidhaMrad1, Madiha Trabelsi1 andHumanGenetics,BaylorCollegeofMedicine,Houston,TX,USA, 6Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, 1Department of Congenital and Hereditary Diseases, Charles Nicolle Safat, Kuwait, 7Service de génétique médicale, CHU Nantes, Nantes, Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Faculty of Medicine of Sfax, University of France, 8Université de Nantes, CNRS, INSERM, l’institut du thorax, Sfax,Sfax,Tunisia,3DepartmentofChildandAdolescentNeurology, Nantes, France, 9Unité INSERM U 1051, Département de Génétique InstituteOf Neurology Mongi BenHmida, Tunis,Tunisia. Médicale, CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 10University of Padova, Laboratorio Genetica Medica Bergamo, Bergamo, Italy, Introduction: Angelman syndrome (AS) (NM_105830) is a 11Functional Unit of Innovative Diagnosis for Rare Diseases, Dijon neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by developmental Bourgogne University Hospital, Dijon, France, 12Medical genetics delay,intellectualdisability,severespeechimpairment,movement Department, Belfast City Hospital, UK BT9 7AB, Belfast, Ireland, orbalancedisorder,seizuresandcharacteristicabnormalbehavior. 13Division of Evolution & Genomic Sciences, School of Biological ASiscausedbythelossofexpressionofthematernalcopyofthe Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of UB E3
A gene in 15q11.2-q13 imprinted region. Many genetic Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 14Manchester Centre for mechanisms are involved, of which the most frequent was the Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester University NHS deletionofthe maternally inherited 15q11.2-q13region. FoundationTrust,HealthInnovationManchester,Manchester,United Materials and Methods: Clinical and genetic analyses of a Kingdom, 15Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, cohort of 44 patients, referred to our Department of Congenital Houston, TX, USA, 16Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor and Hereditary Diseases from 2004 to 2020. MS-PCR was College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, 17College of Medicine, performed for diagnostic conﬁrmation while FISH, microsatellites University of Baghdad, Baghdad, Iraq, 18Children Welfare Teaching study and UB E3
A gene sequencing were realized to genetic Hospital, Baghdad, Iraq, 19Department of Genetics, King Faisal mechanismdetermination. Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Results:Wenotedonefamilialformwith6/44affectedcases 20Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, and 38/44 sporadic ones. The sex ratio was 1,44. The average Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 21Divisions of Newborn age at the ﬁrst presentation was 4 years and at the diagnosis Medicine and Genetics & Genomics, Manton Center for Orphan conﬁrmation was 4.5 years. All patients had developmental Disease Research, Boston, MA, USA, 22Department of Pediatrics, delay, severe speech impairment and characteristic behavior. BostonChildren’sHospital,HarvardMedicalSchool,Boston,MA,USA, Seizures and ataxia were noted in 81.8 and 72.7% of patients, 23Center for Mendelian Genomics, Program in Medical and Popula- respectively.Thephysicalexaminationrevealed hypopigmenta- tion Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, tion (72.7%), an evocative facial dysmorphia. 70.4%, microce- USA,24TheMantonCenterforOrphanDiseaseResearch,Divisionof phaly(63.6%)andstrabismus(68%).Thefollow-upwaspossible Genetics & Genomics; Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA, for only 59% of patients. The genetic mechanisms were 15q11- 25Centre de Référence des Malformations et Maladies Congénitales q13microdeletion(30/44),UB E3
Amutations(8/44)andmaternal du Cervelet, et Département de Génétique, AP-HP.Sorbonne Uni- DU P15
 (3/44). versité, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 26Developmental Brain EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 230 Disorders Laboratory, Imagine Institute, INSERM UMR 1163, Paris, Smol13, K.E. Stuurman14, B.B.A. de Vries3, S.E. Hickey12,15, I France, 27APHP, Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Armand Trous- Maystadt*11,G.W.E. Santen*1 seau,UPMCUniversité,InsermU676,Paris,France,28FunctionalUnit of Innovative Diagnosis for Rare Diseases, Dijon Bourgogne 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, University Hospital, Dijon, France, 29Centre de référence Déﬁciences Leiden, Netherlands, 2Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, IntellectuellesdeCausesRares,DijonBourgogneUniversityHospital, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Depart- Dijon,France,30CentredeRéférenceAnomaliesduDéveloppementet mentofHumanGenetics,DondersInstituteforBrain,Cognitionand SyndromesMalformatifs,DijonBourgogneUniversityHospital,Dijon, Behaviour, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Nether- France. lands, 4Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 5Department of Introduction: ADP Ribosylation Factor Guanine nucleotide Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Exchange Factors (ARFGEFs) are a family of proteins implicated Netherlands, 6Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, incellulartrafﬁckingbetweentheGolgiapparatusandtheplasma Seattle, WA, USA, 7Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle membrane through vesicle formation. Amongst them, ARFGEF1/ Children’s Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA, 8Genetics and BIG1, involved in axon elongation, neurite development and Metabolism, Children’s National Hospital, Washington, WA, USA, polarization processes, has been previously suggested as a 9Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of candidate gene for rolandic epilepsy, familial febrile convulsions Medicine,Houston,TX,USA,10BaylorGeneticsLaboratories,Houston, andepilepticencephalopathy.However,itsimplicationinhuman TX,USA,11CentredeGénétiqueHumaine,InstitutdePathologieetde disease hasnot beenconﬁrmedso far. Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium, 12Division of Genetic & Genomic Methods and Results: Through international data sharing, we Medicine, Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA, identiﬁed 13 individuals presenting with neurodevelopmental 13Service de génétique clinique Guy Fontaine, CHRU de Lille-Hôpital disorders (NDDs) and carrying heterozygous likely damaging Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 14Erasmus MC, University Medical variantsinARFGEF1,identiﬁedasacandidateresearchgeneafter Center Rotterdam, Department of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, negative clinical exome analyses. These individuals displayed Netherlands, 15Department of Pediatrics, The Ohio State University congruentclinicalfeaturesofmotordevelopmentaldelay(12/13), Collegeof Medicine, Columbus, OH, USA. speech delay (12/13), behavioral disorders (12/13), intellectual disability (10/13), brain neuroanatomical ﬁndings (7/13), and ARID1Bisoneofthemostfrequentlymutatedgenesinintellectual epileptic disorders (6/13), although phenotypes were variable, disability (~1%). Most variants in ARID1B are readily classiﬁed, even within families. While almost half of the cohort carried de since pathogenic variants are usually de novo and truncating. novovariants,atleast40%ofvariantswereinheritedfrommildly Recentlywehaveshown that theARID1Bphenotype can include affected parents, clinically reevaluated by reverse phenotyping. normal IQ values, suggesting that a pathogenic variant may be Our functional assays show that the mechanism underlining inherited from a very mildy affected parent. We also found that ARFGEF1-relatedconditions isconsistent withhaploinsufﬁciency. someregionsseemtobedevoidofARID1Bmutationssuggesting Conclusions: Overall, these results show that pathogenic that truncating variants here may not lead to ARID1B haploinsuf- variants in ARFGEF1 are responsible for sporadic and familial ﬁciency. Thus, for some truncating variants, in particular those cases of NDDs with variable expressivity. In this respect, some which are inherited, it may be difﬁcult to make the distinction individualscarriedrarevariantsfoundintheGenomeAggregation between non-pathogenic variants or pathogenic variants with Database - gnomAD, indicating that phenotypes may be very variable expression. We collected patients with potentially mild. Eventually, ARFGEF1 should be routinely screened in truncating variants which could not be readily classiﬁed because unsolved cohorts of individuals presenting with neurodevelop- ofinheritanceorthelocationofthevariants,andperformedDNA mentaldisorders with orwithout epilepsy. methylation analysis. In total, 12 patients were included. With Q. Thomas: None. T. Gauthier: None. D. Maraﬁ: B. Research clinicalandDNAmethylationstudieswewereabletoconﬁdently Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and classify most variants. We thus identiﬁed 5 families with pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; transmitted pathogenic variants conﬁrming highly variable MedicalGeneticsResearchFellowshipProgram.T.Bernard:None. expression. We also provide further evidence of an alternative M.Willems:None.S.Moutton:None.B.Isidor:None.B.Cogné: start-site, which is located between cDNA position 363-521, and None. S. Conrad: None. R. Tenconi: None. M. Iascone: None. A. formulate guidelines for the interpretation of ARID1B variants. Sorlin: None. A. Masurel: None. T. Dabir: None. A. Jackson: *sharedlast author None. S. Banka: None. J. Delanne: None. J.R. Lupski: E. P.vanderSluijs:None.M.Alders:None.A.Dingemans:None. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other E. Gerkes: None. B. van Bon: None. J. Dempsey: None. D. intellectual property); Modest; 23andMe. F. Consultant/Advisory Doherty:None.I.Miller:None.J.Rosenfeld:None.S.Moortgat: Board;Modest;RegeneronGeneticsCenter.N.W.Saadi:None.F. None. K. Parbhoo: None. M. Pastore: None. D. Regier: None. B. S. Alkuraya: None. F. Al Zahrani: None. P.B. Agrawal: None. E. Schmalz:None.T.Smol:None.K.Stuurman:None.B.deVries: England:None.J.A.Madden:None.J.E.Posey:None.L.Burglen: None.S. Hickey: None.I. Maystadt*: None. G.Santen*: None. None.D.Rodriguez:None.M.Chevarin:None.S.Nguyen:None. F.TranMau-Them:None.Y.Duffourd:None.P.Garret:None.A. Bruel: None. P. Callier: None. N. Marle: None. A. Denomme-  P08
.006.D Clinical phenotype associated with ARID2 patho- Pichon:None.L.Duplomb:None.C.Philippe:None.C.Thauvin- genic variants: a report of twelve new cases and literature Robinet: None. J. Govin: None. L. Faivre: None. A. Vitobello: review None. Clara Houdayer1, Alban Ziegler1, Céline Bris1, Alice Goldenberg2, Antoine Bonnevalle2, Mélanie Fradin3, Christèle Dubourg3, Marie  P08
.005.C Inherited ARID1B variants: evidence of non- Vincent4, Benjamin Cogné4, Sandra Whalen5, Boris Keren5, Christel pathogenicity or variable expression? Tauvin6,ArthurSorlin6,Ange-LineBruel6,DavidGeneviève7,Rebecca Procopio8,KarenGripp8,JenniferSchleit9,BriceMendelsohn9,Olivier P.J. van der Sluijs1, M. Alders2, A Dingemans3, E Gerkes4, B.W. van Patat10,MarineTessarech1,AgnèsGuichet11,DominiqueBonneau11, Bon5, J.C. Dempsey6, D Doherty6,7, I Miller8, J.A. Rosenfeld9,10, S Bertrand Isidor4,Estelle Colin1 Moortgat11, K Parbhoo12, M Pastore12, D Regier8, B Schmalz12, T EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 231 1Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Angers University whole-exomeandwhole-genomesequencing(short-read)were Hospital, Angers, France, 2Department of Genetics and Reference inconclusive. Centre for Developmental Disorders, Rouen University Hospital, In this study, NGS data was revisited by focusing on poorly Rouen,France,3DepartmentofGenetics,RennesUniversityHospital, covered, GC-rich (“dark”) genomic areas, particularly on the Rennes,France,4DepartmentofGenetics,NantesUniversityHospital, X-chromosome (chrX), to potentially reveal unidentiﬁed Nantes,France,5DepartmentofGenetics,APHP,GHPitié-Salpêtrière, clinically-relevant variants. Speciﬁcally, forty-three previously Paris, France, 6Department of Genetics, Dijon University Hospital, reported low-coverage chrX protein-coding regions were cross- Dijon, France, 7Department of Genetics, Montpellier University checked against twenty-nine chrX genes/diseases highly asso- Hospital, Montpellier, France, 8Division of Medical Genetics, AIdu ciated (p<0.05) with ID (HP:0001249) and focal dystonia PontHospitalforChildren,Wilmington,DE,USA,9DivisionofMedical (HP:0004373) according to the Phenomizer tool. The resulting Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA, 10Depart- regions were manually inspected with IGV to identify candidate ment of Genetics, Toulouse University Hospital, Toulouse, France, variants. Finally, Sanger sequencing was used to conﬁrm familial 11Department of Genetics, Angers University Hospital, Angers, co-segregation ofﬁndings. France. Two low-coverage regions resulted from the cross-check; chrX:25013469-25013696 and chrX:111744737-111744820 (hg38) ARID2(AT-richinteractiondomain2)isanewlydescribeddisease- overlappingtheARX(aristaless-relatedhomeobox)andALG13genes, causing gene encoding a protein belonging to the SWI/SNF respectively. The former was of particular interest as it overlaps a complex, an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complex mutation hotspot associated with non-syndromic or syndromic which regulates DNA accessibility at the nucleosome and X-linked ID, including the hand dystonia-related Partington syn- facilitates DNA transcription, replication and repair. ARID2 acts as drome.Visualinspectionofwhole-genomedatarevealedarecurrent a tumor suppressor and has also been involved in intellectual ARX pathogenic variant NM_139058.3:c.441_464dup, p.Ala148_A- disabilities including "SWI/SNF-related intellectual disability dis- la155dup(ARXdup24),whichwasneverﬂaggedbydownstreamNGS orders" (SSRIDDs). Furthermore, it has been shown very recently analyses but was nevertheless conﬁrmed in all affected males. The that ARID2 haploinsufﬁciency is associated with enhanced RAS- non-affected mothers were ARXdup24 carriers, while the non- MAPKactivity.Todate,twenty-twoindividualshavebeenreported affectedfathers, other non-affected relatives,and healthy unrelated with intragenic ARID2 mutations or deletions at chromosome controlwereARXdup24negative. 12q12-13.11, where ARID2 is located. These individuals share Inconclusion,thepathogenicARXdup24variantwasunmasked common features including intellectual disability, hypotonia, supportinggenotype-phenotypecorrelationintheﬁrstPartington behavioral disorders, short stature, and dysmorphic features that syndrome family in Cyprus. Investigating the “dark” genome and may overlap with those of RASopathies. In order to further utilizing Phenomizer for diagnostic assistance are highlighted to delineate the ARID2 phenotypic spectrum, we report a cohort of identifyclinically-relevant variantsin unsolved cases/families. twelve unrelated individuals harboring ARID2 deletion or patho- C. Aristidou: None. A. Theodosiou: None. E. Spanou- genic variants and we compare their features with those Aristidou: None. V. Christophidou-Anastasiadou: None. C. previously described. The clinical characteristics of individuals Sismani: None. G.A.Tanteles: None. from this series seem to be more moderate, in particular, some individualshadmildorevenabsentintellectualdisabilityandthey had more moderate growth abnormalities. Behavioral problems,  P08
.008.BDiagnosisintheeraofNGSandvariantreclassiﬁca- anxiety and attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder appear to be tions: acase ofgenetic diseaseor not? commonfeatures of this condition. C. Houdayer: None. A. Ziegler: None. C. Bris: None. A. AmeliaDobrescu1,AlexandruCaramizaru2,CristinaDurac2,Raluca Goldenberg: None. A. Bonnevalle: None. M. Fradin: None. C. Tutunaru2, Andreea Catana3 Dubourg: None. M. Vincent: None. B. Cogné: None. S. Whalen: None.B.Keren:None.C.Tauvin:None.A.Sorlin:None.A.Bruel: 1CRGM Dolj, UMF Craiova, Craiova, Romania, 2CRGM Dolj, Craiova, None.D.Geneviève:None.R.Procopio:None.K.Gripp:None.J. Romania,3UMF IuliuHatieganu, Cluj, Romania. Schleit: None. B. Mendelsohn: None. O. Patat: None. M. Tessarech:None.A.Guichet:None.D.Bonneau:None.B.Isidor: Introduction:Inthepastyears,wehavewitnessedaremarkable None.E. Colin:None. technological evolution in genetic testing. However, from a clinician’s point of view, it is still difﬁcult to manage a patient with neuromotor developmental delay and to determine the  P08
.007.A Investigating the "dark" genome reveals the ﬁrst geneticor non-geneticnature ofthedisease. familywithPartington syndrome in Cyprus Materials and Methods: We report the case of a 10 year old patientwhopresentedwitharegressioninneuromotordevelop- Constantia Aristidou1,2, Athina Theodosiou3,2, Elena Spanou- mentat ageone.Later on,further aspectsemerged:ASD, ADHD, Aristidou1, Violetta Christophidou-Anastasiadou4,1,2, Carolina Sis- delayed motor and language development, intellectual and mani3,2,George A.Tanteles1,2 learning disability, generalized seizures, focal epilepsy, tic dis- orders and sleep problems. Multiple genetic investigations were 1Clinical Genetics Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and performed. Genetics,Nicosia,Cyprus,2TheCyprusSchoolofMolecularMedicine, Results:Thekaryotypewasnormal(46,XY),aswasthenumber The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, of CGG repeats. CGH-array showed a 391 kb gain on chromo- 3Department ofCytogenetics andGenomics, TheCyprus Instituteof some X, but the CNV was not considered pathogenic. WES Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Department of Clinical identiﬁed two heterozygous variants in the ASX L2
 gene, both Genetics,Archbishop MakariosIIIMedical Centre,Nicosia,Cyprus. classiﬁedasVUS,andthediagnosisofSashi-Penasyndromewas possible.Threeyearslater,afterthefamilydecidedtoperforma We present a large four-generation family having multiple prenataldiagnosisfor anewpregnancy,the diagnosisofSashi- affected male individuals with a variable intellectual disability Pena syndrome for the index patient was also excluded due to (ID), hand dystonia and epilepsy phenotype, segregating the fact that the two ASX L2
 variants were reclassiﬁed as likely in an X-linked manner. Extensive genetic testing including benign. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 232 Conclusions: A few questions remain unanswered regarding 1Service de Génétique clinique, AP-HP, Hôpital Necker Enfants thiscase.Dotheclinicalaspectshaveageneticcause?Isatestlike Malades, Paris, France, 2Service de génétique moléculaire, AP-HP, whole genome sequencing needed? Could there also be a HôpitalRobertDebré,Paris,France,3Servicedebiologiemoléculaire, reclassiﬁcation for the CNV discovered by CGH-array? Should we AP-PH,HôpitalNeckerEnfantsMalades,Paris,France,4Universitéde offer genetic counseling based on the information we have, or Paris, Laboratory of Molecular and Physiopathological Bases of refrainand waitformoreevidence to become available? Osteochondrodysplasia, INSERM UMR 1163, Imagine Institute, Paris, A. Dobrescu: None. A. Caramizaru: None. C. Durac: None. R. France. Tutunaru: None. A.Catana: None. Background: Deletions encompassing 10p11.23 and de novo variants in WAC are responsible for DeSanto-Shinawi syndrome,  P08
.009.CA new case ofBainbridge-Ropers syndrome describedfortheﬁrsttimein2012andreportedlessthan20cases so far. Ilona Jaszczuk1, Izabela Winkler2, Agnieszka Sobczyńska-Tomas- Methods:Wereport heretheclinicaland molecular character- zewska3, Aleksandra Pietrzyk3, Monika Lejman4, Wiktor Wojcza- ization of 5 unrelated patients, 4 with loss-of-function WAC kowski5, Dorota Koczkodaj1 variants and 1 with a deletion encompassing 10p11.23. Clinical data were obtained by retrospective ﬁle analysis, clinics and 1Department of Cancer Genetics with Cytogenetic Laboratory, formalneuropsychological evaluation. MedicalUniversity,Lublin,Poland,2St’JohnsCenterOncology,Lublin, Results: Clinical ﬁndings included hypotonia (4/5), develop- Poland, 3MedGen Medical Centre, Warsaw, Poland, 4Genetic mentaldelay(5/5),intellectualdisability(3/5),behavioralproblems Diagnostics, Department of Pediatric Hemathology, Oncology and (3/5), eye abnormalities (5/5), sleep problems (2/5), attention Transplantology, Medical University, Lublin, Poland, 5Department of deﬁcit-hyperactivity (3/5), anxiety (5/5), MRI abnormalities (2/5), Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Transplantology, Lublin, short stature (3/5), feeding difﬁculties (1/5), hypogammaglobuli- Poland. nemia (1/5) growth hormone deﬁciency (1/5), kidney abnormal- ities(1/5),cardiopathy(1/5).Allpatientshavedysmorphicfeatures. Introduction: Bainbridge- Ropers syndrome (BRPS; OMIM # Weidentiﬁedonedenovodeletion60kb10p11.23encompassing 615485) is a rare developmental disorder characterized by WACandfournewheterozygousdenovoWACvariants,including psychomotorandspeechdelays,intellectualdisabilityandautism two nonsense, and two frameshift variants. All were predicted to spectrum disorders, ﬁrst described in 2013. Additional clinical cause loss of function either through nonsense-mediated mRNA features include hypotonia, feeding difﬁculties, postnatal growth decayorprotein truncation. failureanddysmorphicfacialfeatures.Theunderlyingcauseofthe Conclusions: Our series improves clinical description of WAC- syndrome is constitutive variants in the ASX L3
 gene. We present relatedintellectualdisability.Patientspresentedwithrecognisable an 10-old girl with recognized Bainbrigde- Ropers syndrome and characteristic facial dysmorphism and a variable neurocognitive conﬁrmedvariant intheASX L3
 gene. phenotype. Interestingly intellectual disability was quite variable Materials andmethods:During diagnostic procedure analysis while behavioral and attention disorders were consistently of karyotyping, MLPA test (P-245), comparative genomic hybridi- observed. Functional studies are necessary to improve the zationtomicroarray(aCGH)studyandsequencingapanelof372 understanding ofthepathogenicity ofWAC variants. genes (NGS) correlated with short stature, dysmorphic features C. Ormieres: None. M. Rio: None. J. Amiel: None. S. Drunat: andmental retardation wereperformed. None. S. Rondeau: None. C. Huber: None. V. Cormier daire: Results: The cytogenetic analysis showed normal balanced None. femalekaryotype46,XX.MolecularanalyseswithMLPAandaCGH methods did not reveal any genome imbalances. NGS analysis allowed identiﬁcation of new heterozygotic variant p.Glu367Glyf-  P08
.011.A BICRA-based neurodevelopmental disorder: Two sTer17 (c.1095_1096delAA) in the ASX L3
 gene. This variant is additional case reports and computational analysis of facial reportedindbSNPdatabase(rs1599562180)andClinVarDatabase gestalt as likely pathogenic. Mutation was conﬁrmed using Sanger sequencing. Molecular analysis of p.Glu367GlyfsTer17 was also Axel Schmidt1, Tzung-Chien Hsieh2, Alexej Knaus2, Sophia Peters1, performedforproband’sparentsbutmutationwasnotidentiﬁed, Elisabeth Mangold1, Martina Kreiß1, Janbernd Kirschner1, Hartmut whatconﬁrmedde novo character ofvariant of ASX L3
 gene. Engels1, PeterM. Krawitz2 Conclusions: In the case of patients with intellectual disability andautismspectrumdisorders,BRPSshouldbeconsideredinthe 1UniversityHospitalBonn,Bonn,Germany,2UniversityofBonn,Bonn, differentialdiagnosis.ResearchusingtheNGStechniquefacilitates Germany. and accelerates the diagnosis of patients with delayed psycho- motor and speech development, ASD and dysmorphic features. Recently, de novo loss-of-function and missense variants in the Patients with BRPS require multidirectional care with the gene BICRA were described as causative for a novel autosomal- individualizationof thelearningprocess. dominantneurodevelopmentaldisorder(NDD)intwelvepatients. I. Jaszczuk: None. I. Winkler: None. A. Sobczyńska-Tomas- Using trio exome sequencing in individuals with NDDs, we zewska: None. A. Pietrzyk: None. M. Lejman: None. W. identiﬁed two children with rare heterozygous de novo loss-of- Wojczakowski: None. D.Koczkodaj: None. function BICRA variants (frameshift and nonsense). Child 1 was born small for gestational age and presents with microcephaly, speech delay, ectopic renal tissue and dysmorphic stigmata  P08
.010.DWACRelatedintellectualdisability:presentationof including epicanthal folds, a broad nasal bridge and upslanting ﬁvenew patients palpebralﬁssures.Child2postnatallydevelopedshortstaturewith pronouncedmicrocephaly,developmentaldelay,incompleteright Clothilde ORMIERE S1
, Marlène RIO1, Jeanne AMIE L1
, Severine bundle branch block, and facial dysmorphisms (broad nasal DRUNAT2, Sophie RONDEAU3, Céline HUBER4, Valérie CORMIER bridge,downslantingpalpebralﬁssures,epicanthalfolds).Ofnote, DAIR E1
,4 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 233 child2alsohasamolecularlyconﬁrmedspinalmuscularatrophy, the phenotypic similarities to the previously reported patient. which was treated by Nusinersen followed by Onasemnogene Thus, we further strengthen an association of CCD C186
 biallelic abeparvovec. To compare the facial phenotypes of the present variantswitha severeneurodevelopmental disorder. patients and the seven published patients with available facial M.Brugger:None.F.Becker-Dettling:None.T.Brunet:None. images, we applied the GestaltMatcher algorithm. This analysis T. Strom: None. T. Meitinger: None. S. Müller: None. K. Huß: revealed overall similarities between the patients with two None.E. Lurz: None.I. Borggräfe: None. M. Wagner: None. noteworthy clusters of similar facial gestalts: one with two individuals (missense variant and small deletion) and one cluster with six individuals including our patients (frameshift, nonsense,  P08
.013.C CD C25
B biallelic variants cause short stature, and small deletion variants). In summary, the phenotypes of the microcephaly, intellectual disability, developmental delay, two children reported here ﬁt well with the features of the facialdysmorphism andmicrophthalmia recently reported BICRA-based NDD such as developmental delays,microcephaly,shortstatureandgenitourinaryandcardiac MuhammadAnsar1,2,FabiennePituello3,SohailA.Paracha4,Sophie abnormalities. In addition, GestaltMatcher successfully detected Bel-Vialar3,EmmanuelleRanza2,5,FedericoA.Santoni2,6,Muhammad similarities of facial features between patients. Therefore, our T.Sarwar4, Jawad Ahmed4, EricAgius3, Stylianos E. Antonarakis2,7,8 reportsolidiﬁestheBICRA-basedNDDasadistinctdiseaseentity. A.Schmidt: None. T.Hsieh: None. A.Knaus: None. S.Peters: 1Institute of Molecular and Clinical Ophthalmology Basel(IOB), Basel, None.E.Mangold:None.M.Kreiß:None.J.Kirschner:None.H. Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, Engels:None. P.M. Krawitz:None. University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Centre de Biologie du Developpement,CentredeBiologieIntegrative,UniversitedeToulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France, 4Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,  P08
.012.BAhomozygoustruncatingvariantinCCD C186
inan Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, Pakistan, 5Medigenome, Swiss individual withepileptic encephalopathy Institute of Genomic Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 6Department of Endocrinology Diabetes and Metabolism, University hospital of Melanie Brugger1, Fiona Becker-Dettling2, Theresa Brunet1, Tim Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 7Service of Genetic Medicine, Strom1,ThomasMeitinger1,SusannaMüller3,KristinaHuß2,Eberhard UniversityHospitalsofGeneva,Geneva,Switzerland,8iG E3
Instituteof Lurz4, IngoBorggräfe2,5,Matias Wagner1,6 GeneticsandGenomicsofGeneva,Geneva,Switzerland. 1Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Technical There are many rare autosomal recessive disorders for which the University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 2Division of Pediatric exact molecular etiology remains unknown. Consanguinity that Neurology, Developmental Medicine and Social Pediatrics, Depart- results in large genomic regions of homozygosity facilitates the ment of Pediatrics, Dr. von Haunersches Childrens Hospital, Ludwig detectionofnovelgene-diseaselinks.Here,wereportthreeaffected Maximilians University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 3Institute of individuals (two siblings and one cousin) with short stature, Pathology, Ludwig Maximilians University of Munich, Munich, microcephaly, severe intellectual disability, developmental delay, Germany, 4Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Dr. von Hau- hypotonia,facialdysmorphismandmicrophthalmia,fromaPakistani nersches Childrens Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians University of consanguineous family in which we have identiﬁed homozygosity Munich, Munich, Germany, 5Comprensive Epilepsy Center Ludwig forp.(Arg350Pro)intheCD C25
Bgene(GenbankNM_021873.3)that Maximilians University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 6Institute of segregatedwiththediseasephenotype.CD C25
B(CellDivisionCycle Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München GmbH, German 25B),amemberoftheCD C25
familyofphosphatases,isatyrosine ResearchCenterforEnvironmentalHealth,Neuherberg,Germany. protein phosphatase, which induces the mitotic progression and activates the cyclin dependent kinase CD C2
 by removing two Introduction: A disease association of biallelic variants in phosphate groups. Experiments in chick embryos showed that the CCD C186
, a downstream effector of RAB2 involved in dense core mutant protein (CD C25
B with Pro350) affects the cell cycle and vesicle trafﬁcking, has been previously suggested, but only a neurogenesis. The genetic evidence in the family and functional single patient has been described in the literature. Previous experiments in chick embryos indicate that the homozygous studies in C. elegans and rat insulinoma cells illustrate the pathogenic variant in CD C25
B are likely the cause of a recessive importance of CCD C186
 (or its orthologue CCCP-1) for formation syndrome with short stature, microcephaly, severe intellectual and cargo sorting of dense core vesicles in neurons, (neuro) disabilityanddevelopmentaldelay. endocrine and exocrinecells. M.Ansar:None.F.Pituello:None.S.A.Paracha:None.S.Bel- MaterialandMethods:Weperformedexomesequencingofa Vialar: None. E. Ranza: None. F.A. Santoni: None. M.T. Sarwar: femalepatientpresentingwithepilepticencephalopathyandher None.J. Ahmed: None. E.Agius:None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. parentsattheInstituteofHumanGenetics,TechnicalUniversityof Munich, Germany. Clinical investigations and treatment of the patient was performed at the Dr. von Haunersches Childrens  P08
.014.D <New heterozygous mutation in CDK13 gene in a Hospital inMunich, Germany. child with developmental delay, dysmorphic facial features, Results: The 2-year old female patient born form consangui- andcongenital heartdefect.> neous parents presented with severe developmental delay, microcephaly and epileptic encephalopathy with no ability to sit RuyaM. Bafaqih, Azhar Maghribi, Zohor Azher and lacking visual ﬁxation of objects. Seizures and EEG were refractorytoseveralantiepilepticdrugsandsteroids.Additionally, Medical genetics department, Faculty of Medicine, Umm al-qura failure to thrive and feeding difﬁculties requiring a percutaneous university, Makkah, Saudi Arabia. feeding tube as well as exocrine and possible endocrine pancreatic dysfunction were present. Trio exome sequencing CDK13 is a protein-coding gene for a member of the cyclin- identiﬁed the homozygous loss-of-function variant c.767C>G; p. dependent kinases family1. Heterozygous pathogenic mutations (Ser256Ter) inthecandidate geneCCD C186
 (NM_018017.2). in CDK13 are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner Conclusions: We provide detailed clinical information on a characterized by congenital heart defects, dysmorphic facial patientwithabiallelictruncatingvariantinCCD C186
andillustrate EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 234 features, and intellectual developmental disorder2. We present Germany, 24HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, data relating to a child investigated for global developmental USA,25Murdoch Children’sResearch Institute, Victoria, Australia. delay,intellectualdisability,malformationsoftheheartandgreat vessels,autistic traits,and attention deﬁcithyperactivity disorder. The number of genetic diagnoses in individuals with neurodeve- Thewhole-exomesequencingtestidentiﬁedintheCDK13genea lopmentalsyndromeshasgreatlyincreasedoverthepastdecade. heterozygous variant p. (Asp855Glu). To our knowledge, this Whereasdenovooccurrencestronglysupportspathogenicityofa variant is not reported before, and it is absent in the general variantincommonlyuseddiagnosticpipelinesfornextgeneration population in the control databases. In silico analysis, predict a sequencing, inheritance from a seemingly healthy parent gen- deleterious effect of this variant. Based on the ACMG guidelines, erally downgrades it. However, variable penetrance and expres- thisvariantisclassiﬁedasalikelypathogenicvariant.Thereareno sivitychallenge this paradigm. variantsidentiﬁedinothergenesinthischild;thisgenecanmost DenovoCHD3variantscauseSnijdersBlok-Campeausyndrome likelyexplainthischild’sphenotype.Toourknowledge,therearea (SNIBCPS;MIM#618205).Here,weidentiﬁednineteenfamilieswith fewcasesreportedwithamutationincdk13withthesameclinical an inherited CHD3 variant, likely explaining the proband’s feature. References:1- Greifenberg, A. K., D. Hönig, K. Pilarova, R. phenotype (12 predicted pathogenic missense and 7 predicted Düster, K. Bartholomeeusen et al., 2016 Structural and Functional lossoffunctionvariants).Weobservednodifferencebetweenthe Analysis of the Cdk13/Cyclin K Complex. Cell Rep 14: 320-331. 2- phenotypeofprobandswithdenovoandinheritedCHD3variants, Bostwick, B., 1993 CDK13-Related Disorder in GeneReviews(®), including developmental delay/intellectual disability (100%), editedbyM.P.Adam,H.H.Ardinger,R.A.Pagon,S.E.Wallace,L.J. speech delay (100%) and facial dysmorphisms. Carrier parents H.Beanetal.UniversityofWashington,SeattleCopyright©1993- hada milder orabsent phenotype. 2020, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a In addition to clinical phenotyping we performed several registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. analyses.First,weestablishedafacialanalysismodelandshowed Allrights reserved.,Seattle (WA). that facial characteristics of probands with an inherited CHD3 R.M.Bafaqih: None.A. Maghribi: None. Z. Azher:None. variant signiﬁcantly overlapped with those of de novo cases. Secondly, we used an Human Phenotype Ontology based computational comparison to objectively demonstrate the simi-  P08
.015.A Inherited variants in CHD3 demonstrate variable laritybetweendenovoandinheritedcases.Thirdly,wefoundthat expressivity in SnijdersBlok-Campeau syndrome healthy individuals with CHD3 stop-gain variants have lowered CHD3transcriptandCHD3proteinlevels.Lastly,weevaluatedthe JetvanderSpek1,2,JoerydenHoed3,4,LotSnijdersBlok1,2,3,Alexander effect of rare CHD3 variance on a population level, using UK J. M. Dingemans1,2, Dick Schijven3,4, E. Martina Bebin5, Stefanie Beck- biobankdata. Wödl6, Gea Beunders7, Natasha Brown8, Melanie Brugger9, Theresa Taken together, our data demonstrate variable expressivity for Brunet9, Philippe M. Campeau10,11, Goran Čuturilo12,13, Tobias B. SNIBCPS, and exemplify that rare inherited variation in genes Haack6,IrinaHüning14,RalfA.Husain15,BenjaminKamien16,Christina described with de novo variants in neurodevelopmental syn- M. Lill14,17,18, Janine Magg6, Aleš Maver19, Danielle C. Monteil20, dromes, can be causal due to yet underreported variable Charlotte W. Ockeloen1, Christopher Richmond8, Eva M. C. Schwai- expressivity. bold21,MarleenE.H.Simon22,StefﬁSpranger23,TiongTan8,MichelleL. J. van der Spek: None. J. den Hoed: None. L. Snijders Blok: Thompson24, EllaWilkins8,25, Marjolein H.Willemsen1, LisenkaE. L. M. None. A.J.M. Dingemans: None. D. Schijven: None. E.M. Bebin: Vissers1,2,SimonE.Fisher2,3,TjitskeKleefstra1,2 None.S.Beck-Wödl:None.G.Beunders:None.N.Brown:None. M. Brugger: None. T. Brunet: None. P.M. Campeau: None. G. 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Čuturilo:None.T.B.Haack:None.I.Hüning:None.R.A.Husain: Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cogni- None. B. Kamien: None. C.M. Lill: None. J. Magg: None. A. tionandBehaviour,Nijmegen,Netherlands,3LanguageandGenetics, Maver: None. D.C. Monteil: None. C.W. Ockeloen: None. C. Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Richmond: None. E.M.C. Schwaibold: None. M.E.H. Simon: 4International Max Planck Research School for Language Sciences, None. S. Spranger: None. T. Tan: None. M.L. Thompson: None. Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, E.Wilkins:None.M.H.Willemsen:None.L.E.L.M.Vissers:None. 5University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA, S.E.Fisher: None. T.Kleefstra: None. 6Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen,Tübingen,Germany,7UniversityMedicalCenterGroningen, Groningen,Netherlands,8VictorianClinicalGeneticsServices,Victoria,  P08
.018.D Novel variant in DDX3X causes syndromic DDX3X Australia,9InstituteofHumanGenetics,SchoolofMedicine,Technical related neurodevelopmental disorder UniversityMunich,Munich,Germany,10CHUSainte-JustineResearch Center,Montreal,QC,Canada,11Sainte-JustineHospital,Universityof Kamilė Šiaurytė1, Kristina Grigalionienė2,3, Algirdas Utkus2, Aušra Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 12University Children’s Hospital Matulevičienė2 Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 13Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade,Belgrade,Serbia,14InstituteofHumanGenetic,Universityof 1Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department of Human and Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 15Department of Neuropediatrics, Jena Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of University Hospital, Jena, Germany, 16King Edward Memorial Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Centre for Medical Hospital, Subiaco, Australia, 17Lübeck Interdisciplinary Platform for Genetics at Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Genome Analytics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 18Ageing Lithuania. EpidemiologyUnit,SchoolofPublicHealth,ImperialCollegeLondon, London,UnitedKingdom,19CentreforMendelianGenomics,Clinical Introduction: DDX3X related neurodevelopmental disorder Institute of Medical Genetics, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, (DDX3X-NDD) is a very rare entity, with less than 200 cases 20NavalMedicalCenterPortsmouth,Portsmouth,VA,USA,21Institute described in literature, caused by mutation in DDX3X gene of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany, (Xp11.4). Characteristic features of DDX3X-NDD include mild to 22DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,UniversityMedicalCenterUtrecht, severe intellectual disability, hypotonia, behavioral problems, Utrecht, Netherlands, 23Praxis für Humangenetik-Bremen, Bremen, movementdisorders, dysmorphic features. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 235 Materials andmethods:Agirl, 9yearsofage,fromunrelated V.Zabnenkova:None.T.Cherevatova:None.A.Orlova:None. parents,presentswithsevereintellectualdisability,mostlyabsent P.Gundorova:None.O.Mironovich:None.O.Ryzhkova:None. speech, muscle hypotonia, stereotypical movements, ataxic gait, convergent strabismus, occasional seizures. Notable phenotypic  P08
.020.B With or without highly restricted-Down syndrome features include prominent arched eyebrows, low nasal tip, thick criticalregion(HR-DSCR).reportoftwonewpartialtrisomy21 upper lip, high and narrow palate, misaligned teeth, distal casesandreview ofthe recentliterature hypotrophy of leg muscles, hypermobile small joints, lax skin, pronounced signs of puberty. Girl also exhibits hyperactive MariaChiaraPelleri1,ChiaraLocatelli2,TeresaMattina3,MariaClara behavior, episodes of unprovoked laughter. SNP-CGH assay and Bonaglia4, Francesca Piazza1, Pamela Magini5, Francesca Antonaros1, otherscreening tests showed nopathology. Giuseppe Ramacieri1, Beatrice Vione1, Lorenza Vitale1, Marco Seri6, Results: Exome sequencing revealed heterozygous frameshift PierluigiStrippoli1,GuidoCocchi7,AllisonPiovesan1,MariaCaracausi1 variant leading to premature stop codon NM_001356.5: c.1629_1630dupAT (NP_001347.3:p.(Phe544TyrfsTer8) in DDX3X 1Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine gene. This variant was not reported in population databases (DIMES), University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Neonatology Unit, St. (1000G, ExAC, GnomAD) and literature previously. Variant is Orsola-Malpighi Polyclinic, Bologna, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, classiﬁedaspathogenicinVarsomedatabaseandappearshighly UniversityofCatania,Catania,Italy,4CytogeneticsLaboratory,Scientiﬁc deleterious after insilico analysis. Institute, IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini (Lecco), Italy, 5Medical Conclusion: The frameshift variant in DDX3X gene should be Genetics Unit, St. Orsola-Malpighi Polyclinic, Bologna, Italy, 6Medical considered as a cause for intellectual disability in girls. However, GeneticsUnit,St.Orsola-MalpighiPolyclinic,DepartmentofMedicaland characteristic features of DDX3X-NDD are unspeciﬁc and hardly Surgical Sciences (DIMEC), University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, distinguishable from other intellectual disability syndromes, 7NeonatologyUnit,St.Orsola-MalpighiPolyclinic,DepartmentofMedical posing challenge to clinicians. Exome sequencing is an indis- andSurgicalSciences(DIMEC),UniversityofBologna,Bologna,Italy. pensable tool to reach the ﬁnal diagnosis and gather further evidence onvery rare disorders. Introduction:Downsyndrome(DS)iscausedbythepresenceofan K.Šiaurytė:None.K.Grigalionienė:None.A.Utkus:None.A. extracopyoffullorpartialhumanchromosome21.Partialtrisomy Matulevičienė:None. 21 (PT21) is an invaluable model for the study of genotype- phenotypecorrelationinDS.Inparticular,a34-kb highly restricted DS critical region (HR-DSCR) has been identiﬁed as the minimal  P08
.019.A Gene spectrum in Russian patients with develop- regionwhose duplicationisshared byall PT21subjectsdiagnosed mental delay, and/or epilepsy, and/or microcephaly via next- withDS,whileitisabsentinallPT21non-DSsubjectsreportedinthe generationsequencing literatureupto2017. Materials and Methods: We report clinical data and cytoge- Victoria Zabnenkova, Tatiana Cherevatova, Anna Orlova, Polina netic characterizations of two PT21 children never described Gundorova,Olga Mironovich, Oxana Ryzhkova before.Moreover,weperformedasystematicbibliographicsearch fornewPT21reportsrecentlypublishedtofurtherinvestigatethe ResearchCentreforMedicalGenetics,Moscow,RussianFederation. associationbetweenthepresenceofthreecopiesoftheHR-DSCR andtheDS diagnosis. Background:Thediagnosisofdevelopmentaldelay,epilepsyand Results: Clinical and cytogenetic analyses of the two PT21 microcephaly is complicated by the variability of the phenotypic children reported here revealed specular features: one case with manifestation.Patientsmayhavecombineddysmorphicfeatures, theHR-DSCRamongtheduplicatedregionsisdiagnosedwithDS, intellectualdisability,andseizures.NGSisaneffectivestrategyfor while the other without the HR-DSCR duplication has no DS geneticanalysis inthis complexcondition. diagnosis.Asdemonstratedbyclinicaldataandcytogeneticmap Materials and methods: DNA samples of 501 patients with correlation also including PT21 reports recently published, we developmental delay, and/or epilepsy, and/or microcephaly have conﬁrmedthepresenceofduplicatedHR-DSCRinallDS subjects beenanalyzedwith WES(265, IDT)and CES(236, Roche). andits absenceinallnon-DS individuals. Results: Pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants were Conclusions: The results are fully consistent with the hypoth- identiﬁedin84genesin107 patients(107/501,21,4%). 14genes esisthattheHR‐DSCRiscriticallyassociatedwithDSdiagnosis.No have met two or more times: SCN1A, ARID1B, A P4
B1, AT P1
A3, exceptionto this pathogenetic model wasfound. Further studies ANKRD11, CDK L5
, IQSE C2
, KIF11, KMT2D, LZTR1, MEC P2
, NALCN, are needed to detect genetic determinants likely located in the POG2, SMARCA2. Interestingly, the c.1160_1161delCA(p. HR-DSCR and possibly responsible for core DS features, in Thr387ArgfsTer30) mutation was found three times in a hemi/ particular intellectualdisability. homozygous state in the A P4
B1 gene(NM_006594.5), previously M. Pelleri: None. C. Locatelli: None. T. Mattina: None. M. described as cause of spastic paraplegia (OMIM 614066). Also, Bonaglia:None.F.Piazza:None.P.Magini:None.F.Antonaros: there were two different mutations affecting the same codon None. G. Ramacieri: None. B. Vione: None. L. Vitale: None. M. 1181intheNALCNgene(NM_052867.4).Accordingtothetypeof Seri: None. P. Strippoli: None. G. Cocchi: None. A. Piovesan: inheritancetheﬁndingsweredividedasfollows:4cases-X-linked, None.M. Caracausi: None. 30 cases - autosomal recessive, 73 cases - autosomal dominant (including de novo). Promising variants of uncertain signiﬁcance are registered in 138 genes. There is a group of genes encoding  P08
.023.A Molecular analysis of a novel donor splice site proteins of ion channels (KCN1, KCNB1, KCN E2
, KCNH2, KCNJ10, variantin DYN C1
H1 KCNQ3, KCNT1, SCN2A, SCN3A, SCN8A, SCN9A) in these ﬁndings. Variantsoccurnotonlyinpatientswithepilepsy,butalsointhose Gunda Petraitytė, Živilė Maldžienė, Violeta Mikštienė, Evelina withdevelopmental delay duetoepileptic encephalopathy. Siavrienė,Tautvydas Rančelis,Vaidutis Kučinskas, Eglė Preikšaitienė Conclusion: The results of this study demonstrate signiﬁcant geneticheterogeneityamongpatientswithdevelopmentaldelay, DepartmentofHumanandMedicalGenetics,InstituteofBiomedical epilepsy, microcephaly, identify additional phenotypes, and Sciences,FacultyofMedicine,VilniusUniversity,Vilnius,Lithuania. expandthemutation spectrum. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 236 Introduction: Cytoplasmic dynein 1 is a cytoskeletal motor hyperactivitywithpoorvocabulary.Heightandweightwereunder transporting various cargos in cells and playing speciﬁc roles 3th percentile. Karyotype analysis was normal as well as FISH such as empowering neurotrophic signaling important for analysis for 4p- deletion performed by suspicions for Wolf- neuronalsurvival.DYN C1
H1(MIM#600112)geneencodesaheavy Hirschornsyndrome.aCGHanalysisshowedpathologicaldeletion chain1ofthecytoplasmicdynein.Heterozygousmutationsofthis of5,025kbsegmenton15q26.2(14OMIMgenes)andadditional gene are linked to neuromuscular (MIM#158600, MIM#614228) duplicationof4,179kbsegmentonthe1p36.33chromosome(57 and neurodevelopmental disorders (MIM#614563). Here we OMIMgenes)accordingtoClinVarandOMIMdatabase.Thegenes describe a study performed to investigate the pathogenicity of a IGFR1,MEF2A,CHSY1,andTM2D3inthedeletedregioncouldbe novelintron variantin DYN C1
H1. delineatedaccording topatient phenotype. MaterialsandMethods:Amale,14yearsofage,wasreferred Conclusions: The deletion on 15q26.2 may lead to the for genetic assessment for intellectual disability and abnormality description of clinically recognizable syndrome associated with of cerebral cortex. WES was applied to analyse DNA of the development delay. Further examinations should be performed proband and both parents. The DNA of healthy brother was forincluding other genesinthepathological condition. analysed by Sanger sequencing. To determine the effect of M. Pesevska: None. V. Anastasovska: None. E. Sukarova- identiﬁedsplicesitevariantonmRNAstructure,totalbloodmRNA Angelovska: None. D. Nestoroska: None. G. Ilieva: None. S. oftheprobandwasisolated,templatecDNAwassynthesized,and Panovska:None. Sangersequencing was performed. Results:AnalysisofDNAsamplesrevealedheterozygousdonor splice site variant NC_000014.9(NM_001376.5):c.6405+1G>C in  P08
.025.CSolve-RD: the ITHACA perspective DYN C1
H1 gene as de novo in the proband’s DNA. In silico, this altered donor site probably affects mRNA splicing. PCR of A-S Denommé-Pichon*1,2, E. de Boer*3,4, A Jackson*5, E Benetti*6, S proband’s cDNA resulted in two different fragments. Sanger Banka5,7,GCasari8,9,ACiolﬁ10,JClayton-Smith5,7,BDallapiccola10,K sequencing revealed retaining intron 31 in one of them, Ellwanger11,12, L Faivre2,13, C Gilissen3,14, H Graessner11,12, T B. presumably leading to a frameshift and premature stop codon Haack11, A Hammarsjö15, M Havlovicova16, A Hoischen3,14,17, A truncating motor region of the protein (NP_001367.2:p. Hugon18, T Kleefstra3,4, A Lindstrand15, E López-Martín19, M Macek (Ile2136LeufsTer20)). Jr.16, L Matalonga20, M Morleo9, V Nigro9,8, A Nordgren15, M Conclusions: The molecular analysis of the donor splice site Pettersson15, M Pinelli9, S Pizzi10, M Posada19, F C. Radio21, A variant NC_000014.9(NM_001376.5):c.6405+1G>C in DYN C1
H1 Renieri6,22,23, C Rooryck24, L Ryba16, M Schwarz16, M Tartaglia10, C revealed disrupted mRNA splicing which leads to truncated and Thauvin1,2,13,ATorella8,9,ATrimouille25,PVotypka16,KVyshka18,26,B probably dysfunctional protein causing neurodevelopmental Zurek11,12,A Verloes18,27, A Vitobello*1,2, LisenkaVissers*3,4 phenotype oftheproband. TheworkwasfundedbytheResearchCouncilofLithuania(No. 1Unité Fonctionnelle d’Innovation diagnostique des maladies rares, S-MIP-17-19/LSS-150000-1179). FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 2UFR Des G.Petraitytė:None.Ž.Maldžienė:None.V.Mikštienė:None. SciencesdeSanté,INSERM-UniversitédeBourgogneUMR1231GAD« E. Siavrienė: None. T. Rančelis: None. V. Kučinskas: None. E. Génétique des Anomalies du Développement », FHU-TRANSLAD, Preikšaitienė: None. Dijon, France, 3Dept of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine,  P08
.024.B Development delay in paediatric patient with UniversityofManchester,Manchester,UnitedKingdom,6MedBiotech deletion on chromosome15q26.2 Hub and Competence Center, Dept of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 7Manchester Centre for Genomic Milica Pesevska1, Violeta Anastasovska1, Elena Sukarova- Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Angelovska1, Dragica Nestoroska1, Gordana Ilieva1, Sandra Manchester, United Kingdom, 8Dipartimento di Medicina di Pre- Panovska2 cisione, Università degli Studi della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", Napoli, Italy, 9Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, 1Genetic Laboratory, University Clinic for Pediatrics, Ss.Cyril and Italy, 10Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 11Institute of Medical Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2Department of Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, HumanGenetics,AvicenaDiagnostic,Skopje,Skopje,Macedonia,The Germany, 12Centre for Rare Diseases, University of Tübingen, Former Yugoslav Republic of. Tübingen, Germany, 13Dept of Genetics and Centres of Reference for Development disorders and intellectual disabilities, FHU TRANS- Introduction: Subtelomeric chromosomal regions are gene rich. LAD and GIMI Institute, University Hospital Dijon, Dijon, France, Approximately 2.5% of the patients with mental retardation with 14Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Nether- or without association of dysmorphic features have deletions in lands, 15Dept of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska thesesegments. Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 16Dept of Biology and Medical Materials and Methods: We performed a aCGH analysis in Genetics, Charles University Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 17Dept paediatric patient using the CytoScan_750k Array platform of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases, (Affymetrix) which comprises 550 k non-polymorphic and 200 k Radboudumc,Nijmegen,Netherlands,18DeptofGenetics,Assistance SNP markers by the Chromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS) Software Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris - Université de Paris, Paris, France, (v4.0). 19Institute of Rare Diseases Research, Spanish Undiagnosed Rare Results:Wepresenta4-yearoldgirlwithfollowingdysmorphic Diseases Cases Program & Undiagnosed Diseases Network Interna- signs - downward corners of the mouth and large oral opening, tional, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 20CNAG‐CRG, saddle nose with wide nasal root, retracted eye bulbs, triangular Centre for Genomic Regulation, The Barcelona Institute of Science pointedeyebrows, asymmetrical placement oftheeyelid, smaller and Technology, Barcelona, Spain, 21Genetics and Rare Diseases opening of the lid, asthenic pointed forehead, short philtrum, Research Division, Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, smallchinand sparsehair. Shehad developmentdelay with ﬁne Rome, Italy, 22Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, rough motoric skills without signiﬁcant hypotonia and signs of 23Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Senese, Siena, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 237 Italy, 24University Bordeaux, MRGM INSERM U1211, CHU de 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aalborg University Hospital, Bordeaux, Service de Génétique Médicale, Bordeaux, France, Aalborg, Denmark, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus 25Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Service de Génétique University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 3Department of Molecular Médicale, CHU Bordeaux – Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, Diagnostics,AalborgUniversityHospital,Aalborg,Denmark,4Depart- 26CERCRID, UMR 5137 “Centre de Recherches Critiques en Droit”, mentof Paediatrics, Viborg Regional Hospital, Viborg, Denmark. Université de Lyon, Lyon, France, 27INSERM UMR 1141 "NeuroDi- derot",Hôpital RDEBRE, Paris,France. Introduction: MSH6 and FBXO11 are located at chromosome 2p16.3 with overlapping 3’ UTR ends by 33 bp. MSH6-related Solve-RDisaHorizon2020supportedEUﬂagshipprojectaimingto Lynchsyndromeiswell-describedhoweverfewerthan50patients solve rare diseases for which a molecular cause is not yet with FBXO11-related intellectual developmental disorder with established. European Reference Network (ERN) Intellectual dysmorphic facies and behavioral abnormalities (IDDFBA) have disability, TeleHealth And Congenital Anomalies (ERN-ITHACA) is been reported. Most represent de novo cases detected by trio- one of four core ERNs contributing to this project. Here we whole exome sequencing (trio-WES). Only one familial FBXO11 describeour achievements so far. case has been reported. We present a large family with a 0,1Mb (i)Unsolvedexome negativepatients deletion involving MSH6 and the 3’ UTR end of FBXO11.Clinical Over 5,200 data sets consisting of phenotypic and genomic ﬁndings: The proband is a three year old boy with speech- and information have been internationally shared in the Genome- motor delay, hypotonia, low-set ears with a closed helix, thin Phenome Analysis Platform for systematic re-analysis. This has upper lip vermillion, long philtrum and paternal family history of resultedin~6-8%ofnoveldiagnoses.Additionally,for9candidate both intellectual disability and Lynch syndrome caused by disease genes, Solve-RD researchers have been matched with deletion of MSH6. Chromosomal microarray revealed the familial functional scientists via ‘Rare Diseases: Models and Mechanisms 0,1Mb deletion on 2p16.3 involving MSH6 and trio-WES was (RDMM)’-Europe tostudy themolecular mechanism ofdisease. without pathogenic variants. (ii)ITHACA-speciﬁc cohorts Results:Reviewofthefamilyrevealedthat7/8familymembers Wearecollectinggeneticallyunsolvedpatientsforthefollowing withthedeletionhadvariabledegreesoflearningdisabilitiesand syndromes: Moebius/Poland, Goldenhar, Wildervanck, Baraitser- 3/8hadpsychiatricdisturbances.Theproband’sgestaltwassimilar Winter, primary microcephalic dwarﬁsm, MURCS, RAS-opathies to that reported in IDDFBA patients; however, the features were and ‘Rett-like’-phenotypes. For these cohorts, the ﬁrst short-read not consistent in relatives. Revisiting chromosomal microarray genomesare beingperformed. data indicated that deletion involves the terminal 3’ UTR of (iii)Ultra-rare patients FBXO11, conﬁrmed by CNV analysis of the onco-gene panel All ~80 Health Care Providers in ITHACA are collecting (ultra-) (SWEBRCA). rare unsolved patients. Though phenotypic jamborees, 100 Conclusion: The terminal deletion of FBXO11 most likely familiesare selected forWGS. explains the IDDFBA-phenotype seen in this family. Due to (iv)Unsolvable syndromes limitations in trio-WES analyses, a small CNV might be missed We aim to unravel the genetic etiology of Aicardi, Gomez-Lopez- and an inherited FBXO11 variant will also be missed when Hernandez, Pai, OAFNS and Hallermann-Streiff syndrome. Hereto, a searching forde novovariants. multi-omics approach is planned for, including long-read genomes, M. Lundsgaard: None. U.B. Jensen: None. A. Ernst: None. H. transcriptomics, epigenomics, deep-WES and metabolomics on Okkels:None.R.Christensen:None.T.Balslev:None.L.Sunde: multipletissuesperpatient-parenttrio.Firstanalysesareongoing. None.C.K. Lautrup: None. The Solve-RD project has enabled ITHACA data sharing and clinical patient selection at a pan-European level. We expect to facilitate diagnoses for unsolved patients, and to elucidate the  P08
.028.B Electrophysiological and proteomic investigations molecular underpinning of ITHACA-related unexplained ofanFtsj1-deﬁcient mouse modelforintellectual disability syndromes. A.Denommé-Pichon*:None.E.deBoer*:None.A.Jackson*: Lars Jensen, Marian Baldus, Simone Venz, Heike Junker, Viola von None. E. Benetti*: None. S. Banka: None. G. Casari: None. A. Bohlen undHalbach, Oliver von Bohlen undHalbach, Andreas Kuß Ciolﬁ: None. J. Clayton-Smith: None. B. Dallapiccola: None. K. Ellwanger: None. L. Faivre: None. C. Gilissen: None. H. University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany. Graessner: None. T.B. Haack: None. A. Hammarsjö: None. M. Havlovicova: None. A. Hoischen: None. A. Hugon: None. T. Inherited intellectual disability (ID) is a genetically very hetero- Kleefstra:None.A.Lindstrand:None.E.López-Martín:None.M. geneous disorder. Though mutations in each gene are relatively Macek Jr.: None. L. Matalonga: None. M. Morleo: None. V. rare,severalgenesinvolvedinchargingandmodiﬁcationsoftRNA Nigro: None. A. Nordgren: None. M. Pettersson: None. M. molecules have been found mutated in ID-patients. tRNAs Pinelli:None.S.Pizzi:None.M.Posada:None.F.C.Radio:None. transport amino acids to the ribosome but are also involved in a A.Renieri:None.C.Rooryck:None.L.Ryba:None.M.Schwarz: variety of other cellular processes. The underlying molecular None.M.Tartaglia:None.C.Thauvin:None.A.Torella:None.A. causes for the observed ID phenotype is at present not well Trimouille:None.P.Votypka:None.K.Vyshka:None.B.Zurek: understood. Inactivating FTSJ1 mutations have been found in None.A. Verloes:None. A. Vitobello*: None.L.Vissers*: None. several families with non-syndromic ID. FTSJ1 is an evolutionarily conserved, ubiquitously expressed tRNA-methyltransferase that targetsasubsetoftRNAs.Wehavepreviouslyestablishedamouse  P08
.026.D Contiguous gene deletion of MSH6 and FBXO11. modelforFTSJ1deﬁciencyandfoundalteredenergymetabolism, Presenting a large family with Lynch syndrome and FBX011- increased pain threshold in addition to learning defects in Ftsj1 related intellectual developmental disorder deﬁcient mice. To investigate neuronal function at the cellular level we now performed electrophysiological experiments, indu- Malene Lundsgaard1, Uffe B. Jensen2, Anja Ernst3, Henrik Okkels3, cing long-term potentiation (LTP) in hippocampal neurons from Rikke Christensen2, Thomas Balslev4, Lone Sunde1, Charlotte K. mutantandwild-typemice.WeobservedsigniﬁcantlyweakerLTP Lautrup1,2 inFtsj1-deﬁcientanimalsthanincontrollittermates.Wethenused EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 238 protein extracts from whole brain preparations to generate Introduction: Recently, a new x-linked intellectual disability protein abundance proﬁles using 2D-PAGE coupled with mass syndrome was described, caused by deletions of Xp11.22 with spectrometry for peptide identiﬁcation and identiﬁed peptides the smallest region of overlap including CENPV L1
, CENPV L2
, corresponding to 25 unique proteins with >1.5-fold difference in MAGED1 and GSPT2. GSPT2 was suggested as the causal gene abundance, including alpha-Tubulin. Functional annotation ana- fortheintellectualdisability.GSPT2encodeseRF3bthat,together lysisoftheseproteinsshowed,amongothers,enrichmentforthe witheRF3a(encodedby GSPT1),isformingacomplexwitheRF1. GO term “cytoskeletal protein binding”. Our results suggest that Thiscomplexiscomposingacrucialroleintranslationtermination Ftsj1deﬁciencyleadstoalossofsynapticstrengthinhippocampal andnonsense mediateddecay. neurons, which may contribute centrally to the ID phenotype observed in FTSJ1 deﬁcient individuals and pinpoints interesting Patients&methods:Wedescribefamilyone,highlysuggestive novelfunctional aspects ofFTSJ1. ofX-linkedinheritance,withthreeaffectedboysandtwoobligate L. Jensen: None. M. Baldus: None. S. Venz: None. H. Junker: carriers (unaffected females); and family two, with one affected None. V. von Bohlen und Halbach: None. O. von Bohlen und boy.Theoverlappingclinicalfeaturesinthefouraffectedboysare: Halbach: None. A.Kuß:None. central and obstructive apneas, severe epilepsy, profound developmental delay, a secondary microcephaly, mild a-speciﬁc dysmorphicfeaturesandedema.Thethreeboysfromfamilyone  P08
.029.C Next generation sequencing of a genes panel for died in infancy. Whole Exome Sequencing was performed in the the study of Mexican patients with global developmental twoindex patients. delay Results:MissensevariantsintheGTP-asedomainofGSPT2were foundinbothindexpatients.Infamilyone,thevariantsegregated María de la Luz Arenas-Sordo1,2, Paola Linares-Mendoza1, Karina with the phenotype and was found in two affected boys, two Peñuelas-Romero1, Javier Martínez-Martínez1 carrierfemales andwas notfound inone unaffectedmale. Conclusions: GSPT2 missense variants seem to cause a severe 1Instituto Nacional de Rehablitacion, Mexico City, Mexico, 2Uni- x-linked epileptic encephalopathy, whereas larger deletions versidad Nacionalautónoma de México, México City,Mexico. including GSPT2 cause a milder intellectual disability. We Introduction: GDD is deﬁned as a signiﬁcant delay in 2 of the hypothesize that the missense variants described here cause an major developmental domains (gross/ﬁne motor,speech/lan- altered eRF3 complex that hampers the translation termination guage, cognition, social/personal, and activities of daily living), and/or nonsense mediated decay more than a deletion of the althoughmostaffectedpatientshaveimpairmentevidentinall5 gene does. Functional studies are underway to proof this of the domains. The diagnosis is reverved for children under 5 hypothesis. years og age. The prevalence estimates between 1 and 3% of G.Beunders:None.E.Kas:None.S.White:None.K.M.Abbott: children. Around 25-50% of GDD cases can be secondary to None.Y.J. Vos: None. C.C.Diemen: None. geneticcauses. Materials andMethods: Anexomeof506 geneswasdone in  P08
.032.B Mosaic copy number gain chr1p35.1p33 causing a 20 patients, after discarded other causes through karyotype, severe phenotype with intellectualdisability and metabolic screening, and MRI. The patients were studied with macrocepahly detail intheirphenotype and with aneurological evaluation. Results:Ofthe20patientsstudied,14werefemaleand6male. MariaPuiu1, Alexandra Mihailescu2,Adela Chirita-Emandi1 None reported consanguinity and just 1 had inbreeding. One patienthasabrotherwiththesamecondition.Someofthemhave 1Centerof GenomicMedicine, University of Medicine andPharmacy dysmorphia, short stature, epilepsy, microcephaly, deafness, etc. “Victor Babes”, Regional Center of Medical Genetics Timis, Clinical Metabolic screening and karyotype were normal in all patients. Some MRI showed not speciﬁc alterations. The exome found Emergency Hospital for Children “Louis Turcanu”, part of ERN ITHACA, TIMISOARA, Romania, 2Center of Genomic Medicine, variants in: TYR, ZNF423, ALDH18A1, POMPT1 and CA6, all in heterozigous way. Also a CNV’s in the NSUN2 gene that caused University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, TIMISOARA, deletionof33.39kb(chr.5)andonenon-relatedﬁnding,variantin Romania. G6PDgene(c.934G>C; p.Asp312His). Duplicationsinvolvingthe1p35p33chromosomalregionarevery Conclusions: In these preliminary results, we found a deletion rare, associating global developmental delay, craniofacial dys- in the NSUN2 gene as the cause of GDD and the other genes morphism, heart malformations andgrowth failure. couldberelatedwithit.Itisnecessarytostudytheothervariants Material: A 3-year-old girl, presenting with hypotonia, global thatwefound,inthemultipleexistingdatabasesandmakesome developmental delay, macrocephaly, frontal bossing, opened predictionswith differentcomputer systems. anterior fontanelle, ﬂat nasal bridge, hypertelorism, ptosis, M. Arenas-Sordo: None. P. Linares-Mendoza: None. K. prognathism, spaced teeth, bilateral simian crease, clinodactyly, Peñuelas-Romero: None. J.Martínez-Martínez: None. cavovarus, large head and chest compared to lower body, ataxic gait, no language, behavioral issues (stereotypes, anxiety, hand ﬂapping,bruxism) and slow weightgain.  P08
.031.AGenotype-phenotypeeffectsoftheX-linkedGSPT2 Results:Shewasdiagnosedwithatrialseptaldefect.BrainMRIs gene:severe developmental andepileptic encephalopathy in atage1yearand3yearsrevealednormalbrainstructure,without patients with missense variants versus mild developmental hydrocephalus/ventriculomegaly. SNP array: [GRCh37] delayin patients withdeletions chr1p35.1p33(33920586_50612250)x3[0.7]showed16,7Mbcopy GeaBeunders1,EvertKas1,SueWhite2,3,KristinM.Abbott1,Yvonne number gain, mosaic clone 70%. The copy number gain was de J.Vos1, Cleo C.Diemen1 novo. The region contains several autosomal dominant transmis- siongenes:GJB3, KCNQ4 associated with neurosensory deafness, CO L9
A2-epiphysealdysplasia,CO L8
A2-cornealdystrophy/aortic 1UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 2University of Melbourne, Mel- malformations,SL C2
A1-Dystonia/epilepsy.However,theimplica- bourne, Australia, 3Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Melbourne, tions of copy number gainof these genes cannot be accurately Australia. assessed. Only 2 patients with similar gains are reported in EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 239 decipher.sanger.ac.uk(ID:353680;401008).One of these patients patients with moderate and severe global developmental also presentedpolydactily. delay/intellectual disability Conclusion:Pathogenicityincopynumbergainsaredifﬁcultto understand. Evenmore if thenumber of patients reported is very Jelena Ruml Stojanovic1, Marija Mijovic1, Aleksandra Miletic1, small and mosaic, multicentric collaboration is crucial for under- BrankicaBosankic1, HristinaPetrovic1,Goran Cuturilo1,2 standingthephenotype and prognosis. M.Puiu:None.A.Mihailescu:None.A.Chirita-Emandi:None. 1UniversityChildren’sHospital,Belgrade,Serbia,2FacultyofMedicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.  P08
.034.DDDX3Xsyndrome phenotypeheterogeneity acase Introduction:Moderateandsevereformsofintellectualdisability reportand literature review and global developmental delay are genetically and clinically heterogeneous entities. Evaluation of genetic cause is often RossellaColantuono1,MariaChiaraRocco1,DarioDiSalvio2,Maria challenging, and many patients undergo a “diagnostic odyssey”. Tessitore1,LuciaNazzaro3,DomenicoViggiano1,MariaTeresaFalco3, Deﬁning the clinical parameters in correlation with pathogenic GiorgiaMancano4,TjitskeKleefstra5,LotSnijdersBlok5,MatteoDella copy number variations could enable better selection of patients Monica6, PietroVajro1,Daniela Melis1 for chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) and speed up the diagnosticprocess. 1Pediatrics, Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry "Scuola Materials and Methods: The present study included 110 Medica Salernitana", University of Salerno, Baronissi (SA), Italy, children with the diagnosis of moderate or severe global 2Pediatrics, University of Naples “Federico II”, Napoli, Italy, 3“San developmental delay/intellectual disability, present either solely Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi d’Aragona” University Hospital, Salerno, or with diverse additional ﬁndings. CMA was performed in all Italy, 4Meyer University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 5Department of patients. Correlation of clinical parameters and CMA results was Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, assessed usingPearson chi-square and Fisher’s Exacttests. Netherlands, 6Department of Medical and Laboratory Genetics, Results: Pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were identiﬁed Cardarelli Hospital, Naples, Italy. in26,4%(29/110)ofpatients,variantsofuncertainsigniﬁcancein 12,7% (14/110) of patients, while the rest had normal result or About 25-50% of intellectual disability (ID) is genetically deter- benign variant identiﬁed (60,9%, 67/110). Statistical analysis mined, and X-linked ID (XLID) is a major pathogenic cause. De revealedthat patients with multiple congenital anomaliesand/or novo mutations of the DDX3X gene account for 1-3% of ID in microcephaly were more likely to have pathogenic copy number females.The3q29duplicationhasaquiteoverlappingphenotype variationidentiﬁed. and low penetrance, possibly inﬂuenced by "second hit" genetic Conclusion:Therewereseveralattemptsinliteraturetodeﬁne aberrations. clinicalparametersthatcouldpredictthepresenceofpathogenic Case report: We describe a normal height, slightly obese CMA result in patients with global developmental delay/intellec- female patient with ID, language impairment, facial dysmorph- tual disability and the results are inconsistent. Present data isms,macrocephaly, scoliosis, skinabnormalities,brain abnormal- suggest CMA as a method of choice in children with multiple ities (septum pellucidus and cavum vergae cysts), congenital anomalies and/or microcephaly. Study with a larger hepatosplenomegaly, hypertransaminasemia and hepatic steato- number of patients, or meta-analysis of previously performed sis.Exomesequencingidentiﬁedinthepatientaheterozygousde studies, could give more precise insight in correlation of novo pathogenic variant (c.1463G> A; p.Arg488His) in DDX3X phenotypic features and pathogenic CMA results in this speciﬁc gene.A229Kb3q29microduplication,notoverlappingthecritical groupofpatients. regionfor3q29duplicationsyndrome,waspreviouslydetectedby J.RumlStojanovic:None.M.Mijovic:None.A.Miletic:None. CGHarray inthepatient and herhealthy mother. B.Bosankic: None. H.Petrovic:None. G.Cuturilo: None. Literature Review: review of ID cases caused by DDX3X variants and 3q29 duplications to compare their genetic and phenotypic spectra vs.our patient.  P08
.036.B High diagnostic yield using a 460 gene panel in Results: Microcephaly and low weight were often associated patients withintellectual disability with the DDX3X spectrum, whereas obesity, hepatic involvement andmacrocephalywerereported.ThesameDDX3Xvariantofour NinoSpataro1,MiriamGuitart1,ElisabethGabau2,NuriaCapdevila2, patient was previously reported only in one case with some JuanPabloTrujillo-Quintero2,LauraCapel1,NeusBaena1,AnnaRuiz1 phenotype differences (low weight, corpus callosum hypoplasia, ventricular enlargement, cleft lip/palate). Microduplications of 1Genetics Laboratory, UDIAT-Centre Diagnòstic. Parc Taulí Hospital 3q29may present generalizedobesity. Universitari. Institut d’Investigació i Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT. Conclusions: We report a patient with DDX3X variant and Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Sabadell, Spain, 2Paediatric atypical phenotype. Clinical variability could be explained by a Unit.ParcTaulíHospitalUniversitari.Institutd’InvestigacióiInnovació "secondhit"geneticaberrationandwesupposeapossibleroleof Parc Taulí I3PT. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Sabadell, the3q29microduplicationpreviouslydetectedinthepatientand Spain. hermother, thushamperingcorrect categorization. R.Colantuono:None.M.Rocco:None.D.DiSalvio:None.M. Introduction: Intellectual disability (ID) affects 1-3% of the Tessitore:None.L.Nazzaro:None.D.Viggiano:None.M.Falco: population and is deﬁned by deﬁcits in intellectual functioning None. G. Mancano: None. T. Kleefstra: None. L. Blok: None. M. and adaptive behavior with onset before age 18 years. Approxi- DellaMonica: None. P. Vajro:None. D.Melis: None. mately, 70% of ID cases are due to genetic factors, among those de novo pathogenic variants in dominant genes account for the majority ofcases.  P08
.035.AMultiplemajoranomaliesandmicrocephalypredict Material and methods: We developed a dominant and the detection of pathogenic copy number variations in X-linkedIDgenepanelincluding460genes.Thepanelwastested EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 240 on 223 patients affected by ID and with negative aCGH. Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) pipeline. Exome data were Sequencing was performed in an Illumina MiSeq System; a interpreted in agreement with local practices. Phenotypes were customised bioinformatic pipeline was developed for discovery, reportedby each attendingphysician. annotation and ﬁltering of SNVs, indels and CNVs. Sanger Results: We describe 8 patients from 5 families, most of them sequencingonparentalsampleswasusedforsegregationanalysis bornfromconsanguineousparents,carryingrarepresumptiveloss ofcandidate variants. of function variants in THUMPD1. Common phenotypic ﬁndings Results: A diagnostic yield of 30,9% was obtained after target included: microcephaly, global developmental delay, speech high depth sequencing. 74,2% of pathogenic variants were de delay, moderate to severe intellectual deﬁciency, behavioral novo while 15% were inherited, of which 50% were in X-linked abnormalities such as angry outbursts, facial dysmorphism and genes.Fortheremainingpathogenicvariantssegregationanalysis ophthalmologicalabnormalities. wasnotpossible. Theimplementedbioinformatic pipeline allows Conclusions: Given the genotypic and phenotypic similarities a high detection rate of pathogenic variants minimizing the inourcaseseries,weproposethatrecessivevariantsinTHUMPD1 detectionof variantsof unknownsigniﬁcance. should be considered causal of syndromic intellectual disability. Conclusion:ThediagnosticyieldofourcustomisedIDpanelis We describe a new neurodevelopmental syndrome with intellec- higherthanthatofaCGH.WeproposetheuseofourIDpanelas tualdisability,developmentaldelay,behavioralabnormalitiesand ﬁrsttierdiagnosisinunexplainedIDpatients.Eventhoughexome facialdysmorphism. sequencing may yield a higher diagnostic rate, the use of an ID M. Broly: None. B. Isidor: None. T. Besnard: None. D. paneliscosteffective,timesavingandminimizethedetectionof O’Rourke:None.J.Baptista:None.S.Ellard:None.M.Almannai: variantsofunknown signiﬁcance. None.H.Mais Omar:None.F. Abdulwahab: None. H.Shamsel- N. Spataro: None. M. Guitart: None. E. Gabau: None. N. din:None.S.Al-Tala:None.F.Alkuraya:None.A.Leon:None.R. Capdevila: None. J. Trujillo-Quintero: None. L. Capel: None. N. vanLoon:None.A.Ferlini:None.M.Sanchini:None.S.Bigoni: Baena:None. A.Ruiz: None. None.M.O’Connell:None.B.Polevoda:None.K.Awayda:None. S.Bézieau: None.B.Cogné: None.  P08
.037.C THUMPD1 is a new cause of syndromic intellectual developmental disorder  P08
.038.DEfﬁcientapplicationofnext-generationsequencing forthe diagnosis ofneurodevelopmental diseases Martin Broly1, Bertrand Isidor1,2, Thomas Besnard1,2, Declan O’Rourke3, Julia Baptista4,5, Sian Ellard4,5, Mohammed Almannai6, Irene Madrigal, Maria Isabel Alvarez-Mora, Aurora Sanchez, Laia Hashem Mais Omar7, Ferdous Abdulwahab7, Hanan Shamseldin7, Rodriguez-Revenga Saeed Al-Tala8, Fowzan S Alkuraya7,9, Alberta Leon10, R.L.E. van Loon11, Alessandra Ferlini12, Mariabeatrice Sanchini12, Stefania Biochemistry andMolecular Genetics, Barcelona, Spain. Bigoni12,MitchellO’Connell13,BogdanPolevoda13,KamelAwayda13, Stéphane Bézieau1,2,Benjamin Cogné1,2 Introduction: Neurodevelopmental diseases affect 2%-3% of the general population, and have highly clinical and genetic hetero- 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, geneity, which complicates the genetic diagnosis. In fact the 2Université de Nantes, CNRS, INSERM, l’institut du thorax, Nantes, genetic defect remains unknown in around 40% of patients. The France, 3Department of Neurology, Children’s Health Ireland at applicationofnext-generationsequencingischangingthenature Temple Street, Dublin, Ireland, 4Exeter Genomics Laboratory, Royal ofbiomedicaldiagnosis.Thistechnologyhasquicklybecomethe Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom, method of choice for searching for pathogenic mutations in rare 5Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter geneticdiseases. Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, 6Section of Medical MaterialandMethods:Inordertoidentifyvariantsunderlying Genetics,Children’sHospital,KingFahadMedicalCity,Riyadh,Saudi disease phenotypes, we applied whole-exome or genome Arabia,7DepartmentofTranslationalGenomics,CenterforGenomics sequencing to 59 families with one or several members affected Medicine,KingFaisalSpecialistHospitalandResearchCenter,Riyadh, withintellectual disability. SaudiArabia,8PediatricsDepartment,ArmedForcesHospital,Khamis Results: Identiﬁcation of disease-causing mutations was Mushait, Saudi Arabia, 9College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, achieved in 42% of studied families (25/59) who could receive a Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 10Research & Innovation (R&I Genetics) Srl, geneticdiagnosisandcounselling.Allidentiﬁedgenesarerelated Genetic Laboratory, Padua, Italy, 11Department of Genetics, Uni- to ID although the 80% of the variants had not been previously versity of Utrecht, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, described. Regarding the inheritance, 40% were autosomic Netherlands, 12Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Medical dominant, 36% were X-linked, 20% were autosomic recessive Sciences, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 13Department of and4% wereimprinting mutations. Biochemistry and Biophysics, Center for RNA Biology, University of Conclusions: The accessibility to next-generation sequen- Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA. cingallowsclinicianstosavemuchtimeandcostinidentifying theaetiologyofrarediseases.Thepresentedcasesareexcellent Introduction: tRNA-modiﬁcations such as methylation via tRNA- examples that demonstrate the efﬁcacy of next-generation methyltransferase (TRMT1) or NO P2
/Sun RNA Methyltransferase 2 sequencing in rare disease diagnosis. Acknowledgements: This (NSUN2) have been implicated in autosomal recessive intellectual study was supported by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III [PI12/ developmental disorder (ARIDD). THUMPD1 carries a thiouridine 00879], co-ﬁnanced by Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional synthases, methylases and pseudouridine synthases (THUMP) RNA- (FEDER) “una manera de hacer Europa”, AGAUR from the bindingdomaininvolvedintRNAacetylation.Recently,thisgenewas Autonomous Catalan Government [2017 SGR1134] and Funda- proposedasacandidategeneforARIDD.Herewepresentaseriesof ción Alicia Koplowitz (AKOPLOWITZ18_001). The ‘CIBER de 8 patients showing syndromic intellectual disability with homo- Enfermedades Raras’ is an initiative of the ISCIII. We want to zygousorcompoundheterozygousTHUMPD1variants. thank the “CERCA Programme” from the Autonomous Catalan Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) was Government. performedonblood-derivedDNAsamplesfollowingeachcenter’s EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 241 I.Madrigal:None.M.Alvarez-Mora:None.A.Sanchez:None. intellectual disability or global developmental delay (8/8) and L.Rodriguez-Revenga: None. autismspectrumdisorders(10/11).Seizuresfreewasnotedin2/8 patients. All patients showed speech delay and/or language impairment (8/8), three displayed a regression. Mainly patients  P08
.039.A Dominant variants in ITSN1 cause neurodevelop- presented severe behavioural troubles and/or severe psychiatric mental disorderspectrum disorders. Minor and inconstant dysmorphic features were observed. We suggest ITSN1 gene is involved in development of Ange-Line Bruel1,2, Antonio Vitobello1,2, Isabelle Thiffault3, Linda an autism spectrum disorder with variable additional neurodeve- Manwaring4, Marcia Willing4, Pankaj B. Agrawal5, Allan Bayat6, lopmentaldeﬁciency,thusconﬁrmingthehypothesisthatITSN1is Thomas M. Kitzler7,8, Catherine A. Browntein9, Casie A. Genetti10, importantfor brain development. Joseph Gonzales-Heydrich11, Parul Jayakar12, Jacob W. Zyskind13, A. Bruel: None. A. Vitobello: None. I. Thiffault: None. L. Zehua Zhu13, Clemence Vachet14, Gena R. Wilson15, Brianna Manwaring: None. M. Willing: None. P.B. Agrawal: None. A. Pruniski15, Anne-Marie Goyette16, Yannis Duffourd1,2, Christophe Bayat: None. T.M. Kitzler: None. C.A. Browntein: None. C.A. Philippe1,2,17, ChristelThauvin-Robinet1,17,2,Laurence Faivre2,17,1 Genetti:None.J.Gonzales-Heydrich:None.P.Jayakar:None.J. W. Zyskind: None. Z. Zhu: None. C. Vachet: None. G.R. Wilson: 1UMR1231 INSERM, GAD, Dijon, France, 2Unité Fonctionnelle None.B.Pruniski:None.A.Goyette:None.Y.Duffourd:None.C. Innovation en Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, FHU- Philippe:None. C.Thauvin-Robinet: None. L.Faivre:None. TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 3Center for Pediatric Genomic Medicine, Children’s Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, KS,USA,4DepartmentofPediatrics,DivisionofGeneticsandGenomic  P08
.040.B Expanding the mutational landscape and clinical Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, phenotype ofthe YIF1B related braindisorder USA, 5Divisions of Newborn Medicine, Genetics and Genomics, The Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Boston Children’s Eva Medico Salsench1, Reza Marooﬁan2, Kristina Lanko1, Belén Hospital, Boston, Boston, MA, USA, 6Department of Genetics and Pérez Gonzalez3, Obdulia Sanchez-Lijarcio3, Salvador Ibáñez-Mico4, Precision Medicine, Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Denmark, Antonina Wojcik5, Marcello Vargas5, Audrey Schroeder6, Chin-To 7Research Institute, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Fong6, Amber Begtrup7, Ibrahim H Kaya8, Mohammad AlMuhai- Quebec; Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, zea8,9, Dilek Colak10, Henry Houlden2, Robert-Jan Galjaard1, Namik McGillUniversityHealthCentre,Montreal,QC,Canada,8Department Kaya10,Tahsin StefanBarakat1 of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 9Divisions of Newborn Medicine, Genetics and Genomics, The 1Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Boston Children’s 2UCLQueenSquareInstituteofNeurology,London,UnitedKingdom, Hospital, Boston, MA, USA, 10Divisions of Genetics and Genomics, 3Centro de Biología Molecular, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Department of Pediatrics, The Manton Center for Orphan Disease Madrid,Spain,4ArrixacaUniversitaryHospital,Murcia,Spain,5Gillette Research,BostonChildren’sHospital,Boston,MA,USA,11Department Children’s Specialty Healthcare, St. Paul, MN, USA, 6University of ofPsychiatry,BostonChildren’sHospital,MantonCenterforOrphan Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, USA, 7GeneDx, Gaithers- Disease Research, Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston burg, MD, USA, 8AlFaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 9King Children’s Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical FaisalSpecialistHospitalandResearch,Riyadh,SaudiArabia,10King School, Boston, MA, USA, 12Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi NicklausChildren’sHospital,Miami,FL,USA,13GeneDX,Gaitherburg, Arabia. MD, USA, 14Service de néphrologie pédiatrique, Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire Besançon, Besançon, France, 15Division of Intracellularproteinsinvolvedinmediatingvesiculartrafﬁckingin Genetics and Metabolism, Phoenix Children’s Medical Group, eukaryoticcellshavebeenimplicatedinbraindisorders,showing Phoenix, AZ, USA, 16FRCPC, Developmental Pediatrician, Montreal therelevanceoftheprocessforneuronaldevelopmentinhuman. Children’s Hospital, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, QC, YIF1B is an essential protein involved in the anterograde Canada, 17Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translation- trafﬁckingfromtheendoplasmicreticulumtothecellmembrane, nelle et Anomalies du Développement (TRANSLAD), Centre Hospita- and in Golgi apparatus architecture. We recently described a lier Universitaire Dijon, Dijon, France. neurodevelopmental disorder caused by recessive variants in YIF1B,whichhasnowbeenrecognizedbyOMIMasKaya-Barakat- We described de novo and inherited missense and truncating Masson syndrome (KABAMAS, OMIM# 619125). So far, our study variantsinITSN1asanovelcauseofneurodevelopmentaldisorder (Almuhaizea et al.) and that of Diaz et al. reported 16 affected spectrum in a total of 8 unrelated patients. A review of the individuals from 11 independent families. These individuals literature identiﬁed four additional patients from large meta- presented with a progressive encephalopathy with various analysis studies. ITSN1 plays an important role in brain develop- degrees of movement disorders, microcephaly, and epilepsy. In mentincludingincludingdevelopmentofdendriticspines,cortical all but one family, bi-allelic protein truncating variants were midline connectivity, synaptic vesicle recycling, neuronal migra- identiﬁedinYIF1B,withonlyasinglebi-allelicmissensemutation tion, synaptic plasticity and more recently in learning and assumed to be causative. Here, we describe 6 additional memory. We evidenced that missense ITSN1 variants (3/12 individuals from 6 families harboring protein altering variants in variants) without splicing defect predicted are spatially clustered YIF1B, 4 of which are homozygous or compound heterozygous in C-terminal in an important regional missense constraint. missense variants. Interestingly, all YIF1B missense variants Missense variants are predicted probably damaging by encountered localized in, or close to, the transmembrane PolyPhen-2. GnomAD database reported the intolerance of ITSN1 domains, which were previously shown to be essential for YIF1B gene to support missense variants (misZ-score=3.61). Variants function. To investigate the function of these missense variants, causing premature codon stop (9/12 variants) are located in the we performed site-directed mutagenesis followed by expression ﬁrst half of the protein. ITSN1 showed a high intolerance to and interaction studies, providing functional evidence from in inactivationreportedbyGnomADdatabasewithanassociatedpLI vitro studies that these missense variants impact on YIF1B (probability of loss-of-function intolerance) score of 1. Neurologi- function.Inaddition,wecomparetheclinicalphenotypebetween cal disorders were diagnosed in all patients and included allcurrentlyknownYIF1Bcasestofurtherdelineatethemutational EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 242 landscape and the clinical phenotype associated with this new are known to cause global developmental delay, behavioral disease entity. disorders, and variousepilepsies. Most variants occur denovo and E. Medico Salsench: None. R. Marooﬁan: None. K. Lanko: rarelyinherited.Here,wereporta14-year-oldmalepatientwhowas None. B. Pérez Gonzalez: None. O. Sanchez-Lijarcio: None. S. admitted to our clinic with seizures, developmental delay history, Ibáñez-Mico: None. A. Wojcik: None. M. Vargas: None. A. and mild intellectual disability. Brain magnetic resonance image Schroeder: None. C. Fong: None. A. Begtrup: None. I. Kaya: (MRI) was normal and electroencephalogram (EEG) showed spike None.M.AlMuhaizea:None.D.Colak:None.H.Houlden:None. and sharp-wave complexes emerging in the left hemisphere R.Galjaard: None. N.Kaya:None. T.Barakat: None. parietooccipitalareaswhichparoxysmallygeneralized. Materials and Methods: We performed whole exome sequenceanalysis(WES) intheproband.  P08
.041.CFrameshiftvariantinSETD5inapatientpresenting Results: WES identiﬁed a heterozygous frameshift mutation aKBGsyndrome c.522delA in exon 1 of KCNB1 (NM_004975.4) predicting a premature stop codon p.Lys174Asnfs*20 in the proband. Sanger AngelaTeresaAbadPerez1,FelixBoschann1,BirgitJödicke2,Denise sequencing conﬁrmed the heterozygous c.522delA mutation in Horn1 the proband and his mother who had also epilepsy and mild intellectual disability. His 45 years old mother had used 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité – antiepileptic drugs for 9 yearsafter a seizure episode at 12 years Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität old. Also, the mother’s uncle’s son is nonverbal and has Berlin,Humboldt-UniversitätzuBerlin,andBerlinInstituteofHealth, developmentaldelay and epilepsy. Berlin, Germany, Berlin, Germany, 2Center for Chronically Sick Conclusions: Our study shows that frameshift mutation in Children, Department of Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, KCNB1 gene can cause intrafamilial phenotypic variability and Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie relativelymilder clinicalﬁndingsinthese patients. UniversitätBerlin,Humboldt-UniversitätzuBerlin,andBerlinInstitute E. Uctepe: None. F.N. Esen: None. S. Tümer: None. A. ofHealth, Berlin, Germany. Yesilyurt: None. KBG syndrome (KBGS) is a developmental disorder characterized by distinctive craniofacial features, macrodontia of the upper  P08
.043.AGenIDA,aninternationalparticipatorydatabaseto central incisors, skeletal anomalies, short stature and neurologic get an insight into the natural history and co-morbidities of involvementthatmayincludeseizuresandintellectualdisability.It genetic forms ofneurodevelopmental disorders iscausedbysequencevariantsinANKRD11andthe16q24.3deletion, whichincludesANKRD11.Forasmallnumberofaffectedindividuals, Jean-Louis Mandel1,2, Pauline Burger1,2, Axelle Strehle1,2, Florent acausativeANKRD11variantcannotbedetected.Here,wedescribea Colin1,2, Timothée Mazzucotelli1, Nicole Collot1, Amélie Piton1,2,3, 16-year-old female patient with macrodontia of the upper central Pierre Parrend2,4, Laurence Faivre5,6, David Geneviève7, Valentin incisors, short stature and developmental delay. Hand radiographs Ruault7, Thomas Smol8, Roseline Caumes9, Joost Kummeling10, showed a shortening of the 5th metacarpal. At age 7, she was Charlotte Ockeloen10, TjitskeKleefstra10, David Koolen10 clinically diagnosed with KBGS. Analysis of ANKRD11 revealed no mutations or deletions of the gene. Exome sequencing revealed a 1IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 2Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, heterozygous de novo frameshift-mutation in the SETD5 gene. France, 3Unité de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Haploinsufﬁciency of SETD5 causes intellectual disability with minor Strasbourg,Strasbourg,France,4ECAMStrasbourg-Europe,Schiltigh- facial dysmorphism and skeletal anomalies (mental retardation, eim, France, 5Equipe Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, autosomaldominant23,MRD23)andisbelievedtobecausativeof Université de Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon, France, 6Centre de thecorephenotypeofthemicrodeletion3p25.3syndrome.Loss-of- Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et function variants in SETD5 were recently reported in three patients Syndromes Malformatifs, FHU TRANSLAD, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU with an initial KBGS clinical diagnosis. Reevaluation of previously Dijon et Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 7Université de reported cases revealed a signiﬁcant clinical overlap between KBG, Montpellier, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Montpellier, CLAD Sud MRD23 and microdeletion 3p25.3 syndromes. (Crippa et al., 2019) Languedoc‐Roussillon, INSERM, Montpellier, France, 8CHU Lille, ANKRD11 and SETD5 have been identiﬁed as chromatin regulators Institut de Génétique Médicale, RADEME, Lille, France, 9CHU Lille, involved in gene expression. In mouse embryonic stem cells, both Clinique de Génétique Guy Fontaine, Lille, France, 10Department of proteins have been shown to physically interact at the molecular HumanGenetics,DondersInstituteforBrain,CognitionandBehavior, level.ThisreportprovidesfurtherevidencethatSETD5mutationscan Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,Netherlands. cause KBGS phenotype. Targeted analysis of SETD5 should be consideredinunsolvedKGBSpatients. GenIDAisaninternationalonlineprojectinitiatedwiththeaimof A.T.AbadPerez:None.F.Boschann:None.B.Jödicke:None. better characterising the clinical manifestations and natural D.Horn:None. historiesofgeneticformsofintellectualdisabilitywithorwithout autism or epilepsy. Clinical information reported and updated by theproband’sfamilyusingastructuredquestionnaire,isanalysed  P08
.042.DKCNB1frameshiftvariantcausedinheritedintellec- to identify new medically signiﬁcant information for families and tual disability, developmental delay andseizure professionals concerned by a given condition. The current questionnaire consists of 41 multiple-choice questions exploring EyyupUctepe1, FatmaNisaEsen2,Sait Tümer2,Ahmet Yesilyurt2 physicalparameters,cognitiveandbehaviouralaspects,presence or absence of neurological manifestations or problems affecting 1Acıbadem Labmed/Ankara Tissue Typing Laboratory, Ankara, major physiological functions (cardiac, respiratory, renal…). Five Turkey, 2Acibadem Labgen Genetic Diagnosis Center, İstanbul, openquestionsexplorethefamilies’perceptionofmanifestations Turkey. whichmostaffecthealthandqualityoflifeoftheirrelative,events of adverse reactions to treatments, etc. Currently, the question- Introduction: Potassium voltage-gated channel subfamily B mem- naire is available in 7 languages and has been ﬁlled for 1080 ber 1 (KCNB1) encodes Kv2.1 potassiumchannel. KCNB1 mutations patients, the main cohorts being Koolen-de Vries/KdVS (n=210), EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 243 Kleefstra(147)andKBG(40)syndromes.Thisallowedidentiﬁcation Lisa Pavinato1,2, Marina Villamor-Payà3, Maria Sanchiz-Calvo3, of respiratory problems in KdVS not reported previously, and of Cristina Andreoli4, Marina Gay3, Marta Vilasec3, Gianluca Arauz- differences in behavioural manifestations between the 3 syn- Garofalo3,AndreaCiolﬁ5,AlessandroBruselles6,TommasoPippucci7, dromes.Otherscohortshaveexperiencedsigniﬁcantgrowthover ValentinaProta4,DianaCarli8,ElisaGiorgio1,9,FrancescaClementina thelastyear(MED13L:36,DDX3X:32;POGZ:10).Comparingsleep Radio5, Vincenzo Antona10, Mario Giuffrè10, Kara Ranguin11, Cindy and epilepsy aspects for these 6 conditions reveal major Colson11, Silvia De Rubeis12,13,14, Paola Dimartino15, Joseph Bux- differences. For instance, for POGZ, sleep disorders appear much baum12,13,14,GiovanniBattistaFerrero16,17,MarcoTartaglia5,Simone more frequent than epilepsy. For KdVS, epilepsy that affects Martinelli6, TravisH. Stracker3,18,Alfredo Brusco1,19 almost 50% of patients is of much greater concern than sleep problems. 1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, Conclusion: The data validate the interest of our participatory 2Institute of Human Genetics and Center for Molecular Medicine approach: through their direct involvement, families can reveal Cologne, University of Cologne, Köln, Germany, 3The Barcelona aspects of the pathology that have been underestimated until Institute of Science and Technology, Institute for Research in now. Biomedicine, Barcelona, Spain, 4Department of Environment and J. Mandel: None. P. Burger: None. A. Strehle: None. F. Colin: Health, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 5Genetics and Rare None.T.Mazzucotelli:None.N.Collot:None.A.Piton:None.P. Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù Parrend:None.L.Faivre:None.D.Geneviève:None.V.Ruault: IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 6Department of Oncology and Molecular None.T.Smol:None.R.Caumes:None.J.Kummeling:None.C. Medicine,IstitutoSuperiorediSanità,Rome,Italy,7MedicalGenetics Ockeloen: None. T.Kleefstra: None. D.Koolen:None. Unity, Sant’Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 8Department ofPediatrics andPublicHealthandPediatricSciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 9Department of Molecular Medicine,  P08
.045.C Deletions in MACROD2 gene and Autism Spectrum UniversityofPavia,Pavia,Italy,10DepartmentofSciencesforHealth Disorders Promotion and Mother and Child Care "G. D’Alessandro", University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy, 11Department of Genetics, Reference FernandoMachoCarballido,JavierTorresHernández,MariaLuisa center for Rare Diseases and Developmental Anomalies, Caen, Quintanilla Mata, María Esther Simarro Rueda, Laura Navarro France, 12Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn Casado, EliaLópez Ballesteros School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York City, NY, USA, 13DepartmentofPsychiatry,IcahnSchoolofMedicineatMountSinai, HospitalGeneral Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain. New York City, NY, USA, 14The Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Introduction:AutismSpectrumDisorders(ASD),whicharedeﬁned New York City, NY, USA, 15Department of Medical and Surgical as a chronic neurological disorder with a strong genetic basis, Sciences, Bologna, Italy, 16Department of Pediatrics and Public manifests at an early age with a variety of symptoms related to Health and Pediatric Sciences, Turin, Italy, 17Clinical and Biological social interaction, communication and lack of ﬂexibility in Sciences Department, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 18Radiation reasoning and behavior. MACROD2 is a gene involved in DNA Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA, repair, cell signaling, gene transcription, and chromatin remodel- 19Unit of Medical Genetics, "Città della Salute e della Scienza" ing. It is highly expressed in the ventricular zone of the brain University Hospital, Turin, Italy. during embryonic development. Deletions of 20p12.1 involving MACROD2 have been associated with ASD according to several TheTousled-LikeKinases1and2(TLK1andTLK2)areinvolvedin studies that preliminarily linked this gene to ASD. CASE REPORT manyfundamentalprocesses,includingDNAreplication,cellcycle First,in2012,ina12-year-oldpatientdiagnosedwithASD,a400K checkpoint recovery and chromatin remodeling. Variants in TLK2 array-CGH was made, resulting in a deletion of 86 Kb in 20p12.1 were associated with “Mental Retardation Autosomal Dominant (chr20: 14147320_14234229). This CNV was classiﬁed as of 57” (MRD57), a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by a uncertain clinical signiﬁcance and was not considered as the highly variable phenotype, including intellectual disability, beha- causeofthedisorder.Recently,inanother3-year-oldpatientwith vioralabnormalities,facialdysmorphisms,microcephaly,epilepsy, ASD, a genetic study was carried out using a 180K CGH-array, and skeletal anomalies. By whole exome sequencing and array- ﬁnding a 0.265 Mb deletion in 20p12.1 (chr20: CGH analysis, we identiﬁed three unrelated MRD57 cases. Two 14776880_15041538) in the MACROD2 gene. In both cases, the were sporadic and caused by a missense change (c.1652A>G; p. deletions were inherited from healthy mothers, so these altera- (Asp551Gly)) and a 39-kb deletion encompassing TLK2, and one tions could have incomplete penetrance and high phenotypic wasfamilialwiththreeaffectedsiblingswhoinheritedanonsense variability. changefromanaffectedmother(c.1423G>T;p.(Glu475Ter)).Using Discussion: Based on these cases and others previously spatial proteomics (BioID) and single-cell gel electrophoresis, we reported[Lombardoetal.,2019;Fryeetal.,2016],wheredeletions investigated the proximity interaction landscape of TLK2 and in20p12.1arefoundinnon-syndromicboyswithASD,itwouldbe analyzed the effects of p.(Asp551Gly) and a previously reported necessarytoreviewoldcasesinwhichnocause-effectwasfound missense variant (c.1850C>T; p.(Ser617Leu)) on TLK2 interactions, betweenthedeletion andthedisorder. localization and activity. Proximal interactions between TLK2 and F. Macho Carballido: None. J. Torres Hernández: None. M. otherfactorsimplicatedinneurologicaldisorders,includingCHD7, Quintanilla Mata: None. M. Simarro Rueda: None. L. Navarro CHD8, BRD4, NAC C1
, were identiﬁed. Notably, most of these Casado:None. E. LópezBallesteros: None. interactions were altered by the analyzed missense variants, as well as TLK2 kinase activity and localization. Furthermore, we demonstrated a more relaxed chromatin state in lymphoblastoid  P08
.047.D Functional analysis of TLK2 variants and proximal cells harboring the p.(Asp551Gly) variant compared to control interactome support a pathogenic mechanism based on cells, conferring susceptibility to DNA damage. Overall, our study impaired kinase activity causing alteration of chromatin identiﬁed novel patients carrying pathogenic variants conﬁrming stability pathways and further expanding MRD57-related phenotype. By means of EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 244 interactome and functional analysis, we have molecularly char- The Solve-RD project has received funding from the European acterized two missense variants, providing new insights on the Union’sHorizon2020researchandinnovationprogrammeunder pathomechanisticconsequencesofTLK2mutationsonintellectual grantagreementNo779257. disability andneurodevelopmental disorders. E.deBoer:None.C.W.Ockeloen:None.L.Matalonga:None. L.Pavinato:None.M.Villamor-Payà:None.M.Sanchiz-Calvo: R.Horvath:None.R.J.Rodenburg:None.M.J.H.Coenen:None. None. C. Andreoli: None. M. Gay: None. M. Vilasec: None. G. M. Janssen: None. D. Henssen: None. C. Gilissen: None. W. Arauz-Garofalo: None. A. Ciolﬁ: None. A. Bruselles: None. T. Steyaert: None. I. Paramonov: None. A. Trimouille: None. T. Pippucci:None.V.Prota:None.D.Carli:None.E.Giorgio:None. Kleefstra:None. A. Verloes:None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. F.Radio:None.V.Antona:None.M.Giuffrè:None.K.Ranguin: None.C.Colson:None.S.DeRubeis:None.P.Dimartino:None. J. Buxbaum: None. G. Ferrero: None. M. Tartaglia: None. S.  P08
.049.C A prospective study highlighting the increasing Martinelli:None. T.H.Stracker: None. A.Brusco: None. role of multiple molecular diagnoses in the ﬁeld of rare diseases  P08
.048.B A MT-T L1
 variant identiﬁed by whole exome Caroline Racine1,2,3, Camille Engel2, Frédéric Tran Mau-Them1,2, sequencing in an individual with intellectual disability, Ange-Line Bruel1,2, Antonio Vitobello1,2, Arthur Sorlin1,2,3, Anne- epilepsyandspastic tetraparesis Sophie Denommé-Pichon1,2,3, Hana Safraou1,2,3, Sophie Nambot1,3, Julian Delanne1,3, Aurore Garde1,3, Marie Bournez3, Sébastien Elke de Boer1, Charlotte W. Ockeloen2, Leslie Matalonga3, Rita Moutton1,3, Julien Thevenon3, Daphnée Lehalle3, Nada Houcinat3, Horvath4,Solve-RDSNV-indelworkinggroup,RichardJ.Rodenburg5, Nolwenn Jean-Marçais3, Marjolaine Willems4, Alain Verloes5, Fanny Marieke J. H. Coenen6, Mirian Janssen7, Dylan Henssen8, Christian Laffargue6, Lucile Pinson4, James Lespinasse7, Elodie Lacaze8, David Gilissen9,Wouter Steyaert9,IdaParamonov3,Solve-RD-DITF-ITHACA, Geneviève4, Olivier Patat9, Laetitia Lambert10, Marion Gérard- Aurélien Trimouille10, Tjitske Kleefstra1, Alain Verloes11, Lisenka E. L. Blanluet11, Charlotte Benigni10, Orphanomix Physician’s Group, M.Vissers1 Philippine Garret1,2, Christophe Philippe1,2, Yannis Duffourd1,2, LaurenceFaivre1,2,3,Christel Thauvin-Robinet1,2,12 1Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 1InsermUMR1231GAD,GeneticsofDevelopmentaldisorders,Université 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Nether- de Bourgogne-Franche Comté, FHU TRANSLAD, Dijon, France, 2Unité lands, 3CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Fonctionnelle "Innovation diagnostique dans les maladies rares" Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain, laboratoire de génétique chromosomique et moléculaire, Plateau 4DepartmentofClinicalNeurosciences,UniversityofCambridge,John Technique de Biologie, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 3Centre de Référence Van Geest Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Cambridge, United MaladiesRares"AnomaliesduDéveloppementetsyndromesmalforma- Kingdom,5Department of Laboratory Medicine, Translational Meta- tifs", FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 4Département de bolicLaboratory,Radboudumc,Nijmegen,Netherlands,6Department GénétiqueMédicale,MaladiesraresetMédecinePersonnalisée,CHUde of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Montpellier,Montpellier,France,5DépartementdeGénétique,Assistance Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7Department of Internal Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP) Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, Medicine, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8Department of France, 6Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Medical Imaging, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 9Depart- Estaing, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 7Laboratoire de Génétique Chromo- ment of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life somique, CH Général, Chambéry, France, 8Département de génétique, Sciences, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 10Laboratoire de CHduHavre,LeHavre,France,9ServicedeGénétiqueMédicale,Hôpital GénétiqueMoléculaire,ServicedeGénétiqueMédicale,CHUBordeaux Purpan, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Toulouse, France, 10Service de – Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux Cedex, France, 11Département de Génétique Clinique, CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France, 11Service de Génétique, APHP Robert DEBRE University Hospital and INSERM Génétique,CHUdeCaen,Caen,France,12CentredeRéférenceMaladies U1141,Paris, France. Rares "Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de causes rares", FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon,Dijon,France. The genetic etiology of intellectual disability remains elusive in almost half of all affected individuals. Within the Solve-RD Introduction: The utility of next-generation sequencing (NGS) consortium, systematic re-analysis of whole-exome sequencing technologies in the ﬁeld of rare diseases has already been proven, (WES)datafromunresolvedcaseswithintellectualdisability(n= improving the molecular diagnosis rate. Among those diagnoses, 1,472 probands) was performed. This re-analysis included variant multiple molecular diagnoses have been reported in the literature, calling of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variants, although mtDNA rangingfrom3.2%to7%ofpositivediagnoses.Wehereanalyzetheir is not speciﬁcally targeted in WES. We identiﬁed a functionally characteristicsinastudyonexomesequencing(ES)data. relevant mtDNA variant in MT-T L1
 (NC_012920.1:m.3291T>C; MaterialsandMethods:ESdatawereobtainedfromacohort NC_012920.1:n.62T>C), at a heteroplasmy level of 22% in whole of 1859 unrelated patients, referred to our diagnostic laboratory blood, in a 23-year-old male with severe intellectual disability, for the etiological work-up of intellectual disability and/or epilepsy, episodic headaches with emesis, spastic tetraparesis, congenital abnormalities. Data were analyzed prospectively from brainabnormalitiesandfeedingdifﬁculties.Targetedvalidationin January 2017to December2020. blood and urine supported pathogenicity, with heteroplasmy Results: A molecular diagnosis was raised for 615/1859 patients levels of 23% and 58% in index, and 4% and 17% in mother, (33.1%).Amongthem,21(3.4%)hadtwopathogenicvariantsand20 respectively.Interestingly,notallphenotypicfeaturesobservedin additionalpatientshadonepathogenicandonevariantofunknown the index have been previously linked to this MT-T L1
 variant, signiﬁcance(VUS)withahighprobabilityofbeingreclassiﬁedaslikely suggesting either broadening of the m.3291T>C-associated pathogenicinthefuture,raisingtherateto6.7%.Causalcopy-number phenotype, or presence of a co-occurring disorder. Hence, our variantswerefoundin9/21patients.Twopatientsdisplayedasecond case highlights the importance of underappreciated mtDNA variant involving a distinct disease. Both variants contributed to a variants identiﬁable from WES data, especially for cases with complexphenotypefor10patients.Fortheremaining9,thesecond atypical mitochondrial phenotypes and their relatives in the variant modulated the phenotype. When parental samples were maternalline. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 245 available,bothvariantswerefounddenovofor1/16patient,andone 86021,Poitiers,France,16Columbia University Irving Medical Center, variantdenovofor9/16patients. NewYork,NY,USA,17UniversityofColorado,SchoolofMedicineand Conclusions:Ourresultsareconsistentwiththeliteraturesince Children’s Hospital, Aurora, CO, USA, 18Division of Pediatric multiplemoleculardiagnosesoccurredin3.4%ofpositivecases– Neurology,UniversityofTennessee,HealthScienceCenter,Memphis, 6.7%ifVUSareconsidered.Itsuggeststheirincreasingroleinrare TN, USA, 19Division of Clinical Genetics, Rutgers New Jersey Medical diseases and the great value of taking them into consideration School, Newark, NJ, USA, 20Maine Medical Partners, Pediatric withinalaboratory diagnostic routine. Specialty Care Genetics, Portland, ME, USA, 21Institut de Génétique C.Racine:None.C.Engel:None.F.TranMau-Them:None.A. médicale,CliniqueGuydeFontaine,JeannedeFlandre,Lille,France, Bruel:None. A.Vitobello:None. A.Sorlin:None. A.Denommé- 22Pôle Biologie Pathologie Génétique, Centre de Biologie Pathologie Pichon: None. H. Safraou: None. S. Nambot: None. J. Delanne: Pierre-Marie Degand, Lille, France, 23Département de Génétique None. A. Garde: None. M. Bournez: None. S. Moutton: None. J. Médicale, Hôpital Timone Enfant, Marseille, France, 24Département Thevenon:None.D.Lehalle:None.N.Houcinat:None.N.Jean- de Génétique Médicale, Maladies Rares et Médecine Personnalisée, Marçais: None. M. Willems: None. A. Verloes: None. F. CHUMontpellier, Montpellier, France, 25Service de Nutrition, Hôpital Laffargue: None. L. Pinson: None. J. Lespinasse: None. E. de laPitié Salpêtrière - AP-HP,Paris, France. Lacaze:None.D.Geneviève: None.O.Patat:None.L.Lambert: None. M. Gérard-Blanluet: None. C. Benigni: None. P. Garret: Introduction: Pathogenic variants of the myelin transcription None. C. Philippe: None. Y. Duffourd: None. L.Faivre: None. C. factor-1like(MYT1L)genecauseasyndromicneurodevelopmental Thauvin-Robinet: None. disorder and include missense, premature termination codon (PTC) variants and 2p25.3 microdeletions. Despite a strong enrichment in de novo mutations in developmental disorders or  P08
.050.DMYT1L-associatedneurodevelopmentaldisorder:a autism trio studies, the clinical characterization and phenotype- clinical and molecular description of 37 new cases and genotype correlations are scarce and only 21 patients with literature review missense orPTC variantshave beenreportedso far. Materials and Methods: We collected clinical and genetic JulietteCoursimault1,Anne-MarieGuerrot1,MichelleMorrow2,Bert information of 37 new patients with (likely) pathogenic MYT1L Callewaert3, Sarah Vergult3, Laurence Faivre4, Frédéric Tran Mau- variants through datasharing resources and collaborations and Them4, Ange-Line Bruel4, Estelle Colin5, Marine Tessarech6, Mathilde performedacomprehensivemeta-analysiswithalreadypublished Nizon7, Benjamin Cogne7, Bertrand Isidor7, Cyril Mignot8, Diane data(total=58patients). Doummar9, Boris Keren8, Stéphanie Valence9, Delphine Héron8, Results: We ﬁrst conﬁrmed that the main phenotypic features Françoise Devillard10, Charles Coutton11, Marlène Rio12, Karine of the MYT1L-related disorder are developmental delay (95%), Poirier12,EliseSchaefer13,BénédicteGérard14,GwenaëlLeGuyader15, intellectual disability (ID, 68%), overweight or obesity (59%), FrédéricBilan15,WendyChung16,RebeccaHernan16,AustinLarson17, behavioral disorders (100%) and epilepsy (22%). In addition, 32% Kelly Nori17, Sarah Stewart17, James Wheless18, Salima El Cheha- of the patients presented learning disorders without ID and 19% deh13,BethPletcher19,ChristinaKresge19,MargaretHelm20,Laurence presentedininfancyfeedingdifﬁculties,whichwerenotreported Colleaux12, Anne-Sophie Alaix12, Jeanne Amiel12, Sophie Rondeau12, before. We further describe the inconstant dysmorphic features Roseline Caumes21, Thomas Smol22, Sabine Sigaudy23, Alexandra (69%)and present the weightevolution of 21 patients. Weshow Afenjar8, Christine Coubes24, Christine Poitou25, Thierry Frébourg1, that patients harboring highly clustered missense variants within PascaleSaugier-Veber1,Gaël Nicolas1,François Lecoquierre1 the2ndand 3rd zinc ﬁnger domains are not clinically distinguish- ablefrompatientswithtruncatingvariants.Wereporttheﬁrstde 1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245, CHU Rouen, Depart- novo missense variants outside the 2nd and 3rd zinc ﬁnger ment of Genetics and reference center for developmental disorders, domains,whichneverthelessremainthetargetdomainsformost FHU G4 Génomique, F-76000, Rouen, France, 2GeneDX, 207 Perry pathogenic missense variants. Parkway Gaithersburg, MD 20877, Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 3Center Conclusion:Weprovideanupdateddescriptionofclinicaland for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Department of genetic data of the MYT1L-associated neurodevelopmental BiomolecularMedicine,GhentUniversity,Ghent,Belgium,4Servicede disorder, hence improving diagnosis and clinical management of Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, CHU Dijon, Dijon, thesepatients. Fundings: RIN2018 France,5DepartmentofBiochemistryandGenetics,AngersUniversity J.Coursimault:None.A.Guerrot:None.M.Morrow:None.B. Hospital,Angers,FranceUMRCNR S6015
-INSERM1083andPREMMI, Callewaert: None. S. Vergult: None. L. Faivre: None. F. Tran MitovascInstitute,Angers,France,6DepartmentofBiochemistryand Mau-Them:None.A.Bruel:None.E.Colin:None.M.Tessarech: Genetics,AngersUniversityHospital,Angers,FranceUMRCNR S6015
- None. M. Nizon: None. B. Cogne: None. B. Isidor: None. C. INSERM1083andPREMMI,MitovascInstitute,Angers,France,7CHU Mignot: None. D.Doummar: None. B.Keren: None. S.Valence: Nantes, Service de Génétique Médicale, Nantes, France, 8APHP. None.D.Héron:None.F.Devillard:None.C.Coutton:None.M. SorbonneUniversité,DépartementdeGénétique,GroupeHospitalier Rio:None.K.Poirier:None.E.Schaefer:None.B.Gérard:None. Pitié-Salpêtrière-Hôpital Trousseau, Centre de Référence Déﬁciences G. Le Guyader: None. F. Bilan: None. W. Chung: None. R. Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, Paris, France, 9APHP.Sorbonne Hernan:None.A.Larson:None.K.Nori:None.S.Stewart:None. Université, Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, J. Wheless: None. S. El Chehadeh: None. B. Pletcher: None. C. France, 10Service de génétique et procréation CHU Grenoble Alpes, Kresge:None.M.Helm:None.L.Colleaux:None.A.Alaix:None. Grenoble, France, 11Genetic Epigenetic and Therapies of Infertility, J. Amiel: None. S. Rondeau: None. R. Caumes: None. T. Smol: InstituteforAdvancedBiosciences,InstitutNationaldelaSantéetde None. S. Sigaudy: None. A. Afenjar: None. C. Coubes: None. C. la Recherche Médicale U1209, Centre National de la Recherche Poitou: None. T. Frébourg: None. P. Saugier-Veber: None. G. Scientiﬁque UMR 5309, Université Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France, Nicolas: None.F. Lecoquierre: None. 12Department of Genetics, IHU Necker-Enfants Malades, University Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 13Service de génétique médicale, HôpitauxUniversitairesdeStrasbourg,InstitutdeGénétiqueMédicale  P08
.051.AMicrodeletionsat19p13.11infourindividualswith d’Alsace,Strasbourg,France,14LaboratoiredeDiagnosticGénétique, neurodevelopmental delay Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 15Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Poitiers, Service de Génétique, B P577
, Melissa Rieger1, Sébastien Moutton2, Sarah Verheyen3, Michael Speicher3, Bruno Leheup4, Celine Bonnet5, Katharina Steindl6, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 246 Beatrice Boneda6, Anita Rauch6, Mandy Krumbiegel1, André Reis1, Massachusetts Medical School – Baystate, Springﬁeld, MN, USA, Ulrike Hüffmeier1 3Department of Genetics, Southern California Permanente Medical Group, Kaiser Permanente, Riverside, CA, USA, 4Department of 1Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, Genetics, Southern California Permanente Medical Group, Kaiser 2CPDPN,Pôlemèreenfant,MSPBordeauxBagatelle,Talence,France, Permanente, Riverside, MN, USA, 5Department of Human Genetics, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Diagnostic and Research Center for EmoryUniversitySchoolofMedicine,Atlanta,GA,USA,6UMR-Inserm MolecularBioMedicine, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 1231 GAD team, Génétique des Anomalies du développement, 4Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France, Université de Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, 7Division of 5Laboratoire de génétique médicale, CHRU Nancy, Nancy, France, Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Rutgers Robert Wood 6Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schlieren, Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ, USA, 8Sanford Health, Switzerland. SiouxFalls,SD,USA,9DivisionofGenetics,DepartmentofPediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at Los Introduction: Chromosomal microarrays (CMA) have been used Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 10Institute of Human Genetics, toinvestigatetheetiologyofdevelopmentaldisorders/intellectual University of Leipzig Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany, 11Genetic disability (DD/ID) for more than a decade. The pangenomic HealthQueensland,RoyalBrisbaneandWoman’sHospital,Brisbane approach allowed to identify numerous microdeletion and and School of Medicine, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, microduplication syndromes in undiagnosed patients and con- Brisbane, Australia, 12Synlab Human Genetics Freiburg, Freiburg, tributed to increased diagnostic rate and to better deﬁne Germany, 13Clinical Genetics, Hassenfeld Children’s Hospital at NYU genotype phenotype correlations. Few cases with copy number Langone, NYU Langone, Orthopedic Hospital, New York, NY, USA, variants at 19p13.11 and scarce clinical information have been 14Sackler School of Medicine at Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, previously described. Most of them were identiﬁed by molecular andInstituteofRareDiseases,Edmond&LilySafraChildrenHospital, genetictestingdue tointellectual disability. Tel Hashome, Italy, 15GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, USA, 16Division of Materialandmethods:UsingCMA,microdeletionsatchromo- Medical Genetics and Metabolism, Children’s Hospital of The King’s some band 19p13.11 were detected in four independent Daughters,Norfolk,VA,USA,17UBMDPediatrics,DivisionofGenetics, individuals presenting with a DD/ID phenotype. The group was Buffalo, NY, USA, 18Institut of Human Genetics, Universitätsspital gatheredthrough Decipher and internalcollaborations. Bern,Bern, Switzerland. Results: All four patients presented with variable neurodeve- lopmental and speech delay as well as behavioral and sleeping Introduction:AnidenticalhomozygousmissensevariantinEIF3F, difﬁculties. Moreover, they partly showedcardiovascular, skeletal, identiﬁed through a large-scale genome-wide sequencing and various other malformations. Most common overlapping approach, was reported as causative in nine individuals with a dysmorphic features were a prominent nose, a thin upper neurodevelopmental disorder, characterized by variable intellec- vermilion, and a short neck. Dysmorphic features were rather tual disability, epilepsy, behavioral problems and sensorineural subtle and non-speciﬁc and therefore not considered as a hearing-loss. recognizable facial gestalt. The analyzed parents did not carry Material and methods: To reﬁne the phenotypic and expand thedeletions,indicatingadenovooccurrence.Thedeletionsizes the molecular spectrum of EIF3F-related neurodevelopmental rangedbetween0.7–1.5Mb,locatedbetweenMegabases18-21 disorder,weexamined independentpatients. andcontainedavariablenumberofprotein-codinggenes(n=25- Results: 21 patients were homozygous and one compound 48).Fornoneofthegenesintheshortestregionofoverlapthere heterozygous for c.694T>G/p.(Phe232Val) in EIF3F. Haplotype was enough evidence to qualify them as candidates for the analyses in 15 families suggested that c.694T>G/p.(Phe232Val) neurodevelopmental delay. wasafoundervariant.Allaffectedindividualshaddevelopmental Conclusion: Our ﬁndings support a locus on 19p13.11 delays including delayed speech development. About half of the associated with neurodevelopmental disorder and variable affected individuals had behavioral problems, altered muscular malformations. tone,hearingloss,andshortstature.Moreover,thisstudysuggests M. Rieger: None. S. Moutton: None. S. Verheyen: None. M. that microcephaly, reduced sensitivity to pain, cleft lip/palate, Speicher: None. B. Leheup: None. C. Bonnet: None. K. Steindl: gastrointestinal symptoms and ophthalmological symptoms are None. B. Boneda: None. A. Rauch: None. M. Krumbiegel: None. partofthephenotypicspectrum.Minordysmorphicfeatureswere A.Reis:None. U.Hüffmeier: None. observed, although neither the individuals’ facial nor general appearance were obviously distinctive. Symptoms in the com- pound heterozygous individual with an additional truncating  P08
.052.B EIF3F-related neurodevelopmental disorder: reﬁn- variantwereatthesevereendofthespectruminregardtomotor ingthe phenotypic andexpanding the molecular spectrum milestones, speech delay, organic problems and pre- and postnatal growth of body and head, suggesting some genotype- Ulrike D. Hüffmeier1, Cornelia Kraus1, Miriam S. Reuter1, Steffen phenotype correlation. Uebe1, Mary-Alice Abbott2, Syed A. Ahmed3, Kristyn L. Rawson4, Conclusions:Ourstudyreﬁnesthephenotypicandexpandsthe Eileen Barr5, Hong Li5, Ange-Line Bruel6, Laurence Faivre6, Frédéric molecular spectrum of EIF3F-related syndromic neurodevelop- Tran Mau Them6, Christina Botti7, Susan Brooks7, Kaitlyn Burns8, mental disorder. Funding: IZKF project  E31
 to CZ, NIH National IsumWard8,MarinaDutra-Clarke9,JulianA.Martinez-Agosto9,Hane CenterforAdvancingTranslationalScience(NCATS)UCLAClinical Lee9,StanleyF.Nelson9,UCLACaliforniaCenterforRareDisease9,Pia and Translational Science Institute (CTSI) grant number Zacher10, Rami Abou Jamra10, Chiara Klöckner10, Julie McGaugh- U L1
TR001881. ran11, Jürgen Kohlhase12, Sarah Schuhmann1, Ellen Moran13, John U.D. Hüffmeier: None. C. Kraus: None. M.S. Reuter: None. S. Pappas13, Annick Raas-Rothschild14, Maria J. Guillen Sacoto15, Uebe:None.M.Abbott:None.S.A.Ahmed:None.K.L.Rawson: Lindsay B. Henderson15, Timothy Blake Palculict15, Sureni V. None.E.Barr:None.H.Li:None.A.Bruel:None.L.Faivre:None. Mullegama15, Houda Zghal Elloumi15, Adi Reich15, Samantha A. F.T.M. Them: None. C. Botti: None. S. Brooks: None. K. Burns: Schrier Vergano16,Erica Wahl17,André Reis1, Christiane Zweier1,18 None. I. Ward: None. M. Dutra-Clarke: None. J.A. Martinez- Agosto: None. H. Lee: None. S.F. Nelson: None. U. California 1Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, CenterforRareDisease:None.P.Zacher:None.R.AbouJamra: 2Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of None. C. Klöckner: None. J. McGaughran: None. J. Kohlhase: None.S.Schuhmann:None.E.Moran:None.J.Pappas:None.A. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 247 Raas-Rothschild:None.M.J.GuillenSacoto:A.Employment(full Ben Pode-Shakked1,2, Oratl Barel1, Amihood Singer3, Elon Pras1,2, or part-time); Modest; GeneDx. L.B. Henderson: A. Employment LiorGreenbaum1,2 (full or part-time); Modest; GeneDx. T. Blake Palculict: A. Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest;GeneDx.S.V.Mullegama: 1Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel, 2Sackler Faculty of A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; GeneDx. H. Zghal Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Community Genetics, Elloumi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; GeneDx. A. PublicHealthServices,MinistryofHealth,Jerusalem,Israel. Reich: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; GeneDx. S.A. Wholeexomesequencing(WES)isanimportantdiagnostictoolfor SchrierVergano:None.E.Wahl:None.A.Reis:None.C.Zweier: individualsaffectedbyneurodevelopmentaldisorders(NDD)and/or None. multiplecongenitalanomalies(MCA).However,WEScostisoftenan obstacleforpursuingthisoption.Weevaluatedtheyieldofpublicly funded clinical WES, performed in a single tertiary referral center  P08
.053.CInvestigatingconsanguineousfamiliesfromTurkey during a three-year period (2018-2020). All index cases had the to identify autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental following: (1) moderate to severe intellectual disability (ID) disorders (intelligence quotient [IQ]/developmental quotient [DQ] ≤55); or (2) mild to moderate ID (IQ/DQ<70) with epilepsy or congenital Esen Gumuslu1, Evren Gümüs2, Ozlem Oz3, Melis Ozkan4, Kadri anomaly; or (3) MCA. Only subjects with normal chromosomal Karaer5,ArifEkici1,EdibePembegulYildiz4,NurAydinli4,AndréReis1 microarray analysis results who met inclusioncriteria,were offered to participate. Overall, 280 consecutive families were included. In 1InstituteofHumanGeneticsUniversityHospitalFriedrich-Alexander- 250(89.3%)families,theindexcasehadNDD.In252ofthefamilies University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 2Sitki Kocman (90.0%),atrioWESwasperformed.Moleculardiagnosiswasreached UniversitySchoolofMedicine,MedicalGeneticsDepartment,Mugla, in 115 (41.1%) families, mainly due to de novo mutations (92/115, Turkey, 3Harran University School of Medicine, Medical Genetics 80.0%). Disease-causing variants were identiﬁed in a total of 102 Department, Sanliurfa, Turkey, 4Istanbul University School of genes,ﬁfteenofwhichwereimplicatedinmorethanasinglefamily. Medicine,PediatricNeurologyDepartment,Istanbul,Turkey,5Pamuk- Bothpaternalandmaternalageatpregnancywereolderinfamilies kale University School of Medicine, Medical Genetics Department, with a de novo mutation, compared to all other cases. Yield was Denizli,Turkey. lower in families with premature birth compared to birth at term. Other demographic and clinical variables (including multiply Introduction: Neurodevelopmental disorders(NDDs) are geneti- affected family, coexistence of epilepsy, autism spectrum disorder, cally and phenotypically highly heterogeneous. Autosomal abnormal brain imaging or microcephaly) were not signiﬁcantly recessive (AR) genetic defects are more difﬁcult to diagnose and associatedwithWESyield.Takentogether,ourﬁndingssupportWES are thus underreported. In consanguineous marriages, AR gene utility in a real-world setting, as part of a publicly funded genetic alterations are enriched, but these families also can have work-upforNDDand/orMCA. autosomal dominant new mutations and X-linked inherited variants. We reasoned that studying families with multiple B. Pode-Shakked: None. O. Barel: None. A. Singer: None. E. affectedindividuals wouldselect for ARinheritance. Pras: None.L.Greenbaum: None. Materials and Methods: We recruited 176 patients from 77 consanguineous families with NDDs with two or more affected individuals through clinical genetic and neuro-paediatric con-  P08
.055.A NFIB - associated intellectual disability and/or sultations from various academic hospitals in Turkey. In a pilot speech delay: ﬁrst report of two novel structural variant study, we report exome sequencing results from a subset of 17 disruptions familieswith 38affected. Results: In 12 individuals (32%) from six families we identiﬁed Constantia Aristidou1,2, Marselia Pantelidou1,2, LUDMILA KOUSOU- previously described pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants in LIDOU1,2,AthinaTheodosiou1,2,IoannisPapaevripidou1,SoﬁaKitsiou sixgenes(ADAT3,CL P1
,KMT2D,NSUN,PTRH2andSCNA8A).In24 -Tzeli3,Niels Tommerup4,Carolina Sismani1 individuals we found rare missense variants in established or candidategenes.Ofthese,in9individualsthephenotypewasin 1Department ofCytogenetics andGenomics, TheCyprus Instituteof accordancewiththeliterature,bringingnumberof“solved”cases Neurology and Genetics, NICOSIA, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus School of to 21 (55%). In 14 individuals we found multiple rare variants in Molecular Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Department of Medical genescausingoverlappingphenotypes,whichmakesthesecases Genetics, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, difﬁcult to disambiguate. In three families, affected siblings were 4Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, discordant forthemolecular ﬁndings. Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Conclusion: This study has identiﬁed novel variants in known Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (candidate) genes in 55% of individuals allowing broadening of the phenotypic spectrum associated with these genes. The The nuclear factor I (NFI) genes encode a family of transcription majority of variants are missense and difﬁcult to interpret. factors essential for multi-organ development during embryogen- Affectedindividualsoftenhavevariantsinmultiplegenes,raising esis. NFIA and NFIX have been implicated in abnormal clinical thequestion ofpossibly blended phenotypes. phenotypemanifestation.NFIBhaploinsufﬁciency,causedbymicro- E. Gumuslu: None. E. Gümüs: None. O. Oz: None. M. Ozkan: deletions and point mutations, has only recently been reported in None.K.Karaer:None.A.Ekici:None.E.PembegulYildiz:None. patients with variable intellectual disability, macrocephaly, motor N.Aydinli: None. A.Reis:None. and speech delay. However, NFIB disruptions caused by structural variantshavenotbeenreported.Herewereporttwoindependent cases with NFIB disruptions that were identiﬁed through low-  P08
.054.D High diagnostic rate in publicly funded clinical coveragewhole-genomemate-pairsequencing(WG-MPS). whole exome sequencing for neurodevelopmental disorders Speciﬁcally, WG-MPS was applied to map breakpoints in a and congenital anomalies: A tertiary center experience with female with dysmorphic facial features, speech delay and a 280probands EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 248 balancedt(4;9)(q26;p24)dn(patient1),andamalewithintellectual P. Carrasco Salas: None. R. Mateos Checa: None. A. Serrano disability and an inv(9)(p22q21.2) inherited from his father with Mira:None.M. Oliva de Agar:None. developmental and speech delay (patients 2,3). PCR primers ﬂanking the predicted rearrangement junctions and Sanger sequencing were used to potentially identify clinically-relevant  P08
.057.C Recessively inherited pathogenic  P4
HTM gene genesatthebreakpoint sites. variants cause Hypotonia, Hypoventilation, Intellectual Dis- The rearrangement breakpoints were reﬁned to the base-pair ability, Dysautonomia, Epilepsy, and Eye Abnormalities level in all affected individuals. The derivative 9 breakpoint (HIDEA syndrome) (chr9:14104379-14104385) in patient 1 directly disrupted NFIB intron 10, while the inv(9) breakpoint (chr9:14451707-14451711), Elisa Rahikkala1,2,3, Matti Myllykoski4,5, Reetta Hinttala2,4, Päivi identically found in patients 2,3, mapped ~138kb upstream NFIB Vieira2,6, Naemeh Nayebzadeh2,4, Simone Weiss7, Astrid S. Plomp8, (NM_001190737.2) (hg38). The remaining breakpoints were Reginald Bittner9, Mitja I. Kurki10,11,12, Outi Kuismin1,2,10, Andrea M. locatedinintergenic regions. Lewis13,14, Marja-Leena Väisänen15, Hannaleena Kokkonen15, Jonne In conclusion, this study reports for the ﬁrst time two cases Westermann8, Gűnther Bernert7, Hannu Tuominen16, Aarno Palo- with overlapping phenotypes carrying structural variants that tie10,11,12, Lauri Aaltonen17, Yaping Yang14,18, Lorraine Potocki13,14, disrupt directly or indirectly the NFIB gene. Future functional Jukka Moilanen1,2, Silvana van Koningsbruggen8, Xia Wang14,18, studies will deﬁne the underlying molecular mechanisms and Wolfgang M. Schmidt9, Peppi Koivunen* contributed equally4,5, further support the impact of these novel ﬁndings, thus JohannaUusimaa* contributed equally2,4,6 expanding the current literature on the heterogeneous patho- genicity of NFIB variants. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, C. Aristidou: None. M. Pantelidou: None. L. Kousoulidou: Finland,2PEDEGOResearchUnitandMedicalResearchCentreOulu, None.A.Theodosiou:None.I.Papaevripidou:None.S.Kitsiou- University of Oulu and Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland, Tzeli: None.N.Tommerup: None. C.Sismani: None. 3Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 4Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 5Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, Oulu Centre for Cell-Matrix  P08
.056.B A case report of O-Donnell-Luria-Rodan syndrome Research,UniversityofOulu,Oulu,Finland,6DepartmentofChildren withanovel truncatingvariant and Adolescents, Division of Paediatric Neurology, Oulu University Hospital,Oulu,Finland,7KaiserFranzJosefHospitalwithG.v.Preyer Pilar Carrasco Salas1, Rosario Mateos Checa2, Ana Serrano Mira1, Children’s Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Vienna, Austria, MarinaOliva deAgar3 8Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 9Neuromuscular Research 1Genetic Unit, Clinical Analysis Department, Hospital Juan Ramón Department, Medical University of Vienna, Centre for Anatomy and Jiménez, Huelva, Spain, 2Neuropediatric Unit, Pediatric Department, Cell Biology, Vienna, Austria, 10Institute for Molecular Medicine Hospital Juan Ramón Jiménez, Huelva, Spain, 3Genetics, Reference Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, Helsinki, Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain. Finland, 11Psychiatric & Neurodevelopmental Genetics Unit, Massa- chusettsGeneralHospital,Boston,MA,USA,12TheStanleyCenterfor Introduction: O’Donnell-Luria-Rodan (OLR) syndrome is a neuro- Psychiatric Research, The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, developmental disorder described recently. In the only study Cambridge,MA,USA,13Texas Children’sHospital, Houston,TX,USA, published to date, a possible correlation between genotype and 14Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, phenotype has been proposed. Most individuals with protein- Houston, TX, USA, 15Northern Finland Laboratory Centre NordLab truncating variants in KMT2E gene appear to present with andMedicalResearchCentre,OuluUniversityHospitalandUniversity generally mild developmental delay and intellectual disability, of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 16Department of Pathology, Oulu University while patients with missense variants presented with the most Hospital,Oulu,Finland,17DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Genome- severephenotype. ScaleBiologyResearchProgram,UniversityofHelsinkiandHaartman Material and methods: The proband is a girl aged 6 years. In Institute,Helsinki, Finland, 18Baylor Genetics, Houston, TX,USA. the ﬁrst months of life, she presented with hypotonia, macro- cephaly and three venous hemangiomas that made suspect Introduction: A transmembrane prolyl 4-hydroxylase ( P4
H-TM) initiallyaneurocutaneoussyndrome.Atageone,shestartedwith encodedbythe P4
HTMgenehasnotyetbeenassociatedwithany treatmentrefractoryepilepsy.Later,gastrointestinalabnormalities, Mendeliandisorder.Anewsyndromewithhypotonia,intellectual progressive cerebral atrophy and severe development delay (she disabilityandeyeabnormalities(HIDEA)wasrecentlydescribedin wasunabletowalkorspeak)wasobserved.Duetothiscomplex a large consanguineous family from Northern Finland. Genome phenotype, whole exome sequencing was performed by Sure- sequencing resulted in a shortlist of three candidate genes with SelectXTHumanAllExonV5(AgilentTechnologies,USA).Parents’ potentially pathogenic biallelic variants: TKT,  P4
HTM and US P4
. analysiswasdone by Sangersequencing. However, thecausativegene remained elusive. Results: A heterozygous frameshift variant was identiﬁed in Material & methods: International collaboration and whole KMT2Egeneintheproband((NM_182931.2):c.3487_3488insAT(p. exome sequencing (WES) analysis were used to identify new Arg1163Hisfs*31)). It is a novel variant not previously described. patientswithHIDEAandbiallelicpotentiallypathogenicvariantsin Parents were not carried, being the diagnosis of OLR syndrome the P4
HTMgene. P4
H-TMwildtypeandvariantconstructswithout conﬁrmed. thetransmembraneregionwereoverexpressedininsectcellsand Conclusions: We present a case of severe OLR syndrome in a analyzedwith SDS-PAGE andWestern blot. patient with a truncating variant. This suggests that the Results:Fivedifferenthomozygousorcompoundheterozygous divergence in phenotype of patients with this syndrome is not pathogenic P4
HTMgenevariantswereidentiﬁedinsixnewandsix related to the type of mutations identiﬁed, but is more likely a previously published patients presenting with HIDEA. Hypoventi- resultofadditionalgeneticorepigeneticfactors.Thepatienthad lation, obstructive and central sleep apnea and dysautonomia hemangiomas, a clinical feature not described in other patients were identiﬁed as novel features associated with the phenotype. until now. Further studies are required to conﬁrm these two Characterization of three of the  P4
H-TM variants demonstrated ﬁndings insolubleprotein products and,thus,loss-of-function. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 249 Conclusions: Biallelic loss-of-function  P4
HTM variants were genetically determined mental retardation and increase the shown to cause HIDEA syndrome. Our ﬁndings enable diagnosis effectivenessof preventive measures. of the condition, and highlight the importance of assessing the L. Sheiko: None. I. Lastivka: None. V. Antsupova: None. I. need for non-invasive ventilatory support in patients. Funding: Ushko:None. L.Brisevac:None. V. Davydiuk: None. This study was supported by the Academy of Finland Grants  P08
.063.A Expanding the phenotype of QRICH1 associated 266719and308009,theS.JuséliusFoundation,theEmilAaltonen neurodevelopmental disorder Foundation andthe Janeand AatosErkko Foundation to P.K. E.Rahikkala:None.M.Myllykoski:None.R.Hinttala:None.P. SmithaKumble1,AmandaM.Levy2,SixtoGarcía-Miñaúr3,4,HuaGao5, Vieira:None.N.Nayebzadeh:None.S.Weiss:None.A.S.Plomp: MariaPalomares-Bralo3,4,MartaPacio-Míguez3,SumitParikh6,AlyssaL. None.R.Bittner:None.M.I.Kurki:None.O.Kuismin:None.A.M. Ritter7, Kosuke Izumi7, Trevor L. Hoffman8, Henry Oppermann9, Lise Lewis: None. M. Väisänen: None. H. Kokkonen: None. J. Bjerglund10, Jill A. Rosenfeld11, Cynthia Curry12, Laurence Faivre13,14, Westermann: None. G. Bernert: None. H. Tuominen: None. A. Anja Leiber15, Scott Robinson16, Richard S. Finkel17,18, Amanda Palotie:None.L.Aaltonen:None.Y.Yang:A.Employment(fullor Gerard11,19, Julie S. Cohen20, Yili Xie21, Sureni V. Mullegama21, Konrad part-time); Signiﬁcant; The Department of Molecular and Human Platzer9, Maria J. Guillen Sacoto21, Anya Revah-Politi22,23, Sara M. Genetics at Baylor College of Medicine derives revenue from Berger24, Anne M. Comi25, Kwame Anyane-Yeboa16, Alice Fiévet26,27, molecular genetic testing offered at Baylor Genetics.. L. Potocki: Cassie S. Mintz28, Reymundo Lozano29, Jennifer E. Posey11, Michael None. J. Moilanen: None. S. van Koningsbruggen: None. X. Ciliberto30,LillianHoward30,PaulBenke31,SylvieOdent32,Anne-Sophie Wang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; The Denommé-Pichon33,34, Mathys Wéber13, Nicholas Ah Mew35, Elsebet Department of Molecular and Human Genetics at Baylor College Ostergaard36,37, Alejandro D. Iglesias38, Jaya Punetha11,39, Wendy K. of Medicine derives revenue from molecular genetic testing Chung40,NatashaBrown1,41,ZeynepTümer2,37 offered at Baylor Genetics.. W.M. Schmidt: None. P. Koivunen* contributed equally: None. J. Uusimaa* contributed equally: 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children’s Research None. Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2Kennedy Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen,Denmark,3InstituteofMedicalandMolecularGenetics,  P08
.058.D Phelan-McDermid syndrome: the use of modern La Paz University Hospital, Idipaz, Madrid, Spain, 4Centro de methods of cytogenetic examination in the diagnosis of Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, Instituto autismspectrum disorders Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 5Department of Review Analysis, GeneDx LLC, Maryland, MD, USA, 6Mitochondrial Medicine & Neurogenetics, Larysa Sheiko1, Iryna Lastivka2, Vita Antsupova3, Iana Ushko3, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA, 7Divison of Human Genetics, LjudmilaBrisevac1,Volodymyr Davydiuk4 Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 8Regional Department of Genetics, Southern 1ShupykNationalMedicalAcademyofPostgraduateEducation,Kyiv, California Kaiser Permanente Medical Group, Pasadena, CA, USA, Ukraine, 2Bukovinian State Medical University, Chernivtsi, Ukraine, 9Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center, 3Bohomolets National Medical University, Kyiv, Ukraine, 4National Leipzig, Germany, 10Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital PirogovMemorial Medical University, Vinnitsa, Ukraine. Hvidovre, Copenhagen, Denmark, 11Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, Introduction: Phelan-McDermid syndrome (PMD) is one of the 12GeneticMedicine,DeptofPediatrics,UCSF/Fresno,Fresno,CA,USA, autism spectrum disorder (ASD) syndromes caused by the 13Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes deletion of the terminal or interstitial parts chromosome Malformatifs, FHU TRANSLAD, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, 22q13.3. In the case of the formation of a circular chromosome France, 14Inserm UMR1231 GAD, Génétique des Anomalies du withoutlossofmaterial,thephenotyperemainsnormal,butthere Développement, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 15Depart- is a risk of microdeletion in the offspring. Patients with PMD are ment of neuropediatrics, Childrens Hospital of Eastern Switzerland, usually seen with a diagnosis of undifferentiated mental retarda- St. Gallen, Switzerland, 16Department of Pediatrics, Columbia tion orautism. University New York, New York, NY, USA, 17Nemours Children’s Materials and Methods: a clinical case of Phelan-McDermid Hospital, Orlando, FL, USA, 18Center for Experimental Neurother- syndrome in a child with undifferentiated mental retardation. apeutics, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA, Clinical genealogical, syndromic, cytogenetic, molecular genetic 19Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, USA, 20Department of methods wereused. Neurology and Developmental Medicine, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Results: A six-year-old girl with undifferentiated mental Baltimore, MD, USA, 21Clinical Genomics Program, GeneDx, Mary- retardation was referred for genetic counseling. Previously land,MD,USA,22InstituteforGenomicMedicine,ColumbiaUniversity observed by a pediatrician, pediatric neurologist, psychiatrist for MedicalCenter,NewYork,NY,USA,23PrecisionGenomicsLaboratory, microcephaly, delayed statokinetic and psychoverbal develop- Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA, ment.Girlphenotype:dolichocephaly,highforehead,ﬂatteningof 24Departments of Pediatrics, Columbia University New York, New the middle part of the face, deep-set eyes, full and puffy eyelids, York, NY, USA, 25Kennedy Krieger Institute Hugo Moser Research longeyelashes,hypertelorism,fullcheeks,enlargedears.Thechild Institute, Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins exhibitsautisticbehavior.Genetictestingincludeddetermination SchoolofMedicine,Baltimore,MD,USA,26GCSSeqOIA,Paris,France, ofthekaryotypeoftheprobandandparentsbyseveralmethods: 27Service Génétique des Tumeurs, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, GTG; FISH with DNA samples WC P1
-22, X, Y and FISH with locus 28Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences and Pediatrics, speciﬁc samples 22SI LSI TUPL E1
, 22q13 ARSA. Result: 46,XX,r(22) Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, NY, (p11.2q13), Phelan McDermid syndrome, recommendations for USA,29DepartmentofGeneticsandGenomicSciences,Pediatricsand therehabilitationofthechildweregiven.Maternalkaryotype:46, Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital, New XX. Paternal karyotype: 46,XY,r(22), gene sequencing is recom- York,NY,USA,30SteadFamilyDepartmentofPediatrics,Universityof mendedSHANK3. Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA, 31Joe DiMaggio Children’s Hospital, Conclusions: The use of a complex of modern cytogenetic Hollywood,FL,USA,32CHURennes,HôpitalSud,ServicedeGénétique methods,FISHwithDNAprobes,orSHANK3genesequencingcan Clinique,UnivRennes,CentrederéférenceAnomaliesdudéveloppe- signiﬁcantly increase the number of diagnosed cases of mentCLAD-Ouest,ERNITHACA,Rennes,France,33INSERMUMR1231 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 250 Equipe GAD, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 34Unité Michelle Caudle1, Jacqueline Ogilvie2, John Vincent3, Hanxin Lin4, Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic génomique des maladies Rebecca Lau3,Anna Mikhalov3, Victoria M.Siu1,5 rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 35Rare DiseaseInstitute,Children’sNationalHospital,Washington,DC,USA, 1MedicalGeneticsProgramofSouthwesternOntario,LondonHealth 36Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada, 2Division of Developmental Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 37Department of Clinical Pediatrics,DepartmentofPediatrics,SchulichSchoolofMedicineand Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Dentistry, Western University, London, ON, Canada, 3Family Mental Copenhagen,Copenhagen,Denmark,38DivisionofClinicalGenetics, HealthResearchInstitute,CAMH,Toronto,ON,Canada,4Department DepartmentofPediatrics,ColumbiaUniversityIrvingMedicalCenter, ofPathology and Laboratory Medicine, Schulich SchoolofMedicine NewYork,NY,USA,39DepartmentofGeneticsandGenomicSciences, andDentistry,WesternUniversity,London,ON,Canada,5Divisionof Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA, Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Schulich School of 40DepartmentsofPediatricsandMedicine,ColumbiaUniversityNew MedicineandDentistry,WesternUniversity,London,ON,Canada. York, New York, NY, USA, 41University of Melbourne Department of Paediatrics, RoyalChildren’sHospital, Melbourne, Australia. Introduction: Rett syndrome, an X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder typically affecting females, is most often caused by de Introduction:Ninedenovoloss-of-functionandasinglemissense novo mutations in MEC P2
 on the paternally inherited allele. variant in the QRICH1 gene have previously been reported in Pathogenic hemizygous MEC P2
 variants in males are usually individualswithdevelopmentaldelay,autism,shortstature,facial embryoniclethalorcausesevereneonatalencephalopathy.Case: dysmorphism and chondrodysplasia. We present 27 additional A female child, born at 29 weeks with uncomplicated neonatal individuals with QRICH1-related neurodevelopmental disorder to course,presentedat1yearwithregressioninbabblingandlower further delineate the spectrum of clinical features and genetic limb spasticity. By 36 months she remained non-verbal and variants contributing to this emerging autosomal dominant displayed mid-line stereotypies. Genetic testing identiﬁed a syndrome. heterozygous pathogenic variant in the MEC P2
 gene, Methods: Phenotypic and molecular data from 27 previously NM_001110792.1: c.1195_1246del; p.(Pro399Serfs*5). This 52 bp unreported individuals with QRICH1 variants were gathered deletioninthelastexonisexpectedtoresultinaframeshiftwith through international collaboration and compared to those of premature termination of protein synthesis. Unexpectedly, her the10previously reportedindividuals. unaffectedfather wasfound to be hemizygous for this variant in Results: Frequent phenotypic features included mild to DNA from blood, buccal swab, saliva, and urine. His unaffected moderate developmental delay/intellectual disability (70%), facial mother and sister were heterozygous for the variant. Trio whole dysmorphism (84%), short stature (41%), poor weight gain (41%) exomesequencingoftheprobandandherparentsconﬁrmedthe and hypotonia (49%). Additional ﬁndings were seizures (24%), MEC P2
 variant but did not identify any additional pathogenic minor structural brain abnormalities (24%) and scoliosis (19%). variants in other genes. Inexplicably, mRNA analysis of the Twenty-sevenindividualshadtruncatingorsplicevariants,and10 proband’s DNA only yielded PCR products ampliﬁed from the hadmissensevariants.Fourvariantswereinheritedfromamildly mutant allele while in the proband’s father, there was no MEC P2
 affected parent. Individuals with missense variants were more mRNAampliﬁcationat all. likely to report early language delay as compared to those with Conclusions: While we believe that the frameshift variant is loss-of-function variants(10/10 vs14/27,pvalue=0.005). pathogenic in the proband, we cannot explain why her father is Conclusion: In addition to the known neurodevelopmental unaffected. We postulate that the C terminal deletion may have featuresandshortstature,weexpandthephenotypicspectrumof variable effects or that there may be some modiﬁer gene(s) QRICH1-associated disorders to include poor weight gain, involved. This is the ﬁrst report of an unaffected male carrying a hypotonia,minorstructuralbrainanomalies,scoliosisandseizures. constitutional mutation inMEC P2
. Inherited variants from mildly affected parents are reported for M. Caudle: None. J. Ogilvie: None. J. Vincent: None. H. Lin: the ﬁrst time, suggesting variable expressivity. Aside from None.R. Lau: None. A.Mikhalov: None. V.M. Siu:None. language delay, there were no other statistically signiﬁcant phenotypic differences between individuals with missense var- iantsascomparedtoloss-of-functionvariants.However,additional  P08
.065.C SEMA6B variants cause Intellectual Disability and dataarerequiredtodeterminegenotype/phenotypecorrelations. alter dendritic spine density in mouse primary hippocampal S.Kumble:None.A.M.Levy:None.S.García-Miñaúr:None.H. neurons Gao: None. M. Palomares-Bralo: None. M. Pacio-Míguez: None. S.Parikh:None.A.L.Ritter:None.K.Izumi:None.T.L.Hoffman: Amélie Cordovado1, Médéric Jeanne1,2, Veranika Panasenkava1, None.H.Oppermann:None.L.Bjerglund:None.J.A.Rosenfeld: Anne-Sophie Denommé-Pichon3, Boris Keren4, Cyril Mignot4, Lance None. C. Curry: None. L. Faivre: None. A. Leiber: None. S. Rodan5,KeriRamsey6,VahidBahrambeigi7,WendyMitchell8,JillianR Robinson:None.R.S.Finkel:None.A.Gerard:None.J.S.Cohen: Ozmore9, Leslie Granger10, Andrea Petersen10, Paige Matheny11, None.Y.Xie:None.S.V.Mullegama:None.K.Platzer:None.M.J. Margaret Au11, Chanika Phornphutkul12, Joaquín Alejandro Fernán- GuillenSacoto:None.A.Revah-Politi:None.S.M.Berger:None. dez-Ramos13, Eduardo Lopez-Laso13, Marcella Zollino14, Manuela A.M.Comi:None.K.Anyane-Yeboa:None.A.Fiévet:None.C.S. Morleo15, Telethon Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Rebecca Her- Mintz: None. R. Lozano: None. J.E. Posey: None. M. Ciliberto: zog16, Mona Grimmel17, David Mei18, Renzo Guerrini18, Richard None. L. Howard: None. P. Benke: None. S. Odent: None. A. Redon19, Stéphane Bézieau20, Consortium HUGODIMS, Frédéric Denommé-Pichon:None.M.Wéber:None.N.AhMew:None.E. Laumonnier1,Annick Toutain1,2,Marie-Laure Vuillaume1,2 Ostergaard: None. A.D. Iglesias: None. J. Punetha: None. W.K. Chung:None. N.Brown: None.Z. Tümer:None. 1UMR 1253, iBrain, University of Tours, Inserm, Tours, France, 2Genetics Department, University Hospital of Tours, Tours, France, 3Genetics Department, Hospital of Dijon, Dijon, France, 4Genetics  P08
.064.B An asymptomatic male carrying a constitutional Department, Hospital group Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP, Paris, France, pathogenic MEP C2
 variant, identiﬁed through his daughter 5Department of Pediatrics, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, withRettsyndrome EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 251 USA, 6Center for Rare Childhood Disorders, Translational Genomics  P08
.066.D Delineating the molecular and phenotypic spec- Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA, 7Graduate Program in trumofthe SETD1B-related syndrome Diagnostic Genetics, School of Health Professions, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA, 8Neurology MarjoleinJ.A.Weerts1,KristinaLanko1,FranciscoJ.Guzmán-Vega2, Division Children’s Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA, AdamJackson3,ReshmiRamakrishnan2,KellyJ.Cardona-Londoño2, 9Department of Medical Genetics, Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical KarlaA.Peña-Guerra2,YolandevanBever1,BarbaraW.vanPaassen1, Center, Lebanon, NH, USA, 10Department of Rehabilitation and Anneke Kievit1, Marjon van Slegtenhorst1, Nicholas M. Allen4, Development,RandallChildren’sHospitalatLegacyEmanuelMedical Caroline M. Kehoe4, Hannah K. Robinson5, Lewis Pang5, Selina H. Center, Portland, OR, USA, 11Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Banu6, Mashaya Zaman6, Stephanie Efthymiou7, Henry Houlden7, University of Kentucky HealthCare, Lexington, KY,USA, 12Division of Irma Järvelä8, Leena Lauronen9, Tuomo Määttä10, Isabelle Schrau- HumanGenetics,WarrenAlpertMedicalSchoolofBrownUniversity, wen11,SuzanneM.Leal11,ClaudiaA.L.Ruivenkamp12,DanielaQ.C. Hasbro Children’s Hospital/Rhode Island Hospital, providence, RI, M. Barge-Schaapveld12, Cacha M. P. C. Peeters-Scholte13, Hamid USA,13PediatricNeurologyUnit,DepartmentofPediatrics,University Galehdari14, Neda Mazaheri14, Genomics England Research Con- HospitalReinaSofía,IMIBICandCIBERER,Cordoba,Spain,14Institute sortium,SanjayM.Sisodiya15,VictoriaHarrison16,RezaMarooﬁan17, of Genomic Medicine, Catholic University, Gemelli Hospital Founda- SiddharthBanka3,BekimSadikovic18,StefanT.Arold2,TahsinStefan tion, Rome, Italy, 15Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine Barakat1 (TIGEM),Pozzuoli,Naples,Italy,16InstituteofSystemsMotorScience, University of Lübeck, Center for Brain, Behavior and Metabolism, 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2King Abdullah University of Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538, Lübeck, Germany, 17Institute of ScienceandTechnology(KAUST),ComputationalBioscienceResearch Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, Hertie Institute for Clinical Center(CBRC),DivisionofBiologicalandEnvironmentalSciencesand Brain Research, Tübingen, Germany, 18Pediatric Neurology, Neuro- Engineering (BESE), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia, 3Manchester Centre for genetics, and Neurobiology Unit and Laboratories, Meyer Children’s Genomic Medicine, St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester University NHS Hospital-University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 19INSERM, CNRS, FoundationTrust,HealthInnovationManchester,Manchester,United Nantes University, University Hospital Center, Thorax Institute, Kingdom,4DepartmentofPaediatrics,NationalUniversity ofIreland Nantes, France, 20Genetics Department, Hospital of Nantes, Nantes, Galway, Galway, Ireland, 5Exeter Genomics Laboratory, RILD France. Building, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, UnitedKingdom,6DepartmentofPediatricNeurology,Dr.M.R.Khan Introduction: Intellectual Disability (ID) is a common neurodeve- Shishu(Children)HospitalandICH,Dhaka,Bangladesh,7Department lopmental disorder frequently caused by monogenic defects. By of Neuromuscular Disorders, Queen Square Institute of Neurology, conductingwholeexomesequencinginapatientpresentingwith UniversityCollegeLondon,London,UnitedKingdom,8Departmentof severe ID and after a call for international collaboration, we Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 9Depart- collected11SEMA6Bdenovoheterozygousvariantscarriedby14 ment of Clinical Neurophysiology, New Children´s Hospital, HUS unrelated patients. Clinical features in these patients include Diagnostic Center, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University moderate to severe ID, poor language, movement disorder with Hospital(HUH),Helsinki,Finland,10DisabilityServices,JointAuthority ataxia, and sometimes seizures. To assess the involvement of for Kainuu, Kajaani, Finland, 11Center for Statistical Genetics, SEMA6Binthisphenotype,weinitiatedinvitrofunctionalstudies Sergievsky Center, Taub Institute for Alzheimer’s Disease and the inHEK cellsand inmouse primary hippocampal neurons. Aging Brain, Department of Neurology, New York, NY, USA, Materials and Methods: Plasmids containing either the wild- 12Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, typeorthreemutatedformsofSema6b(V183L,R372*andW689*) Leiden, Netherlands, 13Department of Neurology, Leiden University wereoverexpressedﬁrst,inHEK293Tcelllinetoassesstheimpact Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 14Department of Genetics, ofthevariantsoverexpressiononSema6bexpression,stabilityand FacultyofScience,ShahidChamranUniversityofAhvaz,Ahvaz,Iran, subcellular localization and then, in primary neuronal cultures to Islamic Republic of, 15Department of Clinical and Experimental characterize the effect of the variants on morphogenesis and Epilepsy, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, United synaptogenesis. Kingdom,16WessexClinicalGeneticsService,PrincessAnneHospital, Results:Sema6bstabilityandsubcellularlocalizationarealtered Southampton, United Kingdom, 17Department of Neuromuscular only by overexpression of the R372* variant. This variant by Disorders, Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College leadingtotheformationofatruncatedprotein,decreasesSema6b London,London, United Kingdom,18MolecularGenetics Laboratory, expression and stability and prevents Sema6b from reaching the Molecular Diagnostics Division, London Health Sciences Centre, plasma membrane. Regarding neuronal cultures, the number of London, United Kingdom. dendritic spines in particular mature spines is signiﬁcantly decreased afteroverexpression ofV183Land W689* variants. SETD1B encodes a lysine-speciﬁc histone methyltransferase that Conclusion: Identiﬁcation of SEMA6B variants in patients methylates histone H3 at position lysine-4 (H3K4me1, H3K4me2, presenting with an overlapping phenotype combined with in H3K4me3) and thereby is involved in the regulation of gene vitrofunctionalstudieshighlightstheimportantroleofSEMA6Bin expression. Pathogenic variants in SETD1B have been associated neuronaldevelopmentnotablyinspineformationandmaturation, with a syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder including intel- andadds SEMA6B tothelist ofID-related genes. lectual disability, language delay and seizures. To date, clinical A. Cordovado: None. M. Jeanne: None. V. Panasenkava: features have been described for eleven patients with (likely) None. A. Denommé-Pichon: None. B. Keren: None. C. Mignot: pathogenic SETD1B sequence variants. We perform an in-depth None.L.Rodan:None.K.Ramsey:None.V.Bahrambeigi:None. clinicalcharacterizationofacohortof36unpublishedindividuals W. Mitchell: None. J. Ozmore: None. L. Granger: None. A. with SETD1B sequence variants, describing their molecular and Petersen: None. P. Matheny: None. M. Au: None. C. Phorn- phenotypic spectrum. By means of computational protein phutkul: None. J.A. Fernández-Ramos: None. E. Lopez-Laso: modelling we predict potential functional effect of SETD1B None. M. Zollino: None. M. Morleo: None. R. Herzog: None. M. variants.Selectedvariantslocatedindifferentfunctionaldomains Grimmel: None. D. Mei: None. R. Guerrini: None. R. Redon: of SETD1B were functionally tested using in vitro and genome- None.S.Bézieau:None.F.Laumonnier:None.A.Toutain:None. widemethylationassays,conﬁrminginsilicopredictions.Ourdata M.Vuillaume: None. present evidence for a loss-of-function mechanism of SETD1B variants, resulting in a core clinical phenotype of global EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 252 developmental delay, language delay including regression, identiﬁed by exome sequencing; all of them were protein intellectual disability, autism and other behavioral issues, and truncating variants: 4 nonsense, 4frameshift and one affecting a variable epilepsy phenotypes. Developmental delay appeared to splice-donor site;2/9 previously described. precede seizure onset, suggesting SETD1B dysfunction impacts Conclusions: Our results support that hypotonia and micro- physiologicalneurodevelopmentevenintheabsenceofepileptic cephalyareuncommonandneurologicalprognosisismuchbetter activity.Interestingly,malesaresigniﬁcantlyoverrepresented,and in these cases than in the 3p25.3 deletion syndrome. Digital thuswespeculatethatsex-linkedtraitscouldaffectsusceptibility anomaliesinadditiontopolydactylywerecommonsoitmustbe toclinicalpenetranceandtheclinicalspectrumofSETD1Bvariants. takenintoaccount.Thus,SETD5genehaploinsufﬁciencyshouldbe Together, this work expands the phenotypic and molecular consideredinthedifferentialdiagnosisofKBG,CorneliadeLange spectrum associated with SETD1B variants, provides insights into andCofﬁnSirissyndrome. theirfunctionaleffectsandwillultimatelyfacilitatethecounseling M. Sánchez Soler: None. F. Santos-Simarro: None. S. García- regardingtheclinicalspectrumofnewlydiagnosedpatientswith Miñaúr: None. A. Serrano Antón: None. V. Seidel: None. G. Pi theSETD1B-relatedsyndrome. Castán: None. M. Pacio-Míguez: None. M. Palomares-Bralo: M.J.A. Weerts: None. K. Lanko: None. F.J. Guzmán-Vega: None. None.A.Jackson: None.R.Ramakrishnan: None.K.J.Cardona- Londoño:None.K.A.Peña-Guerra:None.Y.vanBever:None.B. W. van Paassen: None. A. Kievit: None. M. van Slegtenhorst:  P08
.069.CInvestigationoftwonovelSOX4mutationsfoundin None. N.M. Allen: None. C.M. Kehoe: None. H.K. Robinson: patients withintellectual disability None. L. Pang: None. S.H. Banu: None. M. Zaman: None. S. Efthymiou: None. H. Houlden: None. I. Järvelä: None. L. Martin Grosse1, Tabib Dabir2, Shane McKee2, Stefanie Beck-Wödl3, Lauronen: None. T. Määttä: None. I. Schrauwen: None. S.M. Eva Manka4, AlmaKüchler1, ChristelDepienne1, Frank Kaiser1 Leal: None. C.A.L. Ruivenkamp: None. D.Q.C.M. Barge-Schaap- veld:None.C.M.P.C.Peeters-Scholte:None.H.Galehdari:None. 1University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany, 2Northern Ireland N. Mazaheri: None. S.M. Sisodiya: None. V. Harrison: None. R. Regional Genetics Service, Belfast, United Kingdom, 3University Marooﬁan: None. S. Banka: None. B. Sadikovic: None. S.T. HospitalTübingen, Tübingen, Germany,4EZSE,Essen, Germany. Arold: None.T.Barakat: None. Introduction: SOX4 (OMIM:184430) is a transcription factor with pleiotropic functions required for developmental processes such  P08
.067.ANewcasesfromSpanishpopulationwithintragenic ascorticogenesis.LikeotherSOXproteins,SOX4containsahighly pathogenic variants in SETD5 gene: reﬁning the phenotype conservedhighmobilitygroup(HMG)domainthatmediatesDNA andexpanding the genotype binding, bending and nuclear trafﬁcking. Recently patients with pathogenicvariantsinSOX4havebeenreportedfortheﬁrsttime. María José Sánchez Soler1, Fernando Santos-Simarro2,3, Sixto Weaimedtoinvestigatetheeffectsontranscriptionalactivationof García-Miñaúr2,3, Ana Teresa Serrano Antón1, Verónica Seidel4, two novel pathogenic de novo variants in SOX4 identiﬁed in GracielaPiCastán5,MartaPacio-Míguez2,MaríaPalomares-Bralo2,3,6 patientswith intellectualdisability. MaterialandMethods:Wildtype(wt)ormutantSOX4wereco- 1Medical Genetic Section, H. Clinic Universitary V. Arrixaca, IMIB- expressed with the known cofactor POU3F2 and transcriptional Arrixaca,ElPalmar,Spain,2InstitutodeGenéticaMédicayMolecular activationwastestedusingaluciferasereporterassayinHEK293 (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La Paz, IdiPaz., Madrid, Spain, cells. Proper expression of the SOX4 constructs and POU3F2 was 3CIBERER,Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enferme- veriﬁed by western blot. dadesRaras,ISCIII,Madrid,Spain,4MedicalGeneticSection,Gregorio Results:ContrarytowtSOX4,whichwasabletoinduceectopic Marañón Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 5Consulta de Dismorfología, luciferaseexpressionwhenco-expressedwithPOU3F2,thiseffect HospitalUniversitariodelaRibera,Alzira,Valencia,Spain,6European was abolished for both pathogenic SOX4 variants (Arg61Gln and Reference Network Congenital Malformations & Rare Mental Glu27*). Disability (ERN-ITHACA),Madrid, Spain. Conclusions:WereporttwonovelpathogenicvariantsinSOX4 abolishingthetranscriptionalactivationofSOX4invitro.Whilethe Introduction: Loss-of-function variants in SETD5 gene cause the variant SOX4Glu27* leads to a premature stop and loss of the core phenotype of 3p25.3 microdeletion syndrome characterized functional domains, SOX4Arg61Gln shows an exchange of an byintellectualdisability/autism,slowgrowth,dysmorphicfeatures amino acid that is highly conserved in the HMG box of several and malformations such as postaxial polydactyly, heart condition proteins. Besides its localization within a predicted bipartite andgenitourinaryanomalies.However,theprognosisseemstobe nuclear localization signal, previous investigations have provided milderincaseswithintragenicSETD5variants.Untilnow,only15 functional evidence for the role of arginine 61 in DNA-binding caseshave beendescribed. afﬁnity of SOX4. Whether the loss of transcriptional activity is Materialandmethods: Descriptive retrospective collaborative caused by alterations of DNA binding or intracellular localization study of Spanish children with de novo intragenic variants in ofSOX4 iscurrently investigated. SETD5 gene. M. Grosse: None. T. Dabir: None. S. McKee: None. S. Beck- Results: 9 cases collected (3 females/6 males). Mean age: 6 Wödl: None. E. Manka: None. A. Küchler: None. C. Depienne: years old (1.5-15). Prenatal anomalies: 3/9 single umbilical artery, None.F. Kaiser: None. 2/9growthretardationandnuchaledema.Postnatally:allshowed some neurodevelopment disorder but two presented normal intelligence and the language skills improved gradually. 2/9  P08
.070.D Compound heterozygous SPATA5 variants in hypotonia, 1/9 seizures. Growth was normal in 8/9 cases; 3/9 siblings with intellectual disability, hypotonia and autistic microcephaly.Congenitalmalformations:5/9hadheartdisease,2/ features 9 genitourinary anomalies and 6/9 digital anomalies (2 poly- dactyly). The main facial features were: trianglar face, arched/ Daniela Avdjieva-Tzavella1, Slavena Atemin2, Tihomir Todorov3, thick/unusual eyebrows, low nasal bridge, anteverted/thick nares HadilKathom1, Trayan Delchev1, AlbenaTodorova2 and long/smooth philtrum. Molecular data: variants were EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 253 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics Hospital, Conclusion:WereportthepatientwithSTAG1genevariant,with Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico- Angelman-like phenotype, stereotypical hand movements and Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica”, Department of Medical Chemistry regressionofskills,whichisnotbeendescribedbefore.Thenumber and Biochemistry, Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Genetic of described patients with STAG1 variants is very small thus it’s Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica”,Soﬁa,Bulgaria. phenotypic spectrum may be wider than currently described. Funding:EstonianResearchCouncilgrantPRG471,MOBT P175
 Introduction: Variants in spermatogenesis-associated protein 5 K.Rähn:None.K.Muru:None.S.Pajusalu:None.E.Õiglane- gene (SPATA5) are associated with “Epilepsy, Hearing Loss and Šlik:None. K. Õunap:None. Mental Retardation Syndrome”. SPATA5 protein localizes predo- minantly in the mitochondria and is proposed to be involved in mitochondrial remodeling, ATP production and brain  P08
.072.B Tatton-Brown-Brahman syndrome: a novel muta- development. tion inDNMT3A Materials and Methods: A boy aged 11 years (Patient 1) was born the ﬁrst child to non-consanguineous parents at term. He Margarita Martínez-Atienza1, Susana García-Linares2, Antonio was referred to genetic evaluation because of the mental Miguel Poyatos-Andújar2, Irene Sofía Machado-Casas2, Susana retardation, hypotonia and autistic features. Patient 2 was a 1- Pedrinaci-Rodríguez1,MaríaLuzBellido-Díaz1,MatíasPérez-Sánchez1 year-old girl and the younger sister of Patient 1.She was referred to genetic evaluation because of the developmental delay and 1Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain, lowmuscletone.MetabolicandmitochondrialDNAtestingresults 2Hospital Universitario Clínico SanCecilio, Granada, Spain. were normal in both patients. In an attempt to establish the diagnosisWholeexome sequencing wascarried out. Introduction: Tatton-Brown-Rahman syndrome (TBRS) is a con- Results: Both patients underwent Whole Exome Sequencing. genital overgrowth disorder associated with intellectual disability Thetwosiblingscarriedcompoundheterozygousmutationsinthe initiallyidentiﬁedin2014andiscausedbyconstitutivevariantsof SPATA5 gene: c.554G>A(p.Gly185Glu) and c.1831C>T(p.Pro611- the DNMT3A gene. The principal features are overgrowth and Ser). Thevariantswere conﬁrmedby Sanger sequencing. intellectualdisability. Conclusions: Our results describe new, probably pathogenic Material and Methods: We present a 13-years-old boy who variantsinSPATA5gene,andweconﬁrmthatbi-allelicpathogenic presentdevelopmentdelaywithaageof2yearsforindependent variants in SPATA5 cause a syndromic form of intellectual walking and of 2.5 years for ﬁrst spoken words and attention disability. Our study expands the clinical spectrum of SPATA5 deﬁcithyperactivitydisorder.Weperformedaserialmoleculartest mutations. wich included normal karyotype and array-CGH analyses and D. Avdjieva-Tzavella: None. S. Atemin: None. T. Todorov: negativeresultsforfragile-X,ﬁnallytheclinicalexomesequencing None.H.Kathom: None. T.Delchev: None.A. Todorova: None. (CES) analysisoffered ade novovariant inDNMT3A. Results:Wefoundanotreportedvariantc.2114T>C,p.Ile705Thr inDNMT3Agene,thisvariantwasdeterminedasdenovowiththe  P08
.071.A STAG1 gene heterozygous de novo variant in a segregation analysis and is classiﬁed as likely pathogenic patientwithAngelman syndrome likephenotype accordingto theACMG criteria (PM1, PM2,P P2
, P P3
). Conclusions: The phenotype of TBRS included intellectual Kristi Rähn1, Kai Muru1,2, Sander Pajusalu1,2, Eve Õiglane-Šlik3, disabilityandovergrowth,withfrequentclinicalassociationsincluded Katrin Õunap1,2 joint hypermobility, obesity, hypotonia, behavioural/psychiatric issues, kyphoscoliosis and afebrile seizures. TBRS overlaps clinically 1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu withotherovergrowthintellectualdisabilitysíndromes.Themajority UniversityHospital,Tartu,Estonia,2DepartmentofClinicalGenetics, of individuals with TBRS are healthy, however the bibliography Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, reports possible complications of behavioural/psychiatric issues, 3Children’sClinic, TartuUniversity Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. kyphoscoliosis,febrile seizures,cardiacanomalies,hypotonia and/or jointhypermobility,andpossibilityofhaematologicalmalignancy.In STAG1 gene variants (OMIM: Mental retardation, autosomal our case, we have developed a care protocol together with the dominant 47, #617635) belong to a group of cohesinopathies differentmedicalspecialties. and are previously described only in few cases, as a cause of M. Martínez-Atienza: None. S. García-Linares: None. A. unspeciﬁcintellectualdisability.STAG1mutationsareshowntobe Poyatos-Andújar: None. I. Machado-Casas: None. S. Pedrinaci- milderthanthephenotypeassociatedwithothercohesinopathies. Rodríguez: None. M. Bellido-Díaz: None. M. Pérez-Sánchez: In published cases, the constant features characterizing STAG1 None. genevariantsaredevelopmentaldelay,recognizablefacialgestalt and variable associated features.Case report: The proband was born at term by CS due to fetal hypoxia, her birth weight was  P08
.073.C Heterozygous Loss of Function Variants in TBCK 3220g,length52cm,OF C33
cm(-1.75SD).Inlateinfancy,shehad CauseaMild Neurologic Syndrome in HumansandMice somefeedingproblemsandexcessivevomitingepisodes.Speech delay was noticed at the second year and from the third, her AbdiasDiaz-Rosado speech and independent eating skills regressed. At the age of 4, shehasdevelopmentaldelay,importantreceptiveandexpressive Children’s Hospital ofPhiladelphia, Philadelphia, PA,USA. speech impairment. Her phenotype resembles Angelman syn- drome and she has marked microcephaly - OFC 44.5cm (-4 SD). TBCK-related encephalopathy syndrome is a rare pediatric She has peculiar stereotypical “dancing” movements with her neurodegenerative disorder with no current treatment. The hands (less with her feet). Result: Trio-based exome sequencing disease is characterized by loss-of-function biallelic mutations in analysis revealed heterozygous high quality frameshift de novo TBCK,whichleadstoadownregulationofmTOR C1
signalingand insertion inSTAG1gene NM_005862.2(STAG1):c.3288_3289insT p. severechangesinbrainmorphology.Althoughformalstudieson (Thr1097Tyrfs*7).ItisabsentfromClinVarandgnomADdatabases. heterozygous carriers have never been done in the past, families EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 254 have reported differences. Therefore, in this study we used our Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA, 19Department of Neuroscience, King heterozygousmicemodel(tbck+/-)totestthishypothesis.Bothof FaisalSpecialistHospitalandResearchCenter,Riyadh,SaudiArabia, our behavioral and molecular data suggest that there is a 20Department of Translational Genomics, Center for Genomic persistent neurologic phenotype, which could explain the Medicine, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, differences observed in humans. Moreover, our group has also Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 21Sheikh Khalifa Medical City, Abu Dhabi, shownthatheterozygosityinmicecanaffectautophagicﬂux(L C3
- UnitedArabEmirates,22DepartmentofPaediatricsandChildHealth, I/II),mTOR C1
signaling(p S6
anddownstreameffectors)andeven Aga Khan University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan, 23Department of pup vocalizations at PND-6. This suggests the possibility that Neuromuscular Disorders, Queen Square Institute of Neurology, haploinsufﬁciency of TBCK can have phenotypic effect in human UniversityCollegeLondon,London,UnitedKingdom,24OxfordCentre hets. Also, preliminary data from a large dataset indicates the for Genomic Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom, 25NIHR Biomedical presenceofastatisticallysigniﬁcantpreponderanceofneurologic ResearchCentre,WellcomeCentreforHumanGenetics,Universityof symptomsinheterozygoushumans.Althoughmoreinformationis Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 26Department of Molecular and stillneededtounderstandthesemechanisms,ourresultssuggest Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, thatinheterozygousanimalsTBCKfunctionsareaffectedandthis 27DepartmentofPediatrics,BaylorCollegeofMedicine,Houston,TX, canhavefurthereffectsinmetabolismandbehavior.Hopefullyin USA, 28Texas Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, USA, 29Human thenearfuturewewillbeabletounderstand thebasisforthese Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, pathologies and to establish the connection that exists between TX, USA, 30Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children’s heterozygosity in animals and the presence of a phenotype in Hospital, Boston, MA, USA, 31Section of Pediatric Neurology and humans. Developmental Neuroscience, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor A.Diaz-Rosado: None. College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, 32Facultad de Medicina, Clinica Alemana Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile, 33Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Heidel-  P08
.075.A Beyond founder and truncting variants in TECPR2- bergUniversity Hospital,Heidelberg, Germany,34InstituteofHuman associated disorder Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität (FAU), Erlangen, Germany, 35DepartmentofChemistry,VanderbiltUniversity,Nashville,TN,USA, Sonja Neuser1, Barbara Brechmann2,3, Gali Heimer4,5, Ines Brösse3, 36Institute for Drug Discovery, University of Leipzig Medical Center, Susanna Schubert1, Lauren O’Grady6, Michael Zech7,8, Siddharth Leipzig, Germany, 37Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Srivastava2, David A. Sweetser6, Yasemin Dincer9,10, Volker Mall9,11, Collegeof Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh,Saudi Arabia. Juliane Winkelmann7,8,12,13, Christian Behrends13, Basil T. Darras14, Robert J. Graham15, Parul Jayakar16, Barry Byrne17, Bat El Bar- Bi-allelic TECPR2 variants have been associated with a complex Aluma4,5, Yael Haberman4,5,18, Amir Szeinberg4,5, Hesham M. syndrome with features of both a neurodevelopmental and Aldhalaan19, Mais Hashem20, Amal A. Tenaiji21, Shahnaz Ibrahim22, neurodegenerative disorder. Core clinical symptoms entail intel- FatimaKhan22,HenryHoulden23,VijayalakshmiS.Ramakumaran24, lectual disability, muscular hypotonia, dysarthria, gait abnormal- Alistair T. Pagnamenta25, Jennifer E. Posey26, James R. ities, peripheral neuropathy and autonomic dysfunction. To date, Lupski26,27,28,29, Wen-Hann Tan30, Gehad ElGhazali21, Isabella Her- mostly truncating variants have been reported. Two are founder man26,28,31,TatianaMuñoz32,GabrielaM.Repetto32,AngelikaSeitz33, variants in Bukharian and Ashkenazi Jewish populations.Through Mandy Krumbiegel34, M. Cecilia Poli27,32, Usha Kini24, Stephanie aninternationalcollaboration,weidentiﬁed17individualsfrom15 Efthymiou23, Jens Meiler35,36, Reza Marooﬁan23, Fowzan S. Alkur- familieswithbi-allelicTECPR2-variants.Eightof17distinctvariants aya20,37, Rami Abou Jamra1, Bruria Ben Zeev4,5, Darius Ebrahimi- in the cohort were missense variants. Analysis of the spatial Fakhari2,Bernt Popp1 distribution revealed linear clustering of these variants in the N- and C-terminal protein region, in line with higher restrain for 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center, missense variation as indicated by higher computational scores Leipzig, Germany, 2Department of Neurology, The F.M. Kirby and depletion of homozygous missense variants. As TECPR2 has Neurobiology Center, Boston Children’s Hospital, Harvard Medical nopublishedcrystalstructure,weestablishedapipelinetopredict School, Boston, MA, USA, 3Department of Pediatrics, Hospital for 3D protein models based on three different algorithms (Galax- ChildrenandAdolescents,HeidelbergUniversityHospital,Heidelberg, yTBM, swissmodel, trRosetta). We identiﬁed one 7-bladed Germany,4EdmondandLilySafraChildren’sHospital,ShebaMedical β-propeller in the WD40 domain and two β-propeller motifs in Center, Ramat Gan, Israel, 5Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv theTECPR-repeatcontainingregionseparatedbyanunstructured University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 6Division of Medical Genetics and linkerregion.Allmissensevariantsaffectedconservedresiduesin Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, Massachusetts General β-propeller units without clear clustering, indicating structural Hospital, Boston, MA, USA, 7Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz proteinchangesandfasterdegradationaspossiblepathomechan- Zentrum München, München, Germany, 8Institute of Human ism. These results can be used for classiﬁcation of missense Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical University of Munich, variants according to ACMG guidelines as PM1_Supporting.With München, Germany, 9Social Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, the results of our Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO)-based TechnischeUniversitätMünchen,München,Germany,10Zentrumfür phenotype curation, we present an advanced framework for Humangenetik und Laboratoriumsdiagnostik (MVZ), Martinsried, TECPR2 missense reporting. Based on these analyses, we will Germany, 11kbo-Kinderzentrum München, München, Germany, establish a TECPR2-disease focused website allowing automated 12Lehrstuhl für Neurogenetik, Technische Universität München, variant classiﬁcation, comparison of phenotypes and display of München, Germany, 13Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology currentsurveillance recommendations toaid clinicians involved. (Synergy), Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, München, Ger- S. Neuser: None. B. Brechmann: B. Research Grant (principal many, 14Department of Neurology, Boston Children’s Hospital, investigator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA, 15Department of as grants already received); Modest; German National Academic Anesthesia, Critical Care and Pain Medicine, Boston Children’s Foundation, Carl Duisberg Program by the Bayer Foundation. G. Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA, 16Nicklaus Heimer: None. I. Brösse: None. S. Schubert: None. L. O’Grady: Children’s Hospital, Miami, FL, USA, 17Powell Gene Therapy Center, None.M.Zech:None.S.Srivastava:None.D.A.Sweetser:None. University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA, 18Cincinnati Children’s Y. Dincer: None. V. Mall: None. J. Winkelmann: None. C. Hospital Medical Center and the University of Cincinnati College of Behrends: None. B.T. Darras: None. R.J. Graham: None. P. Jayakar: None. B. Byrne: None. B. Bar-Aluma: None. Y. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 255 Haberman:None.A.Szeinberg:None.H.M.Aldhalaan:None.M.  P08
.078.D Expanding the spectrum of WAC-related intellec- Hashem: None. A.A. Tenaiji: None. S. Ibrahim: None. F. Khan: tual disability: two novel variants and a patient with None. H. Houlden: None. V.S. Ramakumaran: None. A.T. congenitalheart disease Pagnamenta: None. J.E. Posey: B. Research Grant (principal investigator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell Rita Quental1, Daniel Gonçalves2, João Parente Freixo3, Miguel asgrantsalreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant;NHGRIK08HG008986.J.R. Leão1 Lupski: None. W. Tan: None. G. ElGhazali: None. I. Herman: None. T. Muñoz: None. G.M. Repetto: None. A. Seitz: None. M. 1MedicalGeneticsService,SãoJoãoUniversityHospitalCentre,Porto, Krumbiegel: None. M. Poli: None. U. Kini: None. S. Efthymiou: Portugal, 2Pediatrics Service, São João University Hospital Centre, None.J.Meiler:None.R.Marooﬁan:None.F.S.Alkuraya:None. Porto,Portugal,3CGPP-IBMC,University of Porto,Porto,Portugal. R.AbouJamra:None.B.BenZeev:None.D.Ebrahimi-Fakhari: Other; Modest; CureA P4
 Foundation, CureSPG50 Foundation, Introduction: Heterozygous pathogenic variants in WAC gene Spastic Paraplegia Foundation, Thrasher Research Fund, Astellas cause a rare syndrome characterized by intellectual disability, Pharmaceutical Inc., MitoBridge Inc. B. Popp: B. Research Grant behavioural abnormalities, facial dysmorphism, gastrointestinal (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending dysfunction, and, in some individuals, visual problems, sleep grants as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Deutsche disturbance and seizures. Chromosomal deletions at 10p11p12 Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). encompassingWACgenehavebeendescribedinpatientswitha similar phenotype, although some present with other clinical manifestations namely cardiac defects. Cases: We report two  P08
.076.B Characterizing a de novo TRIO gene variant as a patients with a syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder whose likelycause ofautosomal dominant Intellectual developmen- clinicalexomerevealednovelvariantsinWACgene.Patient1isa taldisorder type 63withmacrocephaly 7-year-old girlwith dysmorphic features including synophrys, ﬂat nasal bridge, protruding ears, hirsutism, and brachydactyly. Doga Ceren Tekguc1, Gulten Tuncel2, Seﬁk Karanlik3, Nevrez Additionally, she had developmental delay, microcephaly, hypo- Koreken3,Sehime Gulsun Temel4, MahmutCerkezErgoren5 tonia, and constipation. Most remarkable is the presence of congenital heart disease (aortic coarctation associated with atrial 1Dr. Burhan Nalbantoglu State Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, and ventricular septal defects), which required two cardiac Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Near East University, DESAM Institute, Nicosia, surgeries. Patient 2 is a 22-year-old male with microcephaly, Cyprus, 3Near East University Hospital, Department of Medical intellectualdisabilityandaggressivebehaviour.Hehadsynophrys, Genetic Diagnosis Laboratory, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Bursa Uludag pectusexcavatum,historyofpatellarluxationandkyphoscoliosis. University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Patient 1 has the variant c.1407del p.(Ser470Valfs*15) in hetero- Bursa,Turkey,5NearEastUniversity,FacultyofMedicine,Department zygosity in WAC, while in Patient 2 the c.811C>T p.(Gln271*) ofMedical Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. variant was detected. Both were de novo and classiﬁed as likely pathogenic. 3-years-old female patient, born to non-consanguineous healthy Discussion: We report two patients with novel de novo WAC parents was admitted to the laboratory with a possible pre- variants, one of which presenting a complex congenital cardio- diagnosisofKabukiMakeupSyndrome.Inpaediatricexamination, pathy.Althoughcardiacdefectsareacommonfeatureinpatients Bayley Scales of Infant and Toddler Development - III was with 10p11p12 deletions, here we show that single-nucleotide performed and global developmental delay was observed as WACpathogenicvariantscausingasyndromicformofintellectual therewasasigniﬁcantlyincreasedneedforsupportintheareasof disability can also be associated with congenital heart defects. language,cognitiveandmovementdevelopment.Asshealsohad Therefore, this report explores insights on the phenotypic and dysmorphic ﬁndingsincluding macrocephaly and ulnar deviation genotypic spectrum ofthis rare syndrome. ofthewrist,geneticaetiologywasconsidered.Incytogeneticand R. Quental: None. D. Gonçalves: None. J. Parente Freixo: moleculargeneticanalysis,nochromosomalabnormalitiesaswell None.M. Leão:None. asnovariationingenesassociatedwithKabukiMakeupSyndrome (CHD7, EYA1, IRF6, KDM6A, KMT2D) and no copy number variations (CNV) clinically related to the described phenotype  P08
.079.A Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in WDR11 are hasbeenidentiﬁed.However,aheterozygousvariantofuncertain associated withmicrocephaly and intellectual disability signiﬁcance (VUS), in the TRIO gene c.3199_3203delinsGAGCC p. (Lys1067_Glu1068delinsGluAla)wasdetected.Pathogenicvariants Natja Haag1, Ene C. Tan2, Matthias Begemann1, Lars Buschmann1, in the TRIO gene have mainly been associated with autosomal PetraHoschbach3,AngelineH.M.Lai2,MaggieBrett2,Ganeshwaran dominantmentalretardationtype44withmicrocephalyandalso H. Mochida4,5, Stephanie DiTroia6, Lynn Pais6, Jennifer E. Nail4,5,7, autosomal dominant Intellectual developmental disorder type 63 Muna Al-Saffar4,5,8, Laila Bastaki9, Christopher A. Walsh4,5,7, Ingo with macrocephaly. In this context, the genetic diagnosis of an Kurth1,Cordula Knopp1 autosomaldominant TRIO-relateddisorder ispossible butfurther segregation analysis with samples from parents is required to 1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen conﬁrm the variation as de novo. In conclusion, classiﬁcation of University, Aachen, Germany, 2KK Research Centre/Genetics Service, VUS variants by molecular analysis supported by clinical and KKWomen’s&Children’sHospital,Singapore,Singapore,3Divisionof experimental data is of great importance for diagnosis and Neuropediatrics and Social Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, developmentoftreatmentoptionsinraregeneticdisorders.Here Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, we present the c.3199_3203delinsGAGCC p.(Lys1067_Glu1068de- 4Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children’s Hospital, linsGluAla)VUSvariantasalikelycauseofthephenotypicclinical Boston,MA,USA,5DepartmentsofPediatricsandNeurology,Harvard traitsobserved inour patient. Medical School, Boston, MA, USA, 6Center for Mendelian Genomics, D.C. Tekguc: None. G. Tuncel: None. S. Karanlik: None. N. PrograminMedicalandPopulationGenetics,BroadInstituteofMIT Koreken: None. S.G.Temel:None. M.C.Ergoren:None. and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA, 7Howard Hughes Medical EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 256 Institute, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA, 8Department Développement (TRANSLAD), CHU de Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, of Paediatrics, College of Medical and Health Sciences, United Arab France, 9Inserm UMR1231 GAD, Génétique des Anomalies du Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates, 9Kuwait Medical Développement, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 10Service Genetics Centre,Maternity Hospital, Shuwaikh,Kuwait. de Pédiatrie Génétique, CH de Vannes, Vannes, France, 11Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre Référence "Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de Introduction: In humans, heterozygous missense variants in the causes rares" (CRDI), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Rennes, WDR11 gene have been associated with hypogonadotropic Rennes, France. hypogonadism. In contrast, Wdr11-null mice and knockdown- zebraﬁsh demonstrated complex developmental abnormalities in Introduction: Skraban-Deardorff syndrome (a disease related to multipleorgansresemblingfeaturesknowntobeassociatedwith variationsintheWDR26gene;OMIM#617616)wasﬁrstdescribed hedgehog signaling and ciliogenesis. However, no human in a cohort of 15 individuals in 2017, no other cases have been phenotype associated with biallelic variants in WDR11 has been described since. Here, we report on six novel cases with describedyet. heterozygous de novo WDR26 pathogenic variants. We provide Material and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was per- additionalclinicalandmoleculardataandcomparetheprobands’ formed in six affected individuals from three unrelated families. phenotypeswith theliterature data. Independent discoveries were shared through GeneMatcher. All Materials and methods: Clinical and molecular data were patients underwent comprehensive clinical examination. WDR11 collected from six patients treated at four different university protein expressionwasstudied in patient-derived ﬁbroblasts using hospitals in France. WDR26 variants were detected with next- westernblot(WB)analysisandimmunohistochemical(IHC)staining. generation sequencing (whole exome sequencing or screening Results: Biallelic loss-of-function mutations in WDR11 were againstan intellectual deﬁciency and epilepsy genepanel). identiﬁed in six individuals from three independent families. Results: We observed intellectual disability, developmental Affected patients show a distinct phenotype that includes delay (predominantly for the language), early-onset epilepsy, microcephaly, mild short stature and intellectual disability of skeletal manifestations, abnormal gait, characteristic dysmorph- variable degree. Complete loss of WDR11 protein in ﬁbroblasts ism,andahappy/friendlypersonalityconsistent withtheoriginal was demonstrated by WB and IHC analyses for one affected description. One patient displayed marked hypotonia with Z‐line patient. Heterozygous carriers of WDR11 loss-of-function variants disorganisation and multiminicores on the muscle biopsy. Four in our families were healthy and did in particular not show any patients had intrauterine growth restriction. Five patients had obviousclinicalsignsofhypogonadotropichypogonadismasseen feeding difﬁculties during infancy; one had a suspected Pierre‐ inpatients withheterozygous missense variants. Robinsequence,anotherhadavelarcleftpalate.Ourpatientswith Conclusions:OurﬁndingssuggestthatbiallelicWDR11variants WDR26‐relatedsyndromehadapronouncedsubpalpebralcrease, in humans result in an overlapping but milder phenotype roundedpalpebralﬁssuresandrelativelylargeirises,notdescribed compared to Wdr11-deﬁcient animals. However, the observed previously. Language appears to be limited to single words or human phenotype differs signiﬁcantly from dominantly inherited two‐word associations. mutations leadingto hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, suggest- Conclusion: We conﬁrm the rich gastrointestinal and muscu- ing that recessive WDR11 mutations deﬁne a distinct clinically loskeletalmorbidityandvelarcleftaspartoftheclinicalvariability entity. of this condition. Early speech therapy is crucial in order to N. Haag: None. E.C. Tan: None. M. Begemann: None. L. improve language and oral eating and drinking. We additionally Buschmann: None. P. Hoschbach: None. A.H.M. Lai: None. M. observed abnormal features in a muscle biopsy; this ﬁnding Brett:None.G.H.Mochida:None.S.DiTroia:None.L.Pais:None. warrantsfurther investigation. J.E.Nail:None.M.Al-Saffar:None.L.Bastaki:None.C.A.Walsh: A. Cospain: None. E. Schaefer: None. M. Faoucher: None. C. None.I. Kurth: None.C. Knopp:None. Dubourg:None.W.Carré:None.V.Bizaoui:None.J.Assoumani: None.L.VanMaldergem:None.A.Piton:None.B.Gérard:None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. A. Bruel: None. L. Faivre: None. F.  P08
.080.B Skraban-Deardorff Syndrome: six new cases of Demurger:None.L.Pasquier:None.S.Odent:None.M.Fradin: WDR26-related disease and expansion of the clinical None.A. Lavillaureix: None. phenotype Auriane Cospain1, Elise Schaefer2, Marie Faoucher3,4, Christèle  P08
.082.D Importance of a multidisciplinary team when Dubourg3,4, Wilfrid Carré3,4, Varoona Bizaoui5, Jessica Assoumani6, analyzing WES: higher diagnostic rate, increased conﬁdence Lionel Van Maldergem6, Amélie Piton7, Bénédicte Gérard7, Frédéric andbetter care Tran Mau-Them8,9, Ange-Line Bruel8,9, Laurence Faivre8,9, Florence Demurger10, Laurent Pasquier11, Sylvie Odent1,4, Mélanie Fradin1, Sérgio B. Sousa1,2, Maria José Simões3,4, Belinda Campos-Xavier1, Alinoë Lavillaureix1,4 Hugo Froufe3,4, Carolina Ribeiro2, João Mendes2, Joaquim Sá1, Margarida Venâncio1,2, Conceição Egas4,5, Ana Catarina Gomes3, 1CHU Rennes, Service de Génétique Clinique, Centre de Référence JorgeM. Saraiva1,6 Maladies Rares CLAD-Ouest, ERN ITHACA, Hôpital Sud, Rennes, France, 2Service de Génétique Médicale, Institut de Génétique 1Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar e Médicale d’Alsace, Strasbourg, France, 3Service de Génétique Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Medical Genetics Moléculaire et Génomique, CHU, Rennes, Rennes, France, 4Univ Institute-UC Genomics,Faculty of Medicine, University ofCoimbra, Rennes, CNRS, IGDR, UMR 6290, Rennes, France, 5Service de Coimbra, Portugal,3CBRGenomics, Cantanhede, Portugal,4Genoin- Génétique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Caen Normandie, seq, Next-Generation Sequencing Unit, Biocant, Cantanhede, Portu- Caen,France,6CentredeGénétiqueHumaine,UniversitédeFranche- gal,5CenterforNeuroscienceandCellBiology,UniversityofCoimbra, Comté, Besançon, France, 7Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Coimbra, Portugal, 6University Clinic of Pediatrics, Faculty of Institut de Génétique Médicale d’Alsace, Hôpitaux Universitaires Medicine, Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra,Portugal. de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 8Centre de Référence Anomalies du développement et syndromes malformatifs, Fédération The diagnostic rate of whole exome sequencing (WES) is quite Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translationnelle et Anomalies du variable, being the main challenge the accurate interpretation of EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 257 variants for which the dialogue laboratory-clinicians is funda- PTPN11), Wnt/ß-catenin (e.g. DDX3X,GRIN2A, GRIN1), Sonic Hedge- mental. Herein, we present the results of the In2Genome Project hog (e.g. B9D1, C2
CD3) and GPCR signaling (e.g. DDX3X, MK S1
). In whose main goal was to develop a multidisciplinary approach to conclusion,ourresultsdemonstratedtheefﬁciencyofWESanalysis the WES-based genetic diagnosis by having both medical and ontheidentiﬁcationofPVsinID/ASDpatients.Moreoverthisstudy laboratorialgeneticistsworkingdirectlytogetherineachcase.We allowedtosubdividethecausinggenesintofourgroupsaccording analyzed a group of 62 undiagnosed patients with intellectual tothebiologicalpathwayssuggestingnewmolecularinteractions. disability (ID) syndromes. A sequential approached was used in L.P. Bruno: None. G. Doddato: None. F. Valentino: None. A. most cases: ﬁrst, single WES was performed, being the analysis Giliberti:None.C.LoRizzo:None.M.Mencarelli:None.F.Mari: based on an ID virtual gene panel; second, in the inconclusive None. A. Pinto: None. F. Fava: None. M. Baldassarri: None. A. cases (n=42) the parents were sequenced, and trio analysis Tommasi: None. A. Fabbiani: None. V. Lamacchia: None. E. undertaken. Benetti:None.S.Furini:None.F.Ariani:None.A.Renieri:None. The diagnostic rate for the single analyses was 29.1% and C.Fallerini: None. increased, after trio analyses, to 45.2% (28/62 of overall rate). Thirty causal variants, 22 of which novel, were identiﬁed in 28 genes. The advantages of this multidisciplinary approach were  P08
.084.BWESresultreanalysisandCAMK2Bvariantcausing clear:notonlythehigherdiagnosticrate(signiﬁcantlyabovemost developmental delay reportedstudiesandcomparingtoourexperiencewhenWESwas analyzed in an independent laboratory), but also the more cost- Todor Arsov1,2, Aspazija Soﬁjanova3, Marcin Adamski2, Carola effectiveness and certainly the increased team satisfaction and Vinuesa2 conﬁdence in the results. Additionally, there is a much easier translationtoaresearchsetting,datareanalysisandcollaboration 1Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine- with other centers in the remaining unsolved cases (additional 3 Skopje, Institute of Immunobiology and Human Genetics, Skopje, candidategenessofar).TheIn2GenomeprojectCENTRO-01-0247- Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2Australian National FEDER-017800 was supported by Centro Portugal Regional University, John Curtin School of Medical Research, Centre for Operational Programme (CENTRO 2020), under the Portugal Personalized Immunology, Canberra, Australia, 3Ss. Cyril and 2020 Partnership Agreement, through the European Regional Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine-Skopje, PHI DevelopmentFund(ERDF). University Clinic for child diseases, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former S.B.Sousa:None.M.Simões:None.B.Campos-Xavier:None. Yugoslav Republic of. H.Froufe:None.C.Ribeiro:None.J.Mendes:None.J.Sá:None. M. Venâncio: None. C. Egas: None. A. Gomes: None. J.M. CAMK2B has recently been found to cause Intellectual Disability Saraiva:None. Autosomal Dominant 54 (MRD54, OMIM 617799), characterized withglobaldevelopmentaldelay,hypotonia,difﬁcultyholdingthe head, delayed walking (or inability to walk) and speech (50% of  P08
.083.A A WES study in 200 intellectual disability/ autism patients are averbal), behavioral problems, intellectual disability, patients visual impairment, gastrointestinal problems and facial dys- morphicfeatures.Some patientshaveseizureswithEEGchanges Lucia Pia Bruno1,2, Gabriella Doddato1,2, Floriana Valentino1,2, and brain imaging is generally normal. We describe a 3-year old AnnaritaGiliberti1,2,CaterinaLoRizzo3,MariaAntoniettaMencarelli3, patient with global developmental delay recognized at an early Francesca Mari1,2,3, Anna Maria Pinto3, Francesca Fava1,2,3, Mar- age,characterizedwithhypotoniaandinabilitytoholdthehead, gheritaBaldassarri1,2,AndreaTommasi1,2,3,AlessandraFabbiani1,2,3, lack of speech, inability to walk, seizures (controlled on anti- Vittoria Lamacchia1,2,3, Elisa Benetti2, Simone Furini2, Francesca epileptic drugs) and behavioral problems. He is a second child Ariani1,2,3,Alessandra Renieri1,2,3,Chiara Fallerini1,2 from a third pregnancy of non-consanguineous parents with history of anencephaly in the ﬁrst pregnancy and a healthy 1MedicalGenetics,UniversityofSiena,Siena,Italy,2MedBiotechHub daughter. The parents embarked on a long and expensive and Competence Center, Department of Medical Biotechnologies, diagnosticodyssey,includingCMAandtrioWEStestingreturning University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 3Genetica Medica, Azienda noresult.WESdatare-analysis ayearlateridentiﬁeda“denovo” Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy. pathogenic variant in CAMK2B (NM_172079.2:c.709G>A), not presentinthedatabasesofhumanvariation,predicteddamaging Intellectual disability (ID) is a disorder characterized by an by “in silico” tools, affecting conserved amino acid residue and incomplete or arrested mental development and by IQ less than described previously in one other patient with intellectual 70. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disability of different ethnic origin. The result helped end the condition characterized by social impairment, restricted interests diagnosticodysseyinthisfamily,providedreassuranceintermsof and repetitive behaviors. ID and ASD symptoms are often therecurrencerisk,andaddressedsomelongstandingmisconcep- overlapping.Inthepresentstudy,weinvestigatedbyWholeExome tionsabouta“likelyX-linkedcondition/inheritancepattern”inthe Sequencing(WES)analysisatotalof200ID/ASDpatients.Ourcohort family. This case illustrates the diagnostic utility of WES data re- included40patientswithsyndromicID,64withnon-syndromicID,6 analysis and importance of periodically revisiting uninformative with autism and syndromic ID, 19with autism and non-syndromic results against growing evidence base for genetic causes of ID, and71 with isolated autism. We identiﬁed 39 patients with disease. pathogenicvariants(PVs)withadetectionrateof20%.Inparticular, T. Arsov: None. A. Soﬁjanova: None. M. Adamski: None. C. 29PVswerefoundinIDpatientsand3inASDpatients.7PVswere Vinuesa:None. identiﬁed in patients with ID and ASD features. Regarding variant type,13variantsweremissensechangesaccountingfor33%ofthe total,7wereframeshift,14werenonsense,4weresplicingchanges  P08
.085.C Whole-exome sequencing as an effective tool for and1wasinframedeletion.Wereportmoredenovovariants(37) thedetectionofDNAsequenceandstructural variantsinthe thaninheritedones(14).Themajorityofthemutatedgenesbelongs pathogenesis ofneurodevelopmental disorders to 4 biological pathways or regulate them: RAS/MAPK (e.g. FGFR3, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 258 Marketa Wayhelova1,2, Vladimira Vallova3,2, Jan Smetana1, Petr patient had accessory nipples and 2 whirls of hair. Molecular Broz1, AnetaMikulasova4, DominikaLoubalova1, RenataGaillyova5, analysisrevealedthepresenceofpathogenicvariantsc.917del(p. PetrKuglik1,2 Pro306Leufs*146)andc.976_988del(p.Ser326Thrfs*122)inAHD C1
 gene in 2 patients. In one individual, variant of unknown 1Department of Experimental Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk signiﬁcancec.1037G>A (p.Arg346His) was found. University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Centre of Molecular Biology and Conclusions: The presence of macrocephaly, abnormal skull Genetics,UniversityHospitalBrno,Brno,CzechRepublic,3Deaprtmentof shapeanddelayedfontanelclosureaswellasshortstatureinour Experimental Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, patients with XGS conﬁrms the role of AHD C1
 gene product in Czech Republic, 4Biosciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle skeleton development, especially in skull formation and progres- upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 5Department of Medical Genetics and sivegrowth.ThestudiesweresupportedfromInstituteofMother Genomics,UniversityHospitalBrno,Brno,CzechRepublic. andChild intramural grantno. OPK-510-18-63. A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak: None. P. Własienko: None. M. Withmorethan50%diagnosticyieldthewhole-exomesequencing Boczar:None.O.Malinowska:None.T.Gambin:None.M.Kruk: (WES)representsaneffectiveandpowerfultooltoidentifycausesof None.A.Lipiec:None.J.Bal:None.E.Obersztyn:None.M.Gos: neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) at the molecular level. We None. present our experience with WES as an effective tool for the detection of pathogenic sequence variants, copy-number variations (CNVs)andlossesofheterozygosity(LOH)usingthecommercialkit  P08
.087.A A new neurodevelopmental disease with brain Human Core Exome (Twist Biosciences) and Illumina NovaSeq 600. abnormalities due to YWHAE loss-of-function variants: from Ourpilotstudyincluded20families(triosorquatros)ofchildrenwith humanto mice severe NDDs and associated congenital abnormalities. In the optimizationstepforCNVdetectionusingread-depthapproachwe Anne-Sophie Denommé-Pichon1,2,3, Ange-Line Bruel1,2, Stephan C. conﬁrmed and speciﬁed all CNVs and LOH regions previously Collins2, Anna Mikhaleva4, Christel Wagner5, Valerie E. Vancollie6, detected by array-CGH+SNP in 8 families. Mainly, we identiﬁed Mathys Weber2,7, Carlos Prada8, Alexis Overs1,2, María Palomares- recurrentdenovopathogenicsequencevariantsinclinicallyrelevant Bralo9,10,11, Fernando Santos-Simarro9,10,11, Marta Pacio-Míguez11, SHANK3,GRIN1andNSD1genes,noveldenovopathogenicvariants Tiffany Busa12, Eric Legius13, Carlos A. Bacino14, Jill A. Rosenfeld15, in KDM1A, KMT2E and GNAI1 genes, and a pathogenic sequence Maria Antonietta Mencarelli16, Ilaria Longo16, Alessandra variantinEDAgeneofmaternalorigin.Allclinicallyrelevantﬁndings Renieri16,17,18, Salvatore Grosso19,20, Frédéric Tran Mau-Them1,2, were manually veriﬁed using Sanger sequencing and qPCR and Antonio Vitobello1,2,3, Yannis Duffourd1,2, Christopher J. Lelliott6, interpreted using a multistep approach based on information in Christel Thauvin-Robinet1,2,21, Christophe Philippe1,2, Binnaz Yalcin2, integrated databases of genomic variants, relevant scientiﬁc LaurenceFaivre2,3,7 literature, and individual anamnesis. Our pilot results conﬁrm WES asaﬁrst-tierdiagnostictestinthegeneticevaluationofchildrenwith 1Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Diagnostic génomique des NDDs.SupportedbyMinistryofHealthoftheCzechRepublic,grant maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, nr.NU20-07-00145.Allrightsreserved. France, 2UMR1231 GAD, Inserm - Université Bourgogne-Franche M.Wayhelova: None. V.Vallova: None. J.Smetana: None. P. Comté, Dijon, France, 3European Reference Network, ERN ITHACA, Broz: None. A. Mikulasova: None. D. Loubalova: None. R. Dijon, France, 4Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Gaillyova:None. P. Kuglik: None. Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5IGBMC, UMR7104, Inserm, U964, Illkirsch, France, 6Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 7Centre de Référence Maladies Rares « Anomalies  P08
.086.D Xia-Gibbs syndrome - variable clinical manifesta- du développement et syndromes malformatifs », Centre de tion ofthreecases fromasingle genetic department Génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD et Institut GIMI, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 8Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Anna Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak, Paweł Własienko, Maria Boczar, University of Cincinnati School of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA, Olga Malinowska, Tomasz Gambin, Małgorzata Kruk, Agata Lipiec, 9Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM), Hospital JerzyBal,Ewa Obersztyn, Monika Gos Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain, 10Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Instituteof the Motherand Child,Warsaw, Poland. Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER, U753), Instituto Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 11European Reference Network, ERN ITHACA, Madrid, Spain, Introduction: Xia-Gibbs syndrome (XGS) is a rare neurodevelop- 12Départementdegénétiquemédicale,CHUTimoneenfants,AP-HM, mentaldisordercharacterizedbydevelopmentaldelay,behavioral Marseille, France, 13Laboratory for Neuroﬁbromatosis Research, problems, speech delay, hypotonia and seizures. Most of the Department of Human Genetics, KU Leuven University Hospital, patients with XGS have a heterozygous loss-of-function AHD C1
 Leuven, Belgium, 14Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, mutations. Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, 15Baylor Genetics Patients and methods: We present clinical evaluations of 3 Laboratories, Houston, TX, USA, 16Genetica Medica, Azienda patientswiththeclinicalfeaturesofXGS,agedfrom5to10years. Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 17Medical Genetics, The mutation analysis was performed using targeted next UniversityofSiena,Siena,Italy,18MedBiotechHubandCompetence generationsequencing. Center, Department of Medical Biotechnologies, University of Siena, Results: All patients had intellectual disability from mild to Siena,Italy,19DipartimentodiMedicinaMolecolareedelloSviluppo, severe,delayedorabsentspeech,hypotonia,motordevelopment Universita’ degli Studi di Siena, Siena, Italy, 20U.O.C. Pediatria, delay, unstable gait, open mouth appearance, drooling, stereo- Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 21Centre de typicmovementsofhands,characteristicpatternofbehaviorwith RéférenceDéﬁciencesIntellectuellesdeCausesRares,FHU-TRANSLAD, aggression, auto-aggression and tantrums. Two patients had CHUDijonBourgogne, Dijon, France. macrocephaly,oneofthem-delayedclosureoffontanelandone patient - abnormal skull shape. Hypoplastic corpus callosum and Introduction: Miller-Dieker syndrome is caused by a contiguous simiancreasewerefoundin2individuals.Onepatientpresented gene deletion syndrome involving multiple genes on chromo- short stature treated successfully with growth hormone. One some 17p13.3, especially PAFAH1B1 and YWHAE. Toyo-oka et al. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 259 showed that deletions comprising YWHAE were responsible for region, seems to be necessary but not sufﬁcient, for limb the most severe Miller-Dieker cases. Since then, several patients malformation. Depending on the genes involved, patients with with17q13.3deletionsinvolvingYWHAEhavebeenreportedand duplicationsinthisregionmaybecategorizedintoeitherclassIor presented with developmental delay and cerebral abnormalities. classII.IndividualsinclassIhavemicroduplicationsoftheYWHAE, To date, no YWHAE loss-of-function single nucleotide variants but not PAFAH1B1 and generally, result in learning disabilities, (SNV)hasbeendescribed,andthegenehasnotbeenreportedas autism, and developmental delays. Individuals in class II always clearly morbidyet. havemicroduplicationsofthePAFAH1B1gene,whichmayinclude Materials and Methods: Three patients with YWHAE de novo YWHAE and other genetic gains. Class II-microduplications heterozygousloss-of-functionSNVsand5patients(3unpublished) generally result in smaller body size, developmental delays, with deletions (<1 Mb) encompassing YWHAE were gathered microcephaly, and other brain malformations. We review the throughdifferentdata-sharingnetworks(GeneMatcher,Decipher, phenotypes associated with copy number gains of chromosome AnDDI-Rares and ITHACA). To address the speciﬁc impact of 17p13.3 in several cases of Class I and Class II-microduplications YWHAElossoffunctionintheneurodevelopmentalphenotypeof observed in patients from The Spanish Overgrowth Registry Miller-Diekersyndrome,wegeneratedafullknockoutofYwhaein Initiative (SOGRI) by means SNP-arrays, in which the targeted themouseandassessedneuroanatomicalparametersinconjunc- analysis was negative or in which the clinical features were not tion with 3D brain imaging techniques in mouse embryos and compatible withany of thewell-known Overgrowth disorders. adults. J.Nevado:None.J.A.Tenorio:None.A.Touati:None.J.Pozo- Results. The most frequent manifestations in patients were Román: None. M. Segovia: None. P. Arias: None. N. Gallego: developmental delay, delayed speech, seizures and brain mal- None.G. Gordo:None. I. Dapia:None. P.D.Lapunzina: None. formations (corpus callosum hypoplasia, delayed myelination, ventricular dilatation). Patients with SNVs have no dysmorphic featureswhereasthosewithlargedeletionspresentedwithfacial  P09
.002.C Mouse neuronal cells outperform in a novel features. Studies in mouse Ywhae-/- revealed craniofacial char- galactonamide molecular gel rather than in neurosphere; acteristics and numerous brain structural defects (thin cortices, comparison of neurogenesis and neuronal differentiation corpuscallosumdysgenesisandhydrocephalus)parallelingthose mRNAmarkers seenin thehumancondition. Conclusion: These studies conﬁrm YWHAE loss-of-function Keziban Korkmaz Bayram1, Juliette Fitremann2, Arslan Bayram3, variants as cause of a new rare neurodevelopmental disease Zeynep Yılmaz4, Ecmel Mehmetbeyoğlu5, Yusuf Özkul5, Minoo associated withbrain abnormalities inhuman andmouse. Rassoulzadegan6 A.Denommé-Pichon:None.A.Bruel:None.S.C.Collins:None. A.Mikhaleva:None.C.Wagner:None.V.E.Vancollie:None.M. 1Medical Genetics Department, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University, Weber: None. C. Prada: None. A. Overs: None. M. Palomares- Ankara, Turkey, 2Université de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 3Medical Bralo: None. F. Santos-Simarro: None. M. Pacio-Míguez: None. Genetics Department, Etlik Zubeyde Hanım Women’s Diseases T. Busa: None. E. Legius: None. C.A. Bacino: None. J.A. Education and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 4Genome and Rosenfeld: None. M. Mencarelli: None. I. Longo: None. A. Stem Cell Center (GENKOK), Erciyes University, Kayserı, Turkey, Renieri: None. S. Grosso: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. A. 5GenomeandStemCellCenter(GENKOK),ErciyesUniversity,Kayseri, Vitobello: None. Y. Duffourd: None. C.J. Lelliott: None. C. Turkey, 6University ofNice Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France. Thauvin-Robinet: None. C. Philippe: None. B. Yalcin: None. L. Faivre:None. N-heptyl-D-galactonamide(Gal C7
)isasyntheticcarbohydratederiva- tivethatself-assembleintosupramolecularﬁbers-biocompatible3D hydrogels. In this hydrogel, neural stem cells differentiate into both  P09
 Neurogenetic andPsychiatric Disorders glial cells and neurons. In this study, the gene expression of mouse hippocampalstemcellshasbeeninvestigatedinseveralconditions.  P09
.001.B 17p13.3 microduplication syndrome: new cases Theanalysiswascarriedouteitherdirectlyexvivoonthecellsofthe with class I and class II gains and clinical and molecular deli- freshhippocampusoraftercultureoftheprimarycellsinvitrounder neation ofthe syndrome three conditions: (1) culture in neurospheres in non-adherent conditionsfor19days,(2)directcultureinGal C7
for7daysand(3) Julián Nevado1,2,3, Jair A. Tenorio1,2,3, Ameni Touati1, Jesús Pozo- cultureinGal C7
for7daysafter12daysinneurospheres;tocomplete Román4, Mabel Segovia5, Pedro Arias1, Natalia Gallego1, Gema culturedaysto19asin(1).Sox8andSox10,oligodendrocytemarkers, Gordo1, Irene Dapia1, SOGRIConsortium, PabloD. Lapunzina1,2,3 andSox9,anastrocytemarker,wereexpressedatamuchhigherlevel on Gal C7
. Dcx, a marker of neurogenesis and Neurod1, a marker of 1INGEMM-IdiPaz, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3ITHACA neuronaldifferentiation,areexpressedataverylowlevelcompared European Research Network, Madrid, Spain, 4Hospital Universitario to the fresh hippocampi conditions both in neurospheres and in NiñoJesús, Madrid, Spain,5CENAGEM, BuenosAires, Argentina. Gal C7
 hydrogels. However, these two markers were maintained at better levels in the Gal C7
 gelculture compared to the neurosphere Chromosome 17p13.3 is a region of genomic instability due to condition.TheseresultsshowthattheGal C7
hydrogelbringsdifferent extensive LCRs which make it vulnerable to copy number and interesting conditions for inducing the differentiation and variations. Depending on whether a deletion or a duplication of maturationofneuralprogenitorcellscomparedwithpolymer-based 17p13.3occurs,differentrareneurodevelopmentaldisordersarise. scaffoldsorcell-onlyconditions.Microstructureoftheﬁbrousnetwork, Phenotypic features of 17p13.3 microduplication-syndrome (MIM the chemical composition, and the bioavailability of the gelling #613275) include developmental and psychomotor delay, beha- moleculemakecellcultureinsupramolecularhydrogelsverydifferent. vioral problems, distinct physical features, postnatal-overgrowth Thedifferencesobservedopennewperspectivesintissueengineer- and ASD, as well as limb malformations and cleft lip and palate. ing,induction,andgeneexpressionanalysis. Genes thorough this region; CRK, PAFAH1B1, and YWHAE have K. Korkmaz Bayram: None. J. Fitremann: None. A. Bayram: crucialrolesinneuronalmigrationandcontributetoeachofthese None. Z. Yılmaz: None. E. Mehmetbeyoğlu: None. Y. Özkul: genetic disorders. BHLAH9 located within chromosome 17p13.3, None.M. Rassoulzadegan: None. but immediately outside of the Miller-Dieker Syndrome critical EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 260  P09
.003.D Transcriptomic characterization of 7q11.23 Martina Servetti1,2, Livia Pisciotta1,3, Elisa Tassano4, Lino Nobili1,5, patient-speciﬁc induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and Silvia Boeri1,5, Maria Cerminara1, Margherita Lerone2, Maria Teresa derivates Divizia2, PatriziaRonchetto4, Aldamaria Puliti1,2 Mar Costa-Roger1, Bernd Kuebler2, Marina Alvarez-Estape1, Raquel 1Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Flores1, Luis Alberto Pérez-Jurado1,3, Ivon Cuscó1,4, Roser Genetics, Maternal and Child Health (DiNOGMI), University of Corominas1,5 Genova, Genova, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy, 3Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, ASST 1GeneticsUnit,DepartamentdeCiènciesExperimentalsidelaSalut, Fatebenefratelli Sacco, Milano, Italy, 4Human Genetics Laboratory, PompeuFabraUniversity,HospitaldelMarResearchInstitute(IMIM), IRCCSIstitutoGianninaGaslini,Genova,Italy,5ChildNeuropsychiatry ParcdeSalutMarandCentrodeInvestigaciónBiomédicaenRedde Unit,IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini,Genova, Italy. Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain, 2Regenerative Medicine Programme, Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge, Introduction: Inconsistency of genotype-phenotype correlations IDIBELL, L’Hospital de Llobregat, and Spanish National Stem Cell often complicates the clinical interpretation of CNVs. Increasing Bank-Barcelona Node, Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, ﬁndingssuggestthatsuchinconsistencymaybealsoexplainedby Spain, 3Genetics Service, Parc de Salut Mar, Barcelona, Spain, complexinteractionsamongmultipleCNVs.Theaimofthisstudy 4Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics and Medicine was to re-evaluate patients with CNVs previously classiﬁed as Genetics Group, VHIR, University Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, variant of uncertain signiﬁcance (VOUS) to unveil new candidate Spain, 5Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, genes and pathogenetic mechanisms that could explain the Barcelona University, Barcelona, Spain. patient’s phenotype. Methods:CNVsidentiﬁedbydiagnosticarray-CGHin526NDD Introduction: Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS;OMIM#194050) cases were re-analysed. A deep analysis, mainly consisting in a and 7q11.23 microduplication syndrome (DU P7
;OMIM#609757) revision of gene expression/function annotation, and chromatine are rare multisystem disorders with somehow opposed neurobe- organization data, was performed. New candidate genes were havioral trajectories caused by 1.55-1.84Mb heterozygous micro- analysedbyGeneCodis4toevidenceenrichmentforknownNDD- deletion or microduplication of 26-28 contiguous genes at associated GeneOntology termsand pathways. 7q11.23,respectively.Cellularreprogrammingisagoodapproach Results:In42%ofcasespathogenicCNVswerefound,whilein toovercometheexperimentallimitationstostudyneurodevelop- 58% identiﬁed CNVs remained initially VOUS. Notably, 3.5% of mental disorders in humans. The purpose of this project is to patients with variants classiﬁed as VOUS had two CNVs, each evaluate the transcriptomic consequences of 7q11.23 patient- inherited from one of the two healthy parents and overlapping derivediPSC linesand derivatives. known and/or new candidate NDD genes, that could act by Methods:Wegeneratedpatient-speciﬁciPSCsfromﬁbroblasts double-hitmechanisms.Interestingly,twodeletionsinvolvingtwo from four WBS patients, four DU P7
 patients and two controls, newcandidategenes,PTPRDandBUD13,werefoundinapatient whichweredifferentiatedtoneuralprogenitorcells(NPCs)andto with neuropsychiatric and neurological features that together dopaminergic neurons. After RNA extraction from all cell-types could fully explain the patient’s phenotype. Double-hit mechan- (ﬁbroblasts,iPSCs,NPCsandneurons),weassessedgenome-wide isms were also found among the 225 patients with pathogenic differentialexpression using expression microarrays. CNVs,asthosewithsyndromicCNVs(9%)andwithinheritedCNVs Results: We identiﬁed a total of 722 differentially expressed encompassing known NDD genes (14%), that could account for genes(DEGs)inapairwisecomparisonofthethreegenotypesin variableexpressivity and incomplete penetrance. all cell-types. Half of the genes in 7q11.23 showed mirroring Conclusions: In our cohort of patients CNV-mediated double- expression between DU P7
 and WBS models. Enrichment analysis hitmechanisms seemto play arelevant role inNDDs, helpingto of DEGs in ﬁbroblasts revealed speciﬁc pathways and gene elucidatecomplex phenotypes. ontologycategoriesrelevantforthehallmarkphenotypesofboth M. Servetti: None. L. Pisciotta: None. E. Tassano: None. L. disorders. Neuronal processes, such as transmission across Nobili: None. S. Boeri: None. M. Cerminara: None. M. Lerone: chemical synapses, were signiﬁcantly enriched in neurons. In None.M. Divizia: None. P. Ronchetto: None.A. Puliti:None. addition, WGCNA of iPSCs and NPCs lines uncovered interesting co-expressionmodulesrelatedtoiontransport(q-value=0.0365) orglutamatereceptor signaling (q-value=0.0463), respectively.  P09
.005.BSexspeciﬁceffectofATXN2rs7969300polymorph- Conclusions: Integrative transcriptomic analysis of in vitro ismonage ofonset in Spinocerebellar Ataxia type 2 7q11.23-CNVscellularmodelsrevealsgenesandpathwaysaltered during early neuronal development in these genomic disorders, Luis E. Almaguer-Mederos1, Suzana Gispert2, Dennis Almaguer- which could lead to novel potential therapeutic targets. Funded Gotay1, Raúl Aguilera-Rodríguez1, Yanetza González-Zaldívar1, by grants FPU16/06907, FI S16
/00369, H2020-MSC-656359, Yaimé Vázquez-Mojena1, Dany Cuello-Almarales1, Daniel O. Palen- RYC-2017-21636, RTI2018-101960-A-I00, CIV P16
A1828, RD12/ zuela3, Georg Auburger2 0019/0034,PRB2;PT13/0001/0041. M. Costa-Roger: None. B. Kuebler: None. M. Alvarez-Estape: 1Center for the Investigation and Rehabilitation of Hereditary None. R. Flores: None. L. Pérez-Jurado: A. Employment (full or Ataxias, Holguín, Cuba, 2Goethe University Medical Faculty, Frank- part-time);Modest;qGenomics.E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stock furt, Germany, 3Center of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; qGe- Havana,Cuba. nomics. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; qGenomics. I. Cuscó:None. R. Corominas:None. Background: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2) shows huge clinicalvariabilityeveninindividualssharingthesameCAGrepeat length. A large study was conducted to assess the role of SNP  P09
.004.A Relevance of double-hit mechanisms in patients rs7969300 asamodiﬁer of theageofonset inSCA2 patients. with Neurodevelopmental Disorders (NDDs): a re-evaluation Methods:Across-sectionalstudyinvolving427Cubanclinically of526patientswithnon-benigncopynumbervariants(CNVs) and molecularly conﬁrmed SCA2 patients was conducted. The EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 261 ATXN2 CAG-repeat length was determined by PCR followed by A.Grossi:None. T.Bachetti: None. I.Ceccherini: None. polyacrylamidegelelectrophoresis, whiletheSNPrs7969300 was assessed byqPCR usinga TaqMan assay.  P09
.008.A Alkuraya-Kucinskas syndrome: novel compound Results:Themutant“T”alleleforSNPrs7969300wasdetected heterozygous KIAA1109 variants in two siblings with this in17outof427individuals,forafrequencyof0.0398.Regression recentlydelineated disorderofbraindevelopment analysis showed that SNP rs7969300 genotypes contributed in a 0.3% to explain age of onset variability (p=0.029), while the Matina Prapa1, Suzanna Dunkerton2, Jeremy Brockelsby2, Nishi- interaction term between SNP rs7969300 genotypes and sex gandhDeole3,PoojaHarijan4,MarionBohatschek5,ElspethWhitby6, contributedina0.5%(p=0.012).Theoccurrenceofone“T”allele JoanPaterson1, Soo-Mi Park1, Sarju G.Mehta1 produced an average age of onset of 6.41 years earlier than expected inmale SCA2 patients. 1East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge University Conclusions: Evidence for a sex-speciﬁc effect of SNP Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, rs7969300 on the age of onset of SCA2 patients is provided. 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Cambridge University Further replication studies in different SCA2 populations in the Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, world will be needed to clarify the role of this SNP on the SCA2 3DepartmentofObstetricsandGynaecology,EastSuffolkandNorth clinical phenotype. Also, further functional studies would be EssexNHSFoundationTrust,Ipswich,UnitedKingdom,4Department valuable to establish the role of SNP rs7969300 in SCA2 of Paediatric Neurology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS physiopathology. Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5Rosie Neonatal L.E. Almaguer-Mederos: None. S. Gispert: None. D. Alma- Unit, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cam- guer-Gotay: None. R. Aguilera-Rodríguez: None. Y. González- bridge, United Kingdom, 6University of Shefﬁeld, Shefﬁeld, United Zaldívar:None.Y.Vázquez-Mojena:None.D.Cuello-Almarales: Kingdom. None.D.O. Palenzuela: None. G.Auburger:None. Biallelic mutations in the KIAA1109 gene are reported to cause Alkuraya-Kucinskas syndrome (OMIM #617822) characterised by  P09
.007.DAnapparentlydenovoAlexander-associated GFAP cerebral parenchymal underdevelopment. To date, only a few mutation transmitted from a healthy mother showing clinical reports have been published detailing the phenotype of gonosomalmosaicism this rare autosomal recessive disorder. Severe loss of function variantswerelethal;survivingpatientswithmissensevariantshad AliceGrossi,Tiziana Bachetti, Isabella Ceccherini global developmental delay, early-onset epilepsy and arthrogry- posis.WereportaKurdishconsanguineousfamilywithfetalbrain Istituto Giannina Gaslini,Genova, Italy. abnormalities in two pregnancies detected at 20 weeks of gestation. The couple’s ﬁrst female child died at nine months Alexander disease (AxD) is a leukodystrophy caused by hetero- duetocomplicationsofrespiratorytractinfection;shehadsevere zygousmutationintheGFAPgene,presentingatdifferentageof global developmental impairment with hypotonia and infantile onset: early childhood (type I) and later, up to adult (type II). To epilepsy. Antenatally detected brain defects were conﬁrmed via date, pathogenic variants identiﬁed throughout thegene explain MRIheadimagingat1weekofageincludingseveregeneralised morethan90%ofthepatients.RarerecurrenceofAxDinsiblings, lissencephaly,parenchymalthinning,Dandy-Walkermalformation, without apparent parental transmission, allowed to hypothesize colpocephaly, and absent corpus callosum. Trio exome sequen- the occurrence of germinal and eventually somatic mosaicism, a cing reported compound heterozygosity for a protein-truncating circumstance however never proven so far.Next Generation variant (c.3673C>T;p.(Arg1225Ter)), and a variant of uncertain Sequencing(NGS)withdeepcoverage(≥500X)attheGFAPlocus, signiﬁcance (c.2794-21C>G) in the KIAA1109 gene predicted to ofDNAisolatedfromperipheralbloodsamples,wasperformedin affectsplicing.Thesecondpregnancywasdiagnosedwithsimilar 11 probands, carrying apparently denovo GFAP mutations, and brain defects including mild ventriculomegaly, absent corpus their healthy parents. One mother revealed a mosaicism of the callosum, lack of sulcation and sylvian ﬁssure formation, thick GFAP mutation already detected in her son. The ratio between neuronaleminence withlack ofmigration,smallcerebellum, and coverages of mutant and wildtype alleles, compared to those kinked brainstem. The pregnancy was terminated at 21 weeks of obtained with known dilutions of the mutant allele, provided an gestation with subsequent testing conﬁrmingcompound hetero- estimateofthemosaicismextension(12.18%)(A).Thisresultwas zygosityforthefamilialKIAA1109variants.Thisreportexpandsthe conﬁrmedthroughsinglenucleotideprimerextensionandratioof mutational spectrum of Alkuraya-Kucinskas syndrome and clones carrying mutant and wildtype inserts, obtaining 8.9% and emphasises its importance as a differential diagnosis of antena- 10%, respectively.Though the search for parental gonosomal tallydetectedneuralmigrationdefects,especiallyinthepresence mosaicisms should make use, whenever possible, of the relevant ofaseverecerebralpatternmimickingtubulinopathies(Cabetet. tissues, deep NGS of even less appropriate DNA sources may al,2019). represent a fruitful approach to this type of investigation. The M.Prapa:None.S.Dunkerton:None.J.Brockelsby:None.N. genetic counseling to AxD families should always take this rare Deole:None.P.Harijan:None.M.Bohatschek:None.E.Whitby: eventinto account. None.J. Paterson: None. S.Park:None. S.G.Mehta:None. A 180A_50% 180A_25% 180A_12,5% 180A_6,125% 110M_  P09
.009.B Whole-exome sequencing reveals differential unknown enhancement of ion channels activity genes between Alzhei- TOT 720 656 739 760 673 merpatients andcontrols (X) WT 371 549 661 730 591 (X) DimitarSerbezov1,MajaAtanasoska2,LubomirBalabanski1,2,Sena Karachanak-Yankova1,3, Radoslava Vazharova4,2, Dragomira Niko- MUT 349 107 78 30 82 (X) lova1, Marta Mihaylova1, Rada Staneva1, Olga Antonova1, Vera Damyanova1,MihailGanev1,ViktoriaSpasova1,DessislavaNesheva1, % 48,47 16,31 10,55 3,95 12,18 Zora Hammoudeh1, Savina Hadjidekova1, Diyana Belezhanska1, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 262 Shima Mehrabian1, Maria Petrova1, Latchezar Traykov1, Draga Sweden, 12Emerging Science & Innovation, Pﬁzer Worldwide Toncjeva1 Research, Development and Medical, Cambrige, MA, USA, 13MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, 1Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Gynecology and UniversityofEdinburgh,WesternGeneralHospital,Edinburgh,United assisted reproduction hospital “Malinov”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Depart- Kingdom. ment of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, Soﬁa University "St. Kliment Ohridski", Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4Department of Biology, Medical genetics Introduction:Despitetheincreasingglobalburdenofneurologi- and Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Soﬁa University “St. Kliment caldisorders,thereisalackofeffectivediagnosticandtherapeutic Ohridski”, Soﬁa,Bulgaria. biomarkers.Proteinsareoftendysregulatedindiseaseandhavea stronggeneticcomponent;here,weshowthatthehumanserum Introduction:Alzheimerdisease(AD)isthemostcommoncause proteome isan accessible reservoir ofpotential biomarkers. of dementia, and identifying genetic factors causing changes in Materials and Methods: Using deep whole genome sequen- molecularpathwaysassociatedwithADarecrucialfordeveloping cing(WGS)datafromtwopopulation-basedcohorts(15XWGS;N diagnosticmethods and treatment therapies. =2,893), we carry out a protein quantitative trait locus (pQTL) Materials & Methods: Whole-exome sequencing was per- analysis of 184 neurologically-relevant proteins. We then apply formedontwoDNApools,onesetupwithDNAisolatedfrom66 causal inference tools, such as colocalisation analysis, to map AD patients and the other from 100 individuals showing no theseloci toneurological diseases. symptomsofdementia.Geneenhancementwasperformedusing Results:Wedetect139pQTLsfor107proteins,themajorityof genes with variants with very low European population frequen- which(65%)arecis-acting,including76independently-associated cies (< 0.0025) but with higher estimated frequency in our pools sequence variants that have not been previously identiﬁed. We (> 0.01), Associated with these genes molecular functions and observe causal associations between serum levels of CD33 and pathways were determined using the online platforms Toppgene Alzheimer’s disease, GPNMB and Parkinson’s disease, and MSR1 andReactome. and schizophrenia, describing their clinical potential and high- Results:Themolecularfunctionwiththelargestnumberofrare lightingdrug repurposingopportunities. variantgenesinbothpoolswasdeterminedtobeRibonucleotide Conclusions: We have generated a pQTL map of neurological binding. Neuronal system pathways were subsequently found to proteins, elucidating the genetic landscape that underlies the be differentially enhanced in the pools. More speciﬁcally, HCN circulatingproteomeanditsconnectiontoneurologicaldisorders. channels, Long-term potentiation, and Assembly and cell surface In doing so, we conﬁrm known protein-disease associations, and presentationofNMDAreceptorsarepathwaysnotablyenhancedin describe new potential mechanisms that contribute to disease thecontrolgroup comparedto theADpatients group. aetiology. ConclusionsOurresultsrevealdifferentialenhancementofion G. Png: None. A. Barysenka: None. L. Repetto: None. P. activity genes between Alzheimer patients and controls, lending Navarro: None. X. Shen: None. E. Tsafantakis: None. M. support to the ion channel hypothesis of AD. Acknowledgment Karaleftheri: None. G. Dedoussis: None. A. Mälarstig: None. J. KP-06-N33/5from13.12.2019-NationalScienceFundofBulgaria" F.Wilson:None. A. Gilly: None.E. Zeggini:None. D. Serbezov: None. M. Atanasoska: None. L. Balabanski: None. S. Karachanak-Yankova: None. R. Vazharova: None. D. Nikolova: None. M. Mihaylova: None. R. Staneva: None. O.  P09
.011.D Alzheimer’s disease polygenic risk score assess- Antonova: None. V. Damyanova: None. M. Ganev: None. V. mentonlongitudinalamyloidloadincognitivelyintactolder Spasova: None. D. Nesheva: None. Z. Hammoudeh: None. S. adults Hadjidekova:None.D.Belezhanska:None.S.Mehrabian:None. M.Petrova: None.L.Traykov: None. D.Toncjeva: None. EmmaSusanneLuckett1,JolienSchaeverbeke1,LarsBertram2,Koen VanLaere1,3,PatrickDupont1,IsabellCleynen1,RikVandenberghe1,3  P09
.010.C Identifying serum biomarkers of neurological 1KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2University of Lübeck, Lübeck, disordersusing wholegenomesequencing Germany,3UZLeuven, Leuven, Belgium. GracePng1,2,AndreiBarysenka1,LindaRepetto3,PauNavarro4,Xia Introduction: Published data have highlighted associations Shen5,6,7, Emmanouil Tsafantakis8, Maria Karaleftheri9, George between Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) susceptibility loci and AD- Dedoussis10,AndersMälarstig11,12,JamesF.Wilson5,13,ArthurGilly1, related brain changes. We investigated these associations within Eleftheria Zeggini1,2 the Flemish Prevent AD Cohort KU Leuven (F-PACK) using AD polygenicrisk scores(PRSs) and longitudinalbrain amyloid load. 1Institute of Translational Genomics, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, Materials and methods: Sixty-one cognitively healthy partici- Neuherberg,Germany,2TUMSchoolofMedicine,TechnicalUniversity pants(age:68(56-79),29females,29APOEε4carriers)receivedan of Munich and Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Munich, Germany, 3Centre [18F]Flutemetamol-PET scan at two timepoints (interval 4.6 years for Global Health Research, Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, (3.4-8.6)). Amyloid rate of change: absolute change divided by WesternGeneralHospital,Edinburgh,UnitedKingdom,4MRCHuman interval. Genotyping performed using Illumina GSA and imputa- Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, tion using the Michigan server and HRC reference panel. Data University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 5Centre for underwent standard quality control. PRSice was used for PRS Global Health Research, Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, calculations with Stage 1 summary statistics from Kunkle et al. Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 6Biostatistics Group, State Key Labora- (2019)asbaseﬁleandEuropeanindividualsfrom1000Genomes tory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, (N=503) as reference for clumping. We calculated PRSs at three Guangzhou, China, 7Department of Medical Epidemiology and thresholdsforSNPinclusion(pT):pT=0.5(Escott-Priceetal.2015); Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 8Anogia 1x10-5; 5x10-8. Linear regression models determined if PRSs were Medical Centre, Anogia, Greece, 9Echinos Medical Centre, Echinos, associated with amyloid rate of change at each pT (age, sex and Greece, 10Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, School of Health ﬁrstthree PCsas covariates). Science and Education, Harokopio University of Athens, Athens, Results:TherewasasigniﬁcanteffectofPRSonamyloidrateof Greece, 11Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, change when using the more stringent thresholds for SNP EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 263 inclusion: pT=5x10-8: β=0.0054 (CI: 0.000042-0.011), p=0.048; 3ErasmusUniversityMedicalCenter,DepartmentofClinicalGenetics, pT=1x10-5: β=0.0056 (CI: 0.0000785-0.011), p=0.047. Amyloid Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4IMIM - Hospital del Mar Medical Research accumulation,however,wasnotsigniﬁcantlyassociatedwithPRS Institute, Barcelona, Spain, 5Centro de Investigación Biomédica en whenpT=0.5: β=0.0013(-0.004-0.007), p=0.619. Red de Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable (CIBER-FES), Madrid, Conclusions: A signiﬁcant effect of PRS is detected with more Spain, 6Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of stringent pTs, suggesting AD-related brain changes have an Public Health, Boston, MA, USA, 7Channing Division of Network oligogenic architecture, in line with recent publications showing Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA, 8Institute of ADisan oligogenicrather than polygenicdisease. Evolutionary Biology (CSIC-UPF), Department of Experimental and E.S.Luckett:None.J.Schaeverbeke:None.L.Bertram:None. Health Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, K. Van Laere: None. P. Dupont: None. I. Cleynen: None. R. 9InstitucióCatalanadeRecercaiEstudisAvançats(ICREA),Barcelona, Vandenberghe: None. Spain,10Presentaddress:H.LundbeckA/S,Valby,Denmark,11Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Bioingeniería, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina,Madrid,Spain,12CatalanInstituteofOncology(ICO)-  P09
.012.A Pathway based enrichment analysis of genes Bellvitge Biomedical Research Center (IDIBELL), Hospitalet del associated withAlzheimer’sdisease Llobregat, Spain. DavidVogrinc, Katja Goričar,Vita Dolžan Introduction: Telomere length (TL) is an objective biomarker of biological aging. Shorter telomeres are associated with acceler- University of Ljubljana, Faculty ofMedicine, Ljubljana, Slovenia. ated aging, consequently increasing the risk of age-related diseases such as Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). We aimed to test the Introduction: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common potential causal role of TL in age- and AD-related brain structure neurodegenerative brain disease affecting millions worldwide. alterationsthrough a MendelianRandomization (MR) analysis. Late-onsetADcasescomprisethevastmajorityofallADpatients. Methods: We included 1,134 participants from the ALFA AlthoughfamilyhistoryisimportantinassessingADrisk,complex (ALzheimer and FAmilies) study. We calculated composite brain geneticandenvironmentalinteractionscontributetoADevenlate signatures reﬂecting cortical thickness of speciﬁc age or AD inlife.Ouraimwastoperformpathwayenrichmentanalysisona vulnerablebrainregions.Atotalof7genome-widehitsassociated deﬁnedADriskgeneset,obtainedfromcomprehensiveliterature with TL were used as instrumental variables. Causal effects of TL review. were estimated using the MR-inverse-variance weighted method MaterialsandMethods:Weperformedaliteraturesynthesisof (IVW). Sensitivity analyses using the MR-Egger method were genome wide association studies and their meta-analyses that conducted to test for directional pleiotropic effects. All analyses investigated AD susceptibility. Next, we performed a functional were adjusted by age, sex and years of education. Stratiﬁed enrichmentanalysis,basedonGeneOntology:BiologicalProcess. analyses by APOE-ɛ4status wereperformed. Pathway networkwasvisualized using Cytoscape software. Results: MR analysis revealed signiﬁcant associations between Results: 105 loci were associated with AD risk, while 30 geneticallypredictedshorterTLandreducedcorticalthicknessin additional loci were associated with biomarker levels in body age and AD-related brain signatures; however, evidence for ﬂuids or neurologic features. Identiﬁed genes were grouped into directional pleiotropy was observed. Our results suggested an four parental categories for AD risk gene set and seven parental effectmodiﬁcationbyAPOE-ɛ4status:signiﬁcanteffectswereonly categories for AD biomarker gene set. Common categories for observedamongAPOE-ɛ4carrierswithnoevidenceforpleiotropy both gene sets were metabolic process, cellular process, localiza- (AD: βIVW=-7.61, p-value=0.027; Aging: βIVW=-8.10, p-value< tion and biological regulation, while transport, neurological 0.001). system process and regulation of cellular process were addition- Conclusions: Our results suggest a causal role of telomeres in allyidentiﬁed inbiomarkergene set. vulnerabilityofbrainregionsassociatedwithagingprocessesand Conclusion: Functional enrichment analysis enabled us to AD,speciﬁcally inindividuals atincreased geneticrisk of AD. identify key biological processes of AD pathogenesis. Our This work was supported by an awarded Alzheimer’s Associa- comprehensive review can serve as a basis for studies of tion ResearchGrant (AARG-19-618265). pathophysiological mechanisms of risk genes, identiﬁed on a B. Rodríguez-Fernández: None. N. Vilor-Tejedor: None. M. genome-wide scale. Better characterization of risk genes could García: None. G. Operto: None. E.M. Arenaza-Urquijo: None. C. enable the stratiﬁcation of patients according to the main Minguillon:None.K.Fauria:None.I.DeVivo:None.A.Navarro: molecularmechanismsofpathogenesis,supportingdevelopment None. J.L. Molinuevo: None. J.D. Gispert: None. A. Sala-Vila: of tailored and personalised treatment of AD. Research grants: None.M. Crous-Bou: None. ARRS P1
-0170. D.Vogrinc:None. K. Goričar:None. V. Dolžan: None.  P09
.014.C Genomic data suggests the involvement of TLR5 variants in modifyingthe riskfor Alzheimer’s disease  P09
.013.B‘Geneticallypredictedtelomerelengthisassociated with age- and Alzheimer’s Disease-related brain structure Dragomira N. Nikolova1, Dimitar Serbezov1, Mihail Ganev1, Sena alterations.’ Karachanak-Yankova1,MartaMihaylova1,ShimaMehrabian2,Maria Petrova2, Vera Damyanova1, Diyana Belezhanska2, Lachezar Tray- Blanca Rodríguez-Fernández1, Natalia Vilor-Tejedor1,2,3, Marina kov2,Savina Hadjidekova1, Draga Toncheva1 García1, Grégory Operto1,4,5, Eider M. Arenaza-Urquijo1,4,5, Carolina Minguillon1,4,5, Karine Fauria1,5, Immaculata De Vivo6,7, Arcadi 1Department of Medical genetics, Medical University - Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Navarro1,8,9, José Luis Molinuevo1,10, Juan D. Gispert1,4,11, Aleix Bulgaria, 2Department of Neurology, University Hospital “Alexan- Sala-Vila1,4,Marta Crous-Bou1,6,12, for the ALFAstudy drovska”, Medical University - Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria. 1Barcelonaβeta Brain Research Center - Pasqual Maragall Founda- Introduction:Alzheimer’sdisease(AD)isanirreversible,progres- tion, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG). The sive brain disorder leading to dementia in adults. Immune Barcelona Institute for Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain, system’s dysregulation is a key factor in the AD pathogenesis, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 264 particularlyToll-likereceptors(TLRs)whichparticipateinneuroin- found as one of the two pathogenic variants in healthy young ﬂammatory reactions. The TLR-mediated response has beneﬁcial individuals. On the other hand, centenarian exomes contain only roles stimulating phagocytosis releasing neurotoxic products. he one AD pathogenic variant - rs193922916 in APOE, which shows aimofourstudywastodeterminethepresenceandsigniﬁcance recessive inheritance. ofvariantsinTLRgenesinthegenomicdataofpatientswithAD. Conclusions: The case/control analysis of the presence of Materials and Methods: We selected 127 genes associated pathogenic variants in AD patients and healthy individuals at with PRR (pattern recognition receptors) pathways, innate and different age can pave the way towards the implementation of adaptiveimmunity,inﬂammatoryresponses,defenseresponsesto new diagnostic and prognostic blood biomarkers for Alzheimer’s virusesandbacteria.Wholeexomesequencingwasperformedon disease. Acknowledgment: KP-06-N33/5 from 13.12.2019 - twoDNApools,oneconstructedwithDNAfromADpatientsand NationalScience FundofBulgaria the other with DNA from healthy age-synchronized individuals. S. Karachanak-Yankova: None. D. Serbezov: None. L. Theobtainedgenomicdatawasthensurveyedforthepresenceof Balabanski: None. M. Mihaylova: None. D. Nikolova: None. M. PRRvariantsandtheirfrequencyinthetwopoolswascalculated. Ganev: None. D. Nesheva: None. Z. Hammoudeh: None. B. Results: 1229 PRR variants were detected in both pools, but Rukova: None. T. Dekova: None. D. Belezhanska: None. S. only24ofthemweresigniﬁcantlydifferentinfrequencybetween Mehrabian: None. M. Petrova: None. L. Traykov: None. S. thetwopools.Ofthese5variantsbelongedtodifferentTLRfamily Hadjidekova: None. D.Toncheva: None. genemembers-rs5744168andrs2072493(TLR5);rs179008(TLR7); rs3764880 (TLR8); rs5743611 (TLR1). Two variants of highest p-value belonged to TLR5 - rs5744168 (FDR=0.002) and  P09
.017.B Investigation of proven genetic risk factors in the rs2072493 (FDR=0.005). Hungarianamyotrophic lateral sclerosis population Conclusion. Our study demonstrates the role of TLRs in AD Zsóﬁa Flóra Nagy1, Margit Pál1, Gloria Kafui Esi Zodanu1, Dalma pathogenesis. The role of two TLR5 variants can be highlighted - Füstös1,Péter Klivényi2, Márta Széll1 rs5744168, a possibly protective factor and rs2072493, a risk factor.Acknowledgement:ThestudyisapartofaprojectKP-06- N33/5from13.12.2019 - NSFof Bulgaria. 1University of Szeged, Department of Medical Genetics, Szeged, D.N.Nikolova: None. D.Serbezov: None. M. Ganev: None. S. Hungary, 2University of Szeged, Department of Neurology, Szeged, Karachanak-Yankova: None. M. Mihaylova: None. S. Mehra- Hungary. bian: None. M. Petrova: None. V. Damyanova: None. D. Belezhanska: None. L. Traykov: None. S. Hadjidekova: None. Introduction: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal D.Toncheva:None. neurodegenerative disease which affects both upper and lower motorneurons.ALShasanoligogenicbackground:severalgenes andmutationsareknowntocauseALS,andadditionallythereare  P09
.015.D Analysis of pathogenic variants in Alzheimer’s well established genetic risk factors and disease modifying disease related genes in cases, healthy young controls and variants for the disease. In this study we investigated 9 centenarians independent genetic risk factors of ALS in the Hungarian population. Sena Karachanak-Yankova1,2, Dimitar Serbezov1, Lubomir Bala- Patients and methods: 157 patients of Hungarian origin banski1,3, Marta Mihaylova1, Dragomira Nikolova1, Mihail Ganev1, diagnosedwithALSwererecruitedforthisstudy.Fortheanalysis DesislavaNesheva1,ZoraHammoudeh1,BlagaRukova1,TDekova2, of the ATXN1 and ATXN2 genes repeat sizing was used. MLPA DiyanaBelezhanska4,ShimaMehrabian4,MariyaPetrova4,Latchezar techniquewasusedtoscreenfortheduplicationsofSMN1gene. Traykov4,Savina Hadjidekova1, Draga Toncheva1 We reanalyzed whole exome sequencing data from a previous study then used Sanger sequencing to conﬁrm the presence of 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical Uni- thedetectedvariants. versity-Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Department of Genetics, Faculty of Results: We could not conﬁrm the previously detected Biology, Soﬁa University "St. Kliment Ohridski", Soﬁa, Bulgaria, association between the CYLD gene and ALS. We observed a 3Gynecology and assisted reproduction hospital “Malinov”, Soﬁa, non-signiﬁcant but tendentious relationship between ATXN2 Bulgaria, 4Depatment of Neurology, UH “Alexandrovska”, Medical intermediate-length repeat expansion and the duplication of the University-Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria. SMN1 gene and ALS. In the ANXA11, PON1, PON3 and GLT8D1 genesweidentiﬁed1-1relevantvariantsofuncertainsigniﬁcance (VUS),andintheTIA1gene4variantsweredetected;allhavebeen Introduction: Along with vascular and oncological diseases, dementiaisoneofthemostsigniﬁcanthealthandsocialproblems identiﬁed as ALS-associated genetic variants. A potentially pathogenic variantin theMFSD8 genewas revealed. of the 21st century. The most common type of dementia is Alzheimer’sdisease(AD),whichaffects65-70%ofpatientsover65. Discussion:Withourresultswecontributetotheﬁnemapping of the genetic heterogeneity of ALS. For the development and In order to deepen the knowledge of the genetic basis of the clinical application of novel therapeutic modalities in ALS it is disease, in the present study we have analyzed pathogenic essential to stratify the patients based on their genetic back- variants in AD related genes by testing their presence among ground. Funding:Hungarian Brain Research Program (Grant No. patients, healthyyoung individuals andcentenarians. 2017-1.2.1-NKP-2017-00002). Materials and methods: We have performed whole exome Z.F.Nagy:None.M.Pál:None.G.KafuiEsiZodanu:None.D. sequencing of three DNA pools of 66 patients, 61 young healthy Füstös:None. P. Klivényi:None. M. Széll:None. individuals (mean age 25 years) and 32 centenarians. The sequencing was performed with high coverage (250 x) and the obtainedvariants wereﬁlteredby stringent criteria.  P09
.018.C journALS: a comprehensive, uniform analysis of Results: We have focused on the presence of pathogenic three decades of genetics research in amyotrophic lateral variants in AD-related genes, namely APOE, PSEN1, PSEN2, MAPT, sclerosis andfrontotemporal dementia APPandTREM2.TheexomesofADpatientscontain4pathogenic variantsinthesegenesincludingtheAPOE-ε4allele.Thers429358 APOEallele,whichisknowntosigniﬁcantlyincreaseADrisk,isalso Mark A. Doherty1, Ciarán Kelly1, Louisse Mirabueno2, Orla Hardi- man1, RussellL. McLaughlin1 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 265 1Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland, 2University of Reading, rarity, nonspeciﬁc or atypical clinical appearance, some of the Reading, United Kingdom. successfully revealed AR ataxias were solved by using exome sequencing. Background: Here we present journALS, a web-application Conclusions: Optimal testing strategy of the ataxia cohort is designed to assess the clinical signiﬁcance of all previously complicated by (i) highly heterogeneous composition of causes, reported amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)- and frontotemporal (ii) population-speciﬁc prevalence, and (iii) the need of clinical dementia (FTD)-associated genetic variants. ALS is a highly genetics knowledge. These results provide relevant epidemiolo- heritableneurodegenerativedisorderwhichexhibitsaphenotypic gical information, bringing a comprehensive knowledge of the spectrumwithFTD.Inferringvariantsigniﬁcanceiscomplicatedin mostprevalent subtypesofgeneticataxiasandtheirphenotypes ALSandFTDduetogeneticheterogeneity,lateageofonset,age- inHungary. related penetrance anda highproportion of sporadiccases. V. Molnár: None. M. Menyei-Kiss: None. P. Balicza: None. N. Methods: Of 2,914 screened articles, 1,028 were found to be Varga:None.Z.Grosz:None.B.Trombitás:None.A.Gál:None. relevantALSorFTDgeneticstudies.3,111reportedvariantswere M.Molnár: None. identiﬁedin363genes.Detailedphenotypeandvariantdataand were gathered. 479 pedigrees were documented. Variants in the 363identiﬁedgeneswereextractedfromALS-speciﬁcandgeneral  P09
.021.B Genetics of Ataxia Telangiectasia in a Highly genomicsdatasets,creatingaﬁnaldatabaseof1.5millionvariants. Consanguineous Population We uniformly assessed all variants for pathogenicity, penetrance, prevalence, andphenotypic andgeographic heterogeneity. HanoufOmarAldeeb Results: 111 pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants were conﬁrmed in 23 genes, with 10% classiﬁed as benign or likely KSU,Riyadh,Saudi Arabia. benign; and greater than 89% classiﬁed as variants of uncertain signiﬁcance. 10% of pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a rare autosomal recessive multi- exhibit geographic heterogeneity. We ﬁnd that due to the high systemic disorder. It usually presents in toddler years with lifetimeriskofALSandlowfrequencyofpathogenicalleles,even progressive ataxia and oculomotor apraxia, or less commonly, in thecurrent largest genomics projects will struggle to conﬁdently thelate-ﬁrstorearly-seconddecadeoflifewithmixedmovement identifyintermediate penetrance rare variantsinALS. disorders. Biallelic mutations in Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Discussion: As precision treatments targeting speciﬁc ALS- gene(ATM)causeATphenotype,adisease notwelldocumented causing mutations in speciﬁc patients are becoming reality, in Saudi Arabia, a highly consanguineous society. We studied distinguishing pathogenic and benign ALS and FTD variants several Saudi AT patients, identiﬁed ATM variants, and investi- becomes essential. Our results support a reorientated view of gatedassociatedclinicalfeatures.Weincluded17patientsfrom12 severalALS genesandvariants. consanguineousfamilies.Allpatientshadacomprehensiveclinical M.A. Doherty: None. C. Kelly: None. L. Mirabueno: None. O. and radiological assessment, and most were examined through Hardiman: None.R.L. McLaughlin: None. whole-exome sequencing (WES). Selected individuals were analyzed using various genetic approaches. We identiﬁed 4 different ATM variants in our patients: 3 previously reported  P09
.020.A Impact of emerging diagnostic technologies on mutations,andonenovelvariant.Nearlyallpatientshadclassical diagnostic rate of ataxia: experience of a Hungarian expert ATpresentationexceptfortwopatientswithamilderphenotype. centreforrareneurological diseases Among the 3 known variants, a deletion causing truncation (c.381delA resulting in p.Val128Ter) was identiﬁed in 13 patients. Viktor Molnár, Magdolna Menyei-Kiss, Péter Balicza, Noémi Ágnes Two patients harboured the other 2 variants, (c.9001_9002delAG Varga, Zoltán Grosz, Barbara Trombitás, Anikó Gál, Mária Judit resulting in p.Ser3001Phefs*6) and (c.9066delA resulting in p. Molnár Glu3023Alafs*10). We speculate that c.381delA is a founder mutation in our population. This study provides a genotype- Semmelweis University, Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare phenotyperelationshipinapreviouslyunstudiedconsanguineous Disorders, Budapest,Hungary. population.Ourﬁndingscontributetoimprovelocalclinicalcare, therapy, and genetic counseling. We are grateful to the patients Introduction:Thediagnosticevaluationofapatientwithchronic and their families for their participation. This research received ataxia is clinically challenging due to its association with a intramuralfundsfromKFSHRC,grantsfromNSTIP/KACST(NK,DC), heterogeneousarrayofneurologicconditionsspanningcommon and KSCDR (NK). We extend our special thanks to the funding acquired etiologies to rare genetic disorders. Availability of agencies. comprehensive NGS-based testing facilitates the genetic diag- H.O.Aldeeb: None. nosis,howeveritisfarfromperfectchoiceincoveringeverysingle case. Materials and Methods: Consecutive cases referred with  P09
.022.C Case report of classic ataxia-telangiectasia with chronicandprogressiveataxiafromthelast15years.Thedataset neurological phenotype andrareATM gene variant with solved and unsolved cases had been enriched with data about clinical phenotype, severity and co-morbidities as well as Rasa Traberg1, Jurate Laurynaitiene2, Darius Cereskevicius1, Rasa timecourse and family history. Ugenskiene1 Results:Inaccordancewiththeliteratureapproximatelyhalfof the cases in our dataset with hereditary cerebellar ataxia are 1DepartmentofGeneticsandMolecularmedicine,MedicalAcademy, caused by spinocerebellar ataxias. The second largest groups are Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania, mitochondrial disorders including mtDNA mutations and nuclear 2Department of Neurology, Medical Academy, Lithuanian University mitochondrial gene mutations in FRDA, POLG and SPG7 genes. ofHealth Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania. Some of the familial AR ataxias are found to be related to ATM, SETX, SACS alterations. Further rare causes (such as CTX, Background:Classicataxia-telangiectasia(A-T)ischaracterizedby APTX, CACNA1A etc.) were detected in single families. Due to its progressive cerebellar ataxia beginning between ages one and EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 266 fouryears,oculomotorapraxia,choreoathetosis,telangiectasiasof Conclusion:WeconcludethatAsp825whichcoordinatestothe theconjunctivae, immunodeﬁciency,and frequent infections. We Mg2+ionwithintheATPbindingsiteandMet438areessentialfor presenta case wereno telangiectasia wereevident. the proper folding of AT P8
A2 into a functionally active Methods: We report 11-years old boy who was referred to phosphatidylserine ﬂippase. Also, our study for the ﬁrst time geneticistduetosuspectedhereditaryataxia.Heistheﬁrstchild providesevidenceontheassociationoftoothabnormalitieswith of healthy unrelated couple. Perinatal period and early psycho- defects in AT P8
A2 suggesting that disruption of AT P8
A2 ﬂippase motor development were normal but gait instability was notice- activityinterfereswithteethdevelopmentandthereforeexpand- able from16 month of ageand gradually progressed. At 10year ingtheclinical spectrumof theassociated disease. old neurologic examination showed horizontal nystagmus and E. Heidari: None. A. N. Harrison: B. Research Grant (principal saccadiceyemovements,facehyperkinesia,drooling,choreoathe- investigator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell tosis, Romberg instability, gait ataxia. Patient was unable to walk asgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;CanadianInstitutesofHealth without assistance. Brain MRI revealed cerebellar atrophy, ResearchPJT148649.A.R.Tavasoli:None.N.Almadani:None.R. laboratory testing increased alfa fetoprotein - 157 kU/l (normal S. Molday: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator value 0-7,89). There were no oculocutaneous telangiectasia and or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already immunodeﬁciencyreported.Patient’sgrandfatherwasdiagnosed received); Modest; Canadian Institutes of Health Research PJT with prostate cancer at 50 years old. ATM gene sequencing was 148649.M.Garshasbi: None. performedby NGS. Result:Twocompoundheterozygousvariantsintransposition were found: pathogenic variant NM_000051.3(ATM):c.3214G>T;.  P09
.024.A Unravelling the implication of the major vault Glu1072Ter (inherited from father) and variant of unknown protein in neuroanatomical phenotypes at the autism asso- signiﬁcance NM_000051.3(ATM):c.8710G>C ;Glu2904Gln; (inher- ciated16p11.2 locus itedfrommother).Thevariantc.8710G>C(p.Glu2904Gln)wasnot foundinthepopulationdatabases.Alternativevariantc.8711A>G Binnaz YALCIN1, Perrine Kretz2, Christel Wagner2, Charlotte (Glu2904Gly), affecting the same amino acid is classiﬁed as Montillot1, Sylvain Hugel3, Ilaria Morella4, Meghna Kannan2, Anna pathogenic. The variant c.8710G>C was predicted to be deleter- Mikhaleva5, Marie-Christine Fischer2, Maxence Milhau1, Riccardo ious by in silico analysis. Based on clinical ﬁndings and variant Brambilla4, Yann Herault2, Alexandre Reymond5, Mohammed Sell- pathogenicity prediction the variant c.8710G>C (p.Glu2904Gln) oum6, Stephan Collins1 wasclassiﬁedaslikely pathogenic. Conclusions: The progressive symptoms allowed to suspect 1Inserm, Dijon, France, 2IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 3INCI, Strasbourg, andgenetic testingconﬁrmed thediagnosisof A-T. France, 4NMHRI, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 5Center for Integrative R. Traberg: None. J. Laurynaitiene: None. D. Cereskevicius: Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6MCI,Illkirch, France. None.R. Ugenskiene: None. Introduction:Usingmousegeneticstudies,wesetouttoidentify which of the 30 genes causes brain size and other NeuroAnato-  P09
.023.D Novel variants in critical domains of AT P8
A2 and mical Phenotypes (NAPs) at the autism-associated 16p11.2 locus, expansion ofclinical spectrum independentlyinmale andfemale. Materials and methods: To assess NAPs, we developed or Erfan Heidari1, Alexander N. Harrison2, Ali Reza Tavasoli3, Navid acquired through collaboration single-gene heterozygous knock- Almadani4,Robert S.Molday2, MasoudGarshasbi1 outmice,representing20uniquegenesofthe16p11.2locus.For the remaining 10 genes, the germline transmission of the 1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, mutation failed despite multiple attempts or no mouse model 2University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3Tehran wasavailableduringthecourseofthestudy.Result:Hereweshow University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, thatmultiplegenesmappingtothisregionregulatebrainsizein 4Royan Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, Tehran, Iran, Islamic contrasttopreviousstudies,withfemalesigniﬁcantlylessaffected. Republic of. Major Vault Protein (MVP), the main component of the vault organelle,isahighlyconservedproteinfoundinhigherandlower Introduction:AT P8
A2isamemberofthe P4
-ATPasesubfamilyof eukaryotic cells, yet itsfunction isnot understood. Whileweﬁnd P-type ATPases that actively ﬂips phosphatidylserine and phos- MVP expression highly speciﬁc to the limbic system, Mvp stood phatidylethanolamine across membranes to generate and main- out as the top driver of NAPs, regulating the morphology of tain transmembrane phospholipid asymmetry. Loss-of-function neurons, postnatally and speciﬁcally in male. Finally, we demon- variantsinAT P8
A2causesevereneurodegenerativeanddevelop- stratethatthedoublehemideletionMvp::Mapk3rescuesNAPsand mentaldisorders in rodentsand humans. alters behavioral performances, suggesting that MVP and ERK Results: whole exome sequencing combined with homozyg- sharethesame pathway, in vivo. osity mapping on DNA isolated from understudied patients Conclusion:Ourresultshighlightthatsex-speciﬁcneuroanato- unravel one splicing variant (c.1868-2A>G) and two missense mical mechanisms must be considered in neurological disorders variants(p.Asp825Hisandp.Met438Val)resideinhighlyconserved suchasautismandprovidetheﬁrstevidencefortheinvolvement domains of AT P8
A2 gene in three unrelated Iranian families that of the vault organelle in the regulation of the mammalian brain causeintellectualdisability,dystonia,microcephaly/below-average size. headsize,mildopticatrophy,difﬁcultfeedinganddevelopmental B.Yalcin:None.P.Kretz:None.C.Wagner:None.C.Montillot: delay. Furthermore, all the affected individuals displayed tooth None. S. Hugel: None. I. Morella: None. M. Kannan: None. A. abnormalities associated with defects in teeth development. Mikhaleva: None. M. Fischer: None. M. Milhau: None. R. Protein expression and functional studies indicate that p. Brambilla: None. Y. Herault: None. A. Reymond: None. M. Asp825HisvariantleadstoaverylowexpressionlevelofAT P8
A2 Selloum:None. S.Collins: None. and lack of phosphatidylserine-activated ATPase activity. More- over, we conﬁrmed that p.Met438Val and p.Asp825His variants lead to rapid degradation of the misfolded AT P8
A2 by  P09
.025.BContributionofcompoundheterozygousCACNA1H proteasomes. mutations in autismspectrum disorder susceptibility EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 267 MartaViggiano1,CinziaCameli1,AnnioPosar2,3,MariaC.Scaduto2, Introduction: Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are complex and MagalìRochat4, PaolaVisconti2,Elena Bacchelli1,Elena Maestrini1 lifelongheterogeneousneurodevelopmentalconditions.Different genetic models could explain ASD, ranging from monogenic 1DepartmentofPharmacyandBiotechnology,UniversityofBologna, disorder or copy number variation to polygenic disease. Mito- Bologna,Italy,2IRCCSIstitutodelleScienzeNeurologichediBologna, chondrial DNA (mtDNA) may have a role in the pathogenesis of UOSIDisturbidelloSpettroAutistico,Bologna, Italy,3Department of ASD. Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna, Materials and Methods: Our cohort consists of 98 families Bologna,Italy,4IRCCSIstitutodelleScienzeNeurologichediBologna, including 117 subjects with ASD, 193 parents and 59 unaffected Diagnostica Funzionale Neuroradiologica, Bologna, Italy. siblings. We performed deep sequencing of mtDNA, deﬁning haplogroups and evaluating private variants, including those at Introduction: Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a complex lowheteroplasmy.Anindependentcohortof127Italianfamilieswas neuropsychiatric disorder with a strong genetic component. So used as a replica. Both these cohorts were compared to a control far, morethanone hundred high-conﬁdence susceptibility genes groupof5088healthyindividuals.MtDNAcontentwasassessedin have been identiﬁed and recent efforts have led to an ever- bloodcells.Multivariableregressionwasusedtoevaluateriskfactors growing list of ASD candidate genes. Among these, low-voltage inﬂuencingASDseverityclassiﬁedbythecalibratedseverityscoreof activated T-type calcium channels (Ca 3) genes (CACNA1G, AutismDiagnosticObservationSchedule. v CACNA1H, CACNA1I) have been consistently implicated, which Results:HaplogroupHinprobandsresultedprotectiveforASD, nicely correlates with the role calcium signaling in neuronal counterbalanced by increased risk conferred by haplogroups L function. and I. Paternal haplogroups U5a and K increased the risk of Materials and Methods: We performed whole genome developingASDinoffspring.Probandsshowedincreasednumber sequencing analysis in a cohort of 105 families, consisting of of missense mutations in MT-AT P6
 and MT-AT P8
 and reduced 125 ASD individuals, 210 parents and 57 unaffected siblings, to mtDNA content. Paternal super-haplogroups H and JT are explorethepresence ofrare damagingvariantsinCa 3genes. associated with mild phenotypes, whereas variants with 15%-5% v Results:WehaveidentiﬁedinheriteddamagingvariantsinCa 3 heteroplasmy are associated withsevere phenotypes. v genes in 21 ASD families. Interestingly, compound heterozygous Conclusions: Our results indicate a contribution of mtDNA to rare damaging missense variants were detected in the CACNA1H ASD susceptibility and phenotypic expression. Paternal mtDNA gene in 6 ASD subjects (2 sibs, 2 MZ twins and 2 independent inﬂuencestheASDpathogenesis,possiblyduetoaccumulationof cases), belonging to 4 different families. The identiﬁed biallelic nuclear de novo variants or epigenetic alterations in fathers’ damagingvariantscouldaffecttheCACNA1Hproteinactivitywith germinalcellsthataretransmittedtotheoffspring.Supportedby a recessive model and contribute to the disease development in theItalianMinistry of Health(GR-2013-02357561). the context of a high-risk genetic background. Thus, we are L. Caporali: None. C. Fiorini: None. F. Palombo: None. F. performing functional analysis to clarify the role of the CACNA1H Baccari:None.M.Romagnoli:None.P.Visconti:None.A.Posar: variantson thecalcium channelactivity. None.M.Scaduto:None.E.Maestrini:None.C.Cameli:None.M. Conclusions: The identiﬁcation of biallelic mutations in 4 Viggiano:None.A.Olivieri:None.A.Torroni:None.E.Bacchelli: different ASD families provides further support for a role of None.M. Rochat: None. V. Carelli:None. A.Maresca: None. CACNA1HinASDsusceptibility, andfortheﬁrsttimehighlightsit as a candidate gene in ASD, acting in a recessive mode of inheritance.SupportedbytheItalianMinistryofHealth(GrantGR-  P09
.028.A Classiﬁcation and exome sequencing of develop- 2013-02357561). mental brain Disorders (DBD): novel genes, phenotype M. Viggiano: None. C. Cameli: None. A. Posar: None. M.C. expansions andremarkable genetic heterogeneity Scaduto:None.M.Rochat:None.P.Visconti:None.E.Bacchelli: None.E. Maestrini:None. GhayddaMirzaa1, Kimberly Aldinger2, Andrew Timms2 1University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA, 2Seattle Children’s  P09
.027.D Mitochondrial DNA inﬂuences the susceptibility to Research Institute,Seattle, WA,USA. Autism Spectrum Disorders and the severity of the clinical phenotype Developmental brain disorders (DBD) are collectively common pediatric disorders with a high rate of morbidity and mortality Leonardo Caporali1, Claudio Fiorini1,2, Flavia Palombo1, Flavia amongaffectedindividuals.Thesedisordersincludebraingrowth Baccari3, Martina Romagnoli1, Paola Visconti4, Annio Posar4, Maria abnormalitiessuchasmicrocephaly(MIC),megalencephaly(MEG), CristinaScaduto4,ElenaMaestrini5,CinziaCameli5,MartaViggiano5, and malformations of cortical development (MCD; such as Anna Olivieri6, Antonio Torroni6, Elena Bacchelli5, Magali Rochat7, lissencephaly, polymicrogyria). The diagnosis of these disorders ValerioCarelli1,2, Alessandra Maresca1 is often challenging due to the complexity of the clinical and neuroimaging features of these malformations, the rarity of the 1IRCCSIstitutodelleScienzeNeurologichediBologna,Programmadi individual disorders or phenotypes, as well as the rapidly Neurogenetica, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Biomedical and expanding genetic landscape; the identiﬁcation of which is Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3IRCCS primarilyduetotheincreasinguseofNextGenerationSequencing IstitutodelleScienzeNeurologichediBologna,UOSIEpidemiologiae (NGS) methods. We performed exome sequencing (ES) on >500 Statistica,Bologna,Italy,Bologna,Italy,4IRCCSIstitutodelleScienze families with developmental brain disorders (DBD) between the Neurologiche di Bologna, UOSI Disturbi dello Spettro Autistico, yearsof2013-2020.WeanalyzedESdatausingacustomin-house Bologna, Italy, Bologna, Italy, 5Department of Pharmacy and research pipeline searching for recessive (homozygous, com- Biotechnology, University of Bologna, Italy, Bologna, Italy, 6Depart- pound heterozygous), dominant/de novo, and X-linked variants. ment of Biology and Biotechnology "L. Spallanzani", University of We developed a hierarchical clinical classiﬁcation scheme based Pavia, Pavia, Italy, Bologna, Italy, 7IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze on the underlying biological mechanisms including cellular Neurologiche di Bologna, Programma Diagnostica Funzionale pathways,aswellasknownassociationsoffeaturesormalforma- Neuroradiologica, Bologna, Italy,Bologna, Italy. tions. We identiﬁed several novel genes for DBD broadly, in EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 268 addition to numerous candidate genes for MEG, MIC, MCD and VariantsinCACNA1Aareclassicallyrelatedtoepisodicataxiatype other DBD. We also identiﬁed many “atypical presentations” or 2, familial hemiplegic migraine type 1 or spinocerebellar ataxia “phenotype expansions” of known syndromic forms of brain type 6. Over the years, CACNA1A has been associated with a malformations. Our series substantially expands on the molecular broader spectrum of phenotypes including epilepsy, intellectual andphenotypicspectrumofDBDandhighlightsthecombinatorial disability,andneurologicalepisodicsyndromesduringchildhood. strength of accurate evidence-based curation of genetic variation TargetedanalysisandunbiasedsequencingofCACNA1Aresultnot and accurate phenotyping of brain malformations by neuroima- only in clear molecular diagnoses, but also in large numbers of ging.Ourdatawillhighlightimportantinsightsthatwillaidinthe variants of uncertain signiﬁcance, or likely pathogenic variants futureclinicalandmoleculardiagnosisofaffectedfamilies. where the phenotype does not directly match the CACNA1A G.Mirzaa: None.K. Aldinger: None. A.Timms: None. spectrum. Over the last years, targeted and clinical exome sequencing in our center has identiﬁed 41 CACNA1A variants. Variant interpretation was based on the ACMG guidelines. Types  P09
.029.BRNAsequencingproﬁlinginprefrontalbraincortex ofCACNA1Avariantswereexondeletions(n=3),frameshift(n= of C9
ALS/FTD 6), missense (n=22), nonsense (n=6), and splice site (n=4) variants.Ultimately,variantswereconsideredpathogenicorlikely Maria Isabel Alvarez1, Francisco Garcia-Garcia2, Rubén Grillo- pathogenic in 23 cases, with most phenotypes ranging from Risco2,Marta Gracia1, Laia Rodriguez-Revenga1 episodicorprogressiveataxiatomorecomplexataxiasyndromes, aswellaswithphenotypesdominatedbynon-cerebellarfeatures 1Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro de such as intellectual disability and epilepsy. In two cases, the investigación Principe Felipe, Valencia, Spain. causality of the variant was discarded based on non-segregation oranalternativediagnosis.Intheremaining16cases,thevariant Introduction: The GGGGCC (G4 C2
) repeat expansion in the non- wasclassiﬁed asuncertain, duetolackof segregationanalysis or coding region of the  C9
orf72 gene is the most common genetic uncertain association with a non-classical phenotype. CACNA1A cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal thus represents a complex gene in clinical neurogenetics. dementia(FTD)( C9
ALS/FTD).Althoughthemechanismsofdisease Accessible functional read-outs are clearly needed, especially in of C9
ALS/FTDremainunknown,againoffunctionofatoxicmRNA caseswithanon-classicalphenotype.Thisworkwassupportedby and RAN-translation have been proposed as triggering patholo- a grant from Radboud university medical center and Donders gicalmechanisms. Institute forBrain, Cognition, and Behaviour. Material and Methods: To further elucidate the mechanisms M.P. Hommersom: None. T.H. van Prooije: None. M. underlying C9
ALS/FTDweperformedanRNAsequencingstudyin Pennings:None.M.I.Schouten:None.H.vanBokhoven:None. prefrontral brain cortex samples from 20  C9
ALS/FTD and 12 E.Kamsteeg:None. B.P.C. vande Warrenburg: None. individuals without neurological manifestation and normal  C9
orf72repeat alleles. Results: Preliminary data analysis showed ﬁfty one genes  P09
.031.DAcaseofCACNA1Bassociatedneurodevelopmental differentially expressed between both groups (FDR< 0.05). disorder with seizure and non-epileptic hyperkinetic Among them, 46 were protein coding genes and 5 were non- movements protein coding. Functional proﬁling showed deregulated GO annotationsin C9
ALS/FTDpatientsincluding11genesinvolvedin Mehmet Burak Mutlu1, Murat Erdogan2, Aslihan Kiraz2, Mohame- GenerationofneuronsandNeurogenesisbiologicalprocessesand5 dahmedSalih Hassan1,Arslan Bayram3, FatmaDemiryılmaz1 genes involved in Postsynapse cellular component GO annotations. 1Detagen Genetic Diseases Diagnosis Center, Kayseri, Turkey, Conclusions:Ourﬁndingsprovideadditionalevidenceofgenes 2Medical Genetic Department, Kayseri City Hospital, Kayseri, Turkey, deregulated in  C9
ALS/FTD patients that might shed light on 3MedicalGeneticDepartment,EtlikZübeydeHanımWomen’sHealth neuropathological mechanisms underlying  C9
orf72 expansion. Teachingand Research Hospital, Ankara,Turkey. Acknowledgements: We thank brain donors and relatives for generous donation and the Neurological Tissue Bank of the Introduction: CACNA1B associated Neurodevelopmental Disorder Biobanc-Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS. This work was supported by the with Seizures and Non-Epileptic Hyperkinetic Movements (NEDS- Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI17/01067), co-ﬁnanced by Fondo NEH, OMIM #618497) is a very rare type of developmental and Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER) “una manera de hacer epilepticencephalopathywithautosomalrecessiveinheritance.Itis Europa” and AGAUR (2017 SGR1134). The CIBERER is an initiative a severe neurological disorder characterized by psychomotor oftheInstituto deSalud Carlos III developmental retardation, early-onset refractory seizures and M. Alvarez: None. F. Garcia-Garcia: None. R. Grillo-Risco: non-epileptic hyperkinetic movement disorders, including myoclo- None.M. Gracia: None. L.Rodriguez-Revenga: None. nusdystoniaanddyskinesia,usuallymanifestedbyinabilitytowalk andspeakandcausedbybiallelicvariantsoftheCACNA1B(Calcium Channel,Voltage-dependent,N-Type,Alpha-1bSubunit)gene.  P09
.030.C The complexities of CACNA1A in clinical MaterialsandMethods:Twosiblingswithsimilarﬁndingswho neurogenetics were being followed up in the pediatric neurology clinic due to loss of speech, cognitive and motor development retardation Marina P. Hommersom1,2, T. H. van Prooije3,2, M. Pennings1, M. I. wereconsulted for genetic evaluation. Result: Karyotype analysis, Schouten1, H. van Bokhoven1,2, E-J. Kamsteeg1, B. P. C. van de FMR1 gene analysis and microarray analysis of the two siblings Warrenburg3,2 were performed, no abnormality was found. Homozygous pathogenic c.5811dupT, p.Val1938fs (ENST371355) variant 1DepartmentofHumanGenetics,Radbouduniversitymedicalcenter, detected in the CACNA1B gene in the whole exome sequencing Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and analysis. Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Neurology, Conclusions:Thevariantfoundinourpatientswasc.5811dupT; Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. p.Val1938fs is the novel variant previously not reported in the EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 269 literature. Up to now, 5 pathogenic variants were reported to be cases of CANVAS (the vast majority previously tested for other causeofCACNA1BassociatedNEDSNEH,andwepresentthisnovel ataxias),35patients(28families)werefoundwithadiallelic(AAGGG) variantdetectedinourcaseasthe6thvariant.Duetothescarce n expansion. Five additional cases were carriers for only one numberofreportsdescribingCACNA1BassociatedNEDSNEH,this expanded pathogenic allele. Mean age-of-onset was 59±10y variant and the clinical ﬁndings of the patients described in this (range:26-73y).Themostcommonpresentationwasgaitimbalance work will contribute to the expansion of the genetic and clinical (n=33)orsensorysymptoms(n=16).Thisreportdescribestheﬁrst spectrumof thedisease. CANVASpatientsgeneticallycharacterizedinPortugal.Ourexpecta- M.B. Mutlu: None. M. Erdogan: None. A. Kiraz: None. M.S. tionisthatthiscohortwillsigniﬁcantlyexpandintheshortterm,as Hassan: None.A. Bayram:None. F. Demiryılmaz: None. awarenessforthisclinicalentityincreases.Testingforthe(AAGGG)n expansioningeneticallyundiagnosedpatientswithlate-onsetataxia (particularly those with the typical clinical triad) is highly  P09
.032.A Genetic analysis of Portuguese patients with recommended. CerebellarAtaxia,Neuropathy,VestibularAreﬂexiaSyndrome A. Lopes: None. M. Malaquias: None. L. Braz: None. J. (CANVAS) Damásio:None.D.Garcez:None.B.Marques:None.A.Caetano: None.A.Sousa:None.A.Aires:None.A.Velon:None.A.Sousa: AnaLopes1,MariaJoãoMalaquias2,LuísBraz3,4,JoanaDamásio1,2, None. C. Alves: None. C. Costa: None. C. Coelho: None. E. Daniela Garcez5, Bravo Marques5,6, André Caetano7, Ana Paula Brandão: None. G. Nadais: None. J. Guimarães: None. M. Sousa8, Ana Aires3,4, Ana Graça Velon9, Ana Luísa Sousa10, Cristina Mendes: None. N. Vila-Chã: None. P. Abreu: None. P. Castro: Alves2, Cristina Costa11, Cristina Rosado Coelho12, Eva Brandão10, None. R. Barbosa: None. R. Taipa: None. R. Araújo: None. T. Goreti Nadais3, Joana Guimarães3,4, Michel Mendes9, Nuno Vila- Pimentel: None. J. Pinto Basto: None. S. Morais: None. J. Chã2, Pedro Abreu3,4, Pedro Castro3,4, Raquel Barbosa7, Ricardo ParenteFreixo: None.M. Magalhães: None. J.Oliveira: None. Taipa13, Rui Araújo3,4, Teresa Pimentel12, Jorge Pinto Basto14, Sara Morais1,JoãoParenteFreixo1,MarinaMagalhães2,15,JorgeOliveira1  P09
.033.BCANVAS:thebiallelicRF C1
pentanucleotiderepeat 1Centro de Genética Preditiva e Preventiva (CGPP), Instituto de expansion in Greeklate-onset ataxia patients Biologia Celular e Molecular (IBMC), Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, Zoi Kontogeorgiou1, Chrisoula Kartanou1, Chrisanthi Tsirligkani1, Porto, Portugal, 2Serviço de Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar Universi- Evangelos Anagnostou2, Michail Rentzos3, Georgia Karadima1, tário do Porto, Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal, 3Serviço de Georgios Koutsis1 Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João, Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal, 4Departamento Neurociências Clínicas e 1NeurogeneticsUnit,1stDepartmentofNeurology,EginitioUniversity SaúdeMental daFaculdadede Medicina daUniversidade doPorto, Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal, 5Serviço de Neurologia, Instituto Greece,2ClinicalNeurophysiologyUnit,1stDepartmentofNeurology, Português de Oncologia de Lisboa Francisco Gentil, Lisboa, Lisboa, Eginitio University Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Portugal, 6Unidade de Neuropsiquiatria, Fundação Champalimaud, Athens, Athens, Greece, 31st Department of Neurology, Eginitio Lisboa, Portugal, Lisboa, Portugal, 7Serviço de Neurologia, Centro University Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Hospitalar de Lisboa Ocidental, Lisboa, Portugal, Lisboa, Portugal, Athens,Greece. 8ServiçodeNeuroﬁsiologia,CentroHospitalarUniversitáriodoPorto, Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal, 9Serviço de Neurologia, Centro Cerebellar ataxia, neuropathy and vestibular areﬂexia syndrome Hospitalar de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, Vila (CANVAS) has been recently linked to a biallelic expansion of a Real, Portugal, 10Serviço de Neurologia do Centro Hospitalar Entre polymorphicpentanucleotiderepeatinintron2ofthereplication Douro e Vouga, Santa Maria da Feira, Portugal, Santa Maria da factor C subunit 1 (RF C1
) gene. To date, the only clearly Feira, Portugal, 11Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital Prof. Doutor pathogenic CANVAS-associated allele includes an AAGGG of exp Fernando da Fonseca, Lisboa, Portugal, Lisboa, Portugal, 12Serviço at least 400 repeats. We presently aimed to detect the de Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar de Setúbal, Setúbal, Portugal, aforementioned pathogenic expansion in Greek patients with Setúbal, Portugal, 13Unidade de Neuropatologia, Centro Hospitalar late-onsetataxia.Forthispurpose,77selectedindexpatients,with Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal, 14CGC late-onset ataxia (age of onset >35 years) and a compatible Genetics, Porto, Portugal, Portugal, Porto, Portugal, 15Serviço de pedigree, were screened for the expansion. These patients Neurologia,HospitalPadreAmérico,CentroHospitalardoTâmegae originated from undiagnosed ataxia (67) and neuropathy (10) Sousa,Penaﬁel, Porto,Portugal, Penaﬁel, Portugal. cohorts referred to the Neurogenetics Unit, 1st Department of Neurology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Diallelic expansion of an intronic (AAGGG)n in RF C1
 (400_2,000 Greece. Genotyping was performed through fragment and RP- repeats) has been stablished as a genetic cause of the cerebellar PCRanalysis.Wereportthat5outofthe77patients(6.5%)were ataxia, neuropathy, vestibular-areﬂexia syndrome (CANVAS). Four found homozygous for the pentanucleotide pathological expan- mainallelicvariantsweredescribed:the(AAAAG)11referenceallele sion.Moreoverweidentiﬁedtwoaffectedsiblingsraisingthetotal (freq.=0.755);expandedAAAAGorAAAGGrepeats(freq.=0.130and number of genetically conﬁrmed CANVAS cases to 7. Our results 0.079); and the pathogenic (AAGGG)n expansion (freq.=0.007). This conﬁrmedthattheAAGGGbiallelicexpansionisverycommonin relatively high frequency suggests that CANVAS may represent a patients with complete CANVAS (80%), but less common in the considerable fraction of late-onset ataxias. Genetic analysis was groupwithincompleteCANVAS(26.7%),consistentwithprevious based on the approach proposed by Cortese et al. (2019): (1) a studies. All positive cases exhibited sensory neuropathy as the ﬂuorescentlylabelledPCRwasusedtoamplifytherepeat’sregion;(2) earliestclinicalfeature.Theseresultshighlightfortheﬁrsttimethe three speciﬁc repeat-primed PCRs (RP-PCRs) were performed, each presence of the RF C1
 biallelic expansion in Greek patients with targeting one of the known pentanucleotides - presence of the late-onset ataxia. continuous stutter peak proﬁle in the AAGGG-speciﬁc RP-PCR, and Z. Kontogeorgiou: None. C. Kartanou: None. C. Tsirligkani: absenceofsimilarresultsintheothertwoPCRs,iscompatiblewith None. E. Anagnostou: None. M. Rentzos: None. G. Karadima: the diagnosis of CANVAS. From a cohort of 60 clinically suggestive None.G. Koutsis:None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 270  P09
.034.C Novel homozygous CE P41
 mutation in a patient that the new variant does not affect the mRNA expression, but withJoubert syndrome causes instead a decrease in TTBK2 protein levels, denoting impairment of protein stability. Thereby, our cellular models may EzgiGökpınarİli1,Gonca Bektaş2 present reduced TTBK2 kinase activity. Indeed, our previous overexpression studies showed that this variant has reduced 1Genetic Diseases Center, Başakşehir Pine and Sakura City Hospital, kinaseactivity againstTDP-43.Inconclusion, wecreatedrelevant İstanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatric Neurology, Bakırköy Dr. cellular models for study of the molecular and cellular mechan- SadiKonuk Training and Research Hospital,İstanbul, Turkey. isms underlying SCA11 and, for the ﬁrst time, linked a missense variant to SCA11. We also believe that abnormal protein Introduction: Joubert syndrome is a genetically heterogenous phosphorylation mayplay a keyrolein SCA11pathogenesis. disorder characterized by hypoplasia of cerebellar vermis with This work was supported by Ataxia UK (small research grant distinctive‘molartoothsign’,hypotonia,developmentaldelayand ZGRACA). neonatal breathing abnormalities.Clinical Report: Two-year-old D.Felício:None. J. Sequeiros:None. M. Santos:None. male was referred to our clinic for global developmental delay. Aftervaginaldeliveryat37thgestationalweek,hewastransferred to newborn intensive care unit for respiratory distress. He  P09
.036.A A systematic review of cerebral phenotypes obtained head control at 7 months. At two years of age, he was associated withmonogenic cerebral smallvessel disease unabletowalk,juststartedtositwithoutsupportforsmallperiods and couldn’t speak. His parents were consanguineous. Brain MRI EdWhittaker,SophieThrippleton,LizaY.W.Chong,VictoriaCollins, revealed“molartoothsign”ofthemidbrain in theaxialsection. Emily Lancastle, David Henshall, Blair Wilson, Tim Wilkinson, Kirsty Methods: After written informed consent from the parents, Wilson, Cathie Sudlow, Joanna Wardlaw, Kristiina Rannikmäe whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed using peripheral bloodDNAfrom theproband. University ofEdinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Results:Becauseofparentalconsanguinity,wefocusedonrare homozygous variants in known Joubert syndrome genes. Homo- Introduction: Cerebral small vessel disease, an important zygousc.911dupC(Glu305ArgfsTer21)mutationintheCE P41
gene contributor to stroke and dementia, results from environmental was found. The variant was not found in gnomAD. Since digenic and genetic factors. An emerging minority of cases have a inheritance was suggested for heterozygous mutations in CE P41
 monogeniccause.WhileNOTCH3isthebest-knowngene,several and other ciliopathy-related genes such as KIF7 and C C2
D2A, a others have been reported, with less data about their associated secondary analysis was performed. An additional heterozygous phenotypes. c.74delA mutation was detected in KIAA0586 gene which is Methods:Weperformedasystematicreview,searchingMedline/ requiredfor ciliogenesis. Segregation analysisis ongoing. Embase for any language publications describing HTRA1, TREX1, Conclusions:WereportanovelhomozygousmutationinCE P41
 ADA2, CTSA or CO L4
A1/2 pathogenic variant carriers. We extracted and a heterozygous mutation in KIAA0586 in a patient with data about individuals’ characteristics, clinical and radiological Joubert syndrome. It may be beneﬁcial to look for additional vascular cerebral phenotypes. We summarised phenotype frequen- mutations for recurrence risk assessment and family planning ciespergene,comparingpatternsacrossgenes. especiallywhen digenic inheritance issuggested. Results:Wescreened6485publicationsandincluded:61HTRA1 E.Gökpınar İli: None. G.Bektaş: None. (126 individuals), 35 TREX1 (123 individuals), 100 ADA2 (346 individuals), and 5 CTSA (14 individuals). Mean ages ranged from 15 (ADA2) to 59 years (HTRA1 heterozygotes). Clinical phenotype  P09
.035.D Modelling SCA11 in cells using CRISPR/Cas9: frequencies varied widely: stroke 9% (TREX1) to 60% (HTRA1 functional validation ofanew TTBK2missense variant heterozygotes), cognitive decline 0% (ADA2:0/83 adults) to 64% (CTSA:9/14 adults), psychiatric features 0% (ADA2:0/83 adults) to DanielaFelício1,Jorge Sequeiros1,2, MarianaSantos1 100% (HTRA1 homozygotes/compound heterozygotes:44/44 adults;CTSA:14/14adults).Amongindividualswithneuroimaging, 1UnIGENe, IBMC - Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, i3S - vascular radiological phenotypes appeared common, ranging Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do from 65% (ADA2) to 100% (HTRA1 homozygotes/compound Porto,Porto,Portugal,2CGPP,IBMC-InstituteforMolecularandCell heterozygotes;CTSA)(Table).Whitematterlesionswerethemost Biology, i3S - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, commonpathology. CO L4
A1/2 work is ongoing. Universidade do Porto,Porto,Portugal. Conclusions: There appear to be differences in cerebral manifestationsacrossgenes,butthismaybeduetoageandother Spinocerebellar ataxia type 11 (SCA11) is a rare autosomal biases inherent to case reports. The majority of individuals have dominant form of cerebellar ataxia, characterized by an almost vascularchangesonneuroimaging.Grants:KR:MR/ S004130
/1 pure,progressivecerebellarataxia,abnormaleyemovementsand HomZ=homozygous/compound heterozygous; HetZ=heterozy- impairmentofspeech.IthasbeenlinkedtovariantsintheTTBK2 gous; N=number; WML=white matter lesions; ICH=intracerebral gene; all reported cases bear heterozygous truncating variants. haemorrhage; PVS=perivascular spaces. *Only those with TTBK2 encodes the tau tubulin kinase 2 protein, a protein kinase neuroimaging involved in different cellular processes, e.g., ciliogenesis, micro- E. Whittaker: None. S. Thrippleton: None. L.Y.W. Chong: tubuledynamics,andtauandTDP-43phosphorylation.Currently, None.V.Collins:None.E.Lancastle:None.D.Henshall:None.B. thediseasemechanismbehindSCA11andTTBK2remainsunclear. Wilson: None. T. Wilkinson: None. K. Wilson: None. C. Sudlow: Our group has previously identiﬁed a novel missense variant in None.J. Wardlaw:None. K. Rannikmäe: None. TTBK2 (c.625C>T; p. L209
F) in two Portuguese siblings with a diagnosis of cerebellar ataxia. Therefore, we aim to characterize thepotential pathogenic effect of this variant in SCA11. For that,  P09
.037.B Deleterious variants in the autophagy regulator we created cellular models expressing the endogenous TTBK2 CLE C16
A are associated with microcephaly, brain atrophy, missense variant, using CRISPR/Cas9. We also inserted a 3xFLAG growth retardation and a severe neurodevelopmental tag at the N-terminus of TTBK2. Our preliminary results showed disorder EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 271 Daphne J. Smits1, Rachel Schot1, Martina Wilke1, Marjon van investigatingoneofthemissensemutationsusingpatient-derived Slegtenhorst1, Brahim Tabarki2, Amal Alhashem2, Antonio Romito3, iPScells anda knock-in mousemodel. Aida M.Bertoli-Avella3, Grazia M.S.Mancini1 P. Farshadyeganeh: None. B. Ohkawara: None. M. Kamon: None.T.Araki: None. H.Komaki:None. K.Ohno: None. 1ErasmusUniversityMedicalCentre,Rotterdam,Netherlands,2Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3CENTOGENE GmbH,Rostock, Germany.  P09
.040.A Chromosomal aberrations in paediatric patients withepilepsy,withorwithoutadditionalneurodevelopmental Introduction:TheCLE C16
A(c-typelectinprotein16A)genelocus disorders:asingle-centre clinical investigation has frequently been associated with susceptibility to various autoimmune disorders including multiple sclerosis, type - 1 Marlena Młynek1, Katarzyna Urbańska1, Katarzyna Pachota1, Petr diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis and primary biliary sclerosis. Berko1,DanutaSielska-Rotblum1,DorotaWicher1,AgataCieślikowska1, C-type lectin (CLEC) proteins are transmembrane proteins that Agnieszka Madej-Pilarczyk1, Piotr Iwanowski1, Maria Jędrzejowska1,2, recognizeantigensviatheircarbohydraterecognitiondomainand Justyna Pietrasik1, Katarzyna Iwanicka-Pronicka1,3, Anna Gutkowska1, guide them to antigen presenting cells. Unlike other CLEC MałgorzataKrajewska-Walasek1,KrystynaChrzanowska1 proteins, CLE C16
A lacks an active/full length carbohydrate recognition domain and is instead involved in autophagy and 1Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Department of Medical mitophagy.Eventhoughthegenerallinkbetweenautophagyand Genetics,Warsaw,Poland,2PolishAcademyofSciences,Mossakowski autoimmune diseases is well studied, CLE C16
A’s physiological MedicalResearch Centre,Rare Diseases ResearchPlatform, Warsaw, functionand its role inhumandisease is still poorlyunderstood. Poland, 3Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Department of Methods: With the use of trio whole exome sequencing we Audiologyand Phoniatrics, Warsaw, Poland. identiﬁedtheﬁrstindividualsfromtwounrelatedfamilieswithbi- allelicloss offunction variantsin CLE C16
A. Introduction: Epilepsy is one of the most common neurological Results: The affected individuals present with a severe disordersaffectingupto1%ofthepopulation.Anumberofgenes neurodevelopmental disorder including congenital microcephaly, have been associated with rare autosomal dominant and severe brain atrophy, corpus callosum hypoplasia, growth retardation, sporadic forms of epilepsy; however, the underlying cause of hypotonia and a severe developmental delay. In addition, one epilepsyremainsunknowninthemajorityofcases.Copynumber infant showed severe respiratory infections and died after variants (CNV) are increasingly recognised as an important recurrentand unexplained sepsis. aetiology of many human neurodevelopmental disorders, includ- Conclusion: Our observations suggest a causal implication for ingepilepsy. the CLE C16
A variants in these children and conﬁrm the Materials and Methods: A whole-genome oligonucleotide importance of autophagy regulation during human brain devel- microarray(AgilentTechnologies60Kand180K)wasappliedtoa opment.Descriptionsofadditionalpatientswithbi-allelicCLE C16
A cohortof239unrelatedpatientsphenotypicallycharacterisedwith variants will deﬁnitively associate the gene to this novel various type of epilepsy with or without other neurodevelop- neurodevelopmental disorder. We therefore propose to add this mental disorders such as developmental delay, intellectual genetoexome/genomesequencingpanelsformicrocephalyand disability, autism, orothers. severeneurodevelopmental disorders. Results: The chromosomal microarray analysis revealed CNVs D.J. Smits: None. R. Schot: None. M. Wilke: None. M. van considered pathogenic in 43 (18.0%) of affected individuals, Slegtenhorst: None. B. Tabarki: None. A. Alhashem: None. A. ranging from 3.7 kb to 16.9 Mb in size. Of these, 7/43 (16.3%) Romito:None.A.M.Bertoli-Avella:None.G.M.S.Mancini:None. patients had CNVs in the epilepsy/neurodevelopmental disorder “hotspots”(15q13.3,15q11–q13,16p11.2,and16p13.11),and4/43 (9.3%) patients have at least two potentially causative CNVs. We  P09
.039.DFunctionalanalysisofmutationsinaglycosylation identiﬁed novel CNVs in genes previously implicated in other enzyme gene, GFPT1, underlying limb-girdle congenital neurodevelopmental disorders ( L1
CAM) as well as epileptic myasthenic syndromes(CMS) encephalopathy (DENND5A). In addition, we identiﬁed CNVs of uncertain clinicalsigniﬁcancein 18/239 (7.5%)of cases. Paniz Farshadyeganeh1, Bisei Ohkawara1, Masayoshi Kamon2, Conclusions: Our ﬁndings correspond with the data reported Toshiyuki Araki2, Hirofumi Komaki2, Kinji Ohno1 worldwide and highlight the importance of the whole-genome microarray testing in paediatric population with epilepsy with or 1Department of Neurogenetics, School of Medicine, Nagoya Uni- withoutotherneurodevelopmentalfeatures.Ourstudyconﬁrmed versity, Nagoya, Japan, 2National Institute of Neuroscience (NCNP), theimportanceofCNVanalysisforthedetectionofnewcandidate Tokyo,Japan. disease-related geneticregions. ThisstudywaspartiallysupportedbytheCMHIproject S151
/17. Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are heterogeneous M. Młynek: None. K. Urbańska: None. K. Pachota: None. P. inherited disorders caused by defective signal transduction at Berko: None. D. Sielska-Rotblum: None. D. Wicher: None. A. the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). Mutations in more than 30 Cieślikowska: None. A. Madej-Pilarczyk: None. P. Iwanowski: genes expressed at NMJ have been identiﬁed to be involved in None. M. Jędrzejowska: None. J. Pietrasik: None. K. Iwanicka- CMS. One of CMS, limb-girdle CMS, is caused by mutations in Pronicka: None. A. Gutkowska: None. M. Krajewska-Walasek: GFPT1,ageneencodingglutaminefructose-6-phosphatetransfer- None.K. Chrzanowska: None. ase 1. GFPT1 is a rate-limiting enzyme of the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway to synthesize UDP-N-acetylglucosamine, which is a crucial substrate for glycosylation of proteins and  P09
.041.BCSF1R-relatedadult-onsetleukoencephalopathyas lipids. Post-translational modiﬁcations are predicted to be critical an important differential diagnostic factor to consider in forseveralmaincomponentsattheNMJ.However,theunderlying early-onset dementias mechanisms leading to limb-girdle CMS due to GFPT1 deﬁciency remainelusive.Here,wearedissectingmolecularmechanismof6 Dóra Csabán1, Péter Balicza1, Anett Illés2, Barbara Trombitás1, missenseGFPT1mutationsidentiﬁedinCMSpatientsandfurther FruzsinaSzabó1, Zoltán Grosz1,Mária JuditMolnár1 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 272 Frequencyofclinicalandvascularradiologicalcerebralphenotypes Anyclinical Anyvascular WML*(%) Ischaemia* ICH*(%) Enlarged Microbleeds* Atrophy* Calciﬁcation* cerebralfeatures changes*(%) (%) PVS*(%) (%) (%) (%) (%) HTRA1 80(35/44) 100(44/44) 98(43/44) 34(15/44) 2(1/44) 0(0/44) 41(18/44) 20(9/44) 0(0/44) HomZN= 44 HTRA1HetZ 76(62/82) 99(69/70) 96(67/70) 66(46/70) 9(6/70) 16(11/70) 27(19/70) 11(8/70) 0(0/70) N=82 TREX1N= ≥54(≥66/123) 78(57/73) 89(65/73) 8(6/73) 0(0/73) 0(0/73) 1(1/73) 1(1/73) 32(23/73) 123 ADA2N= 42(144/346) 66(78/119) 3(3/119) 44(52/119) 12(14/119) 0(0/119) 0(0/119) 6(7/119) 0(0/119) 346 CTSAN= 100(14/14) 100(14/14) 100(14/14) 57(8/14) 7(1/14) 64(9/14) 21(3/14) 71(10/14) 0(0/14) 14 1SemmelweisUniversity,Budapest,Hungary,2PentaCoreLaboratory, 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,MedicalFaculty,MedicalUniversity Budapest,Hungary. of Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2 “Zdrave” s, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University of Soﬁa, Introduction: The role of colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor Bulgaria,2“Zdrave”s,Gynecologyandassistedreproductionhospital (CSF1R) gene is well-known in the background of adult-onset “Malinov”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Department of Medical leukoencephalopathy with axonal spheroids and pigmented glia Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University of Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2 (ALSP).ALSPisanautosomaldominantneurodegenerativedisorder “Zdrave” s, Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, Soﬁa characterizedbydementia,psychiatricsymptoms,parkinsonismand University "St. Kliment Ohridski", Soﬁa, Bulgar-ia, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, behavioral changes. The pathology and symptoms of ALSP overlap 4Depatment of Neurology, UH “Alexandrovska”, Medical University- with other dementias e.g. frontotemporal dementia (FTD), Alzhei- Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria., Soﬁa,Bulgaria. mer’sdiseasewhichmayleadtomisdiagnosis. Materials and Methods: 60 patients diagnosed with early- Introduction:Theaimofthisstudywastoevaluatenewgenetic onsetdementia(EOD)weretestedbynextgenerationsequencing and immunological biomarkers for unspeciﬁed dementia, as well targeted panel, which contained 127 genes associated to as to identify over-represented molecular pathways related to neurodegenerative disorders. All patients were examined by theirpathogenesis. experienced board certiﬁed neurologists and had brain MRI Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was performed.Patients wereclinically diagnosedwith ADand FTD. performed on two DNA pools, one composed with DNA from 90 Results: Wedetected two rare, potentiallypathogenic variants unspeciﬁeddementiapatientsandtheother-acontrolpoolwith in the CSF1R gene. In a male patient, we identiﬁed a rare DNA from 100 age-synchronized healthy individuals. In total, damaging variant [(NM_005211.3):c.2646_2654+6del]. The pro- 453748variantsweredetectedinthedementiapatients’pooland band’s symptoms were progressive dysphagia, memory impair- 442765 inthecontrolpool. ment, apraxia and spasticity. The other rare variant Results: Variants were selected so that that their population [(NM_005211.3):c.1771G>A (p.Gly591Arg)] was detected in a frequencyislow,i.e.<0.0025innon-FinnishEuropeans(gnomAD female patient. She featured difﬁculty ﬁnding words, cognitive database)andcorrespondinglyenrichedinourdementiapatients declineand depression. Both detected variantswereclassiﬁed as pool and control pools (frequency>0.01). The gene list enrich- pathogenic orlikely pathogenic according toACMG. ment analysis platform ToppGene identiﬁed 37 prioritized Conclusion: In our Hungarian EOD cohort two rare damaging molecular functions on our selected data, and the one involving variantswereidentiﬁedintheCSF1Rgene.Ourﬁndingshighlight the largest number of genes was ribonucleotide binding. Analysis that CSF1R-related ALSP should be included in the differential bytheReactomeplatformonthegenesinvolvedinthismolecular diagnosisofearly-onsetdementias.Usingcomprehensivegenetic functionshowedthattheimmunesystemassociatedMAPkinase testing, which simultaneously examine genes associated with (MAPKs) activation pathway to be signiﬁcantly enriched in differenttypesofdementiacouldbeafeasibleandcosteffective dementiapatients, butnot inthecontrolgroup. waytoincludeinthediagnosticworkup.Thisstudywassupported Discussion:MAPKsareresponsibleformanycellularresponses byKTIA_13_NAP-A-III/6; KTIA_NAP and withthe FIKPprogram. tocytokinesandtoexternalstresssignals,andplayanimportant D.Csabán:None.P.Balicza:None.A.Illés:None.B.Trombitás: role in regulating the production of inﬂammation mediators. None.F. Szabó: None. Z. Grosz: None.M.J. Molnár: None. Acknowledgment:KP-06-N33/5from13.12.2019-NationalScience FundofBulgaria M.Mihaylova:None.D.Serbezov:None.L.Balabanski:None.  P09
.043.D Whole-exome sequencing indicates enrichment in S. Karachanak-Yankova: None. D. Nikolova: None. M. Ganev: MAP kinase activation pathway genes in Bulgarian dementia None.V.Damyanova:None.D.Nesheva:None.Z.Hammoudeh: patients None. B. Rukova: None. D. Belezhanska: None. S. Mehrabian: None. M. Petrova: None. L. Traykov: None. S. Hadjidekova: Marta Mihaylova1, Dimitar Serbezov1, Lubomir Balabanski2, Sena None.D.Toncheva: None. Karachanak-Yankova3, Dragomira Nikolova1, Mihail Ganev1, Vera Damyanova1, Desislava Nesheva1, Zora Hammoudeh1, Blaga  P09
.044.A When two is one -a case of homozygous mutation Rukova1, Diyana Belezhanska4, Shima Mehrabian4, Maria Petrova4, inSTXB P1
 gene as aresult ofsingle-parent disomy Latchezar Traykov4, Savina Hadjidekova1,Draga Toncheva1 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 273 Dorota Hoffman-Zacharska1, Anna Winczewska-Wiktor2, Marta relationship. These reports on adverse effects following immuni- Smyk1, Paulina Gorka-Skoczylas1, Karolina Kanabus1, Barbara zation (AEFI) reduce social conﬁdence in vaccination, however Steinborn3 theirbackground may berare genetic defects. Materials and Methods: The aim of the presented study was 1Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, veriﬁcation the following research hypothesis: Neurological Warsaw,Poland,2DepartmentofDevelopmentalNeurology,Poznan symptoms in children qualiﬁed as AEFI are related to the University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of occurrence of pathogenic mutations in genes related to the Developmental Neurology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, developmentofthenervoussystem.Toverifythishypothesiswe Warsaw, Poland. performed whole exome sequencing (WES) in 22 patients with neurologicalAEFI. Introduction: Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy-4 Results:Ourpreliminaryresultssuggestsigniﬁcantrelationship (DE E4
) is a condition starting in infancy and characterized by between AEFI and the occurrence of mutations in genes abnormal brain function (encephalopathy), intellectual disability associated with neurodevelopmental diseases. We identiﬁed accompaniedoftenbyrecurrentseizures.Thisconditioniscaused pathogenic/VUS variants in 18/22 patients, 9 of them were bymutationsintheSTXB P1
genecodingsyntaxin-bindingprotein acknowledged as deﬁnitely pathogenic due to parent examina- 1.Thephenotypic spectrumofSTXB P1
-relateddisordersisbroad, tion. The mutated genes belonged to the group of genes but the most cases result from heterozygous dominant, loss-of- associated withepilepsy syndromes/epileptic encephalopathy. functionmutation ofde novocharacter. Conclusions: Preliminary results indicate that in many AEFI Materials and Methods: The family in which at the proband patientsthevaccinecanonlytriggerneurologicalsymptomsthat homozygous missense mutation in STXB P1
 gene was identiﬁed. would have manifested anyway as a result of a pathogenic Proband, 7 years old boy, was diagnosed with unclassiﬁed mutation ina geneengagedin neurodevelopment. epileptic encephalopathy but with features of Lennox-Gastaut A. Charzewska: None. D. Hoffman-Zacharska: None. I. syndrome.MutationwasidentiﬁedwiththetargetedNGSmethod Terczyńska: None. T. Mazurczak: None. E. Szczepanik: None. -49EIEEs related genespanel.Sangersequencing performed for A.Karney:None.T.Gambin:None.K.Kanabus:None.R.Tataj: probandandhisparentconﬁrmeddenovocharacterofmutation. None.J. Bal:None. MLPAanalysisshowednoSTXB P1
genedeletionsinpatientnorin his parents. SNP microarray revealed in proband loss of heterozygosity along the entire chromosome 9, further analysis  P09
.046.C Whole exome sequencing as instrument of mole- conﬁrmedpaternal origin ofthis chromosome. cular diagnosis in children with developmental and epileptic Results: In this study, we identiﬁed STXB P1
 mutation p. encephalopathies Arg192Trp that have not been reported previously and was homozygous, what is rather unusual in the case of this gene. Tatyana Kozhanova1,2, Svetlana Zhilina1,2, Tatyana Mescherya- Detailedanalysisrevealedthatmutationarosedenovoonpaternal kova1, Karina Osipova1, Sergey Ayvazyan1, Nikolay Zavadenko2, chromosome,anditshomozygosityisduetopaternaluniparental AndreyPrityko1,3 disomy ofthechromosome 9. Conclusions: So far only one case of homozygous missense 1Scientiﬁc and Practical Center of children medical care, Moscow, mutation has been described causing the Lennox-Gastaut Russian Federation, 2Pirogov Russian National Research Medical syndrome. Here we report the new one, which may follow this University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Pirogov Russian National same, unusual for STXB P1
, gain-of-function effect on synaptic Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, Moscow, transmission. RussianFederation. D. Hoffman-Zacharska: None. A. Winczewska-Wiktor: None. M.Smyk:None.P.Gorka-Skoczylas:None.K.Kanabus:None.B. Epilepsyisacomplexdisordercharacterizedbyapredispositionto Steinborn: None. recurrentseizuresthatarecausedbyabnormalneuronalﬁringin the brain. Around 70—80% of all epileptic cases are caused by geneticmutations.  P09
.045.B An attempt to identify gene variants responsible Materials and Methods: We examined 128 patients with for neurological symptoms in children with adverse effects developmental and epileptic encephalopathies. The clinical following immunization (AEFI) phenotyping,video-electroencephalography,computedandmag- neticresonanceimagingofthebrainwerecarriedout.Allpatients Agnieszka Charzewska1, Dorota Hoffman-Zacharska1, Iwona receivedinformed consent forwhole exomesequencing. Terczyńska2, Tomasz Mazurczak2, Elżbieta Szczepanik2, Alicja Kar- Results:Thevariantsingenesweredetectedin94/128(73,4%) ney3,TomaszGambin1,KarolinaKanabus1,RenataTataj1,JerzyBal1 patients. No mutations have been identiﬁed in 34/128 (26,6%) patients. The variants in genes associated with early infantile 1Institute of Mother and Child, Department of Medical Genetics, epileptic encephalopathy were identiﬁed in 38/94 (40,4%) and Warsaw,Poland,2Institute ofMotherandChild, ClinicofNeurology variants in genes associated with mental retardation - in 16/94 ofChildandAdolescents, Warsaw, Poland,3InstituteofMother and (17%). The remaining patients had variants in genes associated Child,One DayCllinic, Warsaw, Poland. with different types of epilepsy and neurodevelopmental dis- orders (25/94; 26,6%), tuberous sclerosis-2 (3/94; 3,2%), spastic Introduction: Vaccinations are one of the most signiﬁcant paraplegia(3/94;3,2%)andraresyndromes(3/94;9,6%).Themost achievements of medicine in modern times. Many catastrophic commonlyidentiﬁedgeneswereSCN1A-5,CACNA1A-3,GABBR2- diseases,suchasblackpoxorpolio,havebeeneliminateddueto 2,GRIN1-2,GRIN2B-2,TS C2
-3,SYNGA P1
-2,SPTAN1-2,PCDH19- vaccination. These diseases are completely unknown to modern 2,TRIO -2,CHD2 -2, FGF12- 2,KCNQ2- 2,MEC P2
- 2. parents, and therefore they question the validity of preventive Conclusion: Genetic testing has become a ﬁrst line test in vaccination, especially since none of the vaccines is completely epilepsy. Our study suggests that WES is an effective diagnostic freeofsideeffects.Studiesconductedonlargepopulationsshow toolandencouragetheinteractionbetweenanepileptologistand alackofconnectionbetweenvaccinationandseriousneurological geneticist. Genetic diagnosis can help to consolidate the clinical symptoms,althoughthereareisolatedcasesthatindicatesuch a diagnosis, to facilitate phenotypic expansion, and to inﬂuence EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 274 treatment and management options for seizure control in our unchanged on granulocytes whereas FLAER and CD73 levels in patients. ﬁbroblasts were decreased. In addition to common symptoms T. Kozhanova: None. S. Zhilina: None. T. Mescheryakova: suchashypotonia,intellectualdisability/developmentaldelay,and None. K. Osipova: None. S. Ayvazyan: None. N. Zavadenko: seizures, individuals with PIGG variants of null or severely None.A. Prityko: None. decreased activity showed cerebellar abnormalities, neurological manifestations, and mitochondrial dysfunction, a feature increas- inglyrecognizedinIGDs.Individualswithmildlydecreasedactivity  P09
.047.D PIGG variant pathogenicity assessment reveals variantsshowedautism spectrum disorder. novel featureswithin nineteen families Conclusion:Thisinvitrosystemisausefulmethodtovalidate the pathogenicity of new variants in PIGG and to study PIGG CamilleTremblay-Laganiere1,RezaMarooﬁan2,ThiT.M.Nguyen1, physiological functions. Recent work using this system has EhsanGhayoorKarimiani3,SalmanKirmani4,FizzaAkbar4,Shahnaz identiﬁed a new subset of PIGG-dependent GPI-APs with an Ibrahim4, Bushra Afroze4, Mohammad Doosti3, FarahAshrafzadeh5, alternative bridging on the second mannose. Reduced levels of Meisam Babaei6, Stephanie Efthymiou2, Tipu Sultan7, Roger L. speciﬁc PIGG-dependent GPI-APs might explain the phenotype Ladda8, Heather M. McLaughlin9, Rebecca Truty9, Sonal Mahida10, observedin individualswith PIGG-deﬁciency. Julie S. Cohen10, Kristin Baranano10, Fatima Y. Ismail11, Millan S. C. Tremblay-Laganiere: None. R. Marooﬁan: None. T. T. M. Patel12,AnnaLehman12,AndrewC.Edmondson13,AmandaNagy14, Nguyen:None.E.GhayoorKarimiani:None.S.Kirmani:None.F. Melissa A. Walker14, Saadet Mercimek-Andrews15, Yuta Maki16, Rani Akbar: None. S. Ibrahim: None. B. Afroze: None. M. Doosti: Sachdev17, Rebecca Macintosh17, Elizabeth E. Palmer17, Grazia M.S. None. F. Ashrafzadeh: None. M. Babaei: None. S. Efthymiou: Mancini18, Tahsin S. Barakat18, Robert Steinfeld19, Christina T. None. T. Sultan: None. R. L. Ladda: None. H. M. McLaughlin: Rüsch19, Georg M. Stettner19, Matias Wagner20, Saskia B. Wort- None. R. Truty: None. S. Mahida: None. J. S. Cohen: None. K. mann21, Usha Kini22, Angela F. Brady23, Karen L. Stals24, Naila Baranano: None. F. Y. Ismail: None. M. S. Patel: None. A. Ismayilova25, Sian Ellard24, Danilo Bernardo26, Kimberly Nugent27, Lehman: None. A. C. Edmondson: None. A. Nagy: None. M. A. ScottD.McLean27,StylianosE.Antonarakis28,HenryHoulden2,Taroh Walker: None. S. Mercimek-Andrews: None. Y. Maki: None. R. Kinoshita16,Philippe M. Campeau1, Yoshiko Murakami16 Sachdev:None.R.Macintosh:None.E.E.Palmer:None.G.M.S. Mancini: None. T. S. Barakat: None. R. Steinfeld: None. C. T. 1University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2UCL Queen Square Rüsch: None. G. M. Stettner: None. M. Wagner: None. S. B. InstituteofNeurologyandTheNationalHospitalforNeurologyand Wortmann: None. U. Kini: None. A. F. Brady: None. K. L. Stals: Neurosurgery, London, United Kingdom, 3Next Generation Genetic None. N.Ismayilova: None. S. Ellard:None. D. Bernardo: None. Polyclinic, Mashhad, Iran,IslamicRepublic of,4AgaKhan University, K.Nugent:None.S.D.McLean:None.S.E.Antonarakis:None. Karachi, Pakistan, 5Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mash- H.Houlden:None.T.Kinoshita:None.P.M.Campeau:None.Y. had,Iran,IslamicRepublicof,6NorthKhorasanUniversityofMedical Murakami:None. Sciences, Bojnurd, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 7The Children’s Hospital Lahore,Lahore,Pakistan,8MiltonSHersheyMedicalCentre,Hershey, PA,USA,9Invitae,SanFrancisco,CA,USA,10KennedyKriegerInstitute,  P09
.048.A SCN9A gene variants do not cause monogenic Baltimore, MD, USA, 11Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, epilepsyin humans Baltimore,MD,USA,12UniversityofBritishColumbia,Vancouver,BC, Canada,13Children’sHospitalofPhiladelphia,Philadelphia,PA,USA, JamesD.R.Fasham1,JosephS.Leslie1,JamieW.Harrison1,James 14Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA, 15University of Deline2, Katie B. Williams3, Ashley Kuhl3, Jessica Scott Schwoerer3, Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 16Osaka University, Osaka, Japan, HaroldE. Cross4,Andrew H.Crosby1,Emma L. Baple1 17Sydney Children’s Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 18Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 19University 1University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Center for Special Children’sHospitalZurich,Zurich,Switzerland,20TechnicalUniversity Children, La Farge Medical Clinic-VMH, La Farge, WI, USA, Munich, Munich, Germany, 21Paracelsus Medical School, Salzburg, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, Austria, 22Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 23Northwick USA, 4Department of Ophthalmology, University of Arizona College Park Hospital, Harrow, United Kingdom, 24Royal Devon and Exeter ofMedicine, Tucson, AZ, USA. NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom, 25Chelsea and Westminster Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 26University of Many studies demonstrate the clinical utility and importance of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA, 27The Children’s epilepsy gene panel testing to conﬁrm the speciﬁc aetiology of Hospital of San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA, 28University of disease,enableappropriatetherapeuticinterventions,andinform GenevaMedical School, Geneva,Switzerland. accurate family counselling. Previously, SCN9A gene variants, in particular the c.1921A>T p.(Asn641Tyr) substitution, have been Purpose:PhosphatidylinositolGlycanAnchorBiosynthesis,classG deﬁned as likely autosomal dominant causes of febrile seizures (PIGG) is an ethanolamine phosphate transferase catalyzing the plus and other monogenic seizure phenotypes indistinguishable modiﬁcation of the second mannose of glycosylphosphatidylino- from those associated with SCN1A. This led to the inclusion of sitol(GPI).GPIsserveasanchorsonthecellmembranebylinking SCN9Aon epilepsy genepanels globally. over 150 surface proteins called GPI anchored proteins (GPI-APs) IntheAmishandothercommunitysettingsbothpathogenicand ontheir thirdmannose. Pathogenicvariantsin genesinvolved in benign gene variants may become enriched, enabling their clinical thebiosynthesisofGPIcauseinheritedGPIdeﬁciency(IGD)which interpretation. Here we present serendipitous genetic ﬁndings that still needsto befurther characterized. identify SCN9A c.1921A>T p.(Asn641Tyr) at high frequency among Methods:Wedescribetwenty-twoindividualsfromnineteennew the Amish, in the absence of seizure phenotypes. This, alongside unrelatedfamilieswithbi-allelicvariantsinPIGG.WeanalyzedGPI-AP reviewofpublishedcasesandUKBiobankﬁndings,clearlyrefutesan surface levels on granulocytes and ﬁbroblasts for three and two associationofSCN9Awithepilepsy. individuals,respectively.Wedemonstratedenzymaticactivitydefects Given this, the presence of SCN9A on gene testing panels and forPIGGvariantsinvitroinaPIGG/PIGOdoubleknockoutsystem. its currently widely accepted status as an epilepsy disease gene, Results: Phenotypic analysis of reported individuals reveals clearlypresentasubstantialmisdiagnosisrisktopatients.Thisisof novelPIGGdeﬁciencyassociatedfeatures.AlltestedGPI-APswere particular concern where a precise epilepsy molecular diagnosis EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 275 informsdrugchoiceandmisdiagnosismayhavedevastatingand Víctor Soto Insuga, Teresa Moreno Cantero, Beatriz Bernardino lethal consequences. Our ﬁndings highlight the importance of Cuesta, Anna Duat Rodriguez, Verónica Cantarín Extrémera, María ClinGen and other expert groups, and urge reappraisal of the LuzRuiz-Falcó Rojas, JuanJosé GarcíaPeñas evidence regarding SCN9A in monogenic seizure phenotypes, to mitigate potential harms. Further, our studies demonstrate the HospitalInfantil Universitario NiñoJesús, Madrid, Spain. importanceofgenomiccommunitystudiesworldwide,wheredue to ancestral genetic bottleneck events enrichment of otherwise Epileptic encephalopathy (EE) causes severe cognitive and rarevariants allowsimproved interpretation ofpathogenicity. behavioural issues, shows variable expressivity and could be Grants: Wellcome 220600/Z/20/Z (JF); MRC G1001931 (ELB), progressive. EE may present alone, accompanied by a cortical G1002279(AHC) malformation disorder ortaking partof asyndromic entity. J.D.R.Fasham:None.J.S.Leslie:None.J.W.Harrison:None.J. Aim: We collected data from a third level children´s hospital Deline: None. K.B. Williams: None. A. Kuhl: None. J. Scott specialized in treating EE to evaluate the diagnostic yield of Schwoerer: None. H.E. Cross: None. A.H. Crosby: None. E.L. geneticstudies based on nextgeneration sequencing. Baple:None. Patients: We collected data of patients whose primary diagnosis was epilepsy or EE, referred to the Clinical Genetic clinicbytheNeurologydepartmentforstudybetweenJune2018  P09
.049.B In silico association of the seizures phenotype to and December 2020. We separated patients in different pheno- iron-induced non-apoptotic celldeath typic clusters. Cluster 1: syndromic epileptic encephalopathy (HP:0200134),ASD(HP:0000729,HP:0000717),Rett-likephenotype, Alejandro Cisterna García1, Irene Díez García-Prieto2, Paolo spastic paraplegia (HP:0100021) or suspected mitochondrial Maietta2, Sara Álvarez de Andrés2, Álvaro Sánchez-Ferrer1, Juan A. disease (HP:0003287). Cluster 2: cortical developmental disorder Botía1 and/or focal epilepsy. Cluster 3: epilepsy without intellectual disabilityincludingfebrileseizures.Genesanalysedwereselected 1Universidad de Murcia, Murcia, Spain, 2NIMGenetics, Madrid, dependingon thephenotypic cluster. Spain. Results: 137 patients were studied. Total diagnostic yield was 25% with 17% of non-conclusive results due to variants of Epileptic seizures represent a central phenotype within epilepsy. unknownsigniﬁcance.Analysingthedatausingclusterswefound We wanted to expand our knowledge about the phenotypes that Cluster 1 and 2 had the maximum yield of 32 and 23%, associated with genes linked to seizures. We obtained the genes respectively.PathogenicvariantsinCDK L5
werepresentin3non- associatedwithSeizure(HumanPhenotypeOntologyHP:0001250) related individuals of cluster 1, pathogenic variants in DEPD C5
 and performed a phenotype enrichment analysis with PhenoEx- werepresent in3non-related individuals ofcluster 2. amWeb. We observe that the genes associated with seizures are Discussion and conclusion: The study of Epileptic encephalo- also linked to Labile Iron (CRB:0000004 ; P=3.15x10-12) and pathy using next generation sequencing approach has a good Peroxidized Lipids (CRB:0000007; P=2.15x10-19) using CRISPR- diagnostic yield. Whereas the study of epilepsy without intellec- Brain database within PhenoExamWeb. Terms that are not only tualdisabilityhasalowdiagnosticyield,exceptifthereisaclear relevant in epilepsy and glutamatergic neurons, but are also inheritance pattern. associatedwithferroptosis,whichisanovelformofnon-apoptotic N. Ortiz Cabrera: None. B. Fernández Garoz: None. E. regulatedcelldeathattributedtoseverelipidperoxidationcaused González Alguacil: None. M. Jiménez Legido: None. R. Púa by ROS production and iron overload. Although ferroptosis has Torrejón: None. V. Soto Insuga: None. T. Moreno Cantero: recently been studied in epilepsy, the genetics underlying this None.B.BernardinoCuesta:None.A.DuatRodriguez:None.V. process remain unclear. The 49 genes shared by the three CantarínExtrémera:None.M.Ruiz-FalcóRojas:None.J.García annotationtermssuggestapossibleinterestingnovelferroptosis- Peñas:None. seizurerelationship(Fisher´sExactfortheoverlapP=5.95x10-12). Those genes are linked to Epilepsy ( C0014544
; P=0.012), Leigh Disease and Mitochondrial Complex I Deﬁciency ( C1838979
; P=  P09
.051.D A novel disorder causing fetal cerebral hemor- rhages associated to a homozygous mutation of the ESAM 1.9x10-12).Theyarehighlyexpressedinbraintissuesaccordingto GTExV8, preferentially expressed in Pyramidal neurons (P= gene 0.0104) among other mice brain cells according to EWCE. We alsoobservethatsomeofourgenesandGPX4areinthesameco- Jessica Hernandez Rodriguez1, A Ruiz2, Elena Miravet2, Victor Asensio expressionnetworkmodulewithincortexandhippocampustissue Landa3,RosaMartorell-Riera2,MariaCarmenVidalLampurdanes2,Laura networksaccordingtoCoExpWeb.Theseevidencesmaysuggest Torres-Juan3, Iciar Martinez-Lopez3, EmiliaAmengual-Cladera3, Cristofol aroleforferroptosisinepilepsyandalsopointoutthisprocessto VivesBauza3,DAMIANHEINESUÑER3 certain genes.FundaciónSéneca andNIMGenetics. A. Cisterna García: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, 1Institut d’Investigació Sanitaria de Palma (IDISBA), Palma, Spain, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants 2Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma, Spain, 3Hospital Uni- already received); Modest; NIMGenetics. I. Díez García-Prieto: A. versitari Son Espases/Institut d’Investigació Sanitaria de Palma Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIMGenetics. P. (IDISBA),Palma, Spain. Maietta: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; NIMGe- netics. S. Álvarez de Andrés: A. Employment (full or part-time); The stability and permeability of the blood vessel wall relies on Signiﬁcant; NIMGenetics. Á. Sánchez-Ferrer: None. J.A. Botía: endothelial junctions, which are formed and regulated by cell None. adhesion molecules. One of them is ESAM (endothelial adhesion molecule),structurallyrelatedtoJAMproteins,andallformpartof the blood-brain barrier. Furthermore, a homozygous mutation in  P09
.050.C Genetic studies in epilepsy. Experience of a third JAM3hasbeenreportedtocausehemorrhagicdestructionofthe levelpediatric hospital brain.However,uptonowESAMhasnotbeenassociatedtoany disease. In our study, a brother and sister from non- Nelmar Valentina Ortiz Cabrera, Bárbara Fernández Garoz, Elena consanguineous parents suffered severe prenatal cerebral GonzálezAlguacil,MaríaJiménezLegido,RuthCamilaPúaTorrejón, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 276 hemorrhages. As a result both siblings, now 2 and 4 years old, Conclusion: Our ﬁndings suggest that rare, highly penetrant show spastic tetraparesis, seizures, hydrocephalus, dysphagia, variantsofgenesinvolvedinglutamatergicneurotransmissionare respiratory problems and cortical blindness. Whole exome contributing toetiology ofschizophreniainthese families.Italso sequencing (WES) analysis was oriented towards known genes highlights that genetic investigations of multiplex, multigenera- associated to hereditary bleeding or brain disorders but no tionalfamilieswithcouldbeapowerfulapproachtoidentifyrare signiﬁcant variant could be found. After this, we performed geneticvariantsinvolved incomplex disorders. analysis for runs of homozygosity shared between brother and A.Fatima:None.U.Abdullah:None.M.Farooq:None.Z.Ali: sister, and found a single 2,3 Mb homozygous block on None.Y.Mang:None.M.Mehrjouy:None.N.Tommerup:None. chromosome 11q24.1 which contained 46 homozygous variants S.Baig:None. in 19 genes, of which only 1 was likely pathogenic: a previously not described frameshift mutation in exon 3 of the ESAM gene (NM_138961.3;c.287delC/p.Pro96fs).Mutationanalysisofparents  P09
.054.C FKB P5
 in First-Episode Psychosis: Insights from a and grandparents found both parents and the paternal and Greekpopulation sample maternal grandmothers to be carriers but no evidence of consanguinity as they come from very distant parts of Spain. Daniela Theodoridou1, Alexandra Polyzou2, Angeliki Maria Vlai- RNAexpressionand ancestry studieswill be presented. kou3,4, Michaela D. Filiou3,4, George Leondaritis2, Petros Petrikis5, J. Hernandez Rodriguez: None. A. Ruiz: None. E. Miravet: Marika Syrrou1 None. V. Asensio Landa: None. R. Martorell-Riera: None. M. Vidal Lampurdanes: None. L. Torres-Juan: None. I. Martinez- 1LaboratoryofBiology,FacultyofMedicine,SchoolofHealthSciences, Lopez:None.E.Amengual-Cladera:None.C.VivesBauza:None. UniversityofIoannina,Ioannina,Greece,2DepartmentofPharmacol- D.Heine suñer:None. ogy, Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences, University of Ioannina,Ioannina,Greece,3LaboratoryofBiochemistry,Department ofBiologicalApplicationsandTechnology,SchoolofHealthSciences,  P09
.052.ARarepathogenicvariantsingenesofglutamatergic University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, 4Biomedical Research neurotransmission pathway segregate with schizophrenia in Division, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Founda- Pakistanifamilies tion of Research and Technology Hellas (IMBB-FORTH), Ioannina, Greece, 5Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, School of Ambrin Fatima1,2,3, Uzma Abdullah4,3,5, Muhammad Farooq6,2, HealthSciences,UniversityofIoannina,Ioannina,Greece. Zafar Ali2, Yuan Mang2, Mana M. Mehrjouy2, Niels Tommerup2, ShahidM Baig3,1 Introduction: The hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis mediates theneuroendocrineresponsetostress.FKB P5
isaco-chaperoneof 1Department of Biological and Biomedical Sciences,The Aga Khan the cortisol-bound glucocorticoid receptor. SNPs in the FKB P5
 University,Karachi,Pakistan,2DepartmentofCellularandMolecular locus may affect its expression levels and have been associated Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, with psychopathology. Our objective is to investigate the 3National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering distribution of SNP rs1360780 and FKB P5
 mRNA and protein (NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan, 4University Institute of Biochemistry expressioninindividualswithFirst-EpisodePsychosis(FEP)attwo and Biotechnology (UIBB).PMAS-Arid Agriculture University, Raw- timepoints: at theonsetofFEP and after treatmentwith second alpindi,Pakistan,5UniversityofCopenhagen,Copenhagen,Denmark, generationantipsychotics (SGAs). 6DepartmentofBiotechnology,InstituteofBiochemistry,Biotechnol- Materials and Methods: Upon admission, 21 individuals were ogyandBioinformatics(IBBB),TheIslamiaUniversityofBahawalpur, diagnosedwiththePositiveAndNegativeSymptomScale(PANSS) Bahawalpur, Pakistan. andwholebloodwasextracted.rs1360780(C->T)wasgenotyped using Taqman SNP genotyping assay. Total RNA and protein Introduction: Schizophrenia is a disabling neuropsychiatric content were extracted from PBMCs, both upon admission and disorder of adulthood onset with high heritability. World-wide after monotherapy with SGAs. FKB P5
 expression levels were collaborations have identiﬁed association of ~270 common loci, assessed with RT-qPCR and Western Blot. mRNA levels were with small individual effect and hence weak clinical implications. normalized against the 18s rRNA and protein levels against the Recent technological feasibility of exome sequencing is enabling GAPDH reference genes, respectively. Statistical analysis was identiﬁcation of rare variants of high penetrance, that reﬁne performedby GraphPadPrism 8. previousﬁndingsand improverisk assessment andprognosis. Results:Inoursample(N=21),80%ofmalesand50%offemales Material and Methods: We recruited two multiplex Pakistani arehomozygousfortheC(protective)allele.Therestcarryatleast families, having 11 patients and 19 normal individuals in three one T (risk) allele for the rs1360780. FKB P5
 mRNA levels decrease generations. We performed genome-wide SNP genotyping, next after antipsychotic treatment (**p=0.0095). The FKB P5
 protein generation mate pair and whole exome sequencing to unveil levels in a subgroup of individuals (N=12) were assessed before genetic component. Candidate variants were screened in unre- andaftertreatmentandwerenotsigniﬁcantlydifferent(p=0.1763). latedcohortsof508cases,300controlsandﬁfteenfamilies(with Conclusions: We observe altered mRNA but no protein FKB P5
 51 affected and 47 normal individuals) of Pakistani origin. expressionlevelalterations.Furtherstudiesandlargerpopulation Structural impact of substituted residues was assessed through data will shed light on the putative role of SGAs on FKB P5
 insilico modelling usingiTASSER. expression. Results:Inonefamily,weidentiﬁedararenovelmicroduplication D.Theodoridou:None.A.Polyzou:None.A.M.Vlaikou:None. (5q14.1_q14.2) encompassing critical genes involved in glutamate M.D. Filiou: None. G. Leondaritis: None. P. Petrikis: None. M. signalingsuchasCMYA5,HOMER,RasGRF2.Secondfamilysegregates Syrrou:None. two rare, predicted pathogenic variants NM_001134407.3 (GRIN2A): c.3505C>T, (p.R1169W) and NM_001010848.4 (NRG3):c.1951G>A,(p.  E651
K).ThesegenesencodeforpartsofAMPAandNMDAreceptors  P09
.055.DIdentifyinglipidmetabolismgeneswithapotential ofglutamatergicneurotransmissionrespectivelyandthevariantsare roleinthepathogenesisofFrontotemporaldementiathrough predicted to compromise protein function by destabilizing their poolexome sequencing structures.Thevariantswereabsentinaforementionedcohorts. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 277 MihailGanev1,DimitarSerbezov1,LubomirBalabanski1,2,Radoslava cellular, and spatial relationships within an observed missense Vazharova2,3, Sena Karachanak-Yankova1,4, Olga Antonova1, Dra- changesetting.Here,weevaluatetheaccuracyofFMPforclassifying gomira Nikolova1, Marta Mihaylova1, Rada Staneva1, Viktoria variants in the SCN1A-encoded NaV1.1 ion channel previously Spasova1, Vera Damyanova1, Desislava Nesheva1, Zora Hammou- associatedwithsevereepilepsysyndromes. deh1,BlagaRukova1,SavinaHadjidekova1,ShimaMehrabian5,Maria Methods:FMPdataon619missenseSCN1Avariantspredicted Petrova5,DianaBelezhanska5,LachezarTraykov5,DragaToncheva1,2 to be deleterious (P) or tolerated (B) were investigated for their topological enrichment to identify variant-intolerant protein 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, domains. Bulgaria,2Gynecologyandassistedreproductionhospital“Malinov”, Results:FMPpredicted468/619(75.6%)variantsasPand151/ Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Department of Biology, Medical genetics and 619 (24.4%) as B. Of the 468 P variants, 150 (32%) resided in the Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Soﬁa University “St. Kliment cytoplasmicregion,includingaC-terminalclusterwithintheCaM- Ohridski”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4Department of Genetics, Faculty of binding domain (aa 1915-1944), 119 (25.4%) in the transmem- Biology, Soﬁa University “St. Kliment Ohridski”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, brane,29(6.2%)inthe S4
-voltagesensor,45(9.7%)inthe“pore”, 5Depatment of Neurology, UH “Alexandrovska”, Medical University and 125 (26.7%) in the extracellular domains. FMP predicted 107 ofSoﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria. (70.9%)Bvariantsinthecytoplasmic,10(6.6%)intransmembrane, and 34 (22.5%) in extracellular domains. No B-predicted variants Introduction:MolecularpathogenesisofFrontotemporaldementia residedinthe S4
-voltagesensor,“pore”,orCaM-bindingdomains, (FTD) is associated with intracellular accumulation of proteins in suggesting these regionsare particularly variant-intolerant. centralnervoussystem.However,itisunknownwhethergenetically Conclusions:Thesedatademonstratethepredictiveaccuracyof determined lipid disturbances could also be a contributing factor FMPinNaV1.1inidentifyingspeciﬁcfunctionaldomainsapparently (like the ApoE polymorphisms in Alzheimer’s disease). This study intoleranttogeneticvariability,establishingitsutilityinsupporting aims to identify dyslipidemia-associated genes with a potential for clinicalvariantinterpretationingermlinegenetictesting. furtherinvestigationofapathogenicroleinFTD. M.Vatta:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Invitae.E. Materials & Methods: Whole-exome sequencing was per- OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions,patentorotherintellectual formed on two DNA pools set up of frontotemporal dementia property); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. D. McKnight:A. Employment (full or (FTD) patients (n=66) and healthy individuals (n=100), respec- part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock tively. After quality ﬁltering, the 48,455 annotated rare genetic options,patentorotherintellectualproperty);Signiﬁcant;Invitae.K. variantsdetectedintheFTDpoolwereusedtocompileagenelist. Ouyang: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. The list was subjected to functional enrichment analysis yielding OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions,patentorotherintellectual 313 genes from the Gene Ontology “lipid binding” molecular property); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. A. Morales: A. Employment (full or functiongroup.Asalaststep,apathway prioritizingofthe“lipid part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock binding” genes was carried out. The same workﬂow has been options,patentorotherintellectualproperty);Signiﬁcant;Invitae.S. appliedto thedatafrom thehealthyindividuals’pool. Aradhya: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae. E. Results:AnalysisoftheFTDpooldataledtotheprioritizationof9 OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions,patentorotherintellectual pathwayswithatotalof18genesassociatedwithplasmalipoprotein property);Signiﬁcant;Invitae. assembly,remodeling,andclearance.Healthyindividuals’pooldata did not yield overrepresented rare variant genes from the “lipid binding”molecularfunctiongroup.Resultsindicateapossibleroleof  P09
.057.B Screening for the FMR1 premutation in Greek somelipidmetabolismgenesinthepathogenesisofFTD. patients withlate-onset cerebellar ataxia Conclusion:Theanalysisofwhole-exomepoolsequencingdata of FTD patients and heathy individuals has identiﬁed 18 lipid Maria Seferiadi1, Chrisoula Kartanou1, Christalena Sofocleous2,3, metabolism-associated genes potentially associated with FTD JoanneTraeger-Synodinos2, Georgia Karadima1,George Koutsis1 pathogenesis. Acknowledgment: KP-06-N33/5 from 13.12.2019 - NationalScience FundofBulgaria. 1Neurogenetics Unit, 1st Department of Neurology, School of M. Ganev: None. D. Serbezov: None. L. Balabanski: None. R. Medicine, Eginition Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University Vazharova:None.S.Karachanak-Yankova:None.O.Antonova: ofAthens,Athens,Greece,2LaboratoryofMedicalGenetics,Schoolof None.D.Nikolova:None.M.Mihaylova:None.R.Staneva:None. Medicine, University of Athens, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, V. Spasova: None. V. Damyanova: None. D. Nesheva: None. Z. Athens,Greece,3ResearchUniversityInstitutefortheStudyofGenetic Hammoudeh:None.B.Rukova:None.S.Hadjidekova:None.S. and Malignant Diseases of Childhood, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Mehrabian: None. M. Petrova: None. D. Belezhanska: None. L. Hospital,Athens, Greece. Traykov:None. D.Toncheva: None. Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is a late- onset, X-linked, neurodegenerative disorder that occurs in  P09
.056.ATopologicalmappingofvariant-intolerantdomains premutation carriers of the FMR1 gene. Although core motor inSCN1A usinganovel functional modeling platform features include gait ataxia and action tremor, some patients demonstrate parkinsonism, cognitive deﬁcits and peripheral Matteo Vatta, Dianalee McKnight, Karen Ouyang, Ana Morales, neuropathy. Consequently, FXTAS is often misdiagnosed as Swaroop Aradhya spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) or Parkinson’s disease (PD). In Greek patientswithataxia,althoughthemostcommonSCAshavebeen Invitae, SanFrancisco, CA, USA. studied by our group, the occurrence of FXTAS has not been previously investigated. Herein, we sought to investigate the Introduction:Theclinicalclassiﬁcationofnovelmissensevariantsis frequency, genotypic and phenotypic proﬁle of FXTAS in Greek challenging due to insufﬁcient evidence, often leaving them patients with late-onset cerebellar ataxia.From a cohort of 454 categorized as variants of uncertain signiﬁcance (VUS). To generate ataxia cases (SCA1, 2, 3, 6, 7 negative), 92 index patients were additionalevidence to better interpret the effects of missense VUS, selected, clinically characterized by ataxia (100%), tremor (19%), we developed a gene-speciﬁc functional modeling platform (FMP) polyneuropathy (14%), parkinsonism (9.8%), and cognitive decline evaluating DNA sequence conservation, biophysical, structural, (8.7%).Allcaseshadnomale-tomaletransmission.Genotypingwas EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 278 performed using fragment analysis by capillary electrophoresis. We Katrine M. Johannesen1,2, Sumaiya Iqbal3,4, Milena Guazzi5,1, detectedtwoFMR1premutationcarriers(2.2%),wellwithintherange Nazanin A. Mohammadi1,2, Eduardo Perez6, Dennis Lal7,8,9,10, Elise reported by multiple studies in ataxic cohorts (0-4.1%), and higher Schaefer11, AnneDeSaintMartin12, MarieTherese Abiwarde12,Amy than other, movement disorder, cohorts (<1%). Both patients had McTague13, Roser Pons14, Amelie Piton15, Manju Kurian16, Marie cerebellar ataxia and neuropathy. One patient also had mild Deprez17, Liesbeth de Waele18,19, Eva Brilstra20, Nienke E. Verbeek20, parkinsonism and cognitive impairment, and the other with Marjan van Kempen van Kempen20, Gerhard Visser21, Hilde M. H. pyramidal signs. We conclude that FMR1 premutations are not rare Braakman22, Martin Haeusler23, Miriam Elbracht24, David Stern- in Greek patients with late-onset cerebellar ataxia. In light of the man25,UlviVaher26,ThomasSmol27,JoannaKennedy28,KarlMartin above,molecularscreeningforFXTASshouldbeconsideredinSCA Klein29, Billie Au30, Kimberly Smyth31, Thomas Morgan32, Malin panel negative hereditary ataxia cases with supportive clinical Dewenter33, Argirios Dinopoulos34, Damien Lederer35, Vivian Liao36, features. Our study highlights the importance of genetic testing in PhilipK. Ahring36,Rikke S.Møller1,2, ElenaGardella37,2 thedifferentialdiagnosisandearlymanagementofFXTAS. M.Seferiadi:None.C.Kartanou:None.C.Sofocleous:None.J. 1Department of Epilepsy Genetics and Personalized Treatment, The Traeger-Synodinos:None.G.Karadima:None.G.Koutsis:None. Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Denmark, 2Institute for Regional Health Services, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark, 3Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and  P09
.058.C Characterization of SUMO2/3 protein levels in Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA, 4Center for the Development of Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome patients Therapeutics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA,5DepartmentofMedicine,UniversityofGenoa,Genoa,Italy,6Center LaiaRodriguez-Revenga1,2,TamaraBarcos1,EmmaPeruga1,Laura for Genetics and Genomics Instituto de Ciencias e Innovación en Molina-Porcel3,4, Maribel Alvarez-Mora1,2 Medicina (ICIM) Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile, 7Genomic MedicineInstitute,LernerResearchInstitute,ClevelandClinic,Cleveland, 1HospitalCinic,Barcelona,Spain,2CIBERofRareDiseases,Instiutode OH, USA, 8Epilepsy Center, Neurological Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain, 3Alzheimer’s disease and other Cleveland, OH, USA, 9Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad cognitive disorders unit. Neurology Service, Hospital Clínic, Institut InstituteofHarvardandM.I.T,Cambridge,MA,USA,10CologneCenterfor d’InvestigacionsBiomediquesAugustPiiSunyer(IDIBAPS),University Genomics(CCG),UniversityofCologne,Cologne,Germany,11Servicede of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4Neurological Tissue Bank,Biobanc- GénétiqueMédicale,CMCO-SIHCUS,HôpitaldeHautepierre,Strassbourg, HospitalClínic-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain. France, 12Department of Pediatric Neurology, Strasbourg University Hospital,Strassbourg,France,13MolecularNeurosciences,Developmental Introduction: Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome Neurosciences Programme, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child (FXTAS) is a late-onset neurodegenerative disorder with reduced Health,London,UnitedKingdom,14FirstDepartmentofPediatrics,"IAgia penetrance that appears in adult FMR1 premutation carriers (55- Soﬁa" Children Hospital, National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, 200 CGGs). The neuropathological hallmark of FXTAS consists of Athens, Greece, 15Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et presence of ubiquitin-positive nuclear inclusions that are broadly Cellulaire,Illkirch,France,16InstituteofChildHealth,GreatOrmondStreet distributed throughout the brain. The small ubiquitin-related HospitalforChildren,London,UnitedKingdom,17UniversitéCôted’Azur, modiﬁer 2/3 (SUMO 2/3), which is an element of the cellular CNRS, IPMC, Sophia-Antipolis, France, 18Department of Development responsetoenvironmentalstress,hasbeenrecentlydescribedas and Regeneration, Campus Kulak Kortrijk, Kortrijk, Netherlands, one of the most highly abundant proteins in FXTAS inclusions. 19Department of Paediatric Neurology, University Hospitals Leuven, Sincebioenergeticcollapseleadingtocellularstresshasbeenwell Leuven, Netherlands, 20Department of Genetics, University Medical reported in FXTAS patients, we aimed to characterize SUMO2/3 Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, Netherlands, 21Stichting protein levelsin FXTASpatients. Epilepsie Instellingen Nederland (SEIN), Hoofddorp, Netherlands, Material and Methods: Fibroblasts cultures from FXTAS 22Department ofAcademic Center for Epileptology Kempenhaeghe/ patientswereusedtoquantifySUMO2/3proteinlevelsbywestern MaastrichtUniversityMedicalCenterEpilepsyGeneticsandPersonalized blot analysis. Immunohistochemistry experiments were also Treatment,TheDanishEpilepsyCentre,Heeze,Netherlands,23Instituteof performedinpostmortem brain samples fromFXTAS patients. Evolutionary Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, Results: SUMO2/3 quantiﬁcation in whole ﬁbroblasts culture 24InstituteofHumanGenetics,MedicalFaculty,RWTHAachenUniversity, lysates did not revealed signiﬁcant differences between FXATS Aachen,Germany,25DivisionofNeurologyLincolnMedicalandMental and control samples. However, immunohistochemistry analysis Health Center, Bronx, NY, USA, 26Children’s Clinic of Tartu University revealed positive SUMO2/3 staining in intranuclear inclusions of Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 27Institut de Genetique Medicale, CHRU Lille, FXTASpostmortem brain samples. UniversitedeLille,Lille,France,28ClinicalGeneticsDepartment,University Conclusions: although the pathogenic mechanisms inducing Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust, St Michael’s Hospital, Bristol, neurodengeneration and the development of inclusions in FMR1 United Kingdom, 29Epilepsy Centre Frankfurt Rhein-Main, University premutation carriers are unknown, our results support a role of HospitalFrankfurt,UniversityofFrankfurt,Frankfurt,Germany,30Depart- SUMO2/3intheprocess.Acknowledgements:Worksupportedby ment of Medical Genetics, Cumming School of Medicine, University of theInstitutodeSaludCarlosIII(PI17/01067),co-ﬁnancedbyFondo Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 31Department of Pediatrics, Cumming Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER) “una manera de hacer School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, Europa” and AGAUR (2017 SGR1134). The CIBERER is an initiative 32Precision Medicine/Genetic Testing Stewardship Program, Nemours A. of the Instituto de Salud Carlos III. We thank brain donors and I. duPont Hospital for Children Precision Medicine/Genetic Testing relativesforgenerousdonationandtheNeurologicalTissueBank Stewardship Program, Wilmington, DE, USA, 33Universitätsmedizin oftheBiobanc-Hospital Clinic-IDIBAPS. JohannesGutenberg-UniversityMainzInstitutfürHumangenetik,Mainz, L. Rodriguez-Revenga: None. T. Barcos: None. E. Peruga: Germany,34AttikoUniversityHospital,UniversityofAthens,3rdDeptof None.L.Molina-Porcel: None.M. Alvarez-Mora: None. Pediatrics, Haidari, Greece, 35Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut de PathologieetdeGénétique,Charleroi,Belgium,36BrainandMindCentre, SchoolofPharmacy,FacultyofMedicineandHealth,TheUniversityof  P09
.059.D Structural mapping of GABRB3 variants reveal Sydney,Sydney,Australia,37DepartmentofClinicalneurophysiology,the correlations between genotype andphenotype DanishEpilepsyCentre,Dianalund,Denmark. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 279 Objective:Ithaspreviouslybeenshownthatpathogenicvariantsin deﬁcit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are the most common. theGABRB3geneincreaseseizuresusceptibilityandleadtoabroad Severalneurotransmittersystemshavebeenimplicatedindisease phenotypic spectrum ranging from severe developmental and pathogenesis, and amongst these, the dopaminergic and the epileptic encephalopathies to milder epilepsy syndromes such as serotonergicpathwaysarethemostwidelystudied.Inthisstudy, generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures + and childhood absence we aimed to investigate whether the serotonin transporter gene epilepsy.Withacohortof76publishedanunpublishedpatients,we (SL C6
A4)wasdifferentiallyexpressedamongGTSindividuals,and aimed to highlight possible correlations between phenotype and whether DNA variants (5-HTTLPR, rs25531 and rs25532) or genotypeinGABRB3. promoter methylation was associated with GTS phenotype, or MaterialandMethods:Throughaninternationalcollaboration SL C6
A4expression. andliteraturereview,weanalyzedelectro-clinicaldataofpatients Methods: DNA from peripheral blood samples was obtained with variants in GABRB3. All variants was mapped to the 3D from 72 GTS individuals and 87 controls, and RNA from 56 GTS structure of theGABRB3 subunit. individualsand36controls.AllindividualsweregenotypedbyPCR Results: 76 patients with pathogenic or likely pathogenic followed by sanger sequencing, and SL C6
A4 expression was GABRB3 variants, including 24 previously unpublished patients, quantiﬁed using RT-qPCR. Promoter methylation of SL C6
A4 was were included in the study. Clinical phenotype correlated with quantiﬁed usingpyrosequencing. structural location: Patients with variants in the extracellular Results:WeobservedthatSL C6
A4expressionisupregulatedin domain had febrile seizure, myoclonic seizures and epileptic GTS individuals compared to controls. Although no speciﬁc spams with onset at ten months, while patients with variants in genotype, allele or haplotype was overrepresented in GTS the transmembrane domain had focal seizures with or without individuals compared to controls, we observed that the L /L AC AC secondary generalizationwith onsetatsixmonths. genotypeofthe5-HTTLPR/rs25531/rs25532three-locushaplotype Conclusion: Our results suggest a genotype/phenotype corre- wasassociatedwithhigherSL C6
A4mRNAexpressionlevelsinGTS lation, with variants in the extracellular domain causing milder individuals, but not in the control group. We observed no phenotypes with generalized epilepsy and variants in the association between SL C6
A4 promoter methylation and pheno- transmembrane domains causing more severe phenotypes with type, genotypeorexpression levels. early-onset focal epilepsy. Whether or not functional difference Conclusions: Our results show that SL C6
A4 expression is alsoplaysapartinthephenotypicdifferenceswillrequirefurther increased in GTS individuals, and that this difference is more research.Thesecorrelationsareofimportanceaswestandonthe pronounced inGTS individualswith theL /L genotype. AC AC brink of precision medicine in the genetic epilepsies. KMJ was A.M. Levy: None. M. Hildonen: None. C. Dahl: None. V.A. fundedby theLundbeck Foundation (R324-2019-1083) Bjerregaard: None. L.B. Møller: None. P. Guldberg: None. N.M. K.M. Johannesen: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Debes: None.Z. Tümer: None. collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Lundbeck Foundation. S. Iqbal: None.M.Guazzi:None.N.A.Mohammadi:None.E.Perez:None.  P09
.062.C Biallelic frameshift variants in CYHR1 cause severe D. Lal: None. E. Schaefer: None. A. De Saint Martin: None. M. globaldevelopmental delay Abiwarde: None. A. McTague: None. R. Pons: None. A. Piton: None.M.Kurian:None.M.Deprez:None.L.deWaele:None.E. Maria Asif1,2,3, Arwa Ishaq A. Khayyat1,2, Salem Alawbathani1,2, Brilstra: None. N.E. Verbeek: None. M. van Kempen: None. G. JudithHaasters4,BirgitBudde1,PeterNürnberg1,MatiasWagner4,5,6, Visser: None. H.M.H. Braakman: None. M. Haeusler: None. M. MuhammadSajid Hussain1,2,7 Elbracht: None. D. Sternman: None. U. Vaher: None. T. Smol: None.J.Kennedy:None.K.Klein:None.B.Au:None.K.Smyth: 1Cologne Center for Genomics, Faculty of Medicine and University None. T. Morgan: None. M. Dewenter: None. A. Dinopoulos: Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Institute of Biochemistry I, None. D. Lederer: None. V. Liao: None. P.K. Ahring: None. R.S. Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Center Møller:None. E.Gardella: None. for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Department of Pediatric Neurology, Developmental Medicine and  P09
.061.B Elevated expression of SL C6
A4 encoding the Social Pediatrics, Dr. von Hauner’s Children’s Hospital, University of serotonintransporter(SERT)inGillesdelaTourettesyndrome Munich,Munich,Germany,55InstituteofHumanGenetics,Schoolof Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, Amanda M. Levy1, Mathis Hildonen1, Christina Dahl2, Victoria A. 6InstituteforNeurogenomics,HelmholtzZentrumMünchen,Neuher- Bjerregaard1, Lisbeth Birk Møller1,3, Per Guldberg2,4, Nanette M. berg, Germany, 7Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), Debes5,Zeynep Tümer1,6 University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 1Kennedy Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Glostrup, Denmark, 2Danish Introduction: The human brain is a highly sophisticated and Cancer Society Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Institute complexorgan,yettobecompletelyunderstood.Investigationof forNature,SystemsandModels,RoskildeUniversityCenter,Roskilde, neurodevelopmental disorders may unravel protein networks, Denmark, 4Department of Cancer and Inﬂammation Research, crucial forbrain development. Institute for Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, Material and Methods: We recruited index patients from two Odense, Denmark, 5Tourette Clinics, Department of Paediatrics, families with global developmental delay from Yemen and Copenhagen University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark, 6Department of Germany.Toidentifytheunderlyingcausalvariants,wesubjected ClinicalMedicine,FacultyofHealthandMedicalSciences,University DNAsamplesofaffectedmembersofeachfamilytowhole-exome ofCopenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. sequencing. Using immunoﬂuorescence, immunoblotting, and pull-down assays coupled with proteomic mass spectrometry Introduction: Gilles de la Tourette syndrome (GTS) is a complex (MS), we characterized the protein encoded by the candidate neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by motor and vocal geneand explored thefunctional consequences ofthevariants. tics. Most of the GTS individuals have comorbid diagnoses, Results: In both families, we identiﬁed homozygous frameshift of which obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and attention variants,c.959_960delTT,p.(Phe320Cysfs*18)andc.1036_1037delCT, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 280 p.(Leu346Glyfs*49) in CYHR1 (NM_138496.1), a previously unchar-  P09
.064.A A novel GRIN2B mutation sharing the position but acterized gene. In HeLa, MCF7, and human primary ﬁbroblasts, notthe phenotypic expression ofknown pathogenic variant endogenousCYHR1proteinshowedpredominantlynuclearandonly weak cytosolic expression. Transiently expressed wild-type CYHR1 Nevyana Ivanova, Kalina Mihova, Kunka Kamenarova, Tsvetina was exclusively observed in the nucleus, however, mutant protein Veleva,DanielaAdjieva-Tzavella,IvoKremensky,VanioMitev,Ivanka was reduced and found incytoplasm. Reductionof mutant protein Dimova,Radka Kaneva could be recovered by treating the cells with cycloheximide and MG132. In patient derived primary ﬁbroblasts from one case, we Medical University-Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria. observed complete absence of CYHR1. MS analyses identiﬁed 110 interacting partners of CYHR1 which were enriched in spliceosome Introduction: De novo GRINB2 mutations are found in a wide and autophagy related pathways. The autophagy markers LAM P1
 range of neurodevelopmental disorders resulting in epileptic andL C3
βshowedreducedexpressioninpatientderivedﬁbroblasts encephalopathy and mental retardation with/without epilepsy. inlinewithMSresults. Most of them are missense variants clustered in the transmem- Conclusion: Our ﬁndings suggest that loss of CYHR1 causes brane and ligand-binding domains of the N-methyl-D-aspartate autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental delay. Hence, CYHR1 is (NMDA)receptorsshowingdiversefunctionalconsequences.Here likelytobeanovelkeyfactorinhumanbraindevelopmentdueto wereportanewlyidentiﬁedgeneticvariantthatco-localizeswith impairedautophagy andspliceosome function. a previously reported mutation but the related clinical cases M.Asif:None.A.I.A.Khayyat:None.S.Alawbathani:None.J. exhibit extremelydifferent phenotypic expression. Haasters: None. B. Budde: None. P. Nürnberg: None. M. Materials and Methods: We performed clinical exome Wagner:None. M.S.Hussain: None. sequencing to identify the disease-causing variant in the index patient and the Sanger sequencing method to conﬁrm it and to checkits segregation inthefamily.  P09
.063.D Glycosylphosphatidylinositol biosynthesis defect Results: Data ﬁltering identiﬁed a novel genetic variant due to digenic heterozygous mutations in PIGT and PIGV c.2090G>A/p.Cys461TyrintheGRINB2genechangesevolutionary genesin apatient withpsychomotor andcognitive delay conservedaminoacidintheligand-bindingdomainoftheNMDA receptor. Segregation analysis proved that it arises de novo. GergelyBüki1,2,AnnaZsigmond1,AgnesTill1,AttilaGyenesei3,Bela Mutation was found in a child with only subtle dysmorphic Melegh1,2, Kinga Hadzsiev1,2, JuditBene1,2 featuresandmildintellectualdisabilities.Itaffectsthesameamino acid as a previously reported pathogenic variant 1Department of Medical Genetics, Pécs, Hungary, 2Szentagothai (HGMD#СМ1314625) replacing cysteine 461 with phenylalanine Research Center, Pécs, Hungary, 3Genomics and Bioinformatics inapatient with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. Research Group, Szentágothai Research Centre,Pécs, Hungary. Conclusions: According to the ACMG criteria the variant c.2090G>A/p.Cys461Tyr in the GRIN2B gene is deﬁned as Introduction: Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) is an anchor for pathogenic.Presenceofamuchmilderclinicalphenotypewithout many cell surface proteins. GPI-anchored proteins play crucial epilepsycomparedtothealreadyreportedmutationinthesame roles in many pathways and developmental event, particularly amino acid causing a severe form of epileptic encephalopathy embryogenesis, neurogenesis, immune response and signal couldbeattributedtothedifferentphysicochemicalpropertiesof transduction.Morethan30genesareinvolvedinthebiosynthesis the mutant amino acids or imply the inﬂuence of modifying andremodelingofGPIanchor.Mutationsinseveralgenesinthis genetic factors. Acknowledgements: Funded by Ministry of pathway have been associated with inherited GPI deﬁciencies education and ScienceD01-285/2019/D01-395/2020. (IGDs)with awidespectrum ofclinical features. N.Ivanova:None.K.Mihova:None.K.Kamenarova:None.T. Materials and methods: Whole-genome sequencing was Veleva:None.D.Adjieva-Tzavella:None.I.Kremensky:None.V. indicated in a male patient with psychomotor and cognitive Mitev:None. I. Dimova: None. R.Kaneva: None. developmental delay, mild tetraspasticity, rigidity, tremor, reﬂex  P09
.065.BDeep phenotyping ofbiallelic HAC E1
 variants anomalies, dystonic hand movements and mild dysmorphic features. Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 Merope Grifﬁn1, Meena Balasubramanian2, Moira Blyth3, Abhijit instrument with the help of Illumina TruSeqTM DNA PCR-Free HT Dixit1,Peter D.Turnpenny4,Mohnish Suri1 Library Prep Kit and 150bp paired-end chemistry. The detected mutationswere validatedby Sangersequencing. 1Clinical Genetics, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Results:AnalysisofWGSdatarevealedadenovoheterozygous Nottingham, United Kingdom, 2Shefﬁeld Genetics Service, Shefﬁeld, pathogenic mutation (c.439 C>T) in PIGV gene and an unknown, UnitedKingdom,3YorkshireRegionalGeneticsService,Leeds,United potentially pathogenic heterozygous variant (c.256 C>T) in PIGT Kingdom,4ClinicalGenetics,RoyalDevon&ExeterNHSTrust,Exeter, gene.Thepatientphenotypesharesfeaturesrelatedtobothgene United Kingdom. defect. Discussion: IGDs are inherited in autosomal recessive and Introduction: Pathogenic and likely pathogenic HAC E1
 variants X-linked recessive manner. To our knowledge homozygous or are associated with spastic paraplegia and psychomotor retarda- compoundheterozygousmutationswithinthesamegenewere tion with/without seizures (SPPRS), a rare autosomal recessive, responsibleforthedevelopmentofIGDssofar.Herewereporta progressiveneurodevelopmental disorder characterised byhypo- male patient carrying digenic heterozygous mutations in PIGT tonia, weakness and spasticity of the lower limbs, and seizures. and PIGV genes which are involved in the same biosynthesis However,theclinicalpresentationofHAC E1
variantshasnotbeen pathway. More and more rare disorders are being fully characterised. Consequently, we undertook deep phenotyp- recognized with digenic background. NGS technologies (WES ingof 12patientsfrom 7families with biallelicHAC E1
variants. and WGS) are effective tools to facilitate the identiﬁcation of Materials and Methods: Patients with biallelic pathogenic or affected patients. likely pathogenic HAC E1
 variants were identiﬁed by trio exome G.Büki:None.A.Zsigmond:None.A.Till:None.A.Gyenesei: sequencing by the Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) None.B.Melegh: None. K. Hadzsiev: None. J.Bene: None. Study or whole genome sequencing by the 100,000 Genomes EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 281 Project. A comprehensive phenotyping proforma was completed genes [SETX, SI L1
, KIF1C, and CLPP] were found to cause the forallpatients by theirresponsible Clinical Geneticist. disease. Potential novel genes pending further validation were Results: Twelve patients were recruited (7 male/5 female, age identiﬁed intheremaining 50%. rangeof2-39years).Sixpatientswerehomozygousforarecurrent Conclusion:Thehighlevelofnoveltyoftheresultsindicatesan nonsensevariant(c.805C>T;p.(Arg269Ter));allthesepatientswere enormous potential for neurogenetic discoveries in Sudan. The of Pakistani origin. All patients displayed global developmental exceptional phenomena observed as the coexistence of multiple delay and/or intellectual disability. Ten had seizures, with ﬁve genetic disorders in the same of the highly inbred families and havingadiagnosisofepilepsy.Notably,sixpatientshadconﬁrmed intra-familial variation in the phenotypic presentations impose neurogenic bladder, with one further patient having possible challengesontheanalysisoftheWESdataandnecessitatelarger- neurogenic bladder that had not been investigated. Four had scope studies to fully understand the mechanisms underlying vesicoureteric reﬂux. Eye problems (most commonly divergent Sudanese neurogenetic disorders. Grants: French Embassy in squintand/orproptosis) wereseen inﬁvepatients. Sudan, Campus France, University of Khartoum, and the Sudan Conclusions: Patients with SPPRS variants can present with a Ministry of Higher Education for the scholarship (to LE), the distinctive, clinically-recognisable phenotype of developmental WellcomeTrustRDFgrant(toLE),theEuropeanUnionthroughthe delay with early-onset neurogenic bladder, vesicoureteric reﬂux H2020 program (SOLVE-RD to GS), and the French ASL-HSP andophthalmologicalproblems,potentiallyaidingearlydiagnosis Association (to GS). ofthisraredisorder.Thepathogenicp.(Arg269Ter)variantappears L.E.O. Elsayed: None. I.N. Mohammed: None. A.A.A. Hamed: tobe recurrent inthePakistani population. None. M.A. Elseed: None. A.M.A. Babai: None. E.A.A. Ahmed: M.Grifﬁn:None.M.Balasubramanian:None.M.Blyth:None. None.D.M.S.AbdelGaleel:None.I.Z.M.Eltazi:None.R.A.Siddig: A.Dixit: None. P.D.Turnpenny: None. M.Suri: None. None. E.E. Eltaraife: None. A.S.I. Abd Allah: None. A. Eltigani: None.N.M.H.Ali:None.S.M.El-sadig:None.A.M.M.Musa:None. M.E.Koko:None.A.Y.O.Mohamed:None.M.I.Elbashir:None.A.  P09
.066.CAtaxicneurodegenerativedisordersinSudan:when Brice: None. G. Stevanin: None. A.E. Ahmed: None. M.E. whole exome sequencing is combined to high consanguinity Ibrahim:None. &old genome LienaE.O.Elsayed1,2,InaamN.Mohammed1,AhlamA.A.Hamed1,  P09
.067.D Widening the genetic landscape of syndromic MahaA.Elseed1,ArwaM.A.Babai3,ElhamiA.A.Ahmed3,DouaM.S. hereditary opticneuropathies AbdelGaleel3, Isra Z. M. Eltazi1, Rayan A. Siddig3, Esraa E. Eltaraife3, AmalS.I.AbdAllah1,AtheerEltigani4,NabilaM.H.Ali1,SarahM.El- Claudio Fiorini1,2, Chiara La Morgia2, Andrea Degiorgi3, Flavia sadig1,5, Afraa M. M. Musa1, Mahmoud E. Koko6, Ashraf Y. O. Palombo1,Valerio Carelli1,2, Enrico Barufﬁni3, LeonardoCaporali1 Mohamed1,7,8, Mustafa I. Elbashir1, Alexis Brice8,9, Giovanni Steva- nin8,9,10, AmmarE. Ahmed1, MuntaserE. Ibrahim3 1IRCCS Institute of Neurological Sciences of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences, University of 1Faculty of Medicine, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan, Bologna,Bologna,Italy,3DepartmentofChemistry,LifeSciencesand 2College ofMedicine, Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University, Environmental Sustainability, University ofParma, Parma, Italy. Riyadh,SaudiArabia,3DepartmentofMolecularBiology,Instituteof Endemic Diseases, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan, Introduction:HereditaryOpticNeuropathies(HON)arearelevant 4Department of Medical Biotechnology, Commission for Biotechnol- geneticcauseofvisualimpairment,withareportedprevalenceof ogy and Genetic Engineering, National Centre for Research, 1/10000to1/30000inEurope.HONtypicallyshowaselectiveloss Khartoum, Sudan, 5Department of Neurology, Soba University of Retinal Ganglion Cells and subsequent optic nerve atrophy, Hospital, Khartoum, Sudan, 6Department of Neurology & Epileptol- moreover, they are often associated with mitochondrial impair- ogy, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University of ment.MostHONpatientspresentmutationsinthemitochondrial Tübingen,Tübingen,Germany,7DepartmentofBiochemistry,Faculty genome and OPA1. Several other genes, mostly related to of Medicine, National University, Khartoum, Sudan, 8Institut du mitochondrial function, have been identiﬁed as rarer causes of Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, INSERM U1127, CNRS UMR7225, non-syndromic orsyndromic HON. Sorbonne Université, UMR_ S1127
, 75013 Paris, France, 9APHP Pitié- Materials and Methods: We performed WES on 75 patients, Salpêtrière Hospital, Department of genetics, 75013 Paris, France, throughanIlluminasequencingplatform.Rarevariantswerethen 10EcolePratiquedesHautesEtudes,EPHE,PSLuniversité,75013Paris, analyzed prioritizing genes related to mitochondrial or neuronal France. function. Results: We identiﬁed recessive, autosomal, or X-linked Introduction: The highly consanguineous Sudanese population pathogenic mutations in 8 cases of HON plus. Interestingly, 7 of has one of the oldest African genomes with remarkable genetic the identiﬁed causative genes (FDXR, MECR, NDUFAF2, NDUFB11, heterogeneity augmenting the burden of neurogenetic disorders PDS S1
, SL C52
A2, WDR45) were previously associated with severe includingHereditaryAtaxia(HA).AspartofthebroaderSudanese syndromic phenotypes, also involving optic atrophy, and one in neurogeneticproject,weexploredthegeneticsunderlyingtheHA CACNA1F, previously associated with night blindness and retino- inacohort of11families. pathy. Instead, our patients were admitted to the diagnostic Material and Method: Whole exome sequencing (WES) pipeline as HON, with additional symptoms including neurosen- coupled with optimized prioritization approaches was used in 10 sorial hearing loss, neuropathy, developmental delay, ataxia, families with autosomal recessive HA (ARHA). Phenotype-based retinal dystrophy, anemia, ptosis, hypotonia. Those genes are candidate genes were tested in the autosomal dominant HA mainly linked to mitochondrial disorders, for which variable (ADHA)family. expressivityandincompletepenetranceofpathogenicmutations Results: A pathologic CAG repeat expansion in ATXN7 was arewell established. foundtocauseSCA7withclearmaternalanticipationintheADHA Conclusions: Our cases expand the known phenotypic range family.In50%oftheARHAfamilies,novelmutationsinknownHA for rare genes causative for HON plus. Mutations in these genes EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 282 may occur in cases with optic atrophy “plus”, and they must be pre-symptomatic genetic testing for Huntington’s disease via consideredduringthediagnosticprocess.SupportedbytheItalian telephone and virtual appointments. Pre-symptomatic testing for Ministry ofHealth(Grant GR-2016-02361449). incurableneurologicalconditionshaspreviouslyonlybeenoffered C. Fiorini: None. C. La Morgia: None. A. Degiorgi: None. F. as face-to-face appointments. The patients were contacted prior Palombo:None.V.Carelli:None.E.Barufﬁni:None.L.Caporali: to their appointments to determine their preferences for None. appointment type before being taken through the pre- symptomatictestingprocess.Wethensurveyedtheirexperiences post-results inorderto evaluateour services.  P09
.068.A Somatic mosaicism of the CAG repeat of the HTT Methods: We conducted structured telephone interviews to gene is CAG length- and age-dependent in intermediate (27- gain an insight into their experiences and preferences of the 35CAGs) andreduced-penetrance (36-39CAGs) alleles testing processes. This was to determine the impact of having such difﬁcult and emotive discussions while being in their own Ainara Ruiz de Sabando1,2, Marc Ciosi3, Arkaitz Galbete2,4, Darren homes and not in the presence of the Genetic Counsellor or G.Monckton3, Maria A. Ramos-Arroyo1,2 Geneticist. These patients were contacted at least a month after receivingtheir results. 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Results and Conclusions: Although patients had a variety of Pamplona, Spain, 2Navarrabiomed-Complejo Hospitalario de preferences regarding face-to-face versus telephone or virtual Navarra-Universidad Pública de Navarra, IdiSNA, Pamplona, Spain, appointments, all appreciated a ﬂexible service where their 3InstituteofMolecular,CellandSystemsBiology,CollegeofMedical, preferences were considered. It is important to bear in mind VeterinaryandLifeSciences,UniversityofGlasgow,Glasgow,United there was no one method that suited all patients, and, Kingdom, 4Red de Investigación en Servicios de Salud en Enferme- consequently,weneedtoremainpatientfocusedinourdecision dades Crónicas (REDISSEC), Pamplona,Spain. making.Furtherevaluationneedstobeconductedaswecontinue todeliverour services inthese unprecedented times. Introduction:HuntingtonDisease(HD)isanautosomaldominant D. Dufﬁn: None. A. Clarke: None. K. Evans: None. O. Murch: neurodegenerative disorder caused by the expansion of a CAG None.A. Murray:None. I. Tully:None. V. Jain: None. repeat (n≥36) in the HTT gene. This CAG repeat is somatically unstableinaprocessthatisCAGlength-,tissue-andage-speciﬁc inHDfull-penetrance(n≥40)alleles.WefurtherinvestigatedCAG  P09
.071.DAssociationbetweenIQandLSM1(WHS C1
L1 )gene somatic expansions in normal (n ≤ 26), intermediate (n=27-35) polymorphismin Russian students andreduced-penetrance (n=36-39) alleles. Methodology: The HTT repeat genotype was determined and Andrey V. Marusin1, Alexander N. Kornetov2, Maria G. Swarovs- theassociatedsomaticmosaicismquantiﬁedbyMiseqsequencing kaja1, Anna V. Bocharova1, Ksenia V. Vagaitseva1, Ekaterina S. inbloodDNAsamples.Samplesfrom271individualscarryingHTT Pavlenyk2, Vadim A. Stepanov1 alleles with 10 to 66 CAGs were analysed. Linear regression was usedtostudytheassociationoftheHTTrepeatsomaticmosaicism 1The Research Institute for Medical Genetics, National Research withCAG-length and ageatsampling. Medical Center of Russian Academy of Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Results: Somatic mosaicism is allele-length dependent, with a Federation,2FederalStateBudgetaryInstitutionofHigherEducation muchhigherfrequencyofsomaticexpansionsinlargeralleles.We "SiberianStateMedicalUniversity"oftheMinistryofHealthofRussia, could also observe CAG length-dependent mosaicism in alleles Tomsk,Russian Federation. with <40 CAGs (n=184, b=0.045, 95% CI: 0.042-0.048). More- over, we could show an age-dependent mosaicism in intermedi- Introduction: Intellectual capability is one of the most socially ate (n=101) and reduced-penetrance alleles (n=37), with b= signiﬁcant characteristics. Twin studies of adult individuals have 0.001 (95% CI: 0.001-0.002) and 0.006 (95% CI: 0.004-0.008), found a heritability of IQ between 57% and 73%. Intelligence in respectively. thenormalrangeisapolygenictrait,andthereareinﬂuencedat Conclusion: We have demonstrated that the CAG repeat in least 500 genes. However, major intelligence genes, as well as non-HD-causing(CAG<36)andreduced-penetranceHTTallelesis their relationship with neuropsychiatric diseases, have not been somatically unstable in blood DNA. Because some somatic identiﬁed. Objective of the study is to identify common expansions beyond a particular CAG-length are likely to cause polymorphic variants of susceptibility to severe behavioral cellular dysfunction, further studies in tissues that drive HD disorders (schizophrenia and Alzheimer’s disease) with an neurodegeneration are warranted, especially for alleles close to intelligencequotient (IQ)total score ofyoung people. thepathologicboundary. MaterialsandMethods:Thestudywascarriedoutonasampleof A.RuizdeSabando:None.M.Ciosi:None.A.Galbete:None. 135 young people. Using multiplex genotyping by MALDI-TOF D.G.Monckton: None.M.A. Ramos-Arroyo:None. method, 29 polymorphic variants in 27 genes were studied. They have previously been known to be associated with Alzheimer’s disease or schizophrenia using genome-wide association analysis. 
P09 .069.B Patient Survey Evaluating the Experiences of Therelationshipbetweenthestudiedpolymorphicvariantsandthe PatientswhoParticipatedinatleastoneTelephoneorVirtual IQscorewasanalyzedbyusingthenonparametricmediantest. Appointment for Pre-Symptomatic Testing for Huntington’s Results:TherewerenodifferencesinIQbetweenmen(34)and diseasein the AllWales Medical Genomics Service women (101). Statistically signiﬁcant associations were found for IQwithr16887244intheLSM1gene(p=0,026)incaseautosomal Donna Dufﬁn, Angus Clarke, Karenze Evans, Oliver Murch, dominant inheritance (AA vs. GA+GG genotypes). Average IQ AlexandraMurray, IanTully,Vani Jain valueswere113.2,110.5and106.6forAA,GAandGGgenotypes, respectively.Earlier,accordingtoGWAS,thispolymorphic variant CardiffandValeUniversityHealthBoard,Cardiff,UnitedKingdom. showedan association with schizophrenia. Conclusion: The data obtained indicate a common genetic In response to the on-going global SARS-CoV2 pandemic, the basisfortheheritabilityofmentalandneurologicaldisorderswith All Wales Medical Genomics Service piloted consultations for EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 283 the intelligence variability. The reported study was funded by City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan RFBR,project number 20-015-00397. MilitaryMedical City,Riyadh,Saudi Arabia. A.V.Marusin:None.A.N.Kornetov:None.M.G.Swarovskaja: None. A.V. Bocharova: None. K.V. Vagaitseva: None. E.S. Introduction: Lissencephaly is a severe brain developmental Pavlenyk: None.V.A. Stepanov:None. disorder, characterized by reduction in brain folding due to underlyingcorticallayeringdefects.Theseaberrationsariseduring embryonic development from defective neuronal migration, a 
P09 .072.B PRKN exon inversion leads to juvenile generalized processinwhichneuronstravelfromtheirplaceoforigintotheir levodopa-responsive dystonia ﬁnallocationwithinthecerebralcortexgraymatter.Manyofthe important roles of microtubule- and actin-associated proteins in Emuna Paz1, Hagar Mor-Shaked1, Adily Basal1, Simona Ben-Haim2, regulating the dynamics of the cytoskeleton during neuronal Hanna Grobe3, Sami Heymann4, Zvi Israel4, Vardiella Meiner1, migration have been uncovered through the study of genetic MontaserNamnah5,AnatNitzan3,AnnSaada1,TomerTzur6,Ronen variations that lead to lissencephaly in human and neuronal Zaidel-Bar3, Tamar Harel1,David Arkadir5 migration defectsinmouse. Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing (WES) 1DepartmentofGenetics,HadassahMedicalCenter,Jerusalem,Israel, analysiswasperformedina10-month-oldfemaleandher13-year- 2Department of Nuclear Medicine, Hadassah Medical Center, oldbrotherdiagnosedwithlissencephaly.Thisanalysisruleoutall Jerusalem, Israel, 3Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, known diagnostic genes described thus far for lissencephaly, Tel Aviv-Yafo, Israel, 4Department of Neurosurgery, Hadassah followingwhichanapproachfocusingondiseasecandidategenes Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 5Department of Neurology, wasundertaken alongwith theinformed consentof thefamily. Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 6Department of Plastic Results: WES revealed a homozygous missense variant in Surgery,Hadassah Medical Center,Jerusalem, Israel. CLAS
P1 (OMIM:605852)[NM_015282.2:c.4442G>Ap.(Arg1481His)] intheaffected siblings.Bothparents are heterozygouscarriers. Introduction:BiallelicpathogenicvariantsinPRKN,encodingthe Conclusion: Cytoplasmic linker-associated protein 1 (CLAS
P1 ) 
E3  ubiquitin ligase parkin, lead to autosomal recessive juvenile belongsto a groupofproteins known asCLASPs which arenon- Parkinsondisease[MIM600116].Upto60%ofthevariantsinPRKN motor microtubule-associated proteins that interact with CLIPs are structural variants, consistent with its location within FRA6E, (Cap-Gly Domain-containing linker protein), a member of the oneofthemostunstablecommonfragilesites.Wedescribefour microtubule plus-end tracking protein family. In this work, we siblingsafﬂictedbyyoungonsetlevodopa-responsivedystonia,in proposetheimportanceofCLAS
P1 asadiagnosticgene,wherein whom genomic testing led to identiﬁcation of an intragenic variants in CLAS
P1  lead to brain structural disorders such as inversion disrupting PRKN. lissencephaly inhumans. Materials and Methods: Following informed consent, exome Z. Yüksel: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; sequencingandlinkageanalysiswereundertakenonfouraffected Bioscientia Healthcare GmbH. R. Tripathy: A. Employment (full and four unaffected siblings. Whole genome sequencing (WGS) or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Bioscientia Healthcare GmbH. N. wassubsequentlypursuedontwoindividuals.Breakpointjunction Alsaleh: None. A. Al hashem: None. M. Drasdo: A. Employment analysisandanalysisofcDNAfrompatientﬁbroblastsallowedfor (fullorpart-time); Signiﬁcant;Bioscientia Healthcare GmbH. characterization ofthegenomic rearrangement. Results: All affected individuals shared a homozygous block including PRKN. Exome sequencing was not diagnostic. WGS 
P09 .075.DAcaseofposteriorlissencephalyduetoavariation revealed inversion of PRKN exon 5, followed by a common 49kb in CE
P85 L gene: case report and reﬁning of the phenotypic deletion.Breakpointjunctionanalysisimplicatednon-homologous spectrum end joining as the repair pathway involved. Analysis of cDNA indicated that exon 5 (84bp) was skipped, and was replaced by GianlucaContrò1,AlessiaMicalizzi2,SaraGiangiobbe1,3,Simonetta 93bpofretainedintronicsequence,preservingthereadingframe Rosato1, Marzia Pollazzon1, Stefano Giuseppe Carafﬁ1, Gabriele yet alteringa signiﬁcantnumber ofresidues. Trimarchi1, Susanna Rizzi4, Francesca Clementina Radio5, Nives Conclusions: Beyond the common deletions and duplications Melli6, CarloFusco7,Giancarlo Gargano6,Marco Tartaglia5, Antonio in PRKN associated with juvenile dystonia and Parkinson disease, Novelli5, Livia Garavelli1 whichmaybeassessedbyreaddepthanalysisofexomedata,one must also consider inversions. This study further highlights the 1MedicalGeneticsUnit,AziendaUSL,IRCCS,ArcispedaleSantaMaria complexity of the FRA6E locus and its clinical implications. The Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 2Laboratory of Medical Genetics, authorsdeclare no fundingsources for this project. Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, 3Clinical Genomics, E. Paz: None. H. Mor-Shaked: None. A. Basal: None. S. Ben- Medical Genetics Service, San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy, 4Child Haim:None.H.Grobe:None.S.Heymann:None.Z.Israel:None. Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 5Genetics and V.Meiner:None.M.Namnah:None.A.Nitzan:None.A.Saada: Rare Diseases Research Division, Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, None. T. Tzur: None. R. Zaidel-Bar: None. T. Harel: None. D. IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 6Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU), Obstetric Arkadir:None. and Pediatric Department, Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 7Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Azienda USL-IRCCSdi Reggio Emilia,Reggio Emilia, Italy. 
P09 .074.C A CLAS
P1  variant suggests a phenotypic relation withlissencephaly inhumans Lissencephaly describes a group of clinical conditions characterized bytheabsenceofnormalcerebralconvolutionsandabnormalitiesof ZaferYüksel1,RatnaTripathy1,NorahS.Alsaleh2,AmalAlhashem3, corticaldevelopment.Todate,almost20geneshavebeenidentiﬁed Mojgan Drasdo1 ascausativeofthiscondition.VariantsinCE
P85 L,encodingaprotein involved in the regulation of neuronal migration, have been 1Center for Human Genetics, Bioscientia Healthcare GmbH, Ingel- describedascausativeofthisconditionwithaprevalentinvolvement heim, Germany, 2Division of Medical Genetics and Metabolic oftheposteriorcerebralcortexandanautosomaldominantpatterof Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan Military Medical inheritance. Here we describe a 5-month-old boy with delayed EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 284 psychomotor development and mild phenotypic features (such as previouslynoothervariantshavebeenreported.Allpatientswitha bitemporal narrowing, slightly protruding ears with up-lifted lobes, zinc-bindingresiduevariantshowonMRIaseverenarrowingofthe posterior plagiocephaly). In his clinical history, bordeline ventriculo- pons, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia and a variable lissencephaly megaly was observed during the antenatal ultrasound scan. EEG severity. Patients present with global developmental delay, having showed a discontinuous pattern with interemispheric asymmetry impaired motor development and speech development ranging andacorticalelectrogenesisdisorderintheabsenceofepileptiform from no speech to using single words. Most patients develop abnormalities.MRIidentiﬁedlissencephalytype1,prevalentlyinthe epilepsyduringtheirﬁrstyearafterbirth.Furthermore,weidentiﬁed temporo-occipito-parietalregionsofbothsideswith"double-cortex” one patient with a variant located between the two zinc-binding (Dobyns’1-2degree)periventricularbandalterations.Furthermore,a residuepairs(c.15575G>Cp.(Arg5192Pro)),likelytoaffecttheβ-sheet patent foramen ovale was detected. Among the genetic tests no structureoftheGARdomain,whoseMRIrevealsonlymildbrainstem alterations was identiﬁed by array-CGH and NGS-panel for cortical andcerebellarhypoplasiawithcorticaldysgyria,butnolissencephaly. malformations,butwhole-exomesequencingrevealedthepresence These resultsshowthatvariantsinthezinc-bindingresiduesofthe ofapreviouslyunreporteddenovopathogenicvariantintheCE
P85 L MACF1GARdomainresultinatypicalcorticalmalformation,where gene(c.232+1delG,NM_206921).Todate,only13patientsshowing variants in the surrounding residues may be associated with a lissencephaly with prevalent posterior involvement, variable cogni- differentphenotype. tive deﬁcits and epilepsy have been reported as carriers of J. Dekker: None. R. Schot: None. K.A. Aldinger: None. D.B. pathogenic CE
P85 L variants. The present ﬁndings document that Everman:None.J.A.Sullivan:None.V.Shashi:None.M.S.Zaki: CE
P85 L mutations are not necessarily associated with severe None. J.G. Gleeson: None. A. Vitobello: None. A. Denommé- phenotypes and relevant MRI alterations, documenting the impor- Pichon: None. A. Mosca-Boidron: None. S. Nambot: None. L. tance of including CE
P85 L among the genes involved in the Perrin: None. S. Auvin: None. S.E. McKeown: None. M.P. pathogenesisoflissencephaly. Fitzgerald:None.I.Helbig:None.F.D’Arco:None.R.J.Leventer: G. Contrò: None. A. Micalizzi: None. S. Giangiobbe: None. S. None. D. Doherty: None. W.B. Dobyns: None. G.M.S. Mancini: Rosato: None. M. Pollazzon: None. S.G. Carafﬁ: None. G. None.K.C. Slep:None. Trimarchi: None. S. Rizzi: None. F.C. Radio: None. N. Melli: None.C.Fusco:None.G.Gargano:None.M.Tartaglia:None.A. Novelli:None. L.Garavelli: None. 
P09 .077.BGeneticcontributionstopsychopathologicalsymp- tom dimensions in a transdiagnostic cohort of patients with major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, 
P09 .076.A The clinical and neuroradiological spectrum of andschizoaffective disorder variants in the GARdomainofMACF1 Friederike S. David1, Frederike Stein2,3, Till F. M. Andlauer4, Tilo Jordy Dekker1, Rachel Schot1, Kimberly A. Aldinger2, David B. Kircher2,3, Udo Dannlowski5, Sergi Papiol6,7, Urs Heilbronner7, Peter Everman3, Jennifer A. Sullivan4, Vandana Shashi4, Maha S. Zaki5, Falkai6,ThomasG.Schulze7,MarcellaRietschel8,MarkusM.Nöthen1, Joseph G. Gleeson6, Antonio Vitobello7,8, Anne-Sophie Denommé- AxelKrug9,2,Andreas J.Forstner1,10,11 Pichon7,8, Anne-Laure Mosca-Boidron7,8, Sophie Nambot7, Laurence Perrin9, Stéphane Auvin9,10, Sarah E. McKeown11,12, Mark P. 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityofBonn,SchoolofMedicine& Fitzgerald11,12,IngoHelbig11,12,FeliceD’Arco13,RichardJ.Leventer14, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Psychiatry DanDoherty2,15,WilliamB.Dobyns15,16,GraziaM.S.Mancini1,Kevin andPsychotherapy,UniversityofMarburg,Marburg,Germany,3Center C.Slep17 forMind,BrainandBehavior,UniversityofMarburg,Marburg,Germany, 4DepartmentofNeurology,KlinikumrechtsderIsar,SchoolofMedicine, 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Seattle Children’s Research Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 5Department of Institute,Seattle,WA,USA,3GreenwoodGeneticCenter,Greenwood, PsychiatryandPsychotherapy,UniversityofMünster,Münster,Germany, SC, USA, 4Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA, 6DepartmentofPsychiatryandPsychotherapy,UniversityHospital,LMU 5Human Genetics and Genome Research Division, Cairo, Egypt, Munich, Munich, Germany, 7Institute of Psychiatric Phenomics and 6Howard Hughes Medical Institute, San Diego, CA, USA, 7Université Genomics (IPPG), University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany, de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 8Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de 8DepartmentofGeneticEpidemiologyinPsychiatry,CentralInstituteof Dijon,Dijon,France,9HôpitalRobertDebré,Paris,France,10Université Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, deParis,Paris,France,11TheChildren’sHospitalofPhiladelphiaand Mannheim, Germany, 9Department of Psychiatry und Psychotherapy, the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 10Institute of Neuroscience and Philadelphia, PA, USA, 12Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Phila- Medicine(INM-1),ResearchCenterJülich,Jülich,Germany,11Centrefor delphia, PA, USA, 13Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS HumanGenetics,UniversityofMarburg,Marburg,Germany. Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 14Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 15University of Washington, Seattle, Introduction: Major depressive disorder (MDD), bipolar disorder WA, USA, 16University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA, (BD), schizophrenia (SCZ), and schizoaffective disorder (SZA) are a 17University of North Carolina,Chapel Hill, NC,USA. group of psychiatric disorders with a considerable amount of phenotypic and genetic overlap. Recently, Stein et al. (2020) have Microtubule-actin cross-linking factor 1 (MACF1) is a member of developeda5-factormodelthatcapturestransdiagnosticsymptom thespectraplakinproteinfamily,thatcross-linkdifferentcomponents dimensions in these disorders. Here we investigate underlying of the cytoskeleton. The growth arrest speciﬁc 2 (Gas2)-related genetic factors for the ﬁve symptom dimensions (depression, (GAR) domain of MACF1 interacts withmicrotubules and dominant negative syndrome, positive formal thought disorder, paranoid- variants affecting the GAR domain result in a brain malformation hallucinatorysyndrome,andincreasedappetite). involving a predominant posterior lissencephaly and reduced or Methods:Ourtransdiagnosticsample(n=1042)ofindividuals absent pontine crossing ﬁbers resulting in a W-shaped hypoplastic diagnosed with MDD, BD, SCZ, or SZA was recruited from the brainstem.Herewedescribesixpatientswithadenovovariantinthe German FOR2107 cohort. In this sample we performed genome- GARdomainofMACF1,ofwhichﬁvehavenotbeenreportedbefore. wide association studies (GWAS) for each of the ﬁve symptom WealsoidentiﬁedavariantinthemostN-terminalofthefourzinc- dimensionsusingthelinearregressionapproachinPLINK.Forthe binding residues (NM_012090.5:c.15524G>A p.(Cys5175Tyr)), where mostsigniﬁcantﬁnding,weconductedareplicationanalysisinan EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 285 independent sample (n=875) of the German PsyCourse cohort based onan approximate phenotype measure. Results: The discovery GWAS revealed between 5 and 16 suggestively associated loci (P<1x10-5) for each symptom dimension.Forthedimensionofpositiveformalthoughtdisorder, weidentiﬁedonegenome-widesigniﬁcantassociation(P<5x10-8) on chromosome 10 in the FOR2107 discovery sample. However, thisassociation could notbereplicated inthePsyCourse sample. Conclusions: While our ﬁndings suggest that genetic factors contribute to transdiagnostic symptom dimensions in MDD, BD, SCZ, and SZA and thus indicate shared etiological factors, no replicable genome-wide associations could be identiﬁed at the givensamplesizes.Additionalstudieswithlargersamplesizesare required to further elucidate the genetic contributions to H.M. Aytac: None. Y. Oyaci: None. M. Pehlivan: None. S. transdiagnostic symptom dimensions. Pehlivan: None. F.S. David: None. F. Stein: None. T.F.M. Andlauer: None. T. Kircher: None. U. Dannlowski: None. S. Papiol: None. U. Heilbronner: None. P. Falkai: None. T.G. Schulze: None. M. 
P09 .080.A Chromosomal microarray analysis in 97 pediatric Rietschel: None. M.M. Nöthen: None. A. Krug: None. A.J. casesofmicrocephaly Forstner:None. Ana-Maria Meašić1, Adriana Bobinec1, Leona Morožin Pohovski2, IvonaSansović1, Mijana Kero1, Ljubica Boban1,Ingeborg Barišić1 
P09 .079.DDNAmethylationpatternofgenepromotersofMB- COMT, DRD2, and NR3
C1  in Turkish patients diagnosed with 1DepartmentofMedicalGeneticsandReproductiveHealth,Children’s schizophrenia HospitalZagreb,ScientiﬁcCentreofExcellenceforReproductiveand Regenerative Medicine (CERRM), University of Zagreb School of Hasan Mervan Aytac1, Yasemin Oyaci2, Mustafa Pehlivan3, Sacide Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Department of Medical Genetics and Pehlivan2 ReproductiveHealth,Children’sHospitalZagreb,UniversityofZagreb Schoolof Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia. 1PsychiatryUnit,MalazgirtStateHospital,Mus,Turkey,2Departmentof Medical Biology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Introduction: Microcephaly is deﬁned asan occipitofrontal head Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Hematology, Gaziantep circumference(OFC)morethan2standarddeviations(SD)below University,FacultyofMedicine,Gaziantep,Turkey,Gaziantep,Turkey. themeanforsexandage.Itisassociatedwithareductioninbrain volume and often developmental/intellectual disabilities. The Objective:WeaimtoevaluatethemethylationstatusofMB-COMT pathogenesisisheterogeneous,rangingfromgenetictoenviron- promotor, DRD2, and NR3
C1  gene in patients with schizophrenia mental factors. Anomalies may exclusively affect cerebral devel- (SCZ)bycomparinghealthycontrols. opment (non-syndromic) or may include extracranial Methods:Asampleof110patientswithSCZand100age-and malformationsand/orfacial dysmorphism (syndromic). sex-matched healthy volunteers was included in the study. The Materials and Methods: A retrospective analysis was per- interview was started by ﬁlling out data forms that included formedontheresultsofwhole-genomechromosomalmicroarray sociodemographic and clinical information. SCID-I was used to analysis (CMA) of 97 children with microcephaly evaluated by conﬁrmingthediagnosisaccordingtoDSM-IV-TRcriteria.Thenthe clinicalgeneticists intheperiod from2015-2020. patients were evaluated with the PANSS in terms of symptom Results: Twenty-six pathogenic copy number variants (CNVs) severity. Methylation-speciﬁc polymerase chain reaction (MSP- weredetectedin23patientspresentingsyndromicmicrocephaly PCR) was used to determine the methylation status of MB-COMT with diagnostic yield of 23.71%. Slightly higher diagnostic yield promotor,DRD2,and NR3
C1  gene fromDNA material. wasobservedassociatedwithsevere(OFCmorethan3SDbelow Results: When we compared the percentages of MB-COMT the mean), 26.42%, than mild microcephaly, 20.45%. Certain promotor, DRD2, and NR3
C1  gene methylation status in SCZ phenotypes predicted for the presence of pathogenic CNV, patients with the healthy control group, the percentages of MB- especially combined with severe microcephaly, including brain COMT promotor (OR: 0.466; 95% Cl: 0.268-0.809; p=.006), DRD2 anomalies (odds ratio [OR] 2.03 [0.78-5.28]), cardiovascular (OR: 0.439; 95% Cl: 0.375-0.514; p<.001), and NR3
C1  (OR: 0.003; anomalies (OR 4.96 [1.47-16.78]), skeletal anomalies (OR 2.75 95%Cl:0.001-0.011;p<.001)genemethylationstatusofSCZwas [1.05-7.20])and shortstature (OR 2.29[0.81-6.45]). found to be signiﬁcantly different from the control group. Conclusion:TheresultssupporttheuseofCMAasﬁrst-tiertest Whereasunmethylation ofMB-COMT promotor andNR3
C1  genes for syndromic microcephaly, especially for severe microcephaly were associated with SCZ, the partial methylation of the NR3
C1  presented with skeletal and/or cardiovascular anomalies. Other genewasrelated to theSCZ. comorbidities, such as other brain anomalies, neurological Conclusion: The MB-COMT promotor, DRD2, and NR3
C1  gene abnormalities andshortstature,mayalso increasethediagnostic methylationstatusmaybeassociatedwiththeSCZintheTurkish yield. Acknowledgement: This study was supported by CERRM, population. Republic of Croatia, and by the EU through ERDF, under grant agreement No. KK.01.1.1.01.0008, project,,Reproductive and RegenerativeMedicine-ExploringNewPlatformsandPotentials”. A. Meašić: None. A. Bobinec: None. L. Morožin Pohovski: None. I. Sansović: None. M. Kero: None. L. Boban: None. I. Barišić:None. 
P09 .081.B A rare case of microlissencephaly associated with KATNB1gene variants EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 286 AnaGrangeia1,2, CarinaCouto Reis3, Miguel Leão1 ataxia,psychiatricsymptoms,anddiabetesmellituswascommon aswell.Pathogenicorlikelypathogenicmutationswerefoundin6 1Medical Genetics Service, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário São João cases in heterozygous form (3 SPG7, 1 MSTO1, 1 NDUFV1, 1 (CHUSJ),Porto,Portugal,2DepartmentofGenetics,FacultyofMedicine POLG2). (FMUP), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Neurorradiology Service, Conclusion: In our cohort heterozygous pathogenic or likely CentroHospitalareUniversitárioSãoJoão(CHUSJ),Porto,Portugal. pathogenicalterationshavebeenfoundin8%.Thepathomechan- isms of adult-onset disease form is poorly studied, so we do not Introduction: In 2014, pathogenic variants in KATNB1 gene, that haveenoughinformationontheexactintracellulareffectofsingle encodes the regulatory p80 subunit of Katanin, a microtubule- heterozygous mutations, therefore these cases further functional severing enzyme, have been shown to cause microcephaly with test might be needed.This study was supported by KTIA_NAP_ brain malformation, particularly a simpliﬁed gyral pattern. Since 2017-1.2.1-NKP-2017-00002; NKIH_132812 gratnts and FIKP pro- then, only 9 families were described world-wide, 8 of them gram.The Institute isthe partof ERN RNDand NMD. consanguineous,harbouringKATNB1variantsinhomozygosity.Case F. Szabo: None. Z. Grosz: None. A. Gezsi: None. A. Suveges: Report: We present a 14-years-old Portuguese girl born of non- None. I. Jimoh: None. H. Zeke: None. A. Gal: None. M. Molnár: consanguineous healthy parents, who was referred for genetic None. evaluation due to congenital microcephaly. Physical exam at birth and throughout life revealed microcephaly, strabismus, nystagmus andmoderatepsychomotordevelopmentdelay.BrainMRIdemon- 
P09 .084.A Mutations, genes and phenotypes related to strated frontal bilateral and symmetrical lissencephaly and pachy- movement disorders:anever-ending list gyria, parieto-occipital polymicrogyria, subcortical heterotopia and hypoplasiaofthecerebellarvermis.Chromosomalmicroarrayanda Dolores Martínez-Rubio1,2, Paula Sancho1,2, Isabel Hinarejos1,2, new generation sequencing panel targeting key genes involved in Itxazo Martí3, S Jesús-Maestre4, Raquel Baviera2,5, I Sastre2,5, Irene neuronalmigrationdisordersrevealednocausativevariants.Clinical Martínez2,5, Marta Correa-Vela6, Cristina Tello1, Amparo Andrés- exome sequencing revealed two heterozygote variants, c.1567- Bordería1,2, Ana Sánchez-Monteagudo1,2, Alejandra Darling7, A 23_156722del and c.1703_1718+25del in the KATNB1 gene. Both Duat8, P Janeiro9, E Moreno10, M J. Martínez-González11, A Ruiz12, variantsoccurredwithverylowfrequenciesinGenomeAgrregation Vincenzo Lupo1,2, P Mir4, Belén Pérez-Dueñas13, Sergio Aguilera14, DatabaseandwerenotreportedintheliteratureordiseaseClinVar CarmenEspinós1,2 database. In silico tools predicted that c.1567-23_1567-22del and c.1703_1718+25delvariantsaltersplicingbydisruptingthebranch 1Unit of Rare Neurodegenerative Diseases, Centro de Investigación point in the intron 13 and by deleting the acceptor splice-site of PríncipeFelipe,Valencia,Spain,2RareDiseasesJointUnit,CIPF-IISLa intron18oftheKATNB1gene,respectively.Segregationanalysisand Fe,Valencia,Spain,3DepartmentofPediatrics,HospitalU.Donostia, mRNAstudiesforfunctionalevaluationareincourse. San Sebastián, Spain, 4Unit of Movement Disorders, Instituto de Conclusion:Herewereportthesecondpatientwithcongenital BiomedicinadeSevilla,Hospital Universitario VirgendelRocío/CSIC/ microcephaly caused by two heterozygotes variants in KATB1 Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain, 5Department of Neurology, gene. This study supports the fundamental role of KATNB1 in HospitalUniversitariiPolitècnicLaFe,Valencia,Spain,6Department human cerebral cortical development and pathology and extend of Pediatrics, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Seville, Spain, thegenotypeofKATNB1-associated microlissencephaly. 7Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, A.Grangeia: None. C.C.Reis: None.M. Leão:None. Spain,8DepartmentofPediatrics,HospitalInfantilUniversitarioNiño Jesús, Madrid, Spain, 9Department of Pediatrics, Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisbon, Portugal, 10Department of Pediatrics, Hospital 
P09 .082.C Analysis of the most common nuclear genome Regional, Málaga, Spain, 11Department of Pediatrics, Hospital encoded mitochondrial gene in Hungarian patients with UniversitariodeCruces,Barakaldo,Spain,12DepartmentofPediatrics, adult-onsetmitochondrial disorders Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma, Spain, 13Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, FruzsinaSzabo1,ZoltanGrosz1,AndrasGezsi2,AnnaSuveges1,Idris 14Department of Pediatrics, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, JJimoh1, Helga Zeke1,Aniko Gal1, Mária JuditMolnár1 Pamplona,Spain. 1SOTE,InstituteofGenomicMedicineandRareDisorders,Budapest, Introduction: Movement Disorders (MDs) comprise heteroge- Hungary, 2BME, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Informatics neous neurological syndromes that present dysfunction in the (VIK) Department of Measurement and Information Systems, basal ganglia and/or connected structures. Patients may present Budapest,Hungary. withataxia,parkinsonism,dystonia,chorea,spasticity,myoclonus, tremor, and others. Hundreds of genes are associated with MDs Introduction: Mitochondrial disease is one of the most common and genetic diagnosis in clinical practice may end up being a metabolicdiseaseswithaminimumprevalenceofgreaterthan1 cumbersome odyssey. in 5000 in adults. The disease may affect multiple organs and MaterialandMethods:Weinvestigatedaclinicalserieswith54 could be inherited both dominant, recessive, X linked way or patients suffering from MDs using a custom panel based on maternally depending. Beside mtDNA nuclear genes are respon- SureSelectQXT technology (Agilent Technologies), which com- sible for the mitochondrial function. In this study the genetic prises 498 genes. To compare both approaches, 10 additional background of adult onset mitochondrial disorders were investi- patients were studied by whole exome sequencing (WES), using gatedin Hungarianpatients. the whole exome family plus test (Blueprint Genetics) or Human MaterialsandMethods:Inourstudy,75patients(28menand Clinical ExomeCapture &Mitochondrial DNA(Nimblegen). 47women)(meanage:49.9±13.5)withmulti-systemicphenotype Results:UsingthepanelMovDisord-498,20patientsachieveda were tested. The inclusion criteria was a muscle biopsy and/or geneticdiagnosis.NinepatientswerefurtherinvestigatedbyWES, lactatestresstestindicatingmitochondrialdisease.Targetedpanel and3ofthemweresolved.Ontheotherhand,in6outofthe10 NGS sequencing was performed investigating 167 nuclear genes patients only studied by WES, the causative changes were Results: In more than 50% of the cohort the main presenting identiﬁed.All inall,wedetected 34mutations, 19ofthem being symptom was myopathy. Progressive ophthalamoplegia externa, novel, in21different genesin26out of 64probands. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 287 Conclusions: The genetic bases of MDs show an incredible None.D.G.Calame:None.Z.Coban-Akdemir: None.J.M.Fatih: heterogeneity. The obtained diagnosis rate success (45.3%) is a None.I.Hegazy:None.S.N.Jhangiani:None.R.A.Gibbs:None. pretty nice rate, although insufﬁcient. We need to unravel the D. Pehlivan: None. J.E. Posey: None. J.R. Lupski: F. Consultant/ molecular bases underlying these Mendelian disorders whose Advisory Board; Modest; Regeneron Genetics Center. Other; molecular causes escape to the prevailing techniques because Modest; Multiple Molecular DiagnosticPatents. there are a notable proportion of patients who remain without diagnosis. Grants: ISCIII co-funded with ERDF funds [PI18/00147], theFundacióLaMaratóTV3[20143130-31],GeneralitatValenciana 
P09 .086.CMultiplesclerosisassociatedHLAvariantsaffectthe [PROMETEO/2018/135]. immunological T lymphocytes repertoire D.Martínez-Rubio:None.P.Sancho:None.I.Hinarejos:None. I. Martí: None. S. Jesús-Maestre: None. R. Baviera: None. I. Melissa Sorosina1, Silvia Santoro1, Laura Ferrè1,2, Elisabetta Sastre:None.I.Martínez:None.M.Correa-Vela:None.C.Tello: Mascia1, Ferdinando Clarelli1, Antonino Giordano1,2, Miryam Can- None. A. Andrés-Bordería: None. A. Sánchez-Monteagudo: nizzaro1,2, Massimo Filippi2,3,4, Federica Esposito1,2 None. A. Darling: None. A. Duat: None. P. Janeiro: None. E. Moreno:None.M.J.Martínez-González:None.A.Ruiz:None.V. 1Laboratory of Neurological complex disorders, Division of Neuros- Lupo: None. P. Mir: None. B. Pérez-Dueñas: None. S. Aguilera: ciences, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 2Neurol- None.C. Espinós:None. ogy, Neurorehabilitation and Neurophysiology Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy, 3Neuroimaging Research Unit,DivisionofNeuroscience,IRCCSSanRaffaeleScientiﬁcInstitute, 
P09 .085.B Quantitative dissection of multilocus pathogenic Milan, Italy,4Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy. variation Introduction: genetic predisposition to multiple sclerosis (MS) Isabella Herman1, Angad Jolly1, Haowei Du1, Moez Dawood1, includes >200 genetic loci, with the major histocompatibility Ghada M. H. Abdel-Salam2, Dana Maraﬁ1, Tadahiro Mitani1, Daniel complex (MHC) region accounting for 32 independent associa- G. Calame1, Zeynep Coban-Akdemir3, Jawid M. Fatih1, Ibrahim tions.WeaimtoinvestigatetheimpactofMHCMS-riskalleleson Hegazy2, Shalini N. Jhangiani1, Richard A. Gibbs1, Davut Pehlivan1, T-lymphocytes repertoire inMS. JenniferE. Posey1,James R.Lupski1 Methods: 183 untreated relapsing-remitting MS subjects have beenstudied.ClassIandIIHLAalleleswereinferredfromwhole- 1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, 2National Research genome genotyping data using SN
P2 HLA and Beagle_v3.3 tools. Centre,Cairo,Egypt,3TheUniversityofTexasHealthScienceCenter, T-cell receptor (TCR) CDR3 sequences were obtained from whole Houston,TX,USA. blood DNA according to the ImmunoSEQ hsTCRB kit (Adaptive Biotechnologies®). The weighted HLA-risk score (wHRS) was Objective: Genomic sequencing and clinical genomics have calculatedforeachindividual.TheinverseoftheSimpson’sIndex demonstrated substantial subsets of atypical and/or severe (INV.S) was calculated as representative of immune repertoire diseasepresentationsresultfrommultilocuspathogenicvariation diversity. Statistical analyses were performed within R environ- (MPV)causingblendedphenotypes.UsingtheHumanPhenotype ment andplink v.1.9. Ontology (HPO), we quantitatively dissected the blended pheno- Results: after quality controls, the ﬁnal set was composed by typeofaninfantwithsevereneurodevelopmentaldisorder,brain 144 individuals and 30 MS-risk MHC loci. Four loci showed malformation, dysmorphism, and hypotonia. associationwithINV.S:HLADRB1*15:01(P=0.014),rs11751659(P Methods: Family-based exome sequencing (ES) with rare =0.02), rs9271366 (P=0.003), SNP_DRB1_32660116_A (P= variant analysis was completed. HPO analysis with semantic 0.036). A mild association was found between INV.S and wHRS similaritywasimplementedtodeterminephenotypiccontribution (P=0.049),withindividualswithahigherwHRSshowingalower ofeach implicated gene. diversity.Additionally,individualscarryingtheriskallelesshowed Results:ESrevealeddeleteriousvariantsinCAPN3(c.259C>G:p. a different percentage of clonotypes occupying the 10% of the 
L87 V),MUSK(c.1781C>T:p.A594V),NAV2(c.1996G>A:p.G666R),and repertoire. Z
C4 H2 (c.595A>C:p.N199H). CAPN3, MUSK, and Z
C4 H2 are estab- Conclusions:MS-riskMHClociappeartoinﬂuenceTCRrepertoire lished disease genes linked to limb-girdle muscular dystrophy in MS patients, with the risk alleles reducing the diversity and (OMIM# 253600), congenital myasthenia (OMIM# 616325), and inducinganexpansionofspeciﬁcclonotypes.Analysesareongoing Wieacker-Wolffsyndrome(OMIM#314580),respectively.NAV2isa tobetterdeﬁnetheampliﬁedclonotypesandtheirrole. retinoic-acid responsive novel gene candidate with biological Funding:ThisresearchwassupportedbytheItalianMinistryof roles in neurite outgrowth and cerebellar dysgenesis in mouse Health(GR-2016-02363997) models.Usingsemanticsimilarity,weshowquantitativelythatno M. Sorosina: None. S. Santoro: None. L. Ferrè: None. E. geneindividuallyexplainstheprobandphenotypebutratherthe Mascia: None. F. Clarelli: None. A. Giordano: None. M. totality of the clinically observed disease is most parsimoniously Cannizzaro: None. M. Filippi: B. Research Grant (principal explainedby disease-contributing effectsof allfour genes. These investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as data reveal that the combination of variants results in a blended well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; Roche, Biogen Idec, phenotype with each gene affecting a different part of the Merck-Serono,Novartis,TevaPharmaceuticalIndustries.D.Speak- nervous system and nervous system-muscle connection.Interpre- ers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert tation: In patients with MPV and complex blended phenotypes witness); Modest; Bayer, Biogen Idec, Merck-Serono, Novartis, resulting from multiple molecular diagnoses, HPO analysis allows Roche,SanoﬁGenzyme,Takeda,TevaPharmaceuticalIndustries.F. for dissection of phenotypic contribution of both established Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Bayer, Biogen Idec, Merck- diseasegenesandnovelgenecandidatesnotyetproventocause Serono, Novartis, Roche, Sanoﬁ Genzyme, Takeda, Teva Pharma- humandiseasewithmarkedimplicationsforprognosis,treatment, ceutical Industries. F. Esposito: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria andfamily counseling for themost complexgenetic patients. (speakersbureau,symposia,andexpertwitness);Modest;Novartis, I. Herman: None. A. Jolly: None. H. Du: None. M. Dawood: Sanoﬁ Genzyme, Almirall, Merck-Serono. F. Consultant/Advisory None. G.M.H. Abdel-Salam: None. D. Maraﬁ: None. T. Mitani: Board; Modest; Novartis, SanoﬁGenzyme, Almirall, Merck-Serono. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 288 
P09 .087.D Differentially expressed genes and their miRNA Kuwaitipopulation(OR:1.6,95%CI:1.19-2.16,p=0.002;OR:1.36, regulators in Multiple Sclerosis 95%CI:1.04-1.78,p=0.025;andOR:1.79,95%CI:1.3-2.36,p= 0.001; respectively). CD58 rs1414273 did not sustain risk associa- NagehanErsoy Tunali, Birgül Çolak tion (p=0.37). Conclusions:VariantsinEVI5,TNFRSF1AandMTHFRareMSrisk IstanbulMedeniyet University, Istanbul, Turkey. factorsintheKuwaitipopulation.Furtherinvestigationsintotheir roles in MS pathogenesis and progression are merited.This work MultipleSclerosis(MS)isanimmune-mediateddisorder,resulting wasfunded byKFAS grant2012-1302-02. in demyelination of the neurons. Gene expression changes in T R.A. Altemaimi: None. K. Ateyah: None. M. Dashti: None. R. and B cells are considered to be the main initiator of disease Alroughani: None. pathology.Inthiswork,weaimedtoinvestigatethedifferentially expressed genes (DEGs) in T cells in MS using bionformatic tools and to identify the miRNAs regulating these genes. For this 
P09 .090.CNeuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinoses 6type in Yakutia purpose, we used GS
E43591  dataset, which contains microarray proﬁlingdataobtainedfrom10RRMSand10healthyindividuals. Polina Golikova1, Aitalina Sukhomyasova1,2, Elizaveta Gurinova2, Weﬁrstdetermineddifferentiallyexpressedgenes(DEGs),thenwe Irina Nikolaeva2, Diana Petukhova1, Svetlana Stepanova2, Roza applied functional enrichment analysis using DAVID. Pathway Ivanova1,2, Tatyana Grigorieva1,2, Tatyana Nikolaeva3, Nadezda enrichment is accomplished by KEGG pathway analysis. Protein- Maksimova1 protein interaction (PPI) network was constructed using STRING database, then transferred to Cytoscape to screen for the hub 1Research Laboratory “Molecular Medicine and Human Genetics”, proteins. Finally, we screened for the targeting miRNAs for each Medical Institute, M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal University, hub-protein-expressing genes. 582 nodes and 2102 edges were Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Medical Genetic Center, Republican mappedinthePPInetworkofidentiﬁedDEGs,including388up- Hospital №1 - “National Medical Center”, Yakutsk, Russian Federa- regulated and 1318 down-regulated genes. The 10 hub proteins tion, 3Medical Institute, M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal include RBX1, UBA52, SK
P1 , FBXW11, UB
E2 B, CD
C34 , UB
E2 R2, University, Yakutsk, RussianFederation. UB
E3 A, HER
C5  and FBX
L14 . The KEGG pathway analysis showed that the up-regulated genes were signiﬁcantly enriched in Introduction: the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are a ubiquitin mediated proteolysis, RNA degradation and NF-kappa group of lysosomal storage disorders. NCL is the most common B signalling, while down-regulated genes were signiﬁcantly childhood neurodegenerative disease with a prevalence of enriched in B and T cell receptor signalling, neurotrophin 1:1000000to 1:14000worldwide. signalling, NK cell mediated cytotoxicity and apoptosis. The Methods: in the Medical Genetic Center of National Medical miRNAs targeting the genes encoding 10 hub proteins were Center (Yakutsk) a few families with a clinical diagnosis of miR514b-3p, miR495-3p, miR3913-5p, miR4420, miR4789-5p, leukodystrophy were observed. All observed cases were Yakut miR4500, miR4725-3p, miRNA-374b-5p, miR-196a-1-3p, miR5011- nationality. In order to search for a molecular genetic cause of 5p. We conclude that DEGs in Tcells are mostly involved in disease in patients we carried out the exome sequencing using ubiquitination andsignallingin theimmunesystem. the TruSight Inherited Disease panel (Illumina, USA). The results N.ErsoyTunali: None. B.Çolak:None. were validated by Sanger direct sequencing. Experiments were performed using equipment of Center for collective use of the North-Eastern Federal University. 
P09 .088.A A replication study of genetic variants associated Results: we identiﬁed a homozygous frameshift variant withmultiplesclerosis riskin the Kuwaiti population c.396dupT (p.Val133CysfsTer18) in 4th exon of CLN6 gene in all patients.Theirparentswereheterozygouscarriersofthemutation. Rabeah A. Altemaimi1, Khadijah Ateyah1, Mohammad Dashti2, Totally we revealed 22 patients from 18 unrelated Yakut families RaedAlroughani3 withadiagnosisoftype6neuronalceroidlipofuscinosis.Themain clinicalsymptomsofdiseasewereearlyonsetofthediseaseatthe 1Kuwait University, Jabriya, Kuwait, 2Dasman DIabetes Institute, ageof3-4 years,impaired coordination, frequent falls,regression Sharq,Kuwait,3Amiri Hospital,Kuwait City,Kuwait. of psychomotor development, seizures, subatrophy of the optic nerves.ThetotalprevalenceofNC
L6 inYakutiais2.3per100000 Introduction:MultipleSclerosis(MS)isachronicneurodegenera- populations. tive disorder resulting from an autoimmune reaction against Conclusion: All examined patients with NC
L6  had one major myelin. Many genetic variants have been reported to associate mutationintheCLN6gene.Theresultsobtainedcanbeusefulfor with MS risk however their association is inconsistent across moleculargeneticdiagnosticsandconsultations.Grant:Thestudy populations. Here we investigated the association of consistently was supported by the Ministry Education and Science of Russian reportedgenetic MSriskvariants inKuwaitiMSpatients. Federation (Project No. FSRG-2020-0014 “Genomics of Arctic: Materials and Methods: Fifty-six healthy Kuwaitis and 113 epidemiology, hereditaryand pathology”) Kuwaiti MS patients were exome sequenced on Illumina’s P. Golikova: None. A. Sukhomyasova: None. E. Gurinova: HiSeq2000, and 404 healthy Arab control exomes from public None. I. Nikolaeva: None. D. Petukhova: None. S. Stepanova: databaseswereused.Bioinformaticanalysiswasusedtominefor None. R. Ivanova: None. T. Grigorieva: None. T. Nikolaeva: 94 MS related risk variants with ≥ 2 reports conﬁrming MS risk None.N.Maksimova: None. association.Replicationanalysiswasdoneon170MSpatientsand 311healthy Kuwaitis using Taqman genotyping assays. Results:Ofthe94reportedMSriskvariantsfourshowedMSrisk 
P09 .091.D The portray of the Italian cohort of patients with association in the exome analysis (EVI5 rs11808092 p=0.0002; variants in POGZ: new care opportunities from a deep TNFRSF1A rs1800693 p=0.00003; MTHFR rs1801131 p=0.038; genotyping andphenotyping and CD58 rs1414273 p=0.00007). Replication analysis in only Kuwaiti cohorts conﬁrmed EVI5 rs11808092A, TNFRSF1A Agnese Feresin1, Beatrice Spedicati1, Giulia Pelliccione2, Corrado rs1800693C, and MTHFR rs1801131G as MS risk factors in the Romano3, Livia Garavelli4, Maria Lisa Dentici5, Nicola Specchio5, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 289 Paolo Alﬁeri5, Paola Grammatico6, Gabriele Trimarchi4, Margherita Methods: We used human neural stem cells (hNSCs) to study Baldassarri7, Alessandra Renieri7, Roberta Milone8, Flavio Faletra2, the role of AGO1 and the consequences of its inactivation at Giuseppe Cossu9, Giorgia Girotto1,2, Marco Tartaglia5, Paolo molecular and cellular levels. In parallel, we overexpressed AGO1 Gasparini1,2, Maria Teresa Bonati2 mutant proteins in neuronal (Neuro2A) and non-neuronal (HeLa, HEK293)cells. 1University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Results:WeshowedthatAGO1inactivationusingsiRNAdidnot Italy, 3I.R.C.C.S. Oasi Maria SS., Troina, Italy, 4AUSL Reggio Emilia, altertheproliferationofhNSCsbutimpactsdifferentiationprocess ReggioEmilia,Italy,5OspedalePediatricoBambinoGesù,Roma,Italy, in Neuro2A cells. Transcriptomic studies performed in hNSCs did 6UniversitàLaSapienza,Roma,Italy,7UniversityofSiena,Siena,Italy, notrevealanysigniﬁcantchangeatthemRNAlevel(exceptAGO1 8IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Pisa, Italy, 9Centro Medico di itself) but identiﬁed signiﬁcant changes in splicing events in Foniatria, Padova, Italy. several hundreds of genes, enriched in proteins related to DNA binding/transcriptionregulation.Inparallel,AGO1mutantproteins Introduction: Neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) are charac- are stably expressed and localized in HeLa and HEK293 cells, but terized by genetics and phenotypic heterogeneity. Thus, Whole theyshowadifferentpatternofproteininteractionscomparedto Exome Sequencing (WES) studies combined with a clinical thewild-typeAGO1 asrevealed byIP-MSexperiments. evaluation can be a powerful approach maximizing molecular Conclusion: The splicing and neurite outgrowth alterations diagnostic yield. Heterozygous pathogenetic variants in POGZ identiﬁed in neural cells after AGO1 inactivation provide insight genehavebeenassociatedtoasyndromicNDD,includingautism intohowAGO1dysfunctioncouldimpactbraindevelopmentand spectrum disorder (ASD), developmental delay (DD), intellectual can serve as read-out to test the effect of amino acid changes disability (ID)and some dysmorphic facial features. identiﬁed inpatients withNDD. Materialandmethods:Amulticentric,ItalianWESdatasharing C. Delvallee: None. S. Baer: None. L. Sanna: None. V. Skory: hasbeencarriedoutwiththeaimofprovidingacompleteclinical None.J.Courraud:None.N.Drouot:None.D.Plassard:None.J. and neurocognitive picture of patients with a similar phenotypic Mandel: None. A.Piton: None. characteristic(adiagnosisofPOGZ-relateddisorder),andnegative toSNPs/CGH molecular karyotyping. Result, new perspectives: All collected cases resembling a 
P09 .094.C Genetic characterization of 274 patients with POGZ-related disorder (n=13; 8 male) presented with ID (from neuroﬁbromatosistype1:rareanddiagnosticallychallenging mild to severe), a global DD, usually exhibited behavioural co-occurrence oftwo variants in the same patient impairmentsand,inﬁvecases,adiagnosisofASD.Theidentiﬁed, novelpathogeneticorlikelypathogeneticvariantinPOGZinclude Rita Bastos Ferreira1,2, Susana Sousa1,2, Ana Lopes1,2, Ana Filipa frameshift (5), stop (3), splicing (2) and missense (1) variants, Brandão1,2,SaraMorais1,2,PauloSilva1,2,FátimaLopes1,2,Alexandra mostly occurring de novo, except for a familiar case (3 subjects). Lopes1,2,CláudiaPatraquim3,MiguelRocha4,JoãoParenteFreixo1,2, Consideringtheunmetmedicalneedsformostlife-longingNDDs JorgeSequeiros1,2, Jorge Oliveira1,2 and recent evidences on the improvement of behavioural impairments in POGZ knock-in mice, we propose new care 1CGPP-IBMC–CentrodeGenéticaPreditivaePreventiva,Institutode perspectives through the inhibition of glutamatergic signal and BiologiaMoleculareCelular,UniversidadedoPorto,Porto,Portugal, the mitigation of excitatory neurons. A recruitment of patients 2i3S – Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade withPOGZ-related disorder is darefor ongoing. do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Serviço de Pediatria, Hospital de Braga, Conclusion: Combining depth clinical data with genomic Braga, Portugal, 4Serviço de Genética, Hospital de Braga, Braga, ﬁnding, we highlighted, for the ﬁrst time, the important role of Portugal. POGZ gene in the pathogenesis of NDDs, opening new perspectives withtherapeutic opportunities. Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) shows a wide phenotypic A.Feresin: None.B.Spedicati: None.G.Pelliccione: None. C. spectrum. Milder forms exhibit cutaneous and ophthalmological Romano: None. L. Garavelli: None. M. Dentici: None. N. features: café-au-lait macules, axillary and inguinal freckles, Specchio: None. P. Alﬁeri: None. P. Grammatico: None. G. cutaneous neuroﬁbromas, and Lisch nodules. More severe Trimarchi: None. M. Baldassarri: None. A. Renieri: None. R. phenotypespresentarangeoftumours(plexiformneuroﬁbromas Milone: None. F. Faletra: None. G. Cossu: None. G. Girotto: and optic nerve gliomas), variable neurological and cognitive None.M. Tartaglia: None. P.Gasparini: None. M. Bonati:None. features. NF1 is caused by variants in the neuroﬁbromin (NF1) gene,arisingdenovoin~50%ofcases.Atotalof536patientswith a clinical suspicion of NF1 were genetically tested. Variant 
P09 .093.B AGO1 amino acid changes in neurodevelopmental screening in NF1 was performed in all exonic regions, either by disorders Sanger or next-generation sequencing (Ion Torrent). To detect large gene rearrangements in NF1, MLPA was used. A molecular Clarisse Delvallee, Sarah Baer, Léa Sanna, Valérie Skory, Jérémie diagnosisofNF1wasstablishedfor274patients(~51%ofcases). Courraud, Nathalie Drouot, Damien Plassard, Jean-Louis Mandel, Disease-causing variants encompass loss-of-function (n=168), Amélie Piton variantspredictedtoaffectsplicing(n=49),missensevariants(n =29), inframe indels (n=6), and large intragenic deletions or IGBMC, Université de Strasbourg,Illkirch, France. duplications(n=6)orentiregenedeletions(n=16).Onefurther patient with café-au-lait spots, epilepsy, developmental and Introduction: AGO1 is a RNA-binding protein (RBP) from the psychomotor delay, harbored two NF1 variants: a heterozygous Argonaute family involved in gene-silencing mediated by small variant c.731-2A>C co-segregating with NF1 in affected relatives, non-coding RNA and additional processes regulating gene andadeletionofexon19.Usuallyinsuchcontext,onlythefamilial expression. We recently reported 28 patients with a neurodeve- variant would be tested. However, as family history was not lopmentaldisorder(NDD)harboringdenovoaminoacidchanges initiallyavailable,theentireNF1codingsequencingandMLPAwas inAGO1 (Schalk, Cousin et al,BioRxiv 2010).The roleof AGO1 in performed. This case shows the importance of a thorough NF1 neuronalcells,aswellastheimpactoftheseaminoacidchanges variantsscreening.As biallelicdisfunctionofNF1 genethrough a onits functions, remain tobe elucidated. second-hit is critical for the development of additional clinical EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 290 features, precise genotyping is invaluable to establish an early contributing to high rates of congenital malformations and diagnosisand foraccurate geneticcounselling. genetic diseases. Leukodystrophy, presenting with severe mental R. Bastos Ferreira: None. S. Sousa: None. A. Lopes: None. A. retardation and epileptic seizures, was identiﬁed in a consangui- Brandão:None.S.Morais:None.P.Silva:None.F.Lopes:None. neous Bedouinfamily. A.Lopes:None.C.Patraquim:None.M.Rocha:None.J.Parente Materials and Methods: Genome-wide linkage analysis com- Freixo:None. J.Sequeiros: None. J.Oliveira: None. binedwith whole exome sequencing were performed to identify disease-causing variants. Exome data were narrowed down to a fewvariantsusingtheIngenuityVariantAnalysis™softwareandin- 
P09 .095.D Estimated prevalence of Niemann-Pick type C house WES data of 500 ethnicity-matched controls. Sanger diseasein Quebec sequencing and restriction fragment length polymorphism analysiswasconductedtostudyrecentlyfoundandnovelvariant Marjorie Labrecque1,2, Lahoud Touma1,3, Claude Bhérer4, Antoine segregation withintheaffected family. Duquette1,3,5, Martine Tétreault1,3 Results: Based on analysis of gene expression databases and previous human and mouse studies, a homozygous nonsense 1CHUM Research Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Bioinformatics mutation in NOTCH3 (c.2221C>T; NM_ 000435.3; p.Q741*) was Program, Department of Biochemestry and Molecular Medecine, identiﬁedasthemostprobabledisease-causingvariantinthefamily. Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Department of Conclusions:NOTCH3(NotchReceptor3)encodesatransmem- Neurosciences, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada, brane protein involved in signaling pathways expressed during 4Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC, embryonic development. Mutations in NOTCH3 have been Canada,5André-BarbeauMovementDisordersUnit,CHUM,Montreal, previously identiﬁed as the underlying cause of a cerebral QC,Canada. autosomal dominant disease named CADASIL. Moreover a single caseofLeukodystrophywasidentiﬁedwithnullNOTCH3mutation Introduction:Niemann-PicktypeCdisease(NPC)isanautosomal unexpectedlyactinginrecessiveheredity.Theseﬁndingshighlight recessivediseasecausedbymutationsintheNP
C1 orNP
C2 genes. NOTCH3 null mutations as a cause of autosomal recessive Ithasalargerangeofsymptomsdependingonageofonset,thus Leukodystrophy and will allow for carrier testing and early pre- makingitdifﬁculttodiagnose.Inadults,symptomsappearmainly implantation genetic diagnosis within thestudied family and the in the form of psychiatric problems. The prevalence varies from largerBedouinkindred. 0,35to2,2per100000birthsdependingonthecountry.Theaim A. Safran: None. R. Proskorovski‐Ohayon: None. O.S. Birk: of this study is to calculate the estimated prevalence of NPC in None. Quebec todetermineifitis underdiagnosedin thepopulation. Method: The CARTaGENE database regroups individuals between 40-69 years old with no known neurodegenerative 
P09 .097.BDon’t takeyour (virtual) panels for granted! disease.ThebloodRNAwasavailablefor911individualsandthe blood DNA for 198 individuals. We used a bioinformatic pipeline Fulvio D’Abrusco1, Valentina Serpieri1,2, Romina Romaniello3, on those individuals to extract the variants in the NP
C1 /2 genes. Filippo Arrigoni4, Roberto Ciccone1, Renato Borgatti5,6, Enza Maria The estimated prevalence was calculated using the Hardy- Valente1,2 WeinbergEquilibrium. Results:Fromthe452variantsidentiﬁed,twowereclassiﬁedas 1Dept. of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, pathogenic. The variant p.Pro543Leu was found in three hetero- 2Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy, zygous individuals (AF=0,00148) that share a common haplo- 3Neuropsychiatry and Neurorehabilitation Unit, Scientiﬁc Institute type. The variant p.Ile1061Thr was found in two heterozygous IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy, 4Neuroimaging individuals (AF=0,000984). Both variants are usually associated Lab, Scientiﬁc Institute IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, with an infantile or juvenile onset. The estimated prevalence Italy, 5Dept. of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, calculated usingthose two variantsis1,21:100000 births. Pavia, Italy, 6Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, IRCCS Mondino Conclusions:LessthanonecaseofNPCisdiagnosedperyear Foundation,Pavia, Italy. in Quebec which is equivalent to a minimal prevalence of 1,19:100000 births. The estimated prevalence found was Recently,NextGenerationSequencing(NGS)hasrevolutionizedthe 1,21:100000. The estimated result of is relatively close, meaning genetic diagnosis of rare diseases. The adoption of gene panels, thatNPC isprobablynot underdiagnosed inQuebec. clinical exome and whole exome sequencing (WES) increased the M. Labrecque: None. L. Touma: None. C. Bhérer: None. A. diagnosticyieldevenforcomplexsyndromicpatients,oftenleading Duquette: None.M. Tétreault: None. to an expansion of the phenotypic spectrum of a given gene. Nonetheless, in the diagnostic setting, it becomes necessary to bioinformaticallyﬁlterthedata,restrictingtheanalysisonlytothose 
P09 .096.A Leukodystrophy in consanguineous Bedouin kin- genes compatible with the phenotype (so called “virtual panels”). dred caused by homozygous novel NOTCH3 nonsense For complex phenotypes, choosing the right panel may be tricky, mutation leadingtodiagnosticmistakes.Wereportontwomalesiblingswith corpus callosum agenesis, cerebellar hypoplasia, microcephaly, AmitSafran1,Regina Proskorovski‐Ohayon1, Ohad S.Birk1,2 severe intellectual disability (ID), seizures, behavioral disorder, myopia, ataxia and peculiar face dysmorphisms. After WES, the 1Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute for analysis of a virtual panel of 381 genes implicated in corpus BiotechnologyintheNegev,BenGurionUniversity,BeerSheva,Israel, callosum abnormalities disclosed in both siblings a hemizygous 2Genetics Institute,Soroka Medical Center, BeerSheva, Israel. variantinPAK3,ageneknowntocauseID,epilepsy,corpuscallosum agenesisandmicrocephaly.Yet,theextremeseverityofIDandthe Introduction:Leukodystrophiesareagroupofraremetabolicand peculiardysmorphismspromptedafurtheranalysisofalargerpanel genetic diseases affecting the white matter of the brain, spinal of ID-related genes. This showed a second hemizygous variant cord and often the peripheral nervous system. In the Bedouin sharedbybothsiblingsinFRMPD4,ageneassociatedtoID,seizures, community in Israel, consanguineous marriages are common, behavioral disorders and dysmorphic features. This example EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 291 conﬁrmstheadvantageofawiderWES-basedstrategyovercustom 
P09 .099.D PRKN analysis in Parkinson disease: two decades panels and illustrates the importance of a careful phenotyping experience before the analysis. Realistically, many complex cases labelled as “expansion of the phenotypic spectrum” of a given gene, may Ana Filipa Brandão1,2, Sara Morais1,2, Rita Bastos-Ferreira1,2, actuallyharbormutationsintwodistinctgenes,bothconcurringto Susana Sousa1,2, Marina Magalhães3, António Bastos Lima3, José thephenotype. AlvesGriloGonçalves4,LeonorCorreiaGuedes5,AlexandreMendes3, F.D’Abrusco:None.V.Serpieri:None.R.Romaniello:None.F. Ana Graça Velon6, Carlos Sanchez Bueno7, João Proença8, Maria Arrigoni:None.R.Ciccone:None.R.Borgatti:None.E.Valente: Manuela Manuela Costa9, Ana Oliveira10, Joaquim Ferreira5, Mário None. Romero Blanco7, Rui Araújo10, Tânia Lampreia11, João Parente Freixo1,2,Jorge Sequeiros1,2, JorgeOliveira1,2 
P09 .098.C Genetic analysis in a large cohort of patients with 1CGPP-IBMC – Centro de Genética Preditiva e Preventiva, Instituto de hereditary spastic paraplegia: diagnostic challenges BiologiaMoleculareCelular,UniversidadedoPorto,Porto,Portugal,2i3S –InstitutodeInvestigaçãoeInovaçãoemSaúde,UniversidadedoPorto, Sara Morais1,2, Ana Filipa Brandão1,2, Ana Lopes1,2, Rita Bastos- Porto,Portugal,3ServiçodeNeurologia,CentroHospitalarUniversitário Ferreira1,2, Susana Sousa1,2, Paulo Silva1,2, Fátima Lopes1,2, Alexan- do Porto, Hospital de Santo António, Porto, Portugal, 4Serviço de dra Lopes1,2, Joana Damásio1,2,3, José Leal Loureiro4, Marina Neurologia,CentroHospitalareUniversitáriodeCoimbra,EPE,Coimbra, Magalhães3,5, Miguel Leão6, Cristina Costa7, Ricardo Maré8, Jorge Portugal, 5Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Sequeiros1,2,João Parente Freixo1,2,Jorge Oliveira1,2 Hospitalar de Lisboa Norte, EPE, Lisboa, Portugal, 6Serviço de Neurologia,HospitaldeSãoPedro,CentroHospitalardeTrás-os-Montes 1CGPP-IBMC–CentrodeGenéticaPreditivaePreventiva,Institutode e Alto Douro, EPE, Vila Real, Portugal, 7Serviço de Neurologia, Centro BiologiaMoleculareCelular,UniversidadedoPorto,Porto,Portugal, Hospitalar do Barlavento Algarvio, SA, Algarve, Portugal, 8Serviço de 2I3S – Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade Neurologia, Hospital Garcia de Orta, Lisboa, Portugal, 9Serviço de doPorto,Porto,Portugal,3ServiçodeNeurologia,HospitaldeSanto Neurologia,HospitaldasForçasArmadas-PóloPorto,Porto,Portugal, António, CHUP, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Porto, 10Serviço de Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João/ Portugal,4ServiçodeNeurologia,CentroHospitalardeEntreoDouro Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, e Vouga, Santa Maria da Feira, Portugal, 5Serviço de Neurologia, 11ServiçodeNeurologia,HospitaldeEgasMoniz,CentroHospitalarde Hospital Padre Américo, Centro Hospitalar do Tâmega e Sousa, LisboaOcidental,EPE,Lisboa,Portugal. Penaﬁel, Porto,Portugal,6ServiçodeGenética, CentroHospitalar de São João /Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Parkinsondisease(PD)isaneurodegenerativedisorder,characterized Portugal,7ServiçodeNeurologia,HospitalProfessorDoutorFernando byresttremor,musclerigidity,bradykinesia,posturalinstabilityand Fonseca, Amadora, Portugal, 8Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital de dementia. Although predominantly sporadic, there are PD patients Braga,Braga, Portugal. with autosomal recessive (AR) or dominant inheritance. Biallelic variantsinthegeneforparkinRBR
E3 ubiquitinproteinligase(PRKN) Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are a large group of isanimportantcauseofARPD.WedescribethePKRNvariantsproﬁle neurodegenerative disorders, characterized by lower limb spasti- inacohortof524patientswithPD,testedbetween2000-2020.PRKN cityandweakness,butmayincludearangeofotherneurological analysis was performed by Sanger sequencing and/or MLPA, or a and non-neurological symptoms. HSPs are genetically hetero- NGSmultigenepanel.AmoleculardiagnosisofPRKN-relatedPDwas geneous; at least 70 loci have been identiﬁed. Other genes, established in 63 patients, with 3 additional cases with variants of primarilyassociatedtootherphenotypessuchasataxia,havealso unknown clinical signiﬁcance (VUS). A pathogenic variant in beenconsistentlyassociated withHSP. heterozygosity was also identiﬁed in 16 patients. Altogether, 29 Atourcentre,139HSP-relatedgenesareroutinelyanalysed,by PRKN variants have been identiﬁed: 7 missense, 3 affecting splice- single-gene tests or whole exome-based multigene panels, sites, 2 small frameshift deletions and 1 insertion-deletion, plus 16 according to the clinical request. A total of 208 HSP patients copy number variants (14 deletions, 2 duplications). Overall, 25 (and79affectedrelatives)weresuccessfullycharacterized:118by variantswereclassiﬁedaspathogenicorlikely-pathogenic,whereas4 single-gene testing, 78 using multigene panels and 12 through are VUS. The obtained diagnostic yield (12%) is quite relevant largerNGSpanels(e.g.,clinicalexome).Variantswereidentiﬁedat considering the high clinical and genetic heterogeneity of PD. The 33differentloci;SPAST(n=89cases)andSPG11(n=25)werethe c.155del change was the most frequently found variant (65% of most frequently involved. Also, interesting cases with variants in cases). Surprisingly, however, large PRKN rearrangements were also SYN
E1 orAL
S2 highlightthewidephenotypicspectrumassociated identiﬁed in a signiﬁcant proportion (54%) of patients. A deﬁnitive withHSP.Multigenepanelscontributedtotheidentiﬁcationof66 diagnosis of PD allows proper patient management and more casesharbouringvariantsofunknownclinicalsigniﬁcance.Alarge precisegeneticcounsellingofpatientsandfamilies.Asseveralgene- numberofpatients(n=90)carriedasingle(heterozygous)variant targeted therapies for PD have now reached the clinical trial stage in genes associated to diseases with autosomal recessive (notyetthecaseforPRKN-relatedentity),theclinicalutilityofgenetic inheritance. Besides new attempts to identify a missing patho- testingforPDhasexpandedconsiderably. genicallele,functionalstudiesmayalsoclarifytheircausativerole A.Brandão:None.S.Morais:None.R.Bastos-Ferreira:None. and,ultimately, providea deﬁnitivediagnosis. S. Sousa: None. M. Magalhães: None. A. Bastos Lima: None. J. Our results demonstrate the importance of considering over- Alves Grilo Gonçalves: None. L. Correia Guedes: None. A. lappingphenotypesanddifferentialdiagnosisforgenes’selection Mendes:None.A.GraçaVelon:None.C.SanchezBueno:None. forNGSpanelsdesign.Giventhenumberofpatientswithoutany J.Proença:None.M.ManuelaCosta:None.A.Oliveira:None.J. variant(n=135),wepresumethatasigniﬁcantnumberofgenes Ferreira: None. M. Romero Blanco: None. R. Araújo: None. T. related toHSPs areyet to be uncovered. Lampreia:None.J.ParenteFreixo:None.J.Sequeiros:None.J. S.Morais:None.A.Brandão:None.A.Lopes:None.R.Bastos- Oliveira: None. Ferreira:None.S.Sousa:None.P.Silva:None.F.Lopes:None.A. Lopes: None. J. Damásio: None. J. Leal Loureiro: None. M. Magalhães:None.M.Leão:None.C.Costa:None.R.Maré:None. 
P09 .100.A Over-mutated mitochondrial, lysosomal and TFEB- J.Sequeiros: None. J.Parente Freixo:None. J.Oliveira: None. regulated genesin Parkinson disease EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 292 Eulàlia Segur - Bailach1, Olatz Ugarteburu1, Frederic Tort1, Laura cohort of consecutive patients with early-onset (before age 50) Texidó1, Celia Painous2, Yaroslau Compta2, Maria J Martí2, Antonia and/or familial PD. We performed WES analysis of 100 patients Ribes1,Laura Gort1 with either early-onset and/or familial PD, consecutively referred from2014to2021toourcenterfromSlovenia,CroatiaandSerbia. 1Secciód’ErrorsCongènitsdelMetabolisme-IBC,ServeideBioquímica The analysis was based on the Illumina Nextera Coding Exome i Genètica Molecular, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS, CIBERER., Barcelona, targeting37Mbofexoniccodingsequencesandsequencingwas Spain, 2Parkinson’s Disease & Movement Disorders Unit, Hospital performed on Illumina HiSeq 2500 in 2x100 reads paired-end Clínic/IDIBAPS/CIBERNED/European Reference Network for Rare sequencingmode.Variantinterpretationwaslimitedtoapanelof Neurological Diseases (ERN-RND)/Institut de Neurociències, Universi- PD associated genes. We determined pathogenic or likely tatde Barcelona., Barcelona, Spain. pathogenic variants in PD associated genes of 15% of patients, while 26% of patients carried variants of uncertain signiﬁcance Introduction: Association of Parkinson’s disease (PD) with (VUS)inPD-associatedgenes.Themostcommonlyaffectedgene mutations in genes involved in lysosomal and mitochondrial in our population was Glucosylceramidase Beta (GBA) (12/15 function has been reported. However, the involvement of other pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants, and 5/26 VUS). The cellularmechanismsisunknown.Weaimtoidentifynovelgenetic results show diagnostic yield of WES in PD to be 15%, which is associations tobetter understand thepathogenesis of PD. comparabletosimilarstudiesonother populations.GBAvariants Material and Methods: We performed WES in a cohort of 33 represent an important genetic contributor to early onset and/or PD patients and 30 age-matched controls. We searched for rare familiarPD intheBalkan population. variants in 1665 genes: PD-causative (53), related to lysosomal A. Maver: None. A. Kovanda: None. G. Bergant: None. N. function(128),TFEB-regulated(428)andMitocarta2.0(1158).The Teran:None.I.Vrečar:None.M.Brankovic:None.M.Jankovic: variantswereclassiﬁedaccording tothe ACMGcriteria. None.M.Svetel:None.V.S.Kostic:None.I.Novakovic:None.V. Results: We identiﬁed a burden of rare variants in genes Rački: None.V. Vuletic: None. B.Peterlin: None. associated to lysosomal or mitocondrial function in PD patients comparedtocontrols,45%vs17%and76%vs39%respectively. In particular, we found an enrichment of mutations in genes 
P09 .102.C The study of the role of genetic risk factors in encodingforproteinsaffectingtheOXPHOSfunctionandmtDNA neurosychological disorders in Russian patients with Parkin- maintenance. Interestingly, an important accumulation of rare son’s disease variants in TFEB-regulated genes was observed in PD patients (85% vs 45%). The Z-score calculation using the European GulnaraAkhmadeeva1,IrinaKhidiyatova2,IrinaGilyazova2,Gulnaz population database (GnomAD) showed an over-representation Tayupova3, Salavat Umutbaev4, Azamat Baitimerov3, Rim Magzha- ofparticularvariantsin36oftheanalyzedgenes.Remarkably,11 nov1, Elza Khusnutdinova2 ofthesegeneshaveamitochondrialfunctionand18wereTFEB- regulatedgenes. 1Bashkir State Medical University Ministry of Healthcare of the Conclusions: We suggest the involvement of TFEB-regulated Russian Federation, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Biochem- genes in the genetic susceptibility to PD. This is remarkable as istry and Genetics Ufa Research Study Center, Ufa, Russian TFEB factor has been reported to be sequestered inside Lewy Federation, 3Clinical Institute of Neurology and Rehabilitation Bodies,pointingtoaroleofTFEBinthepathogenesisofPD.Our NationalmedicalholdingLimitedLiabilityCompany«Medstandart», data also reinforce the involvement of lysosomal and mitochon- Ufa, Russian Federation, 4State budgetary healthcare institution drial mechanismsin PD.Funding: ISCIII (PI
E14 /00061), CIBERER. KuvatovRepublican clinical hospital, Ufa,Russian Federation. E.Segur-Bailach:None.O.Ugarteburu:None.F.Tort:None. L.Texidó: None. C. Painous: None. Y. Compta: None. M. Martí: Introduction:Morethan90%ofpatientswithParkinson’sdisease None.A. Ribes: None. L.Gort:None. (PD) have various neuropsychological disorders: depression, anxiety and cognitive impairments. We assumed that there are geneticmarkersforneuropsychologicaldisordersdevelopmentin 
P09 .101.B Diagnostic yield of whole exome sequencing in PD patients among polymorphic variants of genes of the early-onset andfamilial Parkinson’sdisease inthe Balkans dopaminergicand serotoninergic systems. MaterialsandMethods:Weinvestigated357PDpatientsfrom AlešMaver1, AnjaKovanda1,GaberBergant1,NatasaTeran1,Irena Republic of Bashkortostan. We used MMSE, the Beck depression Vrečar1, Marija Brankovic2, Milena Jankovic3, Marina Svetel2, inventory (BDI) and the state-trait anxiety inventory (STAI). The Vladimir S. Kostic2, Ivana Novakovic4, Valentino Rački5, Vladimira analysis of 18 SNPs of dopamine and serotonin receptors, Vuletic5, Borut Peterlin1 serotonin transporter, monoamine oxidase B, catechol-O-methyl- transferase, tryptophan hydroxylase and tyrosine hydroxylase 1ClinicalInstituteofGenomicMedicine,Ljubljana,Slovenia,2Neurol- genes was performed. The SPSS software was used for statistical ogy Clinic, Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, analysis.Ap-value <0.05 was consideredstatistically signiﬁcant. Serbia,3NeurologyClinic,CCS,Belgrade,Serbia,4InstituteofHuman Results: Data on the inﬂuence of the rs6275*A/A genotype of Genetics and Neurology Clinic, Faculty of Medicine, University of theDRD2geneonthedevelopmentofanxietyinPDpatientswas Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 5Department of Neurology, University of obtained(p=0.041).Ithasbeshownthatrs6280*T/Tgenotypeof Rijeka, Faculty ofMedicine, Rijeka, Croatia. DRD3genecanbeageneticmarkerofdepressiondevelopmentin PD(p=0.023),andshorteralleles(TH*6andTH*7)ofthe(TCAT)n Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a common neurological disorder, intheTHgenecanbeageneticmarkerofdepressionwithsuicidal hallmarkedbyprogressivemotorandautonomicdysfunctionsand behavior(p=0.041).Asigniﬁcanteffectofthers4680polymorph- cognitive decline, with a typical onset after the age of 60. PD is ism of the COMT gene on the MMSE indicators of the cognitive multifactorial,withgeneticvariationinover30genesinvolvedin functions (p=0,019)was established. PD risk, development, onset and progression. To assess the Conclusion: Our results show the possible inﬂuence of some genetic component in development of PD in the Balkan polymorphicvariantsofthegenesofthedopaminergicsystemon populationandtodeterminethediagnosticyieldofwholeexome the development of certain neuropsychological disorders in sequencing(WES)inourclinicalsetting,weperformedWES ona Parkinson’s disease. It is necessary to conduct more extensive EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 293 studies the larger sampling. The work was supported by RFBR Parkinson’sdisease(PD).Geneticevidencealsonominatedimmune grant#19-015-00331 related genes such as LRRK2, BST1, and the human leukocyte G. Akhmadeeva: None. I. Khidiyatova: None. I. Gilyazova: antigen(HLA)locus.Inthisstudy,weperformedthelargestgenetic None. G. Tayupova: None. S. Umutbaev: None. A. Baitimerov: analysisoftheHLAregioninPD. None.R. Magzhanov: None. E.Khusnutdinova: None. MaterialsandMethods:Weﬁne-mappedtheHLAlocususing 13,770 PD patients, 20,214 proxy-cases and 490,861 controls of European origin. We used genome-wide association studies 
P09 .105.B Analysis of DNM2, EPN2 & EXO
C4  relative gene (GWAS) data to impute HLA types and to performed multiple expressionlevelsinperipheralbloodfromParkinson’sdisease statistical analyzes, to examine the association of speciﬁc HLA patients types, haplotypes and amino acid changes with PD. We further performed conditional analyzes to identify speciﬁc alleles or EkaterinaIgorevnaSemenova1,MargaritaMaksimovnaRudenok1, geneticvariantsthat drive theassociation withPD. Anelya Khanlarovna Alieva1, Alexey Vyacheslavovich Karabanov2, Results: Four HLA types were associated with PD after Sergey Nikolaevich Illarioshkin2, Petr Andreevich Slominsky1, Maria correction for multiple comparisons: HLA-DQA1*03:01, HLA- Igorevna Shadrina1 DQB1*03:02, HLA-DRB1*04:01 and HLA-DRB1*04:04. Haplotype analyzesfollowedbyamino-acidanalysisandconditionalanalyzes 1The Institute of Molecular Genetics of National Research Centre suggested that the association is protective and primarily driven «KurchatovInstitute»,Moscow,RussianFederation,2ResearchCenter bythreespeciﬁcaminoacidpolymorphismspresentinmostHLA- ofNeurology, Moscow, Russian Federation. DRB1*04 subtypes - 11V, 13H and 33H (OR=0.87 95%CI=0.83- 0.90, p<8.23x10-9 for all three variants). No other effects were Introduction:Parkinson’sdisease(PD)isawidespreaddisorderof presentafter adjustment for theseamino acids. thenervoussystem.Becauseofthelongprodromalperiodofthe Conclusions: Our results suggest that speciﬁc variants in the PD it is necessary to search for prognostic biomarkers. To date, HLA-DRB1geneareassociatedwithreducedriskofPD,providing thereis evidence that impaired membrane transport can play an additional evidence for the role of the immune system in PD. important role in the pathogenesis of PD; therefore, in our work Although effect size is small and has no diagnostic signiﬁcance, we have analyzed changes in the relative mRNA levels of the understanding the mechanism underlying this association may DNM2, EPN2 and EXO
C4  genes in the peripheral blood from leadtoidentiﬁcationofnewtargetsfortherapeuticsdevelopment. treatedand untreated patients withPD. E. Yu: None. A. Ambati: None. M.S. Andersen: B. Research MaterialsandMethods:Inthepresentworkwehavestudied2 Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and groupsofpatientswithPDand2comparisongroups.Analysisof pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; mRNA levelswas performedusing reverse transcription andreal- South-Eastern Regional Health Authority. L. Krohn: None. M.A. timePCR withTaqMan probes. Estiar: None. P. Saini: None. K. Senkevich: B. Research Grant Results:Nosigniﬁcantchangesintheexpressionofthestudied (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending genes were found in the group of untreated patients with PD. grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Canada First However,signiﬁcantchangesintheexpressionatthemRNAlevel Research Excellence Fund, Healthy Brains for Healthy Lives. Y.L. fortheDNM2genewereobtainedinthegroupoftreatedpatients Sosero: None. A.A.K. Sreelatha: None. J.A. Ruskey: None. F. withPD. Asayesh:None.D.Spiegelman:None.M.Toft:B.ResearchGrant Conclusion: Our results demonstrate that genes DNM2, EPN2 (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending andEXO
C4 aremostlikelynotinvolvedinthepathogenesisofthe grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Norwegian disease at the mRNA level in patients with early stage of PD. Parkinson Research Fund, Reberg’s legacy. M.K. Viken: None. M. Thereforetheyprobablycannotbeusedasprognosticbiomarkersof Sharma:None.C.Blauwendraat:None.L.Pihlstrøm:B.Research PD.ChangesintheexpressionoftheDNM2geneintreatedpatients Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and with PD suggest that this gene is may be involved in processes pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; associatedwithdopamineagonisttherapy.Thisworkwassupported National Health Association, South-Eastern Regional Health bytheRussianScienceFoundation(grantsno.20-15-00262). Authority. E. Mignot: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; E.I.Semenova:None.M.M.Rudenok:None.A.K.Alieva:None. IdorsiaPharmaceuticalsLtd,JazzPharmaceutical,Alairion,ALPCO, A.V. Karabanov: None. S.N. Illarioshkin: None. P.A. Slominsky: INEXIA, Merck, Orexia, Rhythm, Sunovion. Z. Gan-Or: B. Research None.M.I. Shadrina: None. Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pendinggrantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;Fonds 
P09 .106.C Dissecting the HLA locus in Parkinson’s disease in de recherche du Québec - Santé (FRQS) Chercheurs-boursiers Europeans award. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Idorsia, Neuron23, Handl Therapeutics, Lysosomal Therapeutics Inc, Deerﬁeld, Light- Eric Yu1,2, Aditya Ambati3, Maren S. Andersen4,5, Lynne Krohn1,2, house, Prevail Therapeutics, Ono Therapeutics, Denali, Inception MehrdadA.Estiar1,2,PrabhjyotSaini1,2,KonstantinSenkevich1,2,Yuri Science. L. Sosero1,2, Ashwin A. K. Sreelatha6, Jennifer A. Ruskey1,2, Farnaz Asayesh1,2, Dan Spiegelman1, Mathias Toft4,5, Marte K. Viken4,5, ManuSharma6,CornelisBlauwendraat7,LassePihlstrøm4,Emmanuel 
P09 .107.D A Patient with Parkinsonian-Pyramidal Syndrome Mignot3, Ziv Gan-Or1,2 dueto aTBK1 Mutation 1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2The Neuro (Montreal Jelena Pozojevic1, Diego Santos-García2, Teresa de Deus Fonti- Neurological Institute-Hospital), Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Stanford coba3,MónicaKurtis4,JosepGamez5,ChristineKlein1,MarianaH.G. University,PaloAlto,CA,USA,4OsloUniversityHospital,Oslo,Norway, Monje6, AnaWestenberger1 5University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 6University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany,7NationalInstitutesofHealth,Bethesda,MD,USA. 1Institute of Neurogenetics, Lübeck, Germany, 2Department of Neurology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de A Coruña Introduction: Recent evidence from human and animal studies (CHUAC),ACoruña,Spain,3SectionofNeurology,HospitalArquitecto suggest that the immune system has an important role in Marcide y Hospital Naval, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 294 Ferrol(CHUF),ACoruña,Spain,4DepartmentofNeurology,Hospital demethylase that has already been shown to promote memory Ruber Internacional, Madrid, Spain, 5Neurology Department, GMA consolidation in mice via CREB signaling, however, PHF2 has yet Clinic, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 6HM- not been implicated in congenital disorder.The ﬁrst de novo CINAC, Hospital Universitario HM Puerta del Sur, Universidad CEU- variant affects the Jumonji-C domain (JmjC), c. 727G>C; p. SanPablo,Madrid, Spain. (Asp243His), probably impairing demethylase activity. The other two de novo variants affect highly conserved amino acids in the Introduction: Pathogenic variants in TBK1 cause amyotrophic plant homeodomain PHD, c.23G>C; p.(Cys8Ser) and c.125C>T; p. lateral sclerosis/frontotemporal dementia spectrum neurodegen- (Ala42Val).ThecysteineresiduesofthePHDdomainarecrucialin erativedisorders.Occasionally,patientsmanifestcerebellarataxia forming a complex with Zn2+, p.(Cys8Ser) is predicted to and a form of progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal compromise DNA binding; while p.(Ala42Val) lies in the highly syndrome/progressive nonﬂuent aphasia. We have identiﬁed the conserved α-helix of the PHD domain.Further studies including ﬁrst patient with a pallidopyramidal syndrome due to a TBK1 gestalt matching and transcriptional proﬁling will explore the mutation. speciﬁcmechanismsimplicatedinthepathophysiologyofdenovo Methods: Our patient underwent a series of clinical and variantsinPHF2. neuroimaging examinations at two time points (2011 and 2017). A.Knaus:None.M.Wojcik:None.M.Viktor:None.K.Grand: Genetic investigations included gene-panel sequencing, long- None. P.A. Sanchez-Lara: None. T. Hsieh: None. G. Bergant: rangeand quantitativePCRanalyses. None. W.K. Chung: None. A. Geltzeiler: None. E. Torti: A. Results: At the age of 40 years, our patient manifested with Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;GeneDx.P.M.Krawitz: restingtremor,bradykinesia,andrigidityonhisleftside.BrainMRI None. was normal and a DaTSCAN revealed an asymmetric bilateral reduction of striatal tracer uptake. Thus, he was diagnosed with early-onset Parkinson´s disease. Within six years, the patient 
P09 .109.B A variant in PIGK clears up the diagnosis of a progressively developed a bilateral pyramidal syndrome, mild patient with neurological disorder after 4 years been wearing-off, and dyskinesias. Another DaTSCAN and 18F-DOPA undiagnosed positron emission tomography showed striatal dopaminergic denervation with right-side predominance and cranio-caudal Bárbara Fernández Garoz, Verónica Cantarín Extremera, Anna progression. He displayed no signs of lower motor neuron Duat Rodríguez, Victor Soto Insuga, Elena González Alguacil, Juan involvement or cognitive impairment. Gene-panel sequencing José García Peñas, Luis González Gutiérrez-Solana, María Jiménez revealed a splicing variant c.701+1G>A in TBK1. No alternatively Legido, Beatriz Bernardino Cuesta, María Luz Ruiz-Falco Rojas, spliced TBK1 mRNA forms were detected by long-range PCR. NelmarValentina Ortiz Cabrera However, quantitative PCR revealed markedly decreased TBK1 levels in the patient sample, as compared to three healthy HospitalInfantil Universitario NiñoJesús, Madrid, Spain. controls. Conclusions: Since the mutant TBK1 mRNA is likely degraded Introduction: Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored pro- bynonsense-mediateddecayinourpatient,haploinsufﬁciencyisa teins are glycolipids found on many blood cells and served to conceivable disease mechanism. Our ﬁndings extend the pheno- anchor other proteins to the cell surface. They are critical for typic spectrum of pathogenic variants in TBK1, indicate a novel embryogenesis, neurogenesis and cell signalling. Case presenta- geneticcauseofpallidopyramidalsyndrome,andsuggestscreen- tion:Wepresenta5-year-oldboy,whodebutedwithepilepsyat7 ingfor TBK1mutations inpatients with atypicalparkinsonism. monthsofage,withsevereneurologicalmanifestations: epileptic J. Pozojevic: None. D. Santos-García: None. T. de Deus encephalopathy, progressive cerebellar atrophy, global develop- Fonticoba: None. M. Kurtis: None. J. Gamez: None. C. Klein: mentaldelaywithaxialhypotoniaandspastic-dystonicdisorder.A None.M.H.G. Monje:None. A.Westenberger: None. wholeexome sequencewasperformed. Results: This study reveals the presence of a variant in PIGK (c.748A>C; p.Thr250Pro) in homozygosity. Following the ACMG 
P09 .108.ADenovovariantsinthelysinedemethylasePHF2are criteria and the relation between phenotype and genotype, we associated with developmental delay, autistic behavior, and concluded that this variant is probably pathogenic and respon- facialdysmorphism siblefortheneurodevelopmentaldisorderpresentinourpatient. Conclusions:PIGKgeneencodesforanenzymethatisinvolved Alexej Knaus1, Miriam Wojcik2, Miriam Viktor3, Katheryn Grand4, in GPI-anchor biosynthesis. Pathogenic variants in PIGK gene are PedroA.Sanchez-Lara4,Tzung-ChienHsieh1,GaberBergant5,Wendy related to neurodevelopmental disorder with hypotonia and K.Chung6, AlexaGeltzeiler6, Erin Torti7,Peter M.Krawitz1 cerebellar atrophy with or without epilepsy (MIM#618879). This syndromehasbeenrecentlydescribedbyNguyenetal.(Nguyen 1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, University et al, Am J Hum Genet, 2020). This disease is an autosomal Hospital, Bonn, Germany, 2Division of Newborn Medicine Division recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by global of Genetics and Genomics Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, developmental delay, which is usually severe, accompanied by USA, 3Center for Pediatrics, Devision for Neuropediatrics, University hypotonia with variable intellectual disability. Most patients Hospital, Bonn, Germany, 4Department of Pediatrics, Cedars-Sinai develop early-onset seizures and movement disorder, such as Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 5Centre for Mendelian ataxiaordysmetriaassociatedwithprogressivecerebellaratrophy Genomics, Clinical Institute of Genomic Medicine, UMC Ljubljana, on brain imaging. These manifestations are consistent with the Ljubljana, Slovenia, 6Department of Pediatrics and Medicine, onespresentedinourpatient.Ontheotherhand,beingarecently Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA, describedentity,theinformationavailablemaynotbecompletely 7GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, USA. consistent,and functional studies areneeded. B. Fernández Garoz: None. V. Cantarín Extremera: None. A. WereportdenovomissensevariantsinPHF2inthreeindividuals Duat Rodríguez: None. V. Soto Insuga: None. E. González causing a novel neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by Alguacil: None. J. García Peñas: None. L. González Gutiérrez- developmentaldelay,expressivelanguagedelay,autisticbehavior, Solana:None.M.JiménezLegido:None.B.BernardinoCuesta: stereotypy and facial dysmorphism. PHF2 is a lysine-speciﬁc None.M. Ruiz-Falco Rojas:None. N.Ortiz Cabrera:None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 295 
P09 .110.C Functional analysis of PLXNA1 variants in a novel 
P09 .111.D Re-weighting hundreds of polygenic risk scores neurodevelopmentalsyndromewithoculo-cerebralanomalies improvespredictionaccuraciesofpsychiatricandneurological disorders Paulina Z. M. Kempe1,2,3, Öznur Yilmaz2, Tobias T. Lindenberg2, JayaPunetha4,5,JeshurunC.Kalanithy2,HaktanB.Erdem6,ZeynepC. Clara Albiñana, Florian Privé, Esben Agerbo, ISPYCH-Broad Con- Akdemir4,EnderKaraca7,Tadahiro Mitani4, DanaMaraﬁ4,JawidM. sortium, Preben B.Mortensen, John McGrath,Bjarni Vilhjalmsson Fatih4, Shalini N. Jhangiani8, Boris Keren9, Julien Buratti Buratti9, Perrine Charles9, Caroline Nava9,10, Davut Pehlivan4, Jennifer E. AarhusUniversity, Aarhus V,Denmark. Posey4, James R. Lupski4,11,12,8, Ben Odermatt2, Heiko Reutter3, Gabriel C.Dworschak1,2,3 Thegeneticarchitectureunderlyingpsychiatricandneurological disordersisremarkablycomplexandhighlypolygenic.Polygenic 1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, risk scores (PRS) trained on summary statistics from genome- Bonn,Germany,2InstituteofAnatomy,MedicalFaculty,Universityof wide association studies (GWAS) for these are therefore Bonn,Bonn,Germany,3DepartmentofPediatrics,UniversityHospital generally underpowered and capture only a fraction of the Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Department of Molecular and Human estimated heritable variation. However, many psychiatric and Genetics,BaylorCollegeofMedicine,Houston,TX,USA,5Department neurologicaldisordersaregeneticallycorrelatedwithbehavioral of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at and cognitive traits that have been the focus of large GWAS. Mount Sinai, New York City, NY, USA, 6Department of Medical PRSs for correlated traits can therefore be used to improve Genetics, University of Health Sciences, Diskapi Yildirim Beyazit prediction accuracy of related outcomes (Krapohl et al., Mol Training and Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 7Department of Psych 2018). Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, Here,wemakeuseof940GWASsummarystatisticsforavariety USA, 8Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of of diseases and traits to train PRS for 50 psychiatric and Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, 9AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, neurological disorders and related subtypes in IPSYCH (Bybjerg- Département de Génétique, Paris, France, 10Institut du Cerveau et Grauholmetal.,medRxiv2020).Wegeneratedthe940PRSusing de la Moelle épinière, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France, 11Texas LDpred2-auto (Privé et al., Bioinformatics 2020), which does not Children’s Hospital, Houston, TX, USA, 12Department of Pediatrics, require any validation data to ﬁt hyper-parameters. We then use Baylor Collegeof Medicine, Houston,TX,USA. theseascovariatesfortwomultiPRSspredictionmodels,penalized regressionand gradientboosted trees PLXNA1 encodes for the transmembrane semaphorin receptor We observe that multiPRS can drastically boost the predic- Plexin-A1whichplaysakeyroleinaxonaloutgrowthandneuronal tionaccuracycompared tomarginal(single-outcome)PRS.For migration in the developing central nervous system (CNS). instance, the prediction R2 (adjusted for sex, age, and Previously,wereported3patientsfrom3unrelatedfamilieswith 20 genetic PCs) for the three most prevalent psychiatric monoallelic missense variants and 8 patients from 5 unrelated disorders in the IPSYCH cohort ADHD, autism, and depression familieswith biallelicvariants inPLXNA1 (unpublished). was 1.1%,0.4%, and 2.6% when using the single-outcome PRS Knockdownofthezebraﬁshhomologsplxna1aandplxna1bin (excluding IPSYCH samples), and 9.1%, 4.0%, and 4.3% zebraﬁsh larvae (zﬂ) by antisense morpholinos (MO) was respectively using multiPRS. For some psychiatric diagnoses performed in wild-type and transgenic zﬂ Tg(-3.1ngn1:GFP). We we obtain predictive PRS even though GWAS of these are not performed rescue experiments by co-injection of MO together yet available. with human PLXNA1 mRNA. The eye development and axonal C. Albiñana: None. F. Privé: None. E. Agerbo: None. P.B. outgrowth of the zﬂ were analyzed in vivo using time-lapse Mortensen: None.J. McGrath: None. B.Vilhjalmsson: None. microscopy. To assess the impact of the discovered alleles in PLXNA1, we will co-inject MO together with mRNA carrying the respectivevariants. 
P09 .112.A Correlation of GAA genotypes and enzymatic MO knockdown of plxna1a and plxna1b in zebraﬁsh larvae activity of acid-α-glucosidase among Hungarian Pompe resembled the human CNS and eye phenotype. The number of diseasepatients dorsal root ganglia and outgrowing axons as well as the eye diameterofthezﬂwassigniﬁcantlyreduced.Whileco-injectionof Aniko Gal1, Zoltan Grosz1, Beata Borsos1, Ildiko Szatmari2, Agnes MO together with human PLXNA1 mRNA resulted in a rescue of Sebok3, Laszlo Javor4, Veronika Harmat5, Katalin Szakszon6, Livia phenotype,theimpactofhumanallelesinPLXNA1isbeingtested Dezsi7,EnikoBalku8,ZitaJobbagy9,AgnesHerczegfalvi10,Zsuzsanna inthis model. Almassy11, LeventeKerenyi12, Maria Judit Molnar1 ThezebraﬁshisasuitablemodeltostudytheroleofPLXNA1in CNSdevelopmentandaxonaloutgrowthinvivo.Furthermore,this 1Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Disorders, Semmelweis model allows the testing of (potentially) pathogenic variants in University, Budapest, Hungary, 2First Department of Pediatrics, PLXNA1inthecontextofanovelneurodevelopmentalsyndrome Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 3Department of Neurol- with oculo-cerebral anomalies.BonnNI:Q-614.2954(PZMK); DFG-RE ogy,UniversityofPecs,Pecs,Hungary,4PetzAladárCountyHospital, 1723/5-1(HR); NHGRI and NHLBI grant to the Baylor-Hopkins- Győr,Hungary,5DepartmentofPediatrics,St.RafaelHospitalofZala CenterforMendelianGenomics[UM1HG006542](JRL);BONFOR:O- County,Zalaegerszeg,Hungary,6DepartmentofPediatrics,Facultyof 120.0001, Herbert-Reeck-foundation (GCD) Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 7Department P.Z.M.Kempe:None.Ö.Yilmaz:None.T.T.Lindenberg:None. ofNeurology,UniversityofSzeged,Szeged,Hungary,8Departmentof J. Punetha: None. J.C. Kalanithy: None. H.B. Erdem: None. Z.C. Pediatrics, Andras Josa Teaching Hospital, Nyíregyháza, Hungary, Akdemir: None. E. Karaca: None. T. Mitani: None. D. Maraﬁ: 9DepartmentofNeurology,Bács-KiskunCountyHospital,Kecskemet, None.J.M.Fatih:None.S.N.Jhangiani:None.B.Keren:None.J. Hungary, 10II. Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Buratti: None. P. Charles: None. C. Nava: None. D. Pehlivan: Budapest, Hungary, 11Heim Pal Children’s Hospital Budapest, None.J.E.Posey:None.J.R.Lupski:None.B.Odermatt:None.H. Budapest, Hungary, 12Department of Neurology, Szent György Reutter:None. G.C. Dworschak: None. CountyHospital, Szekesfehervar, Hungary. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 296 Introduction: Pompe disease is caused by the accumulation of inositols, mostly inositol hexakisphosphate (IP ), detected in 6 glycogeninthelysosomeduetodeﬁciencyofthelysosomalacid HEK293, ﬁbroblasts, iPSCs and differentiating neurons lacking alpha-glucosidase(GAA)enzyme.Thediseasecanbedividedinto MINP
P1 .IP hasstrongchelatingpropertiesandisalsoknownto 6 twomajorgroupsbasedonageofonset1.)lateofonsetPompe be a cofactor for multiple enzymes involved in diverse functions disease (LOPD) (>12 months); 2.) infant onset Pompe disease including RNA editing and nuclear RNA export. In mutant cells, (IOPD) (<12 months). In this study, we correlate the enzyme higher IP level is expected to be associated with an increased 6 activityandthegeneticalterationsintheHungarianpatientswith chelationofintracellularcations,suchasironorcalcium,resulting Pompe disease. Patients and methods: 24 patients with Pompe in decreased levels of available ions. These data highlight the disease were enrolled. Enzymatic activity of acid-α-glucosidase critical role of MINP
P1  and IP regulation in human brain 6 was measured by mass spectrometry. The mutation analysis of developmentand homeostasis. GAA gene was performed with Sanger sequencing and MLPA E.Ucuncu: None.K. Rajamani: None.M.S.C. Wilson:None. F. methodology. Picco: None. D. Medina-Cano: None. N. Altin: None. N. Bahi- Results: 21 (87.5%) patients were classiﬁed as LOPD and 3 Buisson:None.C.Fossoud:None.F.Giuliano:None.L.Colleaux: (12.5%) as IOPD. In this cohort 15 different pathogenic or likely None.L.Burglen:None.J.G.Gleeson:None.N.Boddaert:None. pathogenic GAA mutations were detected in homozygous or V.Cantagrel: None. compoundheterozygousform.Themostcommonalterationwas the c.-32-13 T>G splice site mutation. By comparing the α- glucosidase enzyme activity of c.-32-13 T>G homozygous and 
P09 .114.CAbiallelicframeshiftindelinPP
P1 R35asacauseof compound heterozygous cases, the mean GAA activity in primarymicrocephaly homozygous form is signiﬁcantly higher than in the compound heterozygous cases. The lowest enzyme activity was found in Moez Dawood1, Gulsen Akay1, Tadahiro Mitani1, Jawid M. Fatih1, caseswhere thec.-32-13 T>Gmutation was notpresent. Jaya Punetha1, Jaya Punetha1, Dana Maraﬁ1,2, Christopher M. Discussion:Basedonourstudythelocalizationofmutationand Grochowski1, Haowei Du1, Angad Jolly1, Zeynep Coban-Akdemir1,3, proteindomaininvolvementcorrelatedwiththeGAAactivity.Our Shalini N. Jhangiani1, Jill V. Hunter1,4, Davut Pehlivan1,4, Jennifer E. study provides valuable information on the Pompe disease Posey1, Claudia M. B. Carvalho1,5, Richard A. Gibbs1, James R. genotype-phenotype correlation, which is expected to facilitate Lupski1,4 and improve genetic counseling of affected individuals and their family members. 1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, 2Kuwait University, This study was supported by KTIA_13_NAP-A-III/6; KTIA_NAP_ Safat, Kuwait, 3The University of Texas Health Science Center at 2017-1.2.1-NKP-2017-00002; NKFIH_132812 grants. Houston,Houston,TX,USA,4TexasChildren’sHospital,Houston,TX, A. Gal: None. Z. Grosz: None. B. Borsos: None. I. Szatmari: USA,5Paciﬁc Northwest Research Institute,Seattle, WA, USA. None. A. Sebok: None. L. Javor: None. V. Harmat: None. K. Szakszon: None. L. Dezsi: None. E. Balku: None. Z. Jobbagy: Proteinphosphatase1regulatorysubunit35(PP
P1 R35)encodesa None. A. Herczegfalvi: None. Z. Almassy: None. L. Kerenyi: centrosomal protein required for recruiting microtubule-binding None.M.J. Molnar: None. elongation machinery. PP
P1 R35 interacts with several established primarymicrocephaly(MCPH)genes,andmultiplePP
P1 R35model organismstudieshypothesizePP
P1 R35asacandidateMCPHgene. 
P09 .113.B MINP
P1  prevents intracellular accumulation of Here, using exome sequencing and family-based rare variant inositol hexakisphosphate and is mutated in Pontocerebellar analyses, we report a homozygous, frameshifting indel deleting Hypoplasia the canonical stop codon in the last exon of PP
P1 R35 [Chr7: c.753_*3delGGAAGCGTAGACCinsCG (p.Trp251Cysfs*22)] in a 3.7 Ekin Ucuncu1, Karthyayani Rajamani1, Miranda S. C. Wilson2, Mb AOH block in a proband with severe MCPH (-4.3 SD at birth, Francesca Picco1, Daniel Medina-Cano1, Nami Altin1, Nadia Bahi- -6.1 SD by 42 months), pachygyria, and global developmental Buisson1, Catherine Fossoud3, Fabienne Giuliano4, Laurence Col- delay from a consanguineous Turkish family. Droplet digital PCR leaux1, Lydie Burglen1, Joseph G. Gleeson5, Nathalie Boddaert1, conﬁrmed mutant mRNA expression in ﬁbroblasts. In silico VincentCantagrel1 prediction of the translation of mutant PP
P1 R35 protein is expectedtobeelongatedby22aminoacidsbeforeencountering 1InstitutIMAGINE,Paris,France,2UniversityCollegeLondon,London, anotherstopcodon.Asidefromtheprobandfamily,thiscomplex United Kingdom, 3CHU-Lenval, Nice, France, 4Centre Hospitalier indel allele was absent in public databases (ClinVar, gnomAD, Universitaire de Nice, Nice, France, 5University of California San ARIC, 1000 genomes) and our in-house database of 14,000+ Diego,san diego, CA, USA. exomes including 1,800+ Turkish exomes. A comprehensive literature search for PP
P1 R35 mutations yielded two probands Inositol polyphosphates are vital metabolic and secondary affected with severe microcephaly (-15 SD and -12 SD) with the messengers,involvedindiversecellularfunctions.Therefore,tight same homozygous indel from a single, consanguineous, Iranian regulation of inositol polyphosphate metabolism is essential for family from a cohort of 404 predominantly Iranian families. The proper cell physiology. Here, we describe a very early-onset lack of heterozygous cases in two large cohorts representing the neurodegenerative syndrome caused by loss-of-function muta- geneticbackgroundofthesetwofamiliesdecreasessuspicionfor tions in the multiple inositol polyphosphate phosphatase 1 gene a founder allele. Finally, we propose two origin models for the (MINP
P1 ). Patients from 6 families were found to have a distinct same mutation in two different populations mediated by hairpin type of Pontocerebellar Hypoplasia with typical basal ganglia or formationbetweencomplimentaryCGrichsegmentsﬂankingthe thalami involvement on neuroimaging. We found that patient- stop codon. derived and genome edited MINP
P1 -/- induced pluripotent stem M.Dawood:None.G.Akay:None.T.Mitani:None.J.M.Fatih: cells (iPSCs) are not able to differentiate efﬁciently into neurons. None.J.Punetha:None.J.Punetha:None.D.Maraﬁ:None.C.M. MINP
P1  deﬁciency results in an intracellular imbalance of the Grochowski: None. H. Du: None. A. Jolly: None. Z. Coban- inositol polyphosphate metabolism. This metabolic defect is Akdemir: None. S.N. Jhangiani: None. J.V. Hunter: None. D. characterized by an accumulation of highly phosphorylated Pehlivan: None. J.E. Posey: None. C.M.B. Carvalho: None. R.A. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 297 Gibbs: None. J.R. Lupski: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock Introduction: Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; stock disorder associated with genetic alterations in cc. 7-15% of the ownershipin23andMe;coinventoronmultiple USandEuropean cases.GBA1isconsideredoneofthemajorgeneticriskfactorfor patents related to molecular diagnostics for inherited neuropa- PD.Thefrequencyofitsrarevariantsindistinctethnicpopulations thies, eye diseases, and bacterial genomic ﬁngerprinting. F. and the penetrance of these variants in individuals can be Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; paid consultant for Regen- different.Therefore,thegeneticburdenofGBA1variantsandthe eronPharmaceuticals. exact genotype-phenotype correlation isstill a hottopic today. Methods: Patients from the institute’s biobank (NEPSYBANK) 
P09 .115.D Novel variants identiﬁed in the rare undiagnosed were selected for the study (N=116). The enrollment criteria families included the diagnosis of PD, early onset and/or positive family history for PD, and negative ﬁndings for other PD related genes. Farzane Zare Ashraﬁ1, Fatemeh Peymani1, Marzieh Mohseni1, TheoccurrenceofGBA1variantswereidentiﬁedbyeitherSanger Sanaz Arzhangi1, Mohammad R. Akbari2,3,4, Hossein Najmabadi1,5, orNGS.Pathogenicityofthevariantswasdeterminedaccordingto KimiaKahrizi1 theACMG guidelines. Results:GBA1rarevariantsweredetectedin21PDpatients.The 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and mostfrequentmutationsaretheT408M(n=12)and
E365 K(n=4). Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Islamic Republic of, 2Women’s Weidentiﬁed5furtherrarevariants(n=1-2),twopatientshad2 College Research Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, heterozygous variants. Most of the patients with T408 had Canada,3DallaLanaSchoolofPublicHealth,University ofToronto, cognitivedeclineandtremordominantPD,with
E365 Kdepression Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Institute of Medical Science, University of beside the typical PD signs. Two patients had atypical PD with Toronto,Toronto,ON,Canada,5Kariminejad-NajmabadiPathology spasticityand/orpyramidalsigns.Cognitivedeﬁcitwaspresentin &Genetics Center,Tehran,Iran, Islamic Republic of. 35%ofthe GBA1 positivecases. Conclusion:GBA1rarevariantswerepresentin18,1%ofourPD Introduction: Rare disorders refer to a group of diseases that cohort.Theearlyidentiﬁcationofthesepatientsisimportant,since affect less than 200,000 people in the United States or less than they may have targeted causative treatment by using the 2,000peopleinEurope.Thesediseases,althoughindividuallyrare, substratereductiontreatmentorlysosomalexocytosisstimulator. aregenerallyprevalent.Ithasbeenestimatedthatthereareabout This study was supported by KTIA_13_NAP-A-III/6; KTIA_NAP and 7000raregeneticdiseasesthatthegeneticcauseisrecognizedfor withtheFIKP program abouthalf.Manyofthemaffectthenervoussystem;causingsome T.Szlepák:None.A.P.Kossev:None.D.Csabán:None.A.Illés: common phenotypes including intellectual disability, autism, None. B. Borsos: None. P. Balicza: None. Z. Grosz: None. A. epilepsy, ataxia, muscular dystrophy and neuropathy. Recent Takáts:None. P. Klivényi:None. M.J.Molnár: None. advances in molecular approaches like next-generation sequen- cing (NGS) make it possible to reach an accurate molecular and subsequently clinical diagnosis for patients with presumed rare 
P09 .117.B Genome-Wide Association and Whole Exome geneticdisorders whoremained previously undiagnosed. Sequencing Studies reveal a Novel Candidate Locus for Materialsandmethods:20familieswithanundiagnosedrare RestlessLegs Syndrome geneticdisorderwerestudiedbywhole-exomesequencing(WES). Results: 18 causative variants in genes (LAR
P7 (2), TWNK, Ufuk Ergun1, Bahar Say1, Sezen Guntekin Ergun2, Ferda Percin3, 
L2 HGDH, UN
C80 , ANO10, TRRAP, STAMBP, MA
P3 K20, ZNF142, Levent Inan4, Sukran Kaygisiz5, Pınar Gelener Asal6, Buket Yurteri2, TAF2, WDR81, CHRNE, EFTUD2, SPTBN2, MAN1B1, BC
L11 B and MaksimStruchalin7,Dmitry Shtokalo8, Mehmet A.Ergun3 DIAPH3) have been detected by WES in 15 families but no candidate variants were identiﬁed in 4 families and one family is 1KırıkkaleUniversity,Kırıkkale,Turkey,2HacettepeUniversity,Ankara, under study by using whole-genome sequencing (WGS). In total, Turkey, 3Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey, 4Ankara Training and weidentiﬁed12singlevariantsin12patientswhichoneofthem Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 5Ordu University Education and is a known copy number variation (CNV) reported for hearing Research Hospital, Ordu, Turkey, 6Near East University, Lefkosa, impairment. Cyprus, 7AcademGene Ltd, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 8A.P. Conclusions: NGS approaches can signiﬁcantly improve diag- Ershov Institute of informatics systems, Moscow, Russian Federa- nosticsofraregeneticdisorders.WearereportingBC
L11 Bvariant tion. asadenovomutationasithasbeenreportedpreviouslyinother studies. This study was supported by INSF (Iran National Science Therestlesslegssyndrome(RLS)isacommonheritableneurologic Foundation)with grantnumber960111200 toKimiaKahrizi. disorder which is characterized by an irresistible desire to move F.ZareAshraﬁ:None.F.Peymani:None.M.Mohseni:None.S. and unpleasant sensations in the legs. We aim to identify new Arzhangi: None. M. Akbari: None. H. Najmabadi: None. K. variantsassociatedwithRLSbyperforminggenome-widelinkage Kahrizi:None. andsubsequentassociationanalysisoffortymember’sfamilywith historyofRLS.Wefoundevidenceoflinkageforthreeloci7q21.11 (HLOD=3.02), 7q21.13-7q21.3 (HLOD=3.02) and 7q22.3 (HLOD 
P09 .116.A Mapping the GBA1 gene rare variants and their =3.09).Fine-mappingofthoseregionsinassociationstudyusing effectsin aHungarian Parkinson’sDiseaseCohort exome sequencing identiﬁed SEMA3A (p-value=8.5·10-4), PP
P1 R9A (p-value=7.2·10-4), PU
S7  (p-value=8.7·10-4), CDHR3 Tamás Szlepák1, Annabel Plamen Kossev1, Dóra Csabán1, Anett (p-value=7.2·10-4),HB
P1 (p-value=1.5·10-4)andCOG5(p-value Illés2, Beáta Borsos1, Péter Balicza1, Zoltán Grosz1, Annamária =1.5·10-4) genes with p-values below signiﬁcance threshold. Takáts1,PéterKlivényi3, Mária JuditMolnár1 Linkage analysis with subsequent association study of exome variantsidentiﬁedsixnewgenesassociatedwithRLSmappedon 1SemmelweisUniversity,Budapest,Hungary,2PentacoreLaboratories 7q21and q22. and Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 3University of U. Ergun: None. B. Say: None. S. Guntekin Ergun: None. F. Szeged,Szeged, Hungary. Percin:None.L.Inan:None.S.Kaygisiz:None.P.GelenerAsal: EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 298 None.B.Yurteri:None.M.Struchalin:None.D.Shtokalo:None. (women 412), aged 36,5±12,3 years, with ICD-10 diagnosis of M.A.Ergun:None. schizophreniaorschizoaffectivepsychosis.Patientswerestratiﬁed into moderate and good or poor (n=233) social functioning groups. Genotyping was performed with HRM (High Resolution 
P09 .119.D Prevalence of Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 in Melt) method. Allele frequencies were aligned with Hardy- Yakutia (Russia) Weinbergequation(р>0,05). Results:Logisticregressionmodelswereestimatedtoexamine AfanasyI.Fedorov1,AitalinaL.Sukhomyasova1,IrinaA.Nikolaeva2, the association between social functioning, SNPs and environ- Anastasia A. Maksimova1, Aiaan V. Ivanov1, Polina I. Golikova1, mental factors such as birth complications, parental alcoholism, Nadezhda R.Maksimova1 history of abuse in childhood or puberty etc. Adjusted models included as signiﬁcant interaction between CD38(rs3796863) and 1North-Eastern Federal University named after M.K. Ammosov, father’s alcoholism (p<0,05); OXTR(rs53576) interaction with Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Medical Genetic Center, Republican childhood difﬁculties (p<0,001). Patients with CD38(rs3796863) Hospital №1 – “National Medical Center”, Yakutsk, Russian Federa- СС genotype who have reported father’s alcoholism were less tion. likelytobeinmoderateandgoodsocialperformancegroup(OR =0,26, 95%CI 0,20-0,34). OXTR rs53576 G allele carriers with a Introduction: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) refers to historyofabusewerealsolesslikelytobeinmoderateandgood polyglutamine diseases. Itis a progressive and late-manifestation social performance group(OR=0,06,95%CI0,01-0,30). neurodegenerative disorder. Conclusion: Oxytocin pathway polymorphisms were found to MaterialandMethods:WeanalyzedSCA1Registerdataofthe beassociatedwithsocialfunctioningandenvironmentalfactorsin MedicalGeneticCenteroftheRepublicanHospitalNo.1(National schizophrenia patients, CD38 rs3796863 С and OXTR rs53576 G Center of Medicine). Monitoring of carriers of the SCA1 mutation beingrisk alleles. coversa 20-year period. V.Mikhailova:None.V.Plakunova:None.T.Lezheiko:None. Results:Duringthemonitoringperiod,theprevalenceofSCA1 in Yakutia increased from 35 to 77.6 cases per 100,000 Yakuts. Currently,532carriersofmutationhavebeenregistered,ofwhich 
P09 .121.B Developing expression system for evaluation of 376withclinicalmanifestations.TheSCA1mutationinYakutiaare SCN1Asplicing alterations distributed over the following geographic foci - Northern (IndigirkaRiver),Central(Lena-Aldaninterﬂuve)andSouthwestern Peter Sparber, Kseniya Davidenko, Margarita Sharova, Alexandra (VilyuiandLenarivers).Currently,theexpansionoftheboundaries Filatova, Mikhail Skoblov ofthe Northern and Southwestern focuses of mutation has been established. New isolated cases of mutation carriage are also ResearchCentreforMedicalGenetics,Moscow,RussianFederation. recorded in the southern regions. The accumulation of the mutation continues in the Central focus. The median number of Introduction: Heterozygous pathogenic variants in the SCN1A CAGrepeatsforthemutantalleleis46repeats.Themedianageof gene is considered to be one of the most common causes of carriers is43 yearsold. childhood-onset epilepsies. To date almost 200 pathogenic Conclusion: The increase in the prevalence of the studied variants are annotated as splice-affecting, many of which locate mutation can be explained by the improvement of molecular outside of thecanonical splice sitesdinucleotides. However, only genetic diagnostic methods. Currently, among the population of few were conﬁrmed to disrupt splicing by a valid splicing assay. Yakutia, the accumulation and spread of the SCA1 mutation Here, we develop a robust splicing assay for functional continues. This requires further improvement of methods for the characterization of intronic and exonic variants covering all prevention of this hereditary disease. Research is part of the protein coding exonsof theSCN1A gene. projectFSRG-2020-0014“ArcticGenomics:epidemiology,heredity Material and methods: Splicing effects were predicted using andpathology”. HSF3.1, MaxEntScan and SpliceAI. Mini-, midi- and maxi-genes A.I.Fedorov:None.A.L.Sukhomyasova:None.I.A.Nikolaeva: plasmids with coding SCN1A exons were constructed based on None.A.A.Maksimova: None.A.V.Ivanov:None.P.I.Golikova: pSpl3-Flu2splicingvector.Theintronic/exonicvariantsofinterest None.N.R. Maksimova: None. wereintroducedbysite-directedmutagenesis.Theplasmidswere transfected into HEK293 cells using calcium phosphate transfec- tion method. Splicing pattern was evaluated using RT-PCR with 
P09 .120.AOxytocinreceptorgeneandCD38genepolymorph- followingSanger sequencing. ismsassociation withsocial functioning inschizophrenia Results:Splicingvectorswithdifferentgenomiccontext,several promoters of varying strength, containing different exons were VeraMikhailova1,2, Victoria Plakunova1,Tatiana Lezheiko1 createdinordertoreproducethewild-typesplicingpatternofthe SCN1A gene. 24 previously published intronic variants and one 1The Mental Health Research Center (MHRC), Moscow, Russian novelmissensevariantwerethentestesforsplicingalteration.The Federation,2Research CentreforMedicalGenetics, Moscow,Russian most common splicing change was exon skipping (37.5%) Federation. followed by complex splicing changes (29.2%) and cryptic acceptor site activation (16.6%). 4 tested variants showed no Introduction: Social adaptation is the main ability for any splicing change, although being reported as pathogenic or likely schizophreniapatientanditsfamilytojudgewhetherthetherapy pathogenic intheliterature. isworkingornot,improvingofsocialfunctioningisthemailgoal Conclusion: A splicing assay for the SCN1A gene was created. toreachforhealthcareprofessionals.Oxytocinplaysanimportant Testing of more than 20 variants conﬁrmed the importance of role in social behavior, multiple OXTR polymorphisms has been functionalanalysis forproper variantannotation. observedto be associated withautism, OCD, bipolar disorder. P.Sparber:None.K.Davidenko:None. M.Sharova:None. A. Materials and Methods: Social functioning was assessed with Filatova: None. M. Skoblov: None. the Personal and Social Performance (PSP) scale in 933 patients EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 299 
P09 .122.C Proteomics of the dentate gyrus reveals semantic seizures,mentalretardation,andsevereelectrolyteimbalance.He dementia speciﬁcbiology could not sit and walk by himself. He could understand spoken language but could not speak. The serum K-level was 2.3-2.5 MerelO.Mol1,ShamiramMelhem1,SuzanneS.M.Miedema2,Harro mmol/l(normal 4.1-5.3 mmol/l). Patient 2 isa female with ataxia, Seelaar1, Netherlands Brain Bank3, August B. Smit2, John C. van intentiontremor,anddyskinesia.Shestudiesinanordinaryschool Swieten1, Jeroen G. J. vanRooij1 withhighgrades.Herspeechhaselementsofchanting.Attheage of4y11m,shehadfebrileseizuresandstartedtakingantiepileptic 1Department of Neurology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, therapy.Withouttherapy,ataxiaandtremorincreaseandshehas Netherlands,2CenterforNeurogenomicsandCognitiveResearch,VU a headache. The details of their symptoms are presented in the University, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Netherlands Institute for Table. Neuroscience, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Results:ThediagnosiswasconﬁrmedbyWESinPatient1and WGSinPatient2.WeidentiﬁednovelvariantsintheKCNJ10gene Introduction:Semanticdementia(SD)isasubtypeoffrontotem- in the compound heterozygous state: c.322T>C/с.643G>A and poral dementia (FTD) characterized by impaired word compre- c.148C>T/c.925T>A.ThevariantswereveriﬁedbySangersequen- hensionandsemanticmemory.Theconsistentneuropathological cing.Parentsandsiblingsarehealthyandheterozygousforeither diagnosis is FTD-TDP subtype C, with TDP-43 protein aggregates mutantallele. in the temporal cortex and dentate gyrus of the hippocampus. Conclusions: We describe patients with the different pheno- Despite this striking clinicopathological concordance, the patho- typesof SESAMEsyndrome. physiologicalmechanisms remain largely unknown. Materials and Methods: We assessed the relative protein abundance changes in laser capture micro-dissected dentate gyrus of 15 SD patients and 14 age- and sex-matched non- demented controls using a label-free quantitative proteomics approach. We identiﬁed proteins and biological pathways that might be uniquely altered in SD, by comparing to 9 other large FTDandAlzheimer’sDisease(AD)proteomicsdatasets.Validation experiments on selected candidate proteins are ongoing, includ- ingimmunoblotting. Results: 145 of all 2414 detected proteins showed differential abundance(FDR<5%)inSDpatients.73proteinswereobserved inatleast2otherproteomicsstudiesinFTD/AD.Theremaining72 proteinswereregardedaspotentiallySDspeciﬁcandselectedfor further analyses. Functional enrichment revealed an overrepre- sentation of the cell-cell adherens junction and the cadherin- catenin complex, represented by multiple upregulated proteins within this complex, including CDH2/N-cadherin, CTNNB1/ß- catenin,and JUP/plakoglobin. Conclusions:OurﬁndingsindicateanSDspeciﬁcupregulation of cell adhesion proteins constituting the cadherin-catenin complexatthesynapticmembrane.Validationofseveralproteins by immunoblotting is currently being performed. This study contributes to an improved understanding of the disease processes in SD, and demonstrates the value of quantitative proteomicstodifferentiatethepathophysiologicalmechanismsof speciﬁcsubtypes ofdementia. M.O.Mol:None.S.Melhem:None.S.S.M.Miedema:None.H. Seelaar: None. .. Netherlands Brain Bank: None. A.B. Smit: None.J.C. van Swieten:None. J.G.J.van Rooij:None. 
P09 .123.DClinical andgenetic characteristics oftwo patients from Russia with SESAME syndrome due to mutations of the KCNJ10 gene N. Semenova: None. O. Schagina: None. A. Marakhonov: NataliaSemenova, OlgaSchagina, AndreyMarakhonov None. ReseachCenterforMedicalGenetics,Moscow,RussianFederation. 
P09 .124.A Discrepancy in phenotypes between SHANK2 deletion and nonsense mutations in hiPSC-derived neural Introduction: SESAME syndrome (seizures, sensorineural deaf- stemcells ness, ataxia, mental retardation, and electrolyte imbalance) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in Flavia-BiancaB.Cristian1,CarstenSticht2,RalphRöth1,3,GudrunA. theKCNJ10gene.Generally,patientshaveseveresymptomsofthe Rappold1,Simone Berkel1 disease. Materialsandmethods:Wepresenttwochildrenofthesame age (10 years old) with SESAME syndrome and different clinical 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Institute of Human pictures. Both of them were from non-consanguineous parents Genetics,HeidelbergUniversityHospital,Heidelberg,Germany,2Core with no signiﬁcant family history. Patient 1 is male and has Facility Next Generation Sequencing, Medical Faculty Mannheim, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 300 HeidelbergUniversity,Mannheim,Germany,3nCounterCoreFacility, Results: As a result of whole exome sequencing analysis Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidel- NM_012090.5: c.3133G>T: p.Val1045Leu, NM_016937.4: berg,Germany. c.1436C>T: p.Thr479Ile, NM_003935.5: c.2018T>A: p.Leu673Gln novel heterozygous variants were detected in the MACF1, POLA1 SHANK2mutationshavebeenconsistentlyassociatedwithautism and TO
P3 B genes, respectively, and the homozygous SL
C13 A5 spectrumdisorders(ASD).However,thespeciﬁcconsequencesof gene: c.425C>T: p.Thr142Met mutation. In the analysis of POLA1 these mutations at the molecular/cellular level, including the cell gene segregation, it was observed that the variant was inherited types/developmental stages that are crucially relevant for the fromthemother. Parent studies ofother variantscontinue. phenotype, remain unclear. A fundamental question is whether Conclusions: In this study, we found two novel heterozygous theaffectedprocessesarelimitedtosynapse formation/function, variantsassociatedwiththeextremelyrarediseasesLissencephaly or if the pathobiology of the disorder starts earlier, either in 9 with complex brainstem malformation (LI
S9  [MIM no: 618325) differentiating neurons or already in neuronal progenitors. We and Van Esch-O’Driscoll syndrome (VEODS [MIM no: 301030]). have reprogrammed ﬁbroblasts from a trio – two neurotypical Although the TO
P3 B gene is not deﬁned as the genotype of a parents and their daughter diagnosed with ASD, harboring a de particular disease in OMIM, its pathogenic variants have been novo120kb deletioninSHANK2– into inducedpluripotent stem associated withepilepsy, cognitive andbehavioral disorders. cells (iPSCs), and subsequently differentiated them into neural B.Gerik-Celebi: None. H.Aydin:None. stem cells (NSCs). For comparison, we used four additional iPSC lines: one derived from a patient with a heterozygous nonsense mutation in SHANK2 (R841X), a CRISPR/Cas9-engineered homo- 
P09 .127.D Familywise whole-genome linkage analysis of zygous SHANK2 knockout line, and their respective isogenic speciﬁc language impairment (SLI) identiﬁes novel loci and controls. Interestingly, only the NSCs derived from the deletion replicates previous ﬁndings patient presented a strikingly different morphology, whereas the otherSHANK2-deﬁcientlineswereindistinguishablefromwildtype ErinM.Andres1,KathleenKelseyEarnest1,ShelleyD.Smith2,Mabel cells. Moreover, the SHANK2 deletion NSCs showed a tendency L.Rice1, Muhammad Hashim Raza1 towards premature differentiation into neurons. The discrepancy between the phenotypes, coupled with comparable SHANK2 1University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, USA, 2University of Nebraska levels in the deletion patient and controls, suggests that the Medical Center,Omaha, NE,USA. altered phenotype might be caused by genetic factors indepen- dentofSHANK2expression.Infact,thisSHANK2deletionremoves Introduction:Individualswithspeciﬁclanguageimpairment(SLI) notonlyexon16, butalsoalargeportionof theadjacentintron. areoftenslowtotalkandtheirperformanceonmultiplemeasures This region harbors numerous enhancers hypothesized to be of language remains below their age-matched peers throughout relevantforgeneralneuraldifferentiation,andtheirdeletioncould development, despite no known cause and typical non-verbal contribute to theobservedphenotype. intelligence. Twin and family studies indicate genetic factors are F.B. Cristian: None. C. Sticht: None. R. Röth: None. G.A. involvedinSLI.Althoughtherearenumerousreportsofgenomic Rappold:None. S. Berkel:None. regionsandgenes,theunderlyingcausalpathwaysofSLIhavenot beenexplained. Materials and Methods: We used SNP genotyping data from 
P09 .125.B Three novel heterozygous variants in the MACF1, six families (N=60) followed longitudinally, all with multiple POLA1 and TO
P3 B genes: a new phenotype associated with members who have SLI, to perform genome-wide parametric the TO
P3 Bgene? linkage analysis. SLI phenotype status was categorically deﬁned based on the lowest score across time points on an age- BetülGerik-Celebi1, Hilal Aydin2 appropriate standardized omnibus language measure. Behavioral informationwas availablefor both parentsofeach proband. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Balikesir Ataturk City Hospital, Results: Suggestive linkage at 14q11.2-q13.3 in family 489 Balikesir, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatric Neurology, Balikesir (LOD=2.4)replicatedapreviousregionofinterest.Additionally,a University Faculty ofMedicine, Balikesir, Turkey. three-branchextendedfamily(315)showedlinkagetoanovelSLI locus at 15q24.3-25.3 (LOD=3.06), while another family (300) Introduction: Epilepsy is a multifactorial and heterogeneous showed suggestive linkage at 4q31.23-q35.2 (LOD=2.4). All the disorder that occurs mainly due to structural, metabolic, highest LOD scores were identiﬁed under a recessive mode of immunologicalandgeneticreasons.Epilepsycanbeseenaspart inheritance. The other three families did not reveal suggestive of the clinical spectrum of chromosomal abnormalities, single linkage. gene disorders, microdeletion and duplication syndromes, with Conclusions:ThisinitialstudyoffamiliesfromtheKUSLIcohort different inheritance patterns, pathophysiology, and accompany- indicatesthecontinuedimportance offamily-based investigation ingdysmorphicand/ornon-dysmorphicﬁndings.Itisextremely of complex disorders, like SLI. The results will serve as the importanttodiagnosepatientswithepilepsy, toknowadditional foundationfortargetedfollow-upinquirytoidentifysharedgene preventable ﬁndings, to recover completely with treatment in effects among families segregating SLI. Funding: NIDCD someofthem,andtopreventtheemergenceofindividualswith (T32D
C000052 and R01D
C001803 ) similarﬁndingswith prenatalpreimplantation geneticdiagnosis. E.M.Andres:None.K.K.Earnest:None.S.D.Smith:None.M.L. Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was Rice:None. M.H. Raza:None. performedusingIlluminaHiSeq4000instrumentonfourdifferent patientswhopresentedwithepilepsyanddysmorphicsymptoms. We used sanger sequencing for mother and father carrier 
P09 .128.AIdentiﬁcationofenhancerregionstoexpose novel screenings. genetic causes ofspinocerebellar ataxia EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 301 Fatemeh Ghorbani, Eddy N. de Boer, Kim A. de Lange, Dineke S. prior-guided gene expression network inference strategy to Verbeek,Helga Westers, CleoC.van Diemen analyze GR-regulated co-expression patterns within and across brain regions. We map the identiﬁed transcriptional proﬁles to a University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. circuit-level in order to get a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms involvedinthe brain response tostress. Introduction: Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a group of N.Gerstner:None.A.Krontira:None.J.Knauer-Arloth:None. genetically heterogeneous, dominantly inherited ataxias. E.B.Binder: None. Although38SCAgenesareknown,approximately25%ofpatients remain genetically undiagnosed upon testing of the coding regionsofSCAgenesforvariations.Wehypothesizethatvariants 
P09 .131.D STXB
P1  splicing variant caused developmental in the regulatory regions of SCA genes might contribute to the delay, hypotonyanddysmorphic featureswithout epilepsy diseaseinsomegeneticallyundiagnosedpatients.Here,weaimto identifytheyetunknowncerebellarenhancersofSCAgeneswith AhmetYesilyurt1,Eyyup Uctepe2,Sait Tumer1,NisaEsen1 theultimategoaltoscreentheseregionsforvariationsinpatients. Materials and methods: We selected four genes, TBP, ATXN3, 1Acibadem Labgen Genetic Diagnosis Center, Istanbul, Turkey, ATXN1andITPR1,forenhanceridentiﬁcationinneuroblastomaSH- 2Acıbadem Labmed/Ankara Tissue Typing Laboratory, Ankara, SY5Y cells and healthy human cerebellum using 4C-seq. Putative Turkey. enhancers were prioritized for follow-up studies by overlapping cerebellar/SH-SY5Y 4C-seq data with publicly available SH-SY5Y/ STXB
P1 genemutationsareamongthemostcommonmutations cerebellar ATAC-seq, ChiP-seq and Dnase-seq data. Next, these in early onset epileptic encephalopathies. Pathogenic variants in regions will be validated with in vitro luciferase assays and the STXB
P1  gene are associated with neonatal or infantile onset screened for genetic variations in 500 genetically undiagnosed refractory epilepsy, EEG abnormality, and global developmental SCApatients. retardation.However,somepathogenicSTXB
P1 variantshasbeen Results: The 4C-seq data showed 2, 3 and 1 shared putative reported with developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypo- enhancer regions between cerebellum and SH-SY5Y for TBP, toniaandataxiawithoutepilepsy.Here,wereporta2year-oldgirl ATXN3, ATXN1, respectively, after prioritization with ATAC-seq, patientwhowasadmittedtoourclinicwithdevelopmentaldelay, ChiP-seq and Dnase-seq data. Additionally, 2, 1 and 7 putative hypotony and dysmorphic features (macrocephaly, ﬂat occiput, enhancer regions were unique for the cerebellum for ATXN3, wide forehead, cup shaped ears, depressed nasal bridge, ATXN1and ITPR1,respectively. hypoplastic nasal wings, short neck and strabismus) without Conclusions:PutativecerebellarandSH-SY5Yenhancerregions epilepsy. Brain magnetic resonance image (MRI) showed mild arequitesimilarforthreeofthefourSCAgenesnowtested.The hyperintense gliotic signals compatible with mild hypoxic identiﬁcation of enhancers will help to understand how the ischemicsequelae.Weperformedwholeexomesequenceanalysis expression of SCA genes is regulated in the human cerebellum (WES) and identiﬁed a heterozygous splicing mutation (c.1029 andwhether variation inthese regions maylead todisease. +1G>A)inSTXB
P1 gene(NM_003165.6).Thisstudyreinforcesthe F.Ghorbani:None.E.N.deBoer:None.K.A.deLange:None. idea that epilepsy is not a mandatory feature of patients with a D.S.Verbeek:None.H.Westers:None.C.C.vanDiemen:None. STXB
P1 mutation. A. Yesilyurt: None. E. Uctepe: None. S. Tumer: None. N. Esen: None. 
P09 .130.C Brain region speciﬁc effects on the expression of glucocorticoid receptor-regulated genes 
P09 .132.A Burden of rare variants in ANK2, AKA
P9  and TS
C2  Nathalie Gerstner1,2,3, Anthodesmi Krontira1,3, Janine Knauer- genes supports membrane trafﬁcking and cytoskeletal pro- Arloth1,2, Elisabeth B.Binder1,4 tein binding as biological processes in patients with severe tinnitus 1Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany, 2Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Sana Amanat1, Alvaro Gallego-Martinez1, Joseph Sollini2, Patricia Germany, 3International Max Planck Research School for Transla- Perez-Carpena1, Juan M. Espinosa-Sanchez1,3, Ismael Aran4, Andres tional Psychiatry, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Soto-Varela5, Angel Batuecas‐Caletrio6, Barbara Canlon7, Patrick Germany,4DepartmentofPsychiatryandBehavioralSciences,Emory May8,ChristopherR.Cederroth9,2,7,JoseAntonioLopez-Escamez1,3,10 University Schoolof Medicine, Atlanta,GA, USA. 1GENYO-Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research–Pﬁzer/Uni- Functional variants increasing the risk for psychiatric disorders versityofGranada/JuntadeAndalucía,PTS,Granada,Spain,2Hearing alter the transcriptional response of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) Sciences, Division of Clinical Neuroscience, School of Medicine, target genes. The GR-regulated transcripts form brain-region UniversityofNottingham,Nottingham,UnitedKingdom,3Department speciﬁc co-expression networks whose structure is affected by ofOtolaryngology,InstitutodeInvestigaciónBiosanitaria,ibs.Granada, different behavioral stressors throughout development in mouse Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain, 4Depart- models.Tofurtherstudytheregionalspeciﬁcityofbrainresponse ment of Otolaryngology, Complexo Hospitalario de Pontevedra, toGRactivation,westimulatedwithglucocorticoidsorvehicle30 Pontevedra, Spain, 5Division of Otoneurology, Department of Otorhi- miceforfourhours,isolatedeightdistinctbrainregions(prefrontal nolaryngology, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario, Santiago de cortex-PFC, amygdala, cerebellum-CER, paraventricular nucleus Compostela,Santiago,Spain,6DepartmentofOtolaryngology,Hospital of the hypothalamus, dorsal and ventral cornu ammonis 1 and Universitario de Salamanca, IBSAL Salamanca Spain, Salamanca, dorsalandventraldentategyrus)andperformedRNAsequencing. Spain, 7Laboratory of Experimental Audiology, Department of Proﬁling patterns of differential gene expression (DE) in each Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Swe- of the brain regions, we observed a strong response of the PFC den,8BioinformaticsCore,LuxembourgCentreforSystemBiomedicine, (245uniquedifferentiallyexpressed(DE)genes,FDR10%)andthe University of Luxemburg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg, 9National CER (176 unique DE genes), while 172 genes were differentially Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Nottingham Biomedical Research expressed across all regions. Furthermore, we employed a Centre, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Ropewalk House, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 302 Nottingham, United Kingdom, 10Department of Surgery, Division of calling was addressed for different genomic features, separating Otolaryngology,UniversityofGranada,Granada,Spain. smallindels(SI),StructuralVariants(SV)andCopyNumberVariants (CNV).Weanalysedtheburdenofhighconstraintvariantsofeach Introduction:Severetinnitusisaheterogeneousconditionreported type in both genders comparing their allelic frequencies with in1%ofthepopulation,showingasigniﬁcantheritability.Itisoften Swedishcontrols from SWEGENdatabase. associated with hearing loss, hyperacusis or Meniere disease (MD). Results: We have found a signiﬁcant burden of ultrarare SV We aim to identify genes involved in severe tinnitus by using an variantsinseveretinnituspatientswhencomparedwithSwedish extremephenotype(EP)approach. controls((SV)=pvalues:(DUP)=1,2e-08;(DEL)=9,4e-04;(INS)=4,1e- Materials and Methods: Three independent cohorts with 12).However,bothgendersreportedsimilarburdenofdamaging European ancestry (Spanish with MD, Swedish tinnitus and variants on the entire genome when considering only structural European with generalised epilepsy) were selected to sequence variantsfoundinhighconstraint regions. patients with severe tinnitus. We performed a single rare variant Conclusion: We report a signiﬁcant burden of ultrarare analysis (MAF<0.05) and a gene burden analysis in the structural variation across highconstraint regions of the genome SynaptomeDB synaptic genes (N=1886, MAF<0.1). Gene ontol- forourtinnituscohortforbothgenders.Thisburdenincreasesas ogy(GO)analysesandgeneenrichmentanalyseswereperformed wesegregate patientswith other clinicalsymptomatology. usingGSEA andMsigDB. Funding:ThisstudyisfundedbyGNP-182GENDER-NetCo-Plus Results: We found an enrichment of rare missense variants in Fund from “La Caixa” Foundation (ID 100010434), under agree- 24synapticgenesincludingAKA
P9 ,ANK2andTS
C2 (p<2E-04).This ment LCF/PR/D
E18 /52010002(JALE and CRC) and H2020-S
C1 - burdenwasreplicatedintheSwedishtinnituscohort(N=97)for 2019-84826. ANK2 and in a subset of (N=34) with severe tinnitus for ANK2, A.Gallego-Martinez:None.S.Amanat:None.N.Trpchevska: AKA
P9  and TS
C2  genes. However, these associations were not None.C.Cederroth: None. J. Lopez-Escamez: None. signiﬁcantintheepilepsycohortwithouttinnitus(N=701).ANK2 coordinates the assembly of several proteins in the axon initial segment (AIS) and drives axonal branching. GO analyses found 
P09 .134.C 90% TS
C1 /TS
C2  mutation detection rate in Tuber- membranetrafﬁckingandcytoskeletalproteinbindinginneurons ousSclerosisComplexpatientswithoutmutationidentiﬁedin associated withsevere tinnitus. commerciallaboratories Conclusion: ANK2, AKA
P9  and TS
C2  reveal the main biological processes suggesting that the cytoskeleton organization in AIS Katarzyna Klonowska1, Joannes Grevelink2, Krinio Giannikou1, could beinvolved insevere tinnitus. MagdalenaTyburczy1, David Kwiatkowski1 Funding source: This project is funded by H2020 MSC-ITN- 2016-722046, H2020-S
C1 -2019-848261 and GENDER-Net Co-Plus 1Brigham and Women’s Hospital/Harvard Medical School, Boston, Fund (GNP-182) by “la Caixa” Foundation (ID 100010434), under MA, USA, 2Boston Dermatology and Laser Center, Massachusetts agreementLCF/PR/D
E18 /52010002. GeneralHospital, Boston, MA, USA. S.Amanat:None.A.Gallego-Martinez:None.J.Sollini:None. P. Perez-Carpena: None. J.M. Espinosa-Sanchez: None. I. Aran: Introduction: Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a genetic None. A. Soto-Varela: None. A. Batuecas‐Caletrio: None. B. disorder due to TS
C1 /TS
C2  mutations, characterized by hamarto- Canlon: None. P. May: None. C.R. Cederroth: None. J.A. Lopez- masinvolvingmultipleorgans.Ourpaststudieshaveshownthat Escamez:None. mosaicism is common in TSC patients who had ‘no mutation identiﬁed’(NMI)by conventional testing. Materials and Methods: We used Massively Parallel Sequen- 
P09 .133.B Ultrarare structural variation across the genome cing (MPS) for analysis of 144 samples [normal tissues/ﬂuids and contributes to severe tinnitus phenotype TSCtumors(skin:angioﬁbromas,ungualﬁbromas,shagreenpatch; kidney:angiomyolipomas)]from30NMITSCpatients(medianage: Alvaro Gallego-Martinez1,2, Sana Amanat1,2, Natalia Trpchevska3, 33). Mosaic mutations were validated by our new MPS strategy Christopher RCederroth3,4,Jose AntonioLopez-Escamez1,2,5 utilizingUniqueMolecularIdentiﬁer(UMI)basederrorsuppression [sensitivity:0.02%variantallelefrequency(VAF)].Combiningthese 1Otology & Neurotology Group CTS 495, Genomic Medicine Area, results with previous analysis of 44 mosaic TSC patients, we Centro de Genomica e Investigación Oncológica (GENyO), Pﬁzer- performedgenotype-phenotype correlations. Universidad de Granada-Junta de Andalucía, Granada, Spain, Results: TS
C1 /TS
C2  mutations were identiﬁed in 27 of 30 2Department of Otolaryngology, Instituto de Investigación Biosani- patients(90%)[21(78%)inTS
C2 ;6(22%)inTS
C1 ];25patientshad taria, ibs.GRANADA, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, mosaicism[bloodVAF:0-19%,median:2.8%].Weidentiﬁed7novel Granada,Spain,3LaboratoryofExperimentalAudiology,Department TS
C1 /TS
C2 mutations,including6largemutations/rearrangements of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, and a de novo deep intronic deletion. We also identiﬁed two Sweden,4DivisionofClinicalNeuroscience,UniversityofNottingham, unique sporadic TS
C2  mutations in each of an angiomyolipoma Nottingham, United Kingdom, 5Department of Surgery, Division of and a facial angioﬁbroma, in a patient with minimal TSC clinical Otolaryngology, University ofGranada, Granada,Spain. features.ThemosaicVAFwassigniﬁcantlyhigherinTS
C1 vs.TS
C2  (median VAF in facial angioﬁbroma: TS
C1 -6.4%, TS
C2 -4.2%, p= Introduction: Tinnitus is the most frequent phantom sensation, 0.02),although the numberof clinicalfeatures wassimilar. affecting 70 million individuals in Europe. While prevalence is Conclusions:WeprovidenewstrategyforverysensitiveTS
C1 / higher in men, women shows greater psychological burden, TS
C2  mosaic mutation detection and deﬁne the spectrum of suggesting that different coping mechanisms operate between mosaicmutationsandassociatedclinicalfeaturesingreaterdetail bothgenders.Inthisstudy,wesequencedaSwedishcohortof97 thanreportedpreviously. tinnitus patients aiming to analyse large genomic feature The study was funded by Engels Family Fund and FY2020 differences betweenboth genders. Tuberous Sclerosis Alliance Postdoctoral Fellowship Award (KK) Methods: We selected 97 tinnitus Swedish patients according K.Klonowska:None.J.Grevelink:None.K.Giannikou:None. to their reported tinnitus functional index scores through M.Tyburczy: None.D.Kwiatkowski: None. questionaries and performed whole genome sequencing. Variant EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 303 
P09 .135.D Tyrosine hydroxylase deﬁciency associated with Introduction: The Undiagnosed Rare Diseases Program, Spai- dopa-responsive dystonia inaBulgarian family nUDP,(http://spainudp.isciii.es/)isaninstitutionalProgramwhich has the aim of ﬁnding a diagnosis for people with unsolved rare MayaAtanasoska1,2,RadoslavaVazharova1,3,LubomirBalabanski1, diseases. For this purpose, genomic analysis is applied together SlavyanaYaneva-Staykova1, Draga Toncheva1,4 with deep phenotyping in a multidisciplinary approach involving clinicians,geneticists, bioinformaticians and researchers. 1Gynecologyandassistedreproductionhospital“MalinovMD”,Soﬁa, Materials and Methods: Phenotips was used for an accurate Bulgaria, 2Soﬁa University St Kliment Ohridski, Faculty of Biology, and standardized description of phenotypes (through HPO, DepartmentofGenetics,Soﬁa,Bulgaria,3SoﬁaUniversity StKliment Human Phenotype Ontology). Whole Exome Sequencing (WES), Ohridski, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biology, Medical andmorerecentlyWholeGenome(WGS),wereanalyzedinTrios. genetics and Microbiology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4Medical University of Inaddition,Transcriptome analysis(RNASeq)wasalsoinitiatedin Soﬁa,Department of Medical Genetics, Soﬁa,Bulgaria. 22cases. Results: At this moment, genomic analysis through WES was Introduction: The deﬁciency of tyrosine hydroxylase leads to performed in 140 patients. Signiﬁcantly, we have resolved autosomal recessive L-DOPA-responsive infantile Parkinsonism favorably, establishing the diagnosis of the disease in 43% of andsusceptibilitytoadult-onsetL-DOPA-responsivedystoniadue the cases, the vast majority of them with pediatric neurological to striatal dopamine shortage. Here, we present a family with an rare syndromes. In 78% of diagnosed cases, the casual variant affected 1.5-year-old infant, second-born of nonconsanguineous corresponded to a de novo mutation. Additionally, in 11 cases, parents, with symptoms of progressive hypokinesia, hypotonia, variantsininteresting candidategeneswerefoundwhichshould reducedfacialmimicry,diurnalperiodsoflethargyandirritability, be further explored for functional validation. This data is being sporadicdystonicmovements,developmentaldelay,andseizures. shared through Matchmaker exchange in order to ﬁnd similar MaterialsandMethods:GenomicDNAfromtheprobandand patients,andcollaborationswereestablishedin9cases.Moreover, his family members (mother, father, and a 6-year-old sister) was 13caseswithnegativeexomeresultsarebeinganalyzedbyWGS extracted. Whole exome sequencing was performed for the and/orRNASeq. patient followed by targeted sequencing of the TH gene for his Conclusions:WESanalysishasallowedustogetadiagnosisin family,using anIllumina MiSeqplatform. a signiﬁcant proportion of cases and revealed some recurrent Results:Weidentiﬁedtwoheterozygouspathogenicvariantsin causalgenesinourseries.WGSandRNASeqanalysisisexpected the TH gene: c.605G>A(p.Arg202His) and c.614T>C(p.Leu205Pro), toincreasethediagnosticrate.Collaborativeeffortsareimportant associated with an autosomal recessive form of L-DOPA- to establish new candidate genes as causal genes deﬁning new responsive infantile Parkinsonism. The targeted sequencing disease entities. conﬁrmed the inheritance of the variants, from the mother (TH: B.Martinez-Delgado:None.E.Lopez:None.S.Monzón:None. c.605G>A) and the father (TH:c.614T>C). The sister is a hetero- I. Cuesta: None. B. Baladrón: None. J. Alvarado: None. G. zygouscarrier ofthe TH:c.614T>C. Gomez-Mariano: None. M. Gutierrez: None. J. Lara: None. R. Conclusion: DOPA-responsive dystonias are a group of Cazorla:None.G.Iglesias:None.E.Román:None.P.Ros:None. hereditary neurometabolic disorders. The symptoms of the P.Tutor:None.S.Mellor:None.M.Cabrejas:None.A.Zaballos: proband correspond to the severe autosomal recessive Segawa None.F. Alonso: None. E.Bermejo: None. M. Posada:None. syndrome with dystonia onset in the early neonatal period. Beginning treatment, he developed L-dopa hypersensitivity and adverse side-effects. The rest of the family members were non- 
P09 .137.B Van Maldergem syndrome 2; An extremely rare symptomatic at the time of examination. Studies in a hetero- case zygous knock-in mice-model have shown 60-80% striatal dopa- mine reduction as a result of the dominant-negative effect of Deniz Esin, Fahrettin Duymus, Busra Goksel Tulgar, Ebru Marzioglu mutant alleles. The outcome is gene dosage depended and Ozdemir, TulinCora individuals with heterozygous TH pathogenic variants are expected tobe susceptible toadult-onset DRD. SelcukUniversity, Konya,Turkey. M. Atanasoska: None. R. Vazharova: None. L. Balabanski: None.S. Yaneva-Staykova: None. D.Toncheva: None. Van Maldergem syndrome 2 is an autosomal recessive disease characterized by intellectual disability, dysmorphic craniofacial features, auditory malformations resulting in hearing loss, and 
P09 .136.A Diagnostic exome and genome sequencing in limbmalformations.Thissyndromeiscausedbymutationsinthe complex patients of the Spanish Undiagnosed Rare Diseases FAT4gene.TheFAT4geneencodesaproteinthatisamemberof Program (SpainUDP) protocadherins. In this case, we aimed to share the diagnosis process of a 4-year-old boy with Van Maldergem syndrome 2, BeatrizMartinez-Delgado1,2,EstrellaLopez1,SaraMonzón3,Isabel whichisextremelyrare.Afour-year-old malepatientwasreferred Cuesta3, Beatriz Baladrón1, Jose Ignacio Alvarado1, Gema Gomez- to our clinic with complaints of dysmorphic facial features, poor Mariano1, Marina Gutierrez1, Julián Lara4, Rosario Cazorla4, Gema growth and feeding, and neuromotor retardation. Dysmorphic Iglesias4, Enriqueta Román4,Puriﬁcación Ros4, PabloTutor4,Susana ﬁndings of the patient included microcephaly, bitemporal Mellor4, Maria Jose Cabrejas4, Angel Zaballos5, Francisco Javier narrowing,highpalate,dentalmalocclusion,maxillaryhypoplasia, Alonso1,2,Eva Bermejo1, ManuelPosada1 andaprominentauricle.Thepatientalsohadbilateralhearingloss sincebirthandspasticityandcryptorchidism.CranialMRﬁndings 1Instituto de Investigación de Enfermedades Raras, IIER. Instituto de of the patient were diffuse polymicrogyria, periventricular Salud Carlos III, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBER de Enferme- calciﬁcation, subcortical subependymal heterotopia, pontine dadesRaras(CIBERER),Madrid,Spain,3BioinformaticsUnit.Instituto hypoplasia, and large cisterna magna. The patient had a history deSaludCarlosIII,Majadahonda,Madrid,Spain,4HospitalPuertade ofgastrostomyduetofeedingdifﬁculty.Herparentswerehealthy Hierro, Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain, 5Genomics Unit. Instituto de andhavenoconsanguinity.Wholeexomesequenceanalysiswas SaludCarlos III,Majadahonda, Madrid,Spain. performedonthepatient.FAT4:c.6788 C>TandFAT4:c.3055 C>A heterozygous mutation was detected. As we know to date these EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 304 two mutations and the coexistence of these two heterozygous promoteviabilityofdopaminergicneuronsinParkinson’sdisease, mutations were not found in the literatüre review. In this case ithasnot yet beenlinkedto humandisease. report,weemphasizethatanovelcompoundheterozygousFAT4 Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing was mutation may cause Van Maldergem syndrome 2 and we aim to performedonnineaffectedindividuals,comprisingﬁveunrelated contribute to theliterature. families.Insilicomodelingwasperformedonsuspectedcausative D. Esin: None. F. Duymus: None. B. Goksel Tulgar: None. E. variants. The consequences of VP
S41  disruption were assessed in Marzioglu Ozdemir:None. T.Cora:None. vitro using human embryonic stem cells and in vivo using zebraﬁsh. Results: Affected individuals presented with progressive 
P09 .138.C Bi-allelic variants in HOPS subunit VP
S41  cause neurodevelopmentaldisorderconsistingofcognitiveimpairment, cerebellarataxiaandpointtodifferentiallysosomaldysregu- cerebellaratrophy/hypoplasia,nystagmus,andmotordysfunction lation in braincelltypes withataxiaanddystonia.Wholeexomesequencingrevealedthat eachindividualcarriedoneoffourhomozygousmissensevariants Leslie E. Sanderson1, Kristina Lanko1, Maysoon Alsagob2, Rawan in VP
S41 . In vivo imaging in a genetic zebraﬁsh model indicated Almass3, Nada Al-Ahmady3, Maryam Najaﬁ4,5, Mohammad Al- lysosomal dysregulation throughout the brain, including signiﬁ- Muhaizea6, HamadAlzaidan7, HeshamAldhalaan6,Elena Perentha- cant abnormalities in progenitor cells, microglia, and cerebellar ler1,HermaC.vanderLinde1,AnitaNikoncuk1,NikolasKühn1,Dinu function.InvitroanalysesinVP
S41 knock-outstemcellsconﬁrmed Antony5, Tarek Owaidah8, Salmo Raskin9, Luana Vieira10, Romulo effects of the identiﬁed variants on VP
S41  expression and Mombach11,NajmehAhangari12,TainaSilveira13,NajimAmeziane13, function, supporting insilico predictions. Arndt Rolfs14,13, Aljohara Alharbi8, Raghda Sabbagh8, Khalid Conclusions: Bi-allelic variants in VP
S41  result in lysosomal AlAhmadi6, Bashayer Alawam7, Hazem Ghebeh15, Aljouhra Alhar- dysregulation that impacts multiple brain cell types, affects gan3, Anoud Albader3, Faisal Binhumaid3, Faten Almutairi3, Ali Al- cerebellar function, and contributes to neurodevelopmental Odaib3, Durdane Aksoy16, Nazli A. Basak17, Robin Palvadeau17, Jill disease in humans. Thus, screening for variants in VP
S41  and Rosenfeld18, Daniah Trabzuni19, Ehsan Karimiani20, Brian Meyer3, other HOPS subunits should be considered in cases of unsolved BedriKarakac15,FutwanAl-Mohanna21,StefanArold22,DilekColak23, neurodevelopmental disorder. Reza Marooﬁan20, Henry Houlden24, Aida Bertoli-Avella13, Miriam L.E. Sanderson: None. K. Lanko: None. M. Alsagob: None. R. Schmidts4,5, TahsinS.Barakat1,Tjakko van Ham1, NamikKaya3 Almass: None. N. Al-Ahmady: None. M. Najaﬁ: None. M. Al- Muhaizea: None. H. Alzaidan: None. H. Aldhalaan: None. E. 1Erasmus University Medical Center, Dept of Clinical Genetics, Perenthaler: None. H.C. van der Linde: None. A. Nikoncuk: Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research None. N. Kühn: None. D. Antony: None. T. Owaidah: None. S. Center (KFSHRC), Dept. of Genetics, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3KFSHRC, Raskin:None.L.Vieira:None.R.Mombach:None.N.Ahangari: Dept.ofGenetics,Riyadh,SaudiArabia,4GenomeResearchDivision, None. T. Silveira: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Human Genetics Dept., Radboud University Medical Center, Nijme- CENTOGENEAG.N.Ameziane:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); gen,Netherlands,5UniversityHospitalFreiburg,CenterforPediatrics Modest; CENTOGENE AG. A. Rolfs: A. Employment (full or part- and Adolescent Medicine, Freiburg, Germany, 6KFSHRC, Dept. of time); Modest; CENTOGENE AG. A. Alharbi: None. R. Sabbagh: Neurosciences, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 7KFSHRC, Dept. of Medical None. K. AlAhmadi: None. B. Alawam: None. H. Ghebeh: None. Genetics, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 8KFSHRC, Dept. of Pathology and A. Alhargan: None. A. Albader: None. F. Binhumaid: None. F. Laboratory Medicine, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 9Genetika-Centro de Almutairi:None.A.Al-Odaib:None.D.Aksoy:None.N.A.Basak: AconselhamentoeLaboratóriodeGenética,Curitiba,Curitiba,Brazil, None. R. Palvadeau: None. J. Rosenfeld: None. D. Trabzuni: 10UniversidadedaRegiãodeJoinville,ProgramadePós-Graduação None.E.Karimiani:None.B.Meyer: None.B.Karakac:None.F. em Saúde e Meio Ambiente, Santa Catarina, Brazil, 11Prefeitura de Al-Mohanna: None. S. Arold: None. D. Colak: None. R. Joinville, Núcleo de Assistência Integral ao Paciente Especial, Santa Marooﬁan: None. H. Houlden: None. A. Bertoli-Avella: A. Catarina, Brazil, 12Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Dept. of Employment (full or part-time); Modest; CENTOGENE AG. M. Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Mashad, Iran, Islamic Schmidts:None.T.S.Barakat:None.T.vanHam:None.N.Kaya: Republicof,13CENTOGENEAG,Rostock,Germany,14Albrecht-Kossel- None. Institut for Neurodegeneration, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany, 15KFSHRC, Dept. of Molecular Oncology, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 16Gaziosmanpasa University, Dept. of Neurology, Tokat, 
P09 .139.DNovelWDR45frameshiftvariantdetectedbywhole Turkey, 17Koç University, Istanbul, Turkey, 18Baylor College of exome sequencing in beta-propeller protein-associated neu- Medicine, Dept. of Molecular and Human Genetics, Houston, TX, rodegeneration disease USA, 19UCL Institute of Neurology, Dept. of Molecular Neuroscience, London,UnitedKingdom,20GeneticsResearchCentre,Molecularand SedaSusgun1,2,3,MertDemirel4,GulYalcinCakmakli4,BulentElibol5, ClinicalSciencesInstitute,StGeorge’sUniversityofLondon,London, SibelUgur Iseri1, ZuhalYapici6 United Kingdom, 21KFSHRC, Dept. of Cell Biology, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 22King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, 1Department of Genetics, Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental Computational Bioscience Research Center, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia, Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Graduate School of 23KFSHRC, Dept. of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Scientiﬁc Health Sciences, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Computing, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 24UCL Institute of Neurology, Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Bezmialem Vakif University, Dept.ofNeuromuscular Diseases, London, United Kingdom. Istanbul, Turkey, 4Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 5Department of Neurology, Introduction: Membrane trafﬁcking is an essential process in InstituteofNeurologicalSciencesandPsychiatry,HacettepeUniversity eukaryotic cells responsible for protein transport and processing. SchoolofMedicine,Ankara,Turkey,6DepartmentofNeurology,Faculty Deﬁciencies in vacuolar protein sorting (VPS) proteins, key ofMedicine,IstanbulUniversity,Istanbul,Turkey. regulators of this process, are linked to human disease. VPS proteins function as part of tethering complexes, including the Beta-propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration (BPAN) is an homotypic fusion and vacuole protein sorting (HOPS) complex. X-linked dominant subtype of neurodegeneration with brain iron While the HOPS-speciﬁc subunit VP
S41  has been reported to accumulation (NBIA). It is associated with pathogenic variations in EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 305 WDR45almostexclusivelyinfemalesduetoprobablemalelethality. Conclusions: About 10% of patients from our ASD cohort Somatic mosaicism has been reported for males diagnosed with showed rare deleterious variants in multiple genes that seem to BPAN.WDR45encodesWDrepeatdomain45andhasamainrolein fully explaintheir complex phenotype. autophagy, which is a highly conserved and essential cellular M.Cerminara:None.M.Servetti:None.M.Squillario:None.L. homeostatic process. Clinical features of BPAN include early-onset Pisciotta:None.G.Spirito:None.M.T.Divizia:None.M.Lerone: seizures,developmentaldelay,intellectualdisability,delayedspeech, None. E. De Grandis: None. S. Boeri: None. L. Nobili: None. D. and motor dysfunction. In this study, we have performed whole- Vozzi: None. R. Sanges: None. F. Zara: None. S. Gustincich: exomesequencing(WES)inamalewithapotentialclinicaldiagnosis None.A. Puliti:None. of BPAN at the age of 37. This effort followed by Sanger-based validationand segregationanalysis has led us identify a frameshift variant in low level mosaic state in the DNA obtained from the 
P09 .141.B Whole genome sequencing in neurodegenerative peripheral blood of the affected male. Our next step will be diseases:novel variants usingdifferent bioinformaticstools investigatingsomaticmosaicismusingdifferenttissuesamplesfrom proband. This work has been supported by the grants of TUBA Roberta Croce1, Lucia Corrado1, Nadia Barizzone1, Alice Di Pierro1, GEBI
P2019 program. LoredanaMarialuisaGenovese2,FilippoGeraci2,EleonoraMangano3, S.Susgun:None.M.Demirel:None.G.YalcinCakmakli:None. Romina D’Aurizio2, Roberta Bordoni3, Davide Corà1, Francesco B.Elibol: None. S.Ugur Iseri: None.Z. Yapici: None. Favero1, Miriam Zuccalà1, Cristoforo Comi1, Fabiola De Marchi4, Luca Magistrelli4, Giovanni Manzini2,5, Project MinE ALS sequencing consortium, Gianluca De Bellis3, Alfredo Brusco6, Marco Severgnini3, 
P09 .140.A Complex cases with Autism Spectrum Disorder MarcoPellegrini2, Letizia Mazzini4, SandraD’Alfonso1 (ASD), developmental delay, hyperactivity and sleep distur- banceexplained by oligogenic mechanisms 1University of Eastern Piedmont UPO, Novara, Italy, 2Institute of Informatics and Telematics of CNR, Pisa, Italy, 3National Research Maria Cerminara1, Martina Servetti1,2, Margherita Squillario2, Livia Council of Italy, Institute for Biomedical Technologies, Segrate Pisciotta1,3, Giovanni Spirito4,5, Maria Teresa Divizia2, Margherita (Milano), Italy, 4ALS Center AOU Maggiore della Carità, Novara, Lerone2,ElisaDeGrandis1,6,SilviaBoeri6,LinoNobili1,6,DiegoVozzi5, Italy, 5University of eastern Piedmont, UPO, Alessandria, Italy, Remo Sanges4,5, Federico Zara1,2, Stefano Gustincich5, Aldamaria 6University of Torino,Torino, Italy. Puliti1,2 Weexploredmissingheritabilityin140patientsaffectedbythree 1DepartmentofNeurosciences,Rehabilitation,Ophthalmology,Genetics, different Neurodegenerative disorders (NDDs). We performed Maternal and Child Health (DiNOGMI), University of Genova, Genova, WholeGenomeSequencingafterexcludingpathogenicvariantsin Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, the main causative genes and investigated three classes of Italy, 3Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, ASST Fatebenefratelli Sacco, Milano, potentiallypathogenicvariants:a)Coding/non-codingSNV/Indels Italy, 4Area of Neuroscience, Scuola Internazionale Superiore di Studi in a panel of 696 genes involved in NDDs. Using standard Avanzati(SISSA),Trieste,Italy,5DepartmentofNeuroscienceandBrain annotation,weidentiﬁedpathogenic/likelypathogenicvariantsin Technologies, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT), Genova, Italy, 6Child genescausativeofrareformsofeachdisease(N=15)andingene NeuropsychiatryUnit,IRCCSIstitutoGianninaGaslini,Genova,Italy. causing a NDD different from patient clinical presentation (N= 16).SpliceAI,adeeplearningtoolpredictinganeffectonsplicing Introduction: Genetic diagnosis of complex ASD cases is often mechanismidentiﬁed48variantswithapossiblesplicingimpact. difﬁcult. Emerging evidence suggests that various genetic compo- Weperformedinvitrostudiesfor9variantsandconﬁrmedarole nentscanaccountforthesecasesaccordingtoanoligogenicmodel. in splicing alteration for 6 of them. b) Genome-wide structural After the observation of a patient with deleterious variants in variants. Using CNVkit, we identiﬁed a 15q25 deletion in a PD multiple genes (FrontGenet, https://doi.org/10.3389/ patient. Similar deletions have been associated with mild fgene.2021.625564),weextendedthesearchforpossibleoligogenic intellectual disability and dysmorphisms but never reported in mechanismstoacohortof30ASDtriofamilies. PD cases. c) Genome wide Tandem Repeat (TR). Using literature Methods: Whole exome sequencing was performed and andnoveltools,weidentiﬁedfournovellociinALScohortwitha potentially deleterious variants prioritized by custom ﬁltering possibleTRexpansionandperformedareplicationoftheresultsin strategies including the use of ORVAL (Oligogenic Resource for larger independent cohorts from Italy and International MinE Variant Analysis Platform) and enrichment analysis of candidate project. For 3 of them (FRA10A
C1 , RF
C1 , HK1) the result was not geneswithGeneCodis4. replicated.ForITFG2,preliminarydataarepromisingsincetheTR Results: Two cases showed possible deleterious rare variants, wasobservedonlyinpatientsandinnonecontrols.Inconclusion, eachin3differentgenes.Amalepatientwascarrying2maternally using WGS data we were able to ﬁnd missed pathogenetic inheritedvariants,onehemizygousinBCORandoneheterozygous variants in genes associated with different NDDs, reinforcing the in MYO9B, genes associated to cognitive and behaviour impair- ideaof ashared geneticcause amongthese diseases. ment. A third heterozygous paternally inherited variant affected R. Croce: None. L. Corrado: None. N. Barizzone: None. A. Di HTR1E,aserotoninreceptorhypothesizedtoplayaroleinautism- Pierro:None.L.Genovese:None.F.Geraci: None.E.Mangano: like behaviour and sleep disturbance. The second case, another None. R. D’Aurizio: None. R. Bordoni: None. D. Corà: None. F. malepatient,had2maternallyinheritedvariants,onehemizygous Favero: None. M. Zuccalà: None. C. Comi: None. F. De Marchi: in Z
C4 H2, associated to developmental delay, and one hetero- None.L.Magistrelli:None.G.Manzini:None.G.DeBellis:None. zygous in ALDH5A1, associated to behaviour and sleep impair- A. Brusco: None. M. Severgnini: None. M. Pellegrini: None. L. ment. A further paternally inherited variant affected CPLX3, Mazzini: None. S.D’Alfonso: None. involved in neurotransmitter release, hypothesized to be impli- cated in neurodevelopmental delay. Implicated genes revealed enrichmentinASD-associatedbiologicalprocessesandpathways. 
P09 .142.CGeneticvariationspectrumofAT
P7 Binacohortof Asourpreviouslydescribedpatient,thesetwopatientspresented 113patients withWilson disease complexASD phenotype. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 306 João Parente Freixo1, Ana Lopes1, Rita Bastos-Ferreira1, Henedina Hôpitaux Universitaires Pitié Salpétière, APHP, Paris, France, 6Labor- Antunes2,3,4, Ermelinda Santos Silva5, Jorge Sequeiros1, Marina atoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU de Grenoble et des Alpes, Magalhães6, JorgeOliveira1 Grenoble, France, 7Institut de Myologie, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP,Paris,France,8ServiceBiochimieetBiologieMoléculaireGrand 1CGPP-CentrodeGenéticaPreditivaePreventiva,IBMC-Institutode Est - UM Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme, HCL, Lyon, France, Biologia Molecular e Celular, i3S - Instituto de Investigação e 9UF Cardiogénétique et Myogénétique et Cellulaire, Centre de Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, Génétique moléculaire et chromosomique, Hôpitaux Universitaire 2PediatricGastroenterologyHepatologyandNutritionUnit,Hospital Pitié-salpétière,APHP,Paris,France,10CentredeRechercheGénéthon de Braga, Braga, Portugal, 32CA – Clinical Academic Center, Braga, Institut des Biothérapies Généthon, Paris, France, 11Laboratoire de Portugal,4ICVS -Life andHealth SciencesResearch Institute, School Biochimie, Hôpital de la Conception, APHM, Marseille, France, of Medicine, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal, 5Unidade de 12Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Timone Enfants, APHM, Gastroenterologia Pediátrica, Serviço de Pediatria, Centro Materno- Marseille, France, 13Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Infantil do Norte, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Porto, TimoneEnfants,APHM,Marseille,France,14Laboratoiredediagnostic Portugal,6Serviço de Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar Universitário do génétique CHU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 15Laboratoire de Porto,Porto,Portugal. génétiquemoléculaireServicedebiochimieethormonologieHôpital AntoineBéclère, APHP, Clamart, France,16PhyMedExp, Université de Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of the Montpellier, INSERM, CNRS, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, coppermetabolism,causedbydiallelicpathogenicvariantsinthe CHUdeMontpellier,Montpellier,France,17LaboratoiredeGénétique copper-transporting gene, AT
P7 B. WD usually presents with Moléculaire, CHUde Montpellier, Montpellier, France. hepatic, neurologic, and/or psychiatric disturbances. Molecular genetic testing is critical for a timely-adequate diagnosis and Introduction:Theimplementationofhigh-throughputdiagnostic treatment, to prevent lifelong disabilities. This work aimed at sequencing has led to the generation of large amounts of expandingthemutationalspectrumofdisease-relatedvariantsin mutational data, making their interpretation more complex and AT
P7 B,inalargecohortofWDpatients.Since2004,atotalof301 responsible for long turnaround times. It has been important to patientsweregenotypedatCGPP,forconﬁrmationorexclusionof prioritizecertainanalyses,particularlythoseof"actionable"genes WD.Inthevastmajorityofpatients,AT
P7 Bgenewasanalysedby in diagnostic situations, involving speciﬁc treatment and/or Sangersequencingand,inpatientsheterozygousforonedisease- management. In our project, we carried out an objective causingvariant(n=20),MLPAwasalsoperformed.Variantswere assessment of the clinical actionability of genes involved in classiﬁed according to the ACMG guidelines. WD was genetically myopathies, for which only few data obtained methodologically conﬁrmed in 113 patients (99 families): 32 are homozygotes and existtodate. 81 compound heterozygotes for pathogenic or likely-pathogenic Materials and methods: Using the ClinGen Actionability variants.A totalof 34distinct variants(including 4novel)and 64 criteria, we scored the clinical actionability of all 200 associated different genotypes were determined. The three most common genes for myopathies published by FILNEMUS for the “National disease-causingvariantswerefoundin75.2%ofthecases,among French consensus on gene Lists for the diagnosis of myopathies whom 18 were homozygotes; NM_000053.3:c.3402del was the usingnext generationsequencing”. most frequent, being present in homozygosity in 6 and in Results: We objectiﬁed that 51 associated geènes for myopa- heterozygosity in 19 patients. This data expands the mutational thies were actionable with currently available data. Among In spectrum of WD causing variants and contributes to the theise 52genesonly14had beenvescoredto dateby ClinGen. continuously demanding effort of interpreting variants causing Conclusion: The data obtained through these methodological WD.Interestingly,thec.3402delvarianthasalsobeenreportedas toolsareanimportantresourceforstrategicchoicesindiagnostic themostfrequentinWDcohortsfromVenezuelaandBrazil.This approaches and the management of genetic myopathies. The contrasts with other European or Asian cohorts, where p. clinicalactionabilityofgeneshastobeconsideredasanevolving His1069Gln or p.Arg778Leu, respectively, seem to be the most concept,inrelation toprogresses intherapeutic approaches. prevalent WD-causingalleles. M. Vecten: None. E. Pion: None. R. Juntas Morales: None. D. J. Parente Freixo: None. A. Lopes: None. R. Bastos-Ferreira: Sternberg: None. J. Rendu: None. T. Stojkovic: None. C. None. H. Antunes: None. E. Santos Silva: None. J. Sequeiros: Acquaviva-Bourdain: None. C. Métay: None. I. Richard: None. None.M. Magalhães: None. J.Oliveira: None. L.Villard:None.M.Cérino:None.M.Milh:None.S.Gorokhova: None. N. Levy: None. X. Martin: None. G. Bonne: None. V. 
P10 Neuromuscular Disorders Biancalana: None. F. Petit: None. A. Perrin: None. P. Laforet: None.M. Bartoli: None.M. Cossée: None.M. Krahn: None. 
P10 .001.A Objective evaluation of clinical actionnability for genesinvolved in myopathies: 51promising genes 
P10 .002.B ACTN3 rs1815739 polymorphism is not associated MaudeVecten1,2,EmmanuellePion3,RaulJuntasMorales4,Damien withsportsinjuries inSlovenian femalefootball players Sternberg5, John Rendu6, Tania Stojkovic7, Cécile Acquaviva- Bourdain8, Corrine Métay9, Isabelle Richard10, Laurent Villard2, Inge Sotlar1, Tisa Podkrajšek1, Tina Levstek1, Katja Goričar1, Vita MathieuCérino11,2,MathieuMilh12,2,SevtlanaGorokhova13,2,Nicolas Dolžan1, Katarina Trebušak Podkrajšek1,2 Levy13,2,XeniaMartin6,GiseleBonne7,ValérieBiancalana14,François Petit15, Aurélien Perrin16, Pascal Laforet7, Marc Bartoli2, Mireille 1Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Cossée17,Martin Krahn13,2 Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Clinical Institute for Special Laboratory Diagnostics, University Children’s 1DépartementdeGénétique,HôpitalBichat–Claude-Bernard,APHP, Hospital,University Medical CentreLjubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Paris, France, 2Aix-Marseille Université, INSERM, Marseille Medical Genetics, U1251, Marseille, France, 3Filnemus, Laboratoire de Introduction:Alpha-actinin-3isaproteinexpressedinfast-twitch (typeII)muscleﬁbres.GeneticvariantNM_001104.4:c.1729C>T(p. Génétique Moléculaire, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 4Département de Neurologie, Hôpital Gui de Chauliac, CHU de R577X) (rs1815739) in ACTN3 introduces premature termination Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 5Service de Biochimie Métabolique, codon.Inhomozygousform,itreducesstrength,musclemassand EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 307 fast-twitch ﬁbre diameter. In athletes (including professional M.A.Doherty:None.L.O’Briain:None.J.Hengeveld:None.É. football players), it was associated with a higher risk of sports MacDomhnaill: None. O. Hardiman: None. R.L. McLaughlin: injuries and longer exercise recovery. We aimed to evaluate the None. associationofthep.R577XwithsportsinjuriesinSlovenianfemale footballplayers. Materials and Methods: The study group included 43 female 
P10 .004.DThepleiotropyofneurodegenerativerepeatexpan- football players older than 13 years and actively training football sionsin ALS more than 4 years. Data collected included player’s position and frequency of sports injuries. ACTN3 p.R577X genotyping was Jennifer C. Hengeveld1, Alice Vajda2, Mark Heverin2, Orla Hardi- performed on saliva DNA with PCR and DdeI restriction analysis man2, RussellL. McLaughlin1 withsubsequent Sangersequencing conﬁrmation,ifnecessary. Results: The median (range) age of the group was 16 (13‒28) 1SmurﬁtInstituteofGenetics, Trinity CollegeDublin,Dublin, Ireland, years;theywereactivelytrainingfootballforamedianof7(4‒18) 2Academic Unit of Neurology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, years.p.R577Xinhomozygousorheterozygousformwaspresent Trinity CollegeDublin, Dublin, Ireland. in58.1%oftheplayers,while41.9%hadnormalgenotype.53.7% had a history of at least one sports injury, namely sprains, bone Introduction: Repeat expansions (REs) underlie more than 40 fractures, muscle, or other injuries. However, no statistically diseases, most of them affecting the nervous system. The most signiﬁcant association was found between genotype and the common neurodegenerative repeat expansions (NDREs) diseases presence of injuries (p=0.309), nor between the player position are Huntington’s Disease (HD), Spinocerebellar Ataxias (SCA), andthepresenceofinjuriesorgenotypeandplayerposition(p= FrontotemporalDementia(FTD)andAmyotrophicLateralSclerosis 0.598and p=0.830, respectively). (ALS).ALSisafatalneurodegenerativedisorderwhichcausesthe Conclusion:NoassociationwasfoundbetweenACTN3p.R577X deathofneuronscontrollingvoluntarymuscles.ALShasnocure, genotypes and sports injuries or player position in our study, and its underlying cause is mostly unknown, although a strong although further studies with larger cohort are needed to verify genetic component is known to play a role. Several REs are theresults. pleiotropic; for example, GGGCC RE in 
C9 orf72 is associated with I. Sotlar: None. T. Podkrajšek: None. T. Levstek: None. K. FTD/ALSandCAGREinATXN2causesSCA2/ALS.Previousstudies Goričar:None.V.Dolžan:None.K.TrebušakPodkrajšek:None. on ATXN2 showed that harbouring intermediate-length repeat expansions are signiﬁcantly associated with the risk of ALS. Therefore,pleiotropymightbecommoninALS.Thisstudyaimsto 
P10 .003.C Utilising gold-standard PCR genotypes to accu- genotype 34 neurodegenerative genes that harbour REs, in a rately infer repeat expansions from whole-genome sequence cohortof1000controlsand1000patientsfromtheIrishALSbank data toassess theassociation between expandedgenotypesand ALS. Materials and Methods: The length measurement of each Mark A. Doherty, Laura O’Briain, Jennifer Hengeveld, Éanna NDREgeneanditspossiblerepeatexpansionswasdonebyPCR, MacDomhnaill, OrlaHardiman, RussellL. McLaughlin Repeat Primed-PCR (RP-PCR), agarose gel electrophoresis and fragment lengthcapillary electrophoresis. Trinity CollegeDublin, Dublin 2,Ireland. Results:InanIrishpopulation,ALSmightbedrivenbymultiple intermediate-length repeat expansion in likely 8 NDREs genes: Background: We present a pilot study to ultimately develop a ATXN2, DI
P2 B, FRA11A
C1 , FRA11A, NUTM2B-A
S1 , PABN1, TK2-BEAN pipelineutilisinginsilicotoolstoidentifyandaccuratelyinferthe andZNF713. lengthsofknownandnovelpathogenicrepeatexpansions(REs)in Conclusions: ALS is a very complex disease that might be amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) from whole-genome sequen- causedbypleiotropyofmultipleREsandmultiplefactors.Funding: cing(WGS)data.ThispipelinewillbeneﬁtfromhavingbothWGS ScienceFoundation Ireland(17/CDA/4737) data and gold-standard PCR genotypes of multiple REs. Despite J.C. Hengeveld: None. A. Vajda: None. M. Heverin: None. O. being highly heritable, pathogenic variants are only identiﬁed in Hardiman: None.R.L. McLaughlin: None. approximately15%ofALScases.Themostcommonknowncause ofALSisahexanucleotideREin
C9 orf72.OtherintermediateREsin NIPA1, ATXN1 and ATXN2 are known ALS risk factors. In this 
P10 .006.B Dissecting the sex-dependent genetic architecture preliminarystudyweevaluatetheabilityofinsilicotoolstoassess ofamyotrophic lateral sclerosis thelengthsof ATXN2CAG REs. Methods:221casesand117controlsareincludedinthisinitial Ross P. Byrne1, Wouter van Rheenen2, Jan H. Veldink2, Russell L. study. Both WGS and gold-standard ATXN2 CAG PCR genotypes McLaughlin1 are available for all individuals. The WGS data were interrogated usinga suiteof bioinformatic tools. 1Smurﬁt institute of genetics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, RESULTS:SeveraltoolsincludinghipSTR,lobSTR,tredparseand 2Department of Neurology, Brain Centre Rudolf Magnus, University ExpansionHunter accurately measure ATXN2 CAG REs (route- Medical CenterUtrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. mean-square deviations (RMSDs): 1.2). The worst performing software was gangSTR (RMSD: 12.8), which falsely identiﬁed CAG Introduction: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a late-onset repeatselsewherein thegenome. neurodegenerative disease characterised by progressive loss of Discussion: This project utilises high-quality WGS data and upperandlowermotorneurons.Sexmodiﬁesbothdiseaseriskand gold-standardPCRdata.WeaccuratelyinferthelengthsofATXN2 heritability, with higher incidence in males and higher rates of CAGrepeatsusinginsilicotools;however,certaingeneandrepeat mother to daughter transmission. However, the extent that sex speciﬁc properties can negatively impact results. We now aim to affectsthegeneticarchitectureofALSiscurrentlyunderstudied.We expand this study to a larger gene panel for which accurate PCR reanalysedgeneticdatafromapublishedALSGWAS(N=36,052)to genotypesareavailableandtoalargerinternationalsamplesize. assesssexdifferencesingeneticarchitectureofthedisease. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 308 Methods: We ﬁt sex as an interaction term in a GCTA-GREML expression.ThiscontributestoabettercomprehensionofERGI
C1  model to evaluate its impact on ALS heritability. Next, we ran functionandtoimprovegeneticcounselingofERGI
C1 mutations, GWAS on male-speciﬁc (N=18,732) and female-speciﬁc (N= especiallyin aprenatal setting. 17,322)subsetsofthedatausinglinearmixedmodels.Sexspeciﬁc C. Marconi: None. L. Lemmens: None. F. Masclaux: None. F. lociwereidentiﬁedinmalesandfemalesbyscanningforvariants Mattioli:None.J.Fluss:None.P.Extermann:None.P.Mendez: signiﬁcant at a 5% FDR in one sex, but not even nominally None.R.Ha-VinhLeuchter:None.E.Stathaki:None.S.Laurent: signiﬁcant in the other (p>0.05). Both global and regional sex- None. A. Vanier: None. K. Varvagiannis: None. M. Guipponi: speciﬁc heritabilities were estimated using LD-score regression None. F. Sloan-Bena: None. J. Blouin: None. A. Marc: None. S. andHeritability Estimation fromSummary Statistics (HESS). Fokstuen: None. Results: We observed signiﬁcant evidence of gene by sex interactions that account for ~1/3rd of ALS SNP heritability (likelihood-ratio test: p=0.0087). Female-speciﬁc heritability 
P10 .008.D At birth hypertony and arthrogryposis: expanding (h2=0.043;SE=0.01) was substantially higher than male-speciﬁc the phenotypic spectrum of variants in the Filamin C (FLNC) heritability (h2=0.001;SE=0.01) and regional heritability analysis gene revealed greater polygenicity in females. Finally, our sex speciﬁc scan identiﬁed several known (MOBP, 
C9 orf72, SARM1, UN
C13 A) Nikola Čajbiková1, Pavel Tesner1, Martin Schwarz1, Veronika and novel (PI
P5 K1B, AT
P8 A2, PCDH9, RNAS
E9 , OTUD7A, ITPRIP
L2 , Moslerová1,Miroslava Balaščaková1,LukášRyba1,AnnaKřepelová1, UNK,FBF1)lociharbouringSNPsassociatedwithALSinonlyone LucieDušková2,JanaZídková2,LenkaFajkusová2,MarkétaHavlovi- sex. These loci were enriched for expression in brain tissue cová1, Milan Macek,jr1 consistent withtheknownaetiology ofALS. Grants:SFI17/CDA/ 4737 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech R.P.Byrne:None.W.vanRheenen:None.J.H.Veldink:None. Republic, 2Centre of Molecular Biology and Genetics, University R.L.McLaughlin: None. HospitalBrno, Brno,Czech Republic. Introduction: The Filamin C gene (FLNC; MIM: 102565) is known 
P10 .007.C Bi-allelic loss of ERGI
C1  in relatively mild foritsassociationwithvariouscardiomyopathiesandmyopathies. arthrogryposis Here we report two cases of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (MIM: 208100), which presented at birth through hypertony, as a CaterinaMarconi1,LaureLemmens1,FrédéricMasclaux1,Francesca newphenotypic presentation ofpathogenic variantsinFLNC. Mattioli1, Joel Fluss2, Philippe Extermann3, Puriﬁcacion Mendez4, Materials:Bothprobandscomefromnon-consanguineousCzech Russia Ha-Vinh Leuchter2, Elisavet Stathaki1, Sacha Laurent1, Anne familieswithanegativefamilyhistory.Theﬁrstcaseisatwo-year-old Vanier1, Konstantinos Varvagiannis1, Michel Guipponi1,5, Frédérique boy, diagnosed at birth with symmetric hypertonic syndrome and Sloan-Bena1,6, Jean-Louis Blouin1,6, Abramowicz Marc1, Siv arthrogryposisofhisshoulders.Cardiologicalinvestigationrevealeda Fokstuen1,6 mild form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The second case is a seven-year-old boy diagnosed after birth also with neck hypertony 1Genetic Medicine division, Diagnostic Department, Hôpitaux and limited mobility of his shoulder girdle. His ﬁrst cardiological Universitaires de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Pediatric Specialties examination was performed at the age of 4 years resulting in the division,DepartmentofWomen,ChildrenandAdolescents,Hôpitaux diagnosisofatypicalcardiomyopathy. Universitaires de Genève, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Dianecho, Geneva, Methods: Massively parallel sequencing (Illumina, USA) was Switzerland, 4Centre Médical Eaux-Vives, Geneva, Switzerland, performedinboth cases,followedby SangerDNAsequencing in 5Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, School of order to verify detected variant segregation in available ﬁrst- Medicine, UniersityofGeneva,Geneva, Switzerland,6Departmentof degreerelatives. GeneticMedicineandDevelopment,SchoolofMedicine,Universityof Results: A de novo heterozygous likely pathogenic (Class 4) Geneva,Geneva, Switzerland. variant c.3557C>T p.(Ala1186Val) in FLNC was found in both patients,whileadditionalpathogenicvariantswerenotdetected. Arthrogryposis is a descriptive term that deﬁnes the presence of Conclusions: The phenotype of congenital arthrogryposis multiple joint-contractures. Clinical severity of this phenotype is associated withFLNC wasdescribedonlyrecently, inthreecases. variableandrangesbetweenmildjoint-onlytoseveremulti-organ Our patients have the same pathogenic variant as two of them, involvements.Sofar,morethan400geneshavebeenreportedas suggestingthatthismightbearecurrentvariant.Ourobservation causative.Amongthese,ERGI
C1 isarecentlyproposedcandidate underscores the importance of the analysis of FLNC in patients gene that encodes a putative transmembrane protein of the with at birth hypertony and/or arthrogrypotic clinical features. Endoplasmic Reticulum-Golgi interface. Two homozygous mis- Supported by MH CZ - DRO, Motol University Hospital, Prague, sensevariantshavebeenreportedinpatientswithrelativelymild Czech Republic00064203 non-syndromic arthrogryposis. We report on a consanguineous N. Čajbiková: None. P. Tesner: None. M. Schwarz: None. V. family with two affected siblings presenting relatively mild Moslerová: None. M. Balaščaková: None. L. Ryba: None. A. congenital arthrogryposis of upper and lower limbs, and some Křepelová: None. L. Dušková: None. J. Zídková: None. L. facial dysmorphism. Whole genome sequencing revealed a Fajkusová: None. M. Havlovicová: None. M.Macek, jr:None. homozygous 22.6Kb deletion encompassing the promoter and ﬁrst exon of ERGI
C1 . We mapped the breakpoints at nucleotide- levelresolution, showingtheinvolvement oftwo86%similarAlu 
P10 .009.A Mutations of AT
P1 A3 in residue 756 cause a new elements in the rearrangement. RNA studies demonstrated the phenotype,case report andliterature review complete absence of ERGI
C1  expression in the two affected siblings and a nearly 50% decrease in the heterozygous parents. Mateusz Biela1, Małgorzata Rydzanicz2, Krystyna Szymańska3, Our data allowed to establish the pathogenic role of ERGI
C1  in Karolina Pieniawska-Śmiech1, Aleksandra Lewandowicz-Uszyńska1, congenital arthrogryposis by demonstrating the loss-of-function Joanna Chruszcz1, Leszek Szenborn1, Aleksandra Jakubiak1, Rafał pathogenic mechanism associated to a relatively mild arthrogry- Płoski2, Robert Śmigiel1 posis phenotype even with the complete absence of ERGI
C1  EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 309 1Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 2Warsaw Medical abilitydependsontheCCD2domainintegrityandI669Sfs*,falling University, Warsaw,Poland, 3Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, within that protein portion, could cause the accumulation of Polish Academy ofSciences, Warsaw, Poland. protein aggregates. Our ﬁndings indicate that the 
C20 orf54 mutation R266W alone is not sufﬁcient to trigger BVVL but, Heterozygous mutations in the AT
P1 A3 gene cause different together with other speciﬁc variants, it could orchestrate a phenotypeslike:alternatinghemiplegiaofchildhood(AHC),rapid- particular genetic spectrum able to induce BVVL. Furthermore, onsetdystonia-parkinsonism(RDP),catastrophicinfantileepilepsy wesuggestfortheﬁrsttimethatanewvariantinTBK1genecould withmicrocephaly,andcerebellarataxia,areﬂexia,pescavus,optic exert a crucial action in suppressing autophagy mechanisms, atrophy, sensorineural hearing loss (CAPOS) and severe early contributing topromote BVVL. infantileepilepticencephalopathy.In2017anewphenotypewas B.Perrone:None.P.Ruffo:None.S.Andò:None.F.Conforti: proposedbyYanoetal.forpatientswithmutationsinresidue756 None.V. La Bella:None. - Fever-Induced Paroxysmal Weakness and Encephalopathy (FIPWE), next Sabouraud et al. suggested Relapsing Encephalo- pathy with Cerebellar Ataxia (RECA) in children with AT
P1 A3 
P10 .012.D In-depth characterization of mutations causing mutation. Here we present a case of a boy with 2 episodes of axonal recessive peripheral neuropathy with neuromyotonia severe hypotonia with depressed deep tendon reﬂexes and (NMAN): the structuregives aHINT speech disorder, strabismus and ataxia triggered by a febrile infection. In WES analysis performed in rapid mode a de novo Silvia Amor-Barris1,2, Tamás Lázár3,4, Kristien Peeters1,2, Shoshana AT
P1 A3 mutation (R756H) was found. Additionally, we have Wodak3,4,Albena Jordanova1,2,5 analyzed 34 (including our) cases with mutation in residue 756 of aminoacid sequence described in literature. In the analyzed 1VIB-CenterforMolecularNeurology,Antwerp,Belgium,2University groupofAT
P1 A3mutationpatients,allparoxysmalepisodes(59in of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3VIB - Center for Structural Biology, total)weretriggeredbyfever.Duringtheparoxysmalepisodesthe Brussels, Belgium, 4Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, most common symptoms were: hypotonia (82.4%), symptoms 5Medical University-Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria. including the orofacial area (85.3% i.a. dysarthria, dysphagia, mutism), ataxia (76.5%) and cognitive decline (61.8%). Recovery Introduction:Loss-of-functionmutationsinHINT1wereidentiﬁed was usually slow and not always full. Taking into account the to cause axonal recessive peripheral neuropathy with neuromyo- overall symptoms and the repeatability of the phenotype, we tonia (NMAN). Patients suffered from motor-greater-than-sensory suggest delineating a separate disease entity and support the polyneuropathy with an age of onset mostly within the ﬁrst acronymFIPWE.FinancedfromthefundsgrantedbytheMinistry decade of life. Moreover, 70% of patients present with the of Science and Higher Education in the Regional Initiative of hallmark of neuromyotonia. Currently, 25 NMAN variants have Excellenceprogramfortheyears2019-2022,projectnumber016/ been described, predominantly in sporadic cases and small RID/2018/19. families, most of them with limited functional evidence of M. Biela: None. M. Rydzanicz: None. K. Szymańska: None. K. pathogenicity. We systematically characterized all reported Pieniawska-Śmiech: None. A. Lewandowicz-Uszyńska: None. J. variantsaimingto dissect theloss-of-function mechanism. Chruszcz: None. L. Szenborn: None. A. Jakubiak: None. R. Methods: Each variant was mapped in the crystal structure of Płoski: None.R. Śmigiel:None. HINT1 and in silico folding stability predictions were performed. Stabilityandfunctionalityoftheresultingproteinsweretestedin vivo using HINT1 KO cells and a yeast model deﬁcient for HNT1 
P10 .010.BGeneticinvestigationofaBrownVialettoVanLaere (yeastHINT1 orthologue). familyfrom Southern Italy Results: Mapping of all NMAN-causing variants allowed their classiﬁcation into three structural clusters: a) catalytic pocket; b) Benedetta Perrone1, Paola Ruffo1, Sebastiano Andò1, Francesca dimer interface; c) β-sheet behind the catalytic pocket. Folding LuisaConforti1,Vincenzo LaBella2 stability predictions pointed towards monomer instability for variants in the β-sheet and dimer instability for variants at the 1UniversityofCalabria,Cosenza,Italy,2UniversityofPalermo,Sicilia, dimerinterface.Thesepredictionswereconﬁrmedinvivo,andwe Italy. correlated each structural cluster to different loss-of-function mechanisms: mutations in the catalytic pocket rendered a non- Brown-Vialetto-VanLaeresyndromeisadebilitatingneurodegen- functional protein; mutations at the dimer interface led to erativediseasewithanincidenceofabout1in1,000,000peoplein unstable proteins; mutations in the β-sheet were highly unstable the general population. It is considered a juvenile form of butretainedsome enzymaticactivity. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) characterized by progressive Conclusions: We clustered all HINT1 mutations in three pontobulbar palsy associated with sensorineural deafness. In this different structural groups allowing for a potential patient report,wepresentastudyofafamilyinwhichayoungfemalewas stratiﬁcation strategy for future treatments. Our study enables us affected by BVVL. We performed genetic analysis by Sanger to predict and validate the pathogenicity of newly identiﬁed sequencing for riboﬂavin transporters genes and targeted Next- variants. generationsequencing(NGS)panel,containingallgenescurrently S. Amor-Barris: None. T. Lázár: None. K. Peeters: None. S. associated with ALS. Our results showed 5 known variants in Wodak:None. A.Jordanova: None. 
C20 orf54 gene both in the proband and in healthy family members (I74M in exon 2 and 
P267 L, T278M, I303V, R266W in exon 3). Among these variants, we focused our attention on the 
P10 .013.A Screening of SORD mutations in a CMT cohort heterozygote mutation R266W, that could have a deleterious expandsthe clinical spectrumofSORD-relatedneuropathy consequence for the protein structure perturbing its function. In addition,NGSrevealedanewframeshiftdeletioninexon19ofthe Camila Armirola-Ricaurte1, Els de Vriendt1, Ayse Candayan2, TBK1 gene (I669Sfs*). This gene plays a key role in the Ognyan Asenov3, Yesim Parman4, Teodora Chamova3, Ivailo phosphorylation of several protein, promoting autophagy. This Tournev3,Esra Battaloglu2, Albena Jordanova1,5 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 310 1VIB-UAntwerp Center of Molecular Neurology, Antwerp, Belgium, landing sites of the ﬂy genome and veriﬁed by Sanger 2DepartmentofMolecularBiologyandGenetics,BogaziciUniversity, sequencing. AaRS protein expression levels were quantiﬁed by Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Neurology, University Hospital immunoblotting. General toxicity and locomotor function were Alexandrovska, Medical University-Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4Depart- evaluated via developmental lethality and negative geotaxis mentofNeurology,IstanbulFacultyofMedicine,IstanbulUniversity, climbingassays. Istanbul,Turkey,5MolecularMedicineCenter,DepartmentofMedical Results: Strongubiquitous expressionof mutantaaRS induced Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University-Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bul- developmental lethality in all four aaRS Drosophila models. garia. Reducingmutanttransgenelevelsrestoredﬂyviability,suggesting that toxicity of aaRS-mutants is dosage dependent. Males ﬂies Introduction:Charcot-Marie-Toothneuropathies(CMT)areincur- were more affected than females, suggesting gender speciﬁc ablediseases,andcollectively,theyarethemostcommongenetic vulnerability.Ageingﬂiespan-neuronallyexpressingmutantaaRS disorder affecting peripheral neurons. Mutations in SORD have displayedreducedlocomotion,mimickingtheprogressivewalking been recently identiﬁed as a frequent and potentially treatable impairment features of CMT patients. Overall, our ﬁndings are cause of autosomal recessive CMT, presenting as axonal or similartopreviously describedphenotypesinYARS andGARS ﬂy predominantlydistalmotorneuropathy.Inlightofthisdiscovery, models,conﬁrmingthatphenotypeexpressivitydoesnotcorrelate weaimedtoevaluatetheimpactofSORDmutationsinacohortof withaminoacylation-activity of aaRS. unsolvedindividuals with CMT. Conclusion: Expression of CMT-causing mutations caused Methods: We analyzed 720 unrelated patients, predominantly similar signs of toxicity in four CMT-related aaRS, rendering our ofSouth-EasternEuropeanandTurkishancestry,withsporadicor models a valid platform for investigating putative shared recessive CMT who remained unsolved after targeted re- molecular pathway(s). The knowledge gained might contribute sequencingofthemostcommonCMTgenes.Sangersequencing tocommontreatmentstrategiesforallaaRS-relatedneuropathies. wasusedtoscreenallprobandsformutationsinexon7ofSORD, L. Morant: None. M.L. Petrovic-Erfurth: None. A. Jordanova: which harbors SORD’s most common pathogenic variant None. c.757delG (p.Ala253GlnfsTer27). Targeted sequencing of the remaining exons was performed in cases where only one heterozygouspathogenic variant was foundinexon7. 
P10 .015.C Additive effect of frequent and rare synonymous Results: We identiﬁed 12 individuals homozygous for the variantsasthecauseofalteredNP
C1 splicingintwinpatients c.757delG mutation. Five of them were diagnosed with axonal withNiemann-Pick disease type C CMT, three with demyelinating CMT and one patient with intermediate CMT. Three adult siblings with the c.757delG Igor Bychkov, Aleksandra Filatova, Tatiana Proshlyakova, Vyache- homozygous variant exhibited phenotypic variability, as only slav Tabakov, Galina Baydakova, Alexandra Ilyushkina, Mikhail one of them reported symptoms whereas the others were Skoblov, Ekaterina Zakharova asymptomatic. Interestingly, one Bulgarian patient with axonal CMT also experienced pyramidal and cerebellar symptoms. We Researchcentreformedicalgenetics,Moscow,RussianFederation. identiﬁed10individualsheterozygousforthec.757delGmutation. Oneofthemcarriedadditionallyavariantofunknownsigniﬁcance Background:Niemann-PickdiseasetypeC(NPC)isanautosomal (c.951T>G, p.Asn317Lys). recessivedisordercausedbymutationsineithertheNP
C1 orNP
C2  Conclusions: This work conﬁrms the relevance of SORD as a genes. Two 55 y.o. twins were suspected for adult form of NPC, causal gene for CMT disorders and expands the phenotypic basedonclinicalandbiochemicalsymptomsandwerereferredfor spectrumof SORD neuropathy. agenetic testing. C. Armirola-Ricaurte: None. E. de Vriendt: None. A. Canda- Results: NGS analysis of patient`s DNA revealed two rare yan: None. O. Asenov: None. Y. Parman: None. T. Chamova: compoundheterozygousvariantsinNP
C1 :typicalloss-of-function None. I. Tournev: None. E. Battaloglu: None. A. Jordanova: c.2196dup (p.Ala732fs*30) mutation and c.2727C>T (p.Cys909=) None. variant of unknown signiﬁcance. Analysis of the patients` cDNA showed that c.2727C>T variant causes cryptic donor splice site (DS) activation and 74 b.p. deletion in NP
C1  exon 18. As patients 
P10 .014.B Uniform Drosophila models for four CMT-related alsohadfrequentc.2793C>T (p.Asn931=)variantinhomozygous aminoacyl-tRNA synthesesreveal common signsoftoxicity state,locatedinwildtypeDSofthesameexon,wehypothesized, whether it could affect the competitive activity of two DSs. Laura Morant1,2, Maria Luise Petrovic-Erfurth1,2, Albena MinigeneassaydemonstratedthatthesigniﬁcantdecreaseofWT Jordanova1,2 transcript isoform and the signiﬁcant amount of shortened isoformare observed onlywhenboth variantsare present incis. 1VIB-CenterforMolecularNeurology,Antwerp,Belgium,2University Conclusion: The novel complex allele c.[2727C>T;2793C>T] in ofAntwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. NP
C1  is functionally characterized. Minigene assay demonstrated that it is a “leaky” spliceogenic mutation, which leads to Introduction:Charcot-Marie-Toothdisease(CMT)ischaracterized approximately 50% reduction of WT transcript isoform. In bydemyelinationand/oraxonaldegenerationofperipheralmotor compoundheterozygousstatewithtypicalloss-of-functionmuta- andsensoryneurons.Sixaminoacyl-tRNAsynthetases(aaRS)have tion it causes adult onset form of NPC. The results of this study been associated to CMT etiology. Interestingly, loss of highlightthenecessityofanalyzingtheimpactofgenomicmilieu aminoacylation-activity does not cause CMT, suggesting a toxic in cases when identiﬁed mutation is spliceogenic, as any gainoffunctionmechanism.Weaimtoinvestigatewhetherthere additional variant in close proximity could signiﬁcantly affect the isa commonpathomechanism underlying aaRS-associated CMT. ratio of transcript isoforms and lead to a misconception in Methods: We generated ﬂy models for four CMT-related aaRS genotype-phenotype correlations or evenwrongdiagnosis. by expressing two pathogenic mutations (one altering and one I.Bychkov:None.A.Filatova:None.T.Proshlyakova:None.V. not affecting the enzymatic activity) using a modiﬁed GeneS- Tabakov: None. G. Baydakova: None. A. Ilyushkina: None. M. witchTM technology. Transgenes were injected into the same Skoblov: None.E. Zakharova: None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 311 
P10 .016.D Isoform speciﬁc variant as a potential cause of patients was constructed using STRING v11. Genetic alternations in distalmyopathy theDMDgenewithcancerwasexaminedbyusingcBioPortal. Results:Weexaminedatotalof3,627exonicSNPsintheDMD Jean Mezreani1,2, Florence Martin1, Sébastien Audet1,2, Jade gene.SNPs distributed across allexons. Thelargest category was Charbonneau1, Erik Bareke1, Annie Laplante1, Bernard Brais3,4, Erin nonsynonymousaccountfornearly64%ofallmutations.Exon19 O’Ferrall3,4, Jason Karamchandani3,4,Martine Tétreault1,2 appeared to have most density of pathogenic SNP distribution. Nonsense mutation (i.e. stopgain) or frameshift mutation likely 1CRCHUM, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Neurosciences Department, leadtomorepathogenic.Amongthegeneticmodiﬁersidentiﬁed UdeM,Montreal,QC,Canada,3MUHC,Montreal,QC,Canada,4Rare in DMD patients, THB
S1  has higher network topological para- Neurological Diseases Research Group, Montreal, QC,Canada. meters. In addition, we also observed signiﬁcant poorer overall survivalfor cancer patientswith DMDmutations. Introduction: Despite recent advance in next-generation DNA- Conclusions: We conducted a systematic genetic analysis of all sequencing technologies, at least 25% of myopathy patients variants, especially SNPs, in one of the largest known human gene. remainwithoutageneticdiagnosis.Inordertoincreasediagnostic Networkanalysishighlightednon-randominterconnectivitybetween yield, we combined omic technologies to identify novel gene the genetic modiﬁers identiﬁed in DMD patients, and potentially mutations in a cohort of 17 patients with rare undiagnosed shedlightonnewgeneticmodiﬁersbytheirfunctionalcouplingto myopathies.Amongthose,wehaveidentiﬁedanonsensevariant theseknowngenes.OurresultsalsosuggestDMDgenemayserveas inthegeneMuscularLMNA-InteractingProtein(MLIP)inapatient adiagnosticandtherapeutictargetforcertaintypesofcancer. affected with adult-onset distal myopathy. MLIP is highly H.Chen: None. expressed in muscle, but its role hasn’t been completely elucidated yet. However, it is known to be the direct interactant of LMNA (Lamin Type A/C), which has been linked with 
P10 .018.B Newborn screening of Duchenne Muscular Dystro- laminopathies, cardiomyopathies and muscular dystrophies. phy speciﬁcally targeting deletions amenable to exon- Material and methods: The combination of DNA- and RNA- skippingtherapy sequencing led to the identiﬁcation of the defective MLIP gene. Isoformspeciﬁcanalysisarebeingperformedusingtargetedlong- Pablo Beckers1, Jean-Hubert Caberg1, Vinciane Dideberg1, Johan T. readsequencing. denDunnen2,TamaraDangouloff3,VincentBours1,LaurentServais4, Results:Ahomozygousnonsensevariantinexon5ofMLIP,an FrançoisBoemer1 alternatively spliced exon, has been identiﬁed. Differential expression showed downregulation of speciﬁc MLIP transcripts, 1CHULiege,Liege,Belgium,2LeidenUniversityMedicalCenter,Leiden, thosecontainingtheLMNAinteractingsiteandtheNLSsequence; Netherlands, 3University of Liege, Liege, Belgium, 4University of suggestive of a mislocalization and a loss of function. As a Oxford,Oxford, United Kingdom. compensatory mechanism, we observed an upregulation of its interactant LMNA. Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) is a lethal progressive Conclusion: Our results highlight the importance of consider- muscle-wastingdisease.NewtreatmentstrategiesrelyingonDMD ing alternatively spliced isoforms when calling variants and gene exon-skipping therapy have recently been approved and interpreting their potential functional impact. The interpretation about 30% of patients could be amenable to exon 51, 53 or 45 of pathogenicity when considering alternatively spliced isoform skipping. We evaluated the spectrum of deletions reported in will have a direct impact on the affected individuals and their DMDregistries, and designeda methodto screen newborns and families,itwillalsohelpinformonthenormalfunctionofMLIPin identifyDMDdeletionsamenabletoexon51,53and45skipping. skeletalmuscles. We developed a multiplex qPCR assay identifying hemi(homo)- Acknowlegdments: FondationCourtois, FRQS zygotic deletions of the ﬂanking exons of these therapeutic J. Mezreani: None. F. Martin: None. S. Audet: None. J. targets in DMD exons (ie. exons 44, 46, 50, 52 and 54). We Charbonneau: None. E. Bareke: None. A. Laplante: None. B. conductedanevaluationofournewmethodin51malepatients Brais: None. E. O’Ferrall: None. J. Karamchandani: None. M. withaDMDphenotype,50femalecarriersofaDMDdeletionand Tétreault: None. 19 controls. Studies were performed on dried blood spots with patient’s consent. We analyzed qPCR ampliﬁcation curves of controls,carriers,andDMDpatientstodiscernthepresenceorthe 
P10 .017.A systematic analysis of genetic variation of duch- absence of the target exons. Analysis of the exons ﬂanking the enne musculardystrophy andimplication forcancer exon-skippingtargetspermittedtheidentiﬁcationofpatientsthat could beneﬁt from exon-skipping. All samples were correctly HubertChen genotyped, with either presence or absence of ampliﬁcation of the target exon. This proof-of-concept study demonstrates that IvymindAcademy, West Windsor, NJ, USA. this new assay is a highly sensitive method to identify DMD patients carrying deletions that are rescuable by exon-skipping Introduction: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a rare, treatment. The method is easily scalable to population-based severe, progressive genetic disorder causing disability and screening. This targeted screening approach could address the premature death. In this study, we performed a systematic newmanagementparadigminDMD,andcouldhelptooptimize analysis of the DMD genetic variants via dbSNP database and the beneﬁcial therapeutic effect of DMD therapies by permitting explored protein-protein interactions (PPI) for genetic modiﬁers pre-symptomatic care. identiﬁedinDMDpatients.Inaddition,DMDgeneticalternations P. Beckers: None. J. Caberg: None. V. Dideberg: None. J.T. indifferent tumorshave also beeninvestigated. den Dunnen: None. T. Dangouloff: None. V. Bours: None. L. Methods:ThegeneticvariantsofDMDgeneswereextractedfrom Servais: None.F. Boemer: None. thedbSNPdatabase.PPImapforgeneticmodiﬁersidentiﬁedinDMD EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 312 
P10 .019.CWholegenomesequencingandRNAanalysisallow duplication and is associated with variable phenotypes, ranging genetic diagnosis ofDMDatypical mutations frommild tosevere. Materials and Methods: We proﬁled the muscle biopsy Rita Selvatici1, Rachele Rossi1, Fang Mingyan2, Jerry Lu2, Valeria splicing pattern of DMD exon 2 duplication in six DMD patients Sansone3,MariaSoﬁaFalzarano1,FrancescaGualandi1,LucaBello4, (identiﬁedbyMLPA)usingtheAgilentHighSensitivityassay.Two ElenaPegoraro4,Alessandra Ferlini1 patients showed classical DMD phenotype, with loss of ambula- tionwithin13-year-oldwhileintheotherfourpatientsambulation 1Dept. of Medical Sciences, Unit of Medical Genetics, University- waslost>age 15. Hospital of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 2BGI, Shenzen, China, 3Center for Results: We found four different transcripts due to different the Study of Neuromuscular Diseases, Milan, Italy, 4Dept. of splicingchoices:theexon2-exon2duplicatedtranscript(79%),the Neurosciences, Unit of Neurology, Padua, Italy. intron1-exon2-exon2 transcript, which incorporates an upstream region of intron 1, generating a premature stop codon (14%), a Introduction:Dystrophin(DMD)genemutationscauseDuchenne transcriptwithbothexon2skipped(3%)andatranscriptskipping and Becker muscular dystrophies and are routinely identiﬁed by one exon 2, which generates a normal messenger (6%), this last MLPA and sequencing. Nevertheless, about 1% of patients representedin allsixDMDmuscles. remained undiagnosed. Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) is a Conclusions: We did not identify a phenotype-speciﬁc DMD high throughput method able to detect theoretically all variant splicing pattern in the six exon 2 duplicated DMD patients. All types, including copy number variations or complex genomic DMDpatientsshowasimilarpercentageofwildtypetranscript rearrangements. FluiDMD is a custom TaqMan based assay we (6%), and the very low amount of the transcript skipping both designedtoproﬁlethefull DMDtranscript. exon 2 suggests that dystrophin rescue due to the alternative MaterialsandMethods:WeperformedFluiDMDandWGSin ATGtranslationstartsiteinexon5maynotplayamajorrolein two DMD cases in which no dystrophin mutations were disease severity. Our results therefore indicate lack of correla- found. RNA was obtained from urinary stem cells from the two tion between DMD exon 2 duplication splicing choices and patients. DMD phenotype. Results: In the ﬁrst patient, FluiDMD RNA analysis suggested M. Mietto: None. M. Fabris: None. R. Bonaccorso: None. S.C. theoccurrenceofagenomiceventaffectingthesplicingofexons Previtali: None. A. Zambon: None. F. Gualandi: None. R. Rossi: 54and55.WGSidentiﬁedalargeinversionof15Mbencompass- None.M.S. Falzarano:None. A.Ferlini: None. ing the region Xp:g.[16147177_31662545inv] with breakpoints in DMD intron 54 and in GRPR (a DMD downstream gene, OMIM*305670) intron 1. In the second patient, FluiDMD analysis 
P10 .022.B Somatic mosaicism for Duchenne muscular dystro- showedlackofDMDtranscriptspanningexon1-53,withthesole phyin anasymptomatic 4year-oldboy Dp71 isoform expressed. WGS analysis revealed a large inversion of 10Mb encompassing the region Xp:g.[23607043_32981797inv] Ana-Maria Meašić1, Ivona Sansović1, Adriana Bobinec1, Leona withbreakpointsinDMDintron2andinanupstreamintergenic, MorožinPohovski2, MijanaKero1,Ljubica Odak1,Ingeborg Barišić1 non-coding, region localized in Xp22.12. Both inversions gener- ated fusion genes and DMD-GRPR inversion also generated two 1DepartmentofMedicalGeneticsandReproductiveHealth,Children’s fusiontranscripts. HospitalZagreb,ScientiﬁcCentreofExcellenceforReproductiveand Conclusions: FluiDMD RNA proﬁle accurately addresses the Regenerative Medicine (CERRM), University of Zagreb School of gene region where atypical mutations may have occurred and Medicine, ZAGREB, Croatia, 2Department of Medical Genetics and WGSaccuratelyidentiﬁedthetwoinversions.Wesuggestthatthis ReproductiveHealth,Children’sHospitalZagreb,UniversityofZagreb diagnostic pipeline might facilitate the identiﬁcation of unde- SchoolofMedicine, ZAGREB, Croatia. tectedgenetic variations. Grant references EU project Solve-RD Grant Agreement Introduction: Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD/ number779257 BMD) are X-linked recessive disorders caused by mutations in R. Selvatici: None. R. Rossi: None. F. Mingyan: None. J. Lu: DMD gene, characterized by progressive symmetric skeletal None. V. Sansone: None. M.S. Falzarano: None. F. Gualandi: muscles weakness, elevated creatine kinase (CK) concentrations None.L.Bello: None. E.Pegoraro: None.A. Ferlini: None. andlate-onsetdilatedcardiomyopathy.Herewereportacaseofa boywith elevatedCK and mosaic DMDmutation. Methods: An asymptomatic 4-year-old boy without family 
P10 .021.A Lack of correlation between DMDexon 2 duplica- history of neuromuscular disorders was referred to us due to tion splicing choicesand phenotype severity incidentalﬁndingsofelevatedCK(2160-3335U/L).MLPAforDMD was performed using peripheral blood DNA, followed by NGS of Martina Mietto1, Marina Fabris1, Rosa Bonaccorso2, Stefano Carlo theclinicalexome. Previtali2, Alberto Zambon2, Francesca Gualandi1, Rachele Rossi1,3, Results: MLPA revealed a change in exon 10 of DMD. NGS Maria SoﬁaFalzarano1,Alessandra Ferlini1,3 identiﬁedmosaicnonsense mutation c.[986=/C>A] inexon10of DMDwith 70%of readscontaining alternative alleleA. 1UnitofMedicalGenetics,DepartmentofMedicalSciences,University Conclusions: The DMD shows a high germ-line mutation rate, of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 2Neuromuscular Repair Unit, Head InSpe which predicts high somatic mutation rate and somatic mosai- andDivision of Neuroscience, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milano, cism.OnlyeightcasesofsomaticDMDmosaicismarepublishedto Italy, 3The Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, UCL Great Ormond date.Somaticmutationratesmaybelowerthanexpected,orthe Street Instituteof ChildHealth, London, United Kingdom. patientsaren’tdiagnosedduetomild/uncharacteristicsymptoms. Published cases show lower mutation ratio in muscles than in Introduction:Duchennemusculardystrophy(DMD)isanX-linked blood, consistent with a genetic normalization, a selective disorder caused by mutations in the DMD gene. About 75% of pressure against mutant muscle cells. This could explain the lack DMDmutationsaredeletionsorduplicationswhiletheremaining of symptoms in our case. Patient’s young age should also be are small mutations. Exon 2 duplication is the most frequent consideredashecoulddevelopsymptomslaterinlife.Thisstudy EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 313 was supported by CERRM, Republic of Croatia, and by the EU Introduction: Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) will be the through ERDF, under grant agreement No. KK.01.1.1.01.0008, method of choice in near future genetic diagnostics. Major project,,ReproductiveandRegenerativeMedicine-ExploringNew challengesinWGSareinterpretingandhandlingthelargeamount Platforms andPotentials”. of data and ﬁnding the causative variant(s). Here we present a A. Meašić: None. I. Sansović: None. A. Bobinec: None. L. case that was solved with WGS in which all other methods used Morožin Pohovski: None. M. Kero: None. L. Odak: None. I. didnot yielddeﬁniteresults. Barišić:None. Material/Methods:Thepatientisa6yearoldgirlwithmuscle weakness and very high levels of serum creatine kinase (CK) 
P10 .023.C Dystrophin isoforms transcription heatmap in >20,000U/l. Due to her symptoms and an almost completely humanadult control brainareas skewed X-inactivation a dystrophinopathy was strongly sug- gested. WGS was performed and analyzed with our software for MariaSoﬁaFalzarano1,RacheleRossi1,2,MartinaMietto1,Fernanda routineNGSdiagnostics (GensearchNGS,Phenosystems). Fortunato1, Rita Selvatici1, Pietro Spitali3, Federica Montanaro2, Results: We found a position in intron 54 of the DMD gene Francesco Muntoni2, AlessandraFerlini1,2 where a small intergenic sequence of chromosome (chr) 5 was detected. By performing Sanger sequencing we conﬁrmed a 1UnitofMedicalGenetics,DepartmentofMedicalSciences,University reciprocal translocation involving chr 5p and Xp with deﬁnite ofFerrara,Ferrara,Italy,2TheDubowitzNeuromuscularCentre,UCL breakpoints. Previously performedcytogenetic analysiscould not Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, United depict the evidence of a translocation between 5p and Xp. An Kingdom, 3Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University extendedFISHanalysiscouldvalidatethetranslocationandwillbe Medical Center,Leiden, Netherlands. usefultodemonstrate theparticipationoftheactivechrXinthe translocation. Introduction:Duchennemusculardystrophy(DMD)isanX-linked Discussion: This case shows how important WGS will be or disease due to pathogenic variants in theDMD gene. Inaddition alreadyisforgeneticroutinediagnostics.ByperformingWGSasa to the neuromuscular involvement, DMD often presents with ﬁrststepthiscasecouldhavebeensolvedfasterandwithhigher cognitive and neuro-behavioural co-morbidities, for which the accuracythanthestepwise applicationofconventional methods. pathogenesis and genotype-phenotype relationship are partially Supported by DFGRO 5397/3-1|ZA 1137/2-1 understood. Multiple DMD isoforms, differentially affected based N.Pluta:None.A.Zaum:None.A.vonMoers:None.I.Nanda: onthesiteofthemutation,arethoughttoplayarelevantrolein None.F.Zimmer:None.C.Drewes:None.D.Atlan:A.Employment these co-morbidities, based on their prominent (Dp71) or (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Phenosystems SA. E. Ownership exclusive(Dp140) brain expression. Interest (stock,stockoptions,patentorotherintellectualproperty); Material and methods: All known dystrophin isoforms were Signiﬁcant;PhenosystemsSA.B.Wolf:None.S.Rost:None. analysed in 24 normal adult human brain areas using TaqMan assaysonTissueScancDNAarray(OriGene).Ctwereusedtobuild aheatmapofdystrophinisoformsexpressionwithvaluesranging 
P10 .025.A Bionano optical genome mapping and southern from40(lowest) to27(highest) Ct. blotanalysis forFSHD detection Results:Threemaindystrophinisoformclusterswereidentiﬁed. Cluster 1 includes Dp116, Dp427p1 and Dp260.1 that show low Jeroen Depreeuw, Barbara Dewaele, Sascha Vermeer, Gert Matthijs, expressioninallbrainareas.Cluster2includesDp260.2,Dp427m, ValérieRace Dp140 with intermediate expression levels. Cluster 3 consists of Dp427b,Dp427p2,Dp71thathavetheoverallhighexpressionin Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital of Leuven, Leuven, most brain areas. Hierarchical clustering also highlighted brain Belgium. areaswithoveralllowdystrophinexpression,suchastelencepha- lon (frontal, temporal and occipital lobe, amygdala, caudate, and Introduction: Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD; choroidplexus),diencephalon(thalamusandhypothalamus),and OMIM*158900) is an autosomal dominant muscular disorder myelencephalon (medulla). By contrast, the cerebellum showed characterized by slowly progressive dysfunction of facial, upper thehighestexpression ofDp140. and lower extremity muscles. FSHD1 is associated with the Conclusion: The approach showed that adult human brain contraction of the D4Z4 microsatellite in the 4q35 subtelomeric areas show differential enrichment for expression of speciﬁc region. The most common technique for genetic diagnosis of dystrophin isoforms. This information may help understand the FSHD1 is Southern Blotting. We explored the potential of a new role of dystrophin in brain co-morbidities observed in affected technique, called Optical Genome Mapping (OGM) from Bionano DMDpatients. Grant: BINDEUGrant N. 847826 Genomics forFSHD1 detection. M.S. Falzarano: None. R. Rossi: None. M. Mietto: None. F. Materials and Methods: Blood samples from 10patients with Fortunato: None. R. Selvatici: None. P. Spitali: None. F. FSHDrelatedsymptomswerecollectedandstoredat-80°C.OGM Montanaro: None.F. Muntoni: None. A.Ferlini: None. was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions and samples were loaded on a Saphyr instrument. Bionano “EnFocus FSHD” pipeline was used to calculate the haplotype and the 
P10 .024.D Whole genome sequencing - A solved case of numberD4Z4 repeats(diagnostic when shorterthan 10repeats). dystrophinopathy in ayounggirl OGM results were then compared with the results from the Southern Blotanalyses. Natalie Pluta1, Ann-Kathrin Zaum1, Arpad von Moers2, Indrajit Results:Patientsamplesincluded2affectedindividuals(7and Nanda1, Frederic Zimmer1, Cosima Drewes1, David Atlan3, Beat 8repeats)and8unaffectedindividuals(repeatrange13-59).OGM Wolf4, Simone Rost1 resultswereconcordantwithSouthernBlotresults.Therewereno falsepositivesnorfalsenegativesinourseriesandnodifferences 1Institut fuer Humangenetik, Wuerzburg, Germany, 2DRK Kliniken, were found in terms of repeatability and reproducibility. In Berlin, Germany, 3Phenosystems SA, Wallonia, Belgium, 4iCoSys, addition,OGMcoulddifferentiatebetween4qA(pathogenic)and Fribourg, Switzerland. 4qB(notpathogenic)haplotypes. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 314 Conclusions: Weconclude that OGM is apowerful and robust Materials and Methods: Clinical exome sequencing was technique for FSHD1 testing in genetic diagnostic laboratories, performed identifying a de novo heterozygous variant in NIPA1 providingresultsthatarecompletelyconcordantwiththecurrent (NM_144599.5 c.249C>G; p.Asn83Lys). Molecular modelling was goldstandardSouthern Blotanalysis.Additionally, OGMprovides performed to evaluate putative functional consequence of the extrarelevantinformation,suchasthe4qAor4qBhaplotypeand NIPA1protein. SMCHD1structural variations. Results: The NIPA1 c.249C>G mutation is classiﬁed as likely J. Depreeuw: None. B. Dewaele: None. S. Vermeer: None. G. pathogenic following the ACMG (American College of Medical Matthijs:None. V.Race: None. Genetics and Genomics)/AMP (Association for Molecular Pathol- ogy) guidelines. The Asn83 is located between the second transmembrane domain (TMD) and a loop exposed to the 
P10 .026.BAfamilywithmutationinDMDthatinheritedfrom extracellular space. By molecular modelling, the Asn83Lys gonadal mosaic mother modiﬁcation induces a signiﬁcant perturbation of the protein structure,alteringsignaltransductionorsmall-moleculetransport BasakGogus,Muhsin Elmas bymodulating thelengthof TMDs. Conclusion:WedescribedanovelAsn83LysmutationinNIPA1 Afyonkarahisar Health Science University, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey. in a patient displaying the chief phenotypical characteristics of SPG6. Our data are in agreement with the idea that NIPA1 Introduction: Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and Becker missense variants in SPG6 act through a gain of function muscular dystrophy (BMD) are X-linked recessive disorders these mechanismabletoactivatetheapoptoticprogram,assuggested affect 1 in 7,250 males aged 5 - 24 years. Mutations in the bystudies performed inC.Elegans. Dystrophin (DMD) cause DMD, BMD. Mostly, female relatives of D. Fabbro: None. C. Mio: None. F. Fogolari: None. G. patient’s are carrier. Clinical symptoms are delayed motor mile- Damante: None. stones like walking independently. In addition, increasing at creatininekinaseoccuratthesepatients.Ingenetics,oneofmost challenginghandicapisgonadal(germline)mosaicismmutations. 
P10 .030.B Clinical and genetic characterization of seven Diseases caused by germline mosaicism can be difﬁcult to Portuguese patients with KMT2B variants diagnose as genetically-inherited because the mutant alleles are notlikelytobepresentinthesomaticcells.Weaimtopresentone AlexandraM.Lopes1,SusanaSousa1,AnaLopes1,PauloSilva1,Sara family withgermline mosaicism inDMDgene. Morais1,AnaF.Brandão1,FátimaLopes1,RitaBastos-Ferreira1,André Materials and Methods: 18 months old girl was referred our Jorge2, Cristina Januário2, Henrique M. Costa3, Ana C. Brás2, Rita clinic because of increasing creatinine kinase that found Quental4,MiguelLeão4,JoanaDamásio1,5,MarinaMagalhães5,João incidentally. She had one sister. We decide to perform DMD P.Freixo1, Jorge Sequeiros1,Jorge Oliveira1 MLPA test for her. At the same time, if we will ﬁnd any pathological changes, same test will be performed for her sister 1CGPP-IBMC/I3S, Porto, Portugal, 2Serviço de Neurologia, Centro andmother. HospitalareUniversitáriodeCoimbra,EPE,Coimbra,Portugal,3Serviço Results: At the result of DMD MLPA analysis of patient, we de Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar de Vila Nova de Gaia/Espinho, EPE, determined heterozygous deletion at 14th and 15th exons. The Vila Nova de Gaia, Portugal, 4Serviço de Genética Médica, Centro resultofhersisterwassamewithproband.Buttheirmotherdidn’t Hospitalar Universitário de São João/Faculdade de Medicina da hadanychangesinDMDgene.Thissituationgaveustheideaofa UniversidadedoPorto,Porto,Portugal,5CentroHospitalarUniversitário possible presenceof gonadalmosaicism in themother. doPorto,HospitaldeSantoAntónio,Porto,Portugal. Conclusions:Ifthereisrepatingforsamemutationbutparents haven’tchanges,gonadalmosaicmconsider.Whilegivinggenetic KMT2Bpathogenicvariantswererecentlyidentiﬁedasanimportant counseling, parents should be informed about the rate at which cause of early-onset dystonia. The phenotype spectrum of KMT2B- theirnext childbecomespatient. related diseases is expanding as more complex neurological and B.Gogus:None. M. Elmas: None. syndromic manifestations emerge. Clinical and genetic data from seven Portuguese patients with causal variants in KMT2B were reviewed to further characterize its mutational spectrum and 
P10 .027.C A novel de novo missense NIPA1 mutation causing reassessphenotype.Twopatientspresentedisolateddystonia,while hereditary spastic paraplegia ﬁve had more complex or atypical phenotypes. NGS multigene panels, based on whole-exome sequencing, were applied in six DoraFabbro1, Catia Mio2,Federico Fogolari2, Giuseppe Damante2 patients,whereasone wasdirectly tested for variants in KMT2B by Sanger sequencing, according to the clinical request. The two 1Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Friuli Centrale, Udine, Italy, 2Uni- patients with isolated dystonia carried one missense variant of versityof Udine,Udine, Italy. unknown clinical signiﬁcance (p.Arg1762His) or one splice-site variant (c.5198-4_5206del). The latter occurred de novo; neither Introduction: Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia (HSP) includes a hadbeenpreviouslyreported.Inthegroupofpatientswithcomplex heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders character- dystonia, one frameshift (p.Glu1267Alafs*35) and two missense izedbyspasticity,hyperreﬂexiaandweaknessinthelowerlimbs, variants(p.Arg145Glnandp.Arg1777Pro)wereidentiﬁed.Twowere due to the degeneration of corticospinal axons. To date, more pathogenicorlikely-pathogenic,whereasonemissensesubstitution than80typesofHSPhavebeenidentiﬁed.SPG6accountsfor1% wasofunknownclinicalsigniﬁcance.Onlyonehadbeenreported. ofautosomaldominantHSPandiscausedbypathogenicvariants One patient with an atypical phenotype, comprising ataxia, subtle in NIPA1 (OMIM# 608145). It encodes a magnesium transporter dystoniaandpolyneuropathy,harbouredanovelsplice-sitevariant locatedinplasmamembraneandearlyendosomes,implicatedin (c.3334+1G>A).One additionalpatientwithasyndromic presenta- neuronal development and maintenance. Here we report a 39- tion,includingdysmorphicfeaturesandintellectualdisability,butno years-old woman affected by progressive gait disturbance dystonia,carriedanovelframeshiftvariant(p.Ala1856Profs*115);its associated toabsenceseizures episodes withinchildhood. clinical signiﬁcance and origin are under investigation as another EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 315 candidatevariantinTRIOwasfoundinthispatient.Weexpandthe Conclusion: This report highlights the beneﬁt of trio ES for the spectrumofpathogenicvariantsinKMT2Bandhopecontributingto precociousdiagnosisofchildrenaffectedwithseveredevelopmental explore further their association with atypical and syndromic delay and unusual causative molecular mechanisms such as partial phenotypes. UPD.Italsoappearshighlyusefulforgeneticcounselingforparents A.M. Lopes: None. S. Sousa: None. A. Lopes: None. P. Silva: toprecisetherecurrencerisk. None. S. Morais: None. A.F. Brandão: None. F. Lopes: None. R. N. Hadouiri: None. V. Darmency: None. V. Dulieu: None. M. Bastos-Ferreira: None. A. Jorge: None. C. Januário: None. H.M. Mourot De Rougemont: None. B. Collomb: None. S. Perez Costa:None.A.C.Brás:None.R.Quental:None.M.Leão:None. Martin: None. O. Blanchard: None. A. Vitobello: None. C. J. Damásio: None. M. Magalhães: None. J.P. Freixo: None. J. Philippe:None. L.Faivre: None. C.Thauvin-Robinet: None. Sequeiros:None. J. Oliveira: None. 
P10 .033.AHomozygoussplice-sitevariantinMADD,encoding 
P10 .031.CPartialuniparentaldisomyofchromosome4causes a Rab guanine nucleotide exchange factor, results in by homozygousTRAPP
C11  truncatingvariant pleiotropic effects and a multisystemic infantile-lethal disorder Nawale HADOUIRI1,2, Véronique Darmency3, Véronique Dulieu2, Marie-GabrielleMourotDeRougemont4,BenoitCollomb5,Stéphanie Hagar Mor-Shaked1, Bassam Abu-Libdeh2, Amir A. Atawna3, Gillis Perez Martin6, Olivier Blanchard7, Antonio Vitobello8, Christophe David4, Orli Halstuk1, Nava Shaul-Lotan1, Mordechai Slae4, Mutaz Philippe9, LaurenceFaivre1,10, ChristelThauvin-Robinet1,11,12 Sultan5, VardiellaMeiner1, OrlyElpeleg1, TamarHarel1 1UMR1231 GAD, Inserm - Université Bourgogne-Franche Comté, 1Department of Genetics, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Dijon,France,2Pôlerééducation-réadaptation,CHUdeDijon,23,rue Center, jerusalem, Israel, 2Department of Pediatrics, Makassed Gaffarel, Dijon, France, 33- Service de Neurophysiologie Clinique, HospitalandFacultyofMedicine,Al-QudsUniversity,EastJerusalem, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 44- Hôpital Israel, 3Department of Neonatology, Makassed Hospital, East Francois Mitterrand, département de radiologie diagnostique et jerusalem, Israel, 4Department of Pediatrics, Hadassah-Hebrew thérapeutique,CHU,14,ruePaulGaffarel,Dijon,France,55-Unitéde University Medical Center, jerusalem, Israel, 5Department of Pedia- Réanimation polyvalente, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, trics,MakassedHospitalandFacultyofMedicine,Al-QudsUniversity, Dijon, France, 6Pôle pédiatrie, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon Eastjerusalem, Israel. Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 7Service de Pédiatrie, Centre Hospitalier de Roanne, Roanne, France, 8Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en Introduction: Rab proteins coordinate inter-organellar vesicle- Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, mediated transport, facilitating intracellular communication, France,98-UnitéFonctionnelleInnovationenDiagnosticgénomique protein recycling, and signaling processes. Dysfunction of Rab des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, Dijon, France, 109- Centre de proteinsortheirdirectinteractorsleadtoawiderangeofdiseases Référence maladies rares « Anomalies du Développement et with diverse manifestations. MADD encodes a Rab guanine syndromes malformatifs », centre de génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) which activates RAB3 and CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 1110- Centre de Référence RAB27A/27B and is thus a crucial regulator of neuromuscular maladies rares « Déﬁciences Intellectuelles de causes rares », CHU junctions and endocrine secretory granule release. Pathogenic DijonBourgogne,Dijon,France,12UnitéFonctionnelleInnovationen variants in MADD have recently been associated with syndromic Diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU neurodevelopmental disorder [MIM 619005] and with DEEAH DijonBourgogne, Dijon, France. syndrome [MIM619004]. Materials and Methods: Following informed consent, exome Introduction:Transportproteinparticle(TRAPP)isamultisubunit sequencing analysis was undertaken on seven individuals from tethering complex implicated in tricellular vesicle trafﬁcking. fourconsanguineousArabMuslimfamilieswithaninfantile-lethal Biallelic pathogenic variants of the TRAP
C11  gene have rarely syndrome including failure to thrive, chronic diarrhea, neonatal been associated with various phenotypes from limb-girdle respiratory distress, variable pituitary dysfunction and distal muscular dystrophy (LGMD) to congenital disorder of glycosyla- arthrogryposis. Sanger sequencing was used to segregate the tion (CDG), associated to various extramuscular symptoms. To candidate variant in available family members, and analysis of date,only20patientshavebeenreportedintheliteraturewith13 cDNA allowed characterization of the mutant transcript. Result: pathogenic variants. Internalgene-matchingusingalocalexomedatabaseallowedthe PatientsandResults:Ina15-month-oldmalereferredforsevere identiﬁcationofahomozygoussplice-sitevariantinMADD(c.2816 developmental delay, weakness of the 4 limbs and pelvic girdle +1G>A)onacommonhaplotypeinallfourfamilies,indicating a muscles, mild dysmetria of the upper limbs, severe microcephaly, founder variant. The variant segregated with the disease in all seizures, and mildly elevated creatine kinase (670 UI/L), trio exome available family members. Determination of cDNA sequence sequencing (ES) identiﬁed a homozygous pathogenic splice-site veriﬁedsingleexonskipping,resultinginanout-of-framedeletion. variant (NM_021942.5:c.1287+5G>A) in the intron 12 of the Conclusions:ThecombinedrolesofMADDanditsdownstream TRAPP
C11 gene,onlyinheritedfromhisfather.TargetedESreanalysis effectors correlate with the phenotypic spectrum of disease, and identiﬁedapaternalpartial24Mbuniparentaldisomy(UPD)ofthe call for additional studies to conﬁrm the pathogenic mechanism chromosome 4 including this variant, previously reported in 5 andtoinvestigatepossibletherapeuticavenuesthroughmodula- affected members. Affected individuals had microcephaly, early- tionofTNF-αsignaling.Theauthorsdeclarenofundingsourcesfor onset psychomotor delay, hyperkinetic movement disorder, truncal this project. ataxia,andelevatedcreatinekinase(300−1200UI/L).Atlastfollow- H. Mor-Shaked: None. B. Abu-Libdeh: None. A. A. Atawna: up (4 years of age), he presented a persistent muscular weakness, None.G.David:None. O.Halstuk:None. N.Shaul-Lotan: None. severe microcephaly, seizures, delayed developmental milestones M. Slae: None. M. Sultan: None. V. Meiner: None. O. Elpeleg: and thin corpus callosum. His muscular phenotype appeared more None.T.Harel: None. pronouncedthatpreviousreportedincaseswiththesameTRAPP
C11  
P10 .034.BVariants in the imprintedgene MAGE
L2  variant. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 316 Evelyn Douglas1, Louisa Sanchez1, Jessica Burdett2, Shannon Le counselingtotheinﬂictedfamilies.Awarenessoftheimplications Blanc3, Nicholas J. C. Smith4, Andrew Dubowsky2, David Lawrence5, of consanguineous union is extremely important for parental KarinKassahn6, SuiYu1, Kathie Friend1 counselingand recognition inagreatly inbredsociety. H.S. AlQudairy: None. M. AlMuhaizea: None. O. Dabbagh: 1SA Pathology (Women’s and Children’s Hospital), North Adelaide, None. W. Alotaibi: None. A. AlHargan: None. M. Ali: None. H. Australia, 2SA Pathology (Flinders Medical Centre), Bedford Park, AlHindi:None. D.Colak: None.N.Kaya: None. Australia,3PaediatricandReproductiveGeneticsUnit(Women’sand Children’sHospital),NorthAdelaide,Australia,4Neurology(Women’s and Children’s Hospital), North Adelaide, Australia, 5CCB ACRF 
P10 .036.D Mitochondria-lysosome membrane contacts are Cancer Genomics Facility, Adelaide, Australia, 6SA Pathology defective inGDA
P1 -related Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (TechnologyAdvancement Unit), Adelaide, Australia. Lara Cantarero1,2, Elena Juárez-Escoto1, Azahara Civera-Tregón1,2, Pathogenic variants in MAGE
L2  are associated with Chitayat-Hall María Rodríguez-Sanz1, Yaiza Díaz-Osorio1, Mónica Roldán1,3, Raúl (CHS), Schaaf-Yang (SYS) and Prader-Willi (PWS) syndromes. Benítez1,4, JanetHoenicka1,2, Francesc Palau1,2,3 Schaaf-Yang Syndrome is characterised by neonatal hypotonia, developmental delay, intellectual disability, feeding problems in 1LaboratoryofNeurogeneticsandMolecularMedicine–IPER,Institut infancy,joint contractures and autism spectrumdisorder, sharing de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBER de clinical overlap with Prader-Willi Syndrome and Chitayat-Hall Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain, 3Dept. of Genetic syndrome. Truncating variants in the maternally imprinted Medicine – IPER, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, and Hospital Clínic, MAGE
L2 genehave beenidentiﬁed inpatients with SYS. Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4Automatic Control A neuromuscular gene panel analysis was requested on a two DepartmentandBiomedicalEngineeringResearchCenter,Universitat week old male infant, requiring respiratory support, with Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain. hypotonia, bilateral talipes and central apnoeas. No variants explaining the patient’s phenotype were initially found, but Introduction:Mitochondrialmembranecontactsites(MCSs)allow subsequentreanalysisoftheexomeidentiﬁedatruncatingvariant bidirectional communication between mitochondria and other in the MAGE
L2  gene. Familial studies showed this variant to be organellesforspeciﬁcfunctions.GDA
P1 isanatypicalglutathione paternallyinheritedandalsoconﬁrmedthisvariantinthepaternal S-transferase located both in the outer mitochondrial membrane grandmother, consistent with the inheritance pattern of Schaaf- and in the mitochondrial contacts with endoplasmic reticulum YangSyndrome duetoimprinted inheritance. (MAMs). Since mutations in GDA
P1  cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth Following this ﬁnding, the MAGE
L2  gene was added to our neuropathy, its function is essential for peripheral nerve physiol- standard neuromuscular panel. To date, only one additional ogy.Ourpreviousstudiesshowedstructuraldefectsinmitochon- varianthasbeenidentiﬁedinMAGE
L2 ,anin-framedeletionof30 dria and ER cisternae, associated with abnormal autophagic nucleotides. Parental studies indicated this variant to be vesicles.Nevertheless,theunderlyingpathophysiologicalmechan- maternally inherited, so it is considered unlikely to be disease ismsof loss offunction mutations remain elusive. causing. Materials and methods: Cellular and functional experiments E. Douglas: None. L. Sanchez: None. J. Burdett: None. S. Le onautophagy,interorganellesMCSsandmitochondrialnetworkin Blanc: None. N.J.C. Smith: None. A. Dubowsky: None. D. embryonicmotorneuronsfromGdap1-/-mice,GDA
P1 -silencedSH- Lawrence:None.K.Kassahn:None.S.Yu:None.K.Friend:None. SY5Ycells and GDA
P1 patients’ﬁbroblasts. Results: We demonstrate that GDA
P1  participates in basal autophagy and its depletion affects autophagosome biogenesis 
P10 .035.C Phenotypic variability of MEGF10 variants causing andmembranetrafﬁckingfromMAMs.GDA
P1 alsoparticipatesin congenitalmyopathyReportoftwounrelatedpatientsfroma lysosomematurationbyinteractingwithPYKfyve,apH-dependent highlyconsanguineous population kinase. Notably, we present GDA
P1 -LAMP-1 as a new tethering pair of mitochondria-lysosome MCSs. GDA
P1  deﬁciency reduces Hanan Suliman AlQudairy, Mohammad AlMuhaizea, Omar Dab- MCSsbetweentheseorganelles,impairslysosomalandmitochon- bagh, Wafa Alotaibi, Aljouhra AlHargan, Mariam Ali, Hindi AlHindi, drial network morphology and decreases cellular glutathione DilekColak, NamikKaya levels. Supplying this antioxidant rescues lysosomes membrane and mitochondrial dynamics defects but not early autophagic King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi eventsor mitochondrialMCSs. Arabia. Conclusions:GDA
P1 enablestheproperfunctionofmitochondrial MCSs in both degradative and non-degradative pathways, which Congenital mypoathies are rare neuromuscular hereditary dis- couldexplainprimaryinsultsinGDA
P1 -relatedCMTpathophysiology ordersthatmanifestatbirthorduringinfancyandusuallyappear and highlights new redox-sensitive targets in axonopathies where with muscle weakness and hypotonia. Early onset myopathy, mitochondriaand lysosomesareinvolved.Grants:SpanishMinistry areﬂexia, respiratory distress, and dysphagia (EMARDD, OMIM: of Science, Innovation and Universities (SAF2015-66625-R), General- 614399, MIM: 612453) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder itatdeCatalunya2015FEDER/S-21,andCIBERER. caused by biallelic mutations (at homozygous or compound L.Cantarero:None.E.Juárez-Escoto:None.A.Civera-Tregón: heterozygous status) in MEGF10 (multiple epidermal growth None. M. Rodríguez-Sanz: None. Y. Díaz-Osorio: None. M. factor-likedomainsproteinfamily).Here,wereporttwounrelated Roldán: None. R. Benítez: None. J. Hoenicka: None. F. Palau: patients, born to consanguineous parents, having two novel None. MEGF10 mutations. There are only ﬁve cases reported in the literature to date. Interestingly, presence of MEGF10 associated EMARDD has not been reported in the Saudi Arabia, a highly 
P10 .037.A Cis MFN2 missense variants causing familial consanguineous population. Our work expands phenotypic CMT2A2A features of the disease and provides opportunity for genetic EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 317 Enrica Marchionni1, Fabiana Fattori2, Gioia Mastromoro1, Daniele Todate,onlyoneLAMA2-RDpatientwasreportedwithaverymild Guadagnolo1, Francesca Di Palma1, Luca Bosco2, Enrico Bertini2, phenotype despite the total merosin absence in muscle. This AntonioPizzuti1 patient is still ambulant at the age of 30 with no respiratory insufﬁciencynorcardiomyopathy.Interestingly,thispatientcarries 1DepartmentofExperimentalMedicine,SapienzaUniversityofRome, the same LAMA2 loss-of-function mutation as a severely affected Rome, Italy, 2Unit of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative sibling. We hypothesized that genetic modiﬁer(s) in the atypical Disorders, Department of Neurosciences, Bambino Gesù Children’s patient mitigate the consequences of complete merosin deﬁ- Hospital,IRCCS, Rome, Italy. ciency viaa novelmechanism. Methods: We performed RNA-sequencing on RNA obtained Introduction:MFN2(MIM*608507)isanucleargeneencodingfor from muscle samples of the atypical patient, the affected sibling a mitochondrial outer membrane protein. Heterozygous muta- and unrelated LAMA2-RD patients with both total and partial tions in MFN2 are associated with Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) merosindeﬁciency. disease type 2A2A (CMT2A2A MIM*609260) and CMT6A Results: Transcriptome analysis showed a similar LAMA2 gene (MIM*601152) while biallelic variants cause CMT2A2B expressionintheatypicalpatient,theaffectedsiblingandpatients (MIM*617087). with absent merosin. A limited number of genes differentially Materials and Methods: A 39 y.o. woman was referred for a expressed in the atypical patient affect pathways potentially peripheric neuropathy, sensory deﬁcits and distal-predominant relevant fortheobserved phenotypic divergence. weakness.ENMGshowedamarkedneurogenicinvolvement.At Conclusion:Weplantostudytheroleofcandidatemodiﬁer(s)/ birth she presented clubfeet and during childhood she under- pathways in dystrophic zebraﬁsh and identify novel mechanisms went nine surgical interventions for foot and ankle deformities. to attenuate LAMA2-RD severity. New knowledge about the She also presented scoliosis and a severe symptoms progres- molecularaspectsofthediseasecouldleadtothedevelopmentof sion. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood and Next newtherapeuticapproachesforLAMA2-RD.Projectsupportedby Generation Sequencing (NGS) was performed using an Illumina CureCMD. MiSeq analyzing a customized gene panel including 111 genes V. Pini: None. B. Weisburd: None. V. Ganesh: None. S. Di related to peripheral neuropathies and/or distal SMA. Target Troia: None. F. Catapano: None. S. Aguti: None. F. Muntoni: B. enrichment was carried out using Nextera Rapid Capture Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant Custom Enrichment Kit. and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Results: NGS analysis detected two heterozygous MFN2 UCL. (NM_014874.3) variants: c.2170C>G; p.(Leu724Val) and c.2200C>G; p.(Leu734Val). The ﬁrst one is absent in GnomAD v2.1.1, clinical databases and is not reported in literature. The 
P10 .039.C Interactome-based multi-omics study of molecular second one is described in literature in a patient presenting networksimplicated in disease activity in Multiple Sclerosis CMT2A.Segregationanalysisdisclosedthesamevariantsinher69 y.o. father, revealing the cis phase. Neurological examination Valentina Nale1, Ferdinando Clarelli2, Noemi Di Nanni1, Laura evidenced milder symptoms and the presence of pes cavus, Ferrè2,3,ElisabettaMascia2,SilviaSantoro2,MatteoGnocchi1,Marco scoliosis and distalweakness. Moscatelli1, Martina Tosi2, Kaalindi Misra2, Melissa Sorosina2, Conclusions: MFN2 genotype-phenotype studies show signiﬁ- Luciano Milanesi1, Massimo Filippi3,4,5, Federica Esposito2,3, Ettore cant phenotypic and allelic heterogeneity and variant interpreta- Mosca1 tion is challenging. Interrogation of the in house database permitted to ﬁnd another family with similar indication analysis 1Institute of Biomedical Technologies, National Research Council, andthesameincisvariants,currentlyunderclinicalreassessment Segrate(Milan),Italy,2LaboratoryofNeurologicalcomplexdisorders, tobetter reﬁne theassociated phenotype. Division of Neurosciences, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, E.Marchionni:None.F.Fattori:None.G.Mastromoro:None. Milan, Italy, 3Neurology, Neurorehabilitation and Neurophysiology D. Guadagnolo: None. F. Di Palma: None. L. Bosco: None. E. Unit,IRCCSSanRaffaeleScientiﬁcInstitute,Milan,Italy,4Vita-Salute Bertini: None. A.Pizzuti: None. San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy, 5Neuroimaging Research Unit, Division of Neuroscience, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientiﬁc Institute, Milan, Italy. 
P10 .038.B Exploring the role of genetic modiﬁers in a mild LAMA2-RD case associated with a LAMA2 loss-of-function Introduction:MultipleSclerosis(MS)isanautoimmunediseaseof mutation the Central Nervous System, characterized by high clinical heterogeneity. Interactome-based approaches to complex dis- Veronica Pini1, Ben Weisburd2, Vijay Ganesh2, Stephanie Di Troia2, eases have proven successful to ﬁll the gap of knowledge Francesco Catapano1, SaraAguti1,Francesco Muntoni1 betweengene-levelﬁndingsandpathologicalphenotypes.Inthis study, we used tissue-speciﬁc as well as general models of the 1UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health - Dubowitz human interactome to ﬁnd gene networks affected by the most Neuromuscular Centre, London, United Kingdom, 2Centre for signiﬁcantmolecularalterationsassociatedwithdiseaseactivityin Mendelian Genomics - Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, MSpatients. Cambridge, MA,USA. Materials and Methods: The genome-wide association study involved 1174 patients; gene-wise statistics were estimated with Introduction: Merosin-deﬁcient congenital muscular dystrophy VEGAS; differential expression analysis was performed on whole (LAMA2-RD) is a neuromuscular disorder caused by mutations in blood samples from 182 patients. Tissue-speciﬁc interactomes the LAMA2 gene, coding for the alpha-2 subunit of laminin-211 source: HumanBase. General interactomes: STRING, DIAMOND, (merosin). LAMA2-RD patients carrying LAMA2 loss-of-function HINT, iRefIndex. Network analysis: “dmﬁnd” (genomics); “mND” mutations lack merosin and their invariably severe clinical (genomics and transcriptomics). Statistical signiﬁcance was phenotypeischaracterisedbytheinabilitytoacquireambulation. assessed by permutation-based approaches. Pathway sources: A wider (often milder) spectrum of disease severity results from Biosystems, MsigDB. Pathway cross-talk was quantiﬁed consider- missense mutations, if a partially functional protein is produced. inginter-pathway gene-geneinteractions. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 318 Results: The analysis of genomics in brain-speciﬁc and Conclusion: The recent advances in genetic investigations lymphocyte-speciﬁc interactomes revealed a series of genes that improvedsubstantiallytheunderstandingofthepathophysiology carryvariantsandformsigniﬁcantgenenetworks;thesenetworks of many congenital muscular dystrophies. Further research is share a common component, but let us also hypothesize tissue- needed to unravel new causative candidates and possible speciﬁc effects on different pathways. The integrative analysis treatmentsfor theundiagnosedpatients. revealed intra-pathway functional links between the genetic and M.Nashabat:None.&.Avcı:None.E.Börklü-Yücel:None.H.P. expression alterations, and pathway cross-talks, with a core of Saraçoğlu:None.P.Oﬂazer:None.N.Escande-Beillard:None.H. conserved relations (recurrent across interactomes) as well as Kayserili: None. interactome-speciﬁc ﬁndings. Conclusions: Collectively, the gene networks emerging in our study provide an in-depth knowledge of molecular pathways 
P10 .041.AFunctionalanalysisofanRYR1variantunderlyinga implicated in disease activity. Our study underlines also the myopathy withvariable expressivity importanceofintegratingcomplementaryapproachestoaddress the complexity of molecular networks. Funding: MoH GR-2016- Jennifer Hauteclocque1,2, Adrien Rihoux3,2, Jean-Denis Brisson4,5,6, 02363997;FRRBERAPERMED2018-233 FindingMSGA 779282. AlexParker1,2,Cam-Tu E. Nguyen1,7, Martine Tétreault1,2 V. Nale: None. F. Clarelli: None. N. Di Nanni: None. L. Ferrè: None.E.Mascia:None.S.Santoro:None.M.Gnocchi:None.M. 1DépartementdeNeurosciences,UniversitédeMontréal,Montreal, Moscatelli: None. M. Tosi: None. K. Misra: None. M. Sorosina: QC, Canada, 2Centre de Recherche du CHUM, Montreal, QC, None. L. Milanesi: None. M. Filippi: B. Research Grant (principal Canada,3DépartementdeMicrobiologie,InfectiologieetImmuno- investigator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell logie, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 4Faculté de asgrantsalreadyreceived);Signiﬁcant;Roche,BiogenIdec,Merck- médecine et des sciences de la santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Serono, Novartis, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. D. Speakers Sherbrooke, QC, Canada, 5Groupe de recherche interdisciplinaire Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert wit- sur les maladies neuromusculaires, Centre intégré universitaire de ness);Modest;Bayer,BiogenIdec,Merck-Serono,Novartis,Roche, santé et de services sociaux du Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean, Saguenay, Sanoﬁ Genzyme, Takeda, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. F. QC, Canada, 6Clinique des maladies neuromusculaires, Centre Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Bayer, Biogen Idec, Merck- intégré universitaire de santé et de services sociaux du Saguenay- Serono, Novartis, Roche, Sanoﬁ Genzyme, Takeda, Teva Pharma- Lac-St-Jean, Saguenay, Saguenay, QC, Canada, 7Pediatric Neurol- ceutical Industries. F. Esposito: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria ogy, CHU Sainte-Justine, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, (speakersbureau,symposia,andexpertwitness);Modest;Novartis, Canada. Sanoﬁ Genzyme, Almirall, Merck-Serono. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Novartis, Sanoﬁ Genzyme, Almirall, Merck-Serono. Neuromusculardiseasesareknowntobehighlyheterogeneous E.Mosca: None. diseaseswhereasinglemutationisoftenassociatedwithawide range of phenotypes. Although the nature and location of the variant canexplain the variability between different mutations, 
P10 .040.DExpandingdiseasespectrumofmusculardystrophy differencesinclinicalpresentationamongstcarriersofthesame variantremainelusive.Wepresentastudycohortcomposedof Marwan Nashabat, Şahin Avcı, Esra Börklü-Yücel, Hilal Pırıl individuals carrying the same uncharacterized RYR1 hetero- Saraçoğlu,Piraye Oﬂazer, Nathalie Escande-Beillard, Hülya Kayserili zygous missense variant but who demonstrate extremely diverse phenotypes ranging from exertional rhabdomyolysis, KoçUniversity, Istanbul,Turkey. ﬁxed weakness with ptosis, and asymptomatic individuals. Our goal is to validate the pathogenicity of this variant before Congenitalmusculardystrophyisageneticallyandphenotypically proceeding to investigate the molecular basis of this clinical heterogeneous spectrum of disorders characterized by progres- heterogeneity. sive muscle weakness starting at infancy or early childhood. WeusedaCRISPR/Cas9mediatedhomozygousknock-inofthe Althoughcurrentlythemajorityofpatientsarediagnosedbyhigh RYR1 variant in C. elegans to study the functional effects of the throughput genetic investigations, a large number of muscular mutation. Locomotion, lifespan, and synaptic transmission were dystrophies remain unraveled. measured and compared to wild type (wt) controls using video Case presentation: 8-year-old female patient born from a microscopy, a lifespan assay, and an aldicarb-induced paralysis nonconsanguineous marriage developed normally until early assay respectively. As such, we identiﬁed a decrease in mobility, childhood. At 5 years old, she started to experience frequent longevity, and synaptic efﬁcacy in mutant worms compared to falls and developed an abnormal gait. Her symptoms progres- thewt. sively worsen over time. The patient has normal growth and We conclude that this RYR1 variant is in fact pathogenic as it mental abilities. Her upper and lower limbs muscle power causes a variety of neuromuscular phenotypes in our C. elegans decreasedrangingfrom2to4/5.Thepatienthaswaddlinggait model.Thisprovidesfurtherevidenceforthepathogenicityofthis with mildly anterior pelvic tilt and thoracic scoliosis. Biochem- variant in humans and corroborates the idea that this cohort is ical investigations showed elevated creatinine kinase level. ideal to study the mechanisms of clinical heterogeneity. Finally, Electromyography showed a myopathic pattern. The muscle these ﬁndings will not only have a direct impact on the affected biopsy analysis was consistent with muscular dystrophy. All individuals and their families, but will also help inform disease usual genetic investigations including clinical exome sequen- progression, risk management andprognosis. cing, myositis gene panel, and DMD MLPA analysis were J. Hauteclocque: None. A. Rihoux: None. J. Brisson: None. A. unremarkable.Interestingly,wholeexomesequencingrevealed Parker:None. C.E. Nguyen: None.M. Tétreault: None. a promising candidate involved in the nucleo-cytoplasmic trafﬁcking. Segregation analysis results suggest autosomal recessive inheritance. Encouragingly, additional cases with 
P10 .042.B The c.794C>T p.(Ala265Val) SCN4A variant may be more severe phenotype have been identiﬁed by using associated with congenital myopathy with FSHD-like GeneMatcher. Functional validation is under investigation. phenotype EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 319 Barbora Plevová1, Jana Zídková2, Petra Laššuthová3, Roope consanguineous couple with a history of a male deceased Männikkö4,Jana Haberlová1 newborn and a female stillbirth. In both siblings, AMC had been diagnosed by prenatal ultrasound. The male patient was born at 1DepartmentofPaediatricNeurology,SecondFacultyofMedicine(2. the 37th week of gestation and died postpartum. His younger LF UK) and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, sister died in the 32nd week of gestation. Autopsies in both 2CentreofMolecularBiologyandGenetics,UniversityHospitalBrno, patientsrevealedhypoplasticlungs,ﬂexioncontracturesofhands Brno, Czech Republic, 3Neurogenetic laboratory, Department of and ﬁngers, myocardial hypertrophy and dysmorphic features Paediatric Neurology, Second Faculty of Medicine (2. LF UK) and including hypotrophic antihelix of ears, hypertelorism and high University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of archedpalate. NeuromuscularDisorders,UCLQueenSquareInstituteofNeurology, Results: After genetic counseling, an AMC gene panel was London, United Kingdom. performed and revealed no disease-causing mutation. Exome sequencing allowed us toidentify thenovel homozygous variant Background: The causes and manifestations of congenital c.18800T>C,p.(Leu6267Pro),rs184723737inNEBinbothpatients. myopathymaybediverse.Loss-of-functionvariantsintheSCN4A Bothparentswere heterozygousfor this variant. gene are the cause of autosomal recessive (AR) severe foetal Discussion: NEB encodes nebulin, a giant cytoskeletal protein hypokinesia and congenital myopathy. Gain-of-function variants (773 kDa) expressed in skeletal muscle. Biallelic pathogenic wereassociatedwithautosomaldominantmyotoniaandperiodic variants in NEB cause nemaline myopathy, in which severities paralysis. vary from prenatal lethality, severe early infantile neuromuscular Patients and Methods: A 17-year old girl with the phenotype disease to milder adult-onset phenotypes. Patients with severe of facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy experienced the nemaline myopathy show low set ears, high-arched palate, onset of her symptoms in the neonatal period. The symptoms hypertelorism, which were observed in our patients. Because of included muscle weakness, predominantly on upper limbs, the clinical ﬁndings of our patients, the evolutional conservation scapulaealatae,craniofacialdysmorphiawithptosisand hypomi- of p.Leu6267 and the co-segregation of the variant, we identify mia.AnalysisoftheFSHD1locuswasfollowedbynext-generation thenovelc.18800T>C, p.(Leu6267Pro) variant asdisease causing. sequencing (NGS) using a custom-designed neuromuscular gene Conclusion: Our ﬁnding highlights the importance of whole panel. The results were veriﬁed by Sanger sequencing in both exomesequencing in identifyingrare geneticcauses ofAMC. healthy parents and brothers. In vitro electrophysiological N. Baba: None. I. Schreyer: None. R. Fröber: None. B. Theis: characterization of the variant was performed in order to None.E.Schleußner:None.C.A.Hübner:None.S.Komatsuzaki: determineits functionalimpact. None. Results: FSHD1 testing was negative. NGS revealed homo- zygous missense p.(Ala265Val) variant in the SCN4A gene (NM_000334.4):c.794C>T in the proband. Parents and both 
P10 .044.D Antigen presenting cells from PD patients exhibit brothers were heterozygous for the variant. It is classiﬁed in anautoinﬂammatory cytokine proﬁle ClinVar as a variant of unknown signiﬁcance, predicted as deleterious by SIFT and disease-causing by MutationTaster. Camille Michaud1,2, Camberly Hernandez Paredes1,2, Renaud Population frequency in gnomAD ALL is 0,0018 %. The patch Balthazard1,2, Lovatiana Andriamboavonjy1,2, Annie Laplante1, clampingofthe“mutated”cellsshowedlowercurrentscompared Sébastien Audet1,2,Martine Tétreault1,2, Diana Matheoud1,2 tothe“wildtype”cells. Conclusions: Our results suggest that the SCN4A variant 1Centre de Recherche du CHUM, Montréal, QC, Canada, 2Université c.794C>T may explain the cause of muscular weakness in our de Montréal, Montréal, QC,Canada. probandand further broaden thespectrum ofARinheritance for SCN4A. Introduction:Elevatedlevelsofpro-inﬂammatorycytokineshave SupportedbyMEY
S8 F20002EJPRDandtheEuropeanUnion’s beenshownintheserumofParkinson’sdisease(PD)patientsand Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme, EJP RD mouse models suggesting that peripherally occurring inﬂamma- COFUND-EJP N°825575. toryprocesses participateinPDpathogenesis. However, thecells B. Plevová: None. J. Zídková: None. P. Laššuthová: None. R. responsible for this dysregulated production of cytokines, their Männikkö: None. J.Haberlová: None. exact expression proﬁle and the consequences on T cell polarization remain unknown. Furthermore, PINK1, a PD-related gene, represses pro-inﬂammatory cytokine production mediated 
P10 .043.C Case report: The novel homozygous nebulin by the cGAS/STING pathway (an innate immune signaling mutationc.18800T>C(p.Leu6267Pro)causeslethalarthrogry- pathway that detects cytosolic DNA). PINK1 is also a major posis multiplex congenita repressorofmitochondrialantigenpresentation(MitAP),aprocess dependentonmitochondrial-derivedvesicle(MDV)formationand NaomiBaba1,IsoldeSchreyer1,RosemarieFröber2,BernhardTheis3, involved in mitochondrial autoimmune responses and PD Ekkehard Schleußner4, Christian Andreas Hübner1, Shoko pathogenesis.Wehypothesizethatantigenpresentingcells(APCs) Komatsuzaki1 exhibit a dysregulated cytokine proﬁle in PD that skew T cell polarization. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Jena, Jena, Materials and methods: Monocyte-derived dendritic cells Germany, 2Institute of Anatomy, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, (MDDCs) from PD patients and sex/age matched healthy Jena, Germany, 3Section Pathology of the Institute of Forensic individuals were generated from PBMCs to characterize their Medicine, University Hospital Jena, Jena, Germany, 4Department of cytokineexpressionproﬁleafterLPSorbacterialstimulationusing Obstetrics, University Hospital Jena, Jena, Germany. RT-qPCRand ELISA. Results: We report that MDDCs from PD patients present a Introduction: Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) is a dysregulatedcytokineproﬁle.Moreover,onlyasubsetofcytokines clinically and genetically heterogeneous disease characterized by is altered which promotes the T cell polarization towards congenital joint contractures. Several severe fetal neuromuscular autoimmune-related Th17 cells. disorders are known to cause AMC. Case: We here report a EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 320 Conclusions: Our results indicate that the dysregulated 
P10 .048.D Identiﬁcation of a novel mutation of PIEZO2 gene inﬂammation observed in PD patients affects APCs by inducing asacause ofDistalArthogryposis on achild: acasereport theproductionofpro-Th17cytokines.Thesedatastronglysupport the hypothesis that autoimmune mechanisms are implicated in JavierTorres,FernandoMacho,MaríaL.Quintanilla,EstherSimarro, PD. This project should allow us to better understand the role of María C.Carrascosa, Laura Navarro autoimmunity in PD and to identify new biomarkers. Acknowl- edgements: CIHR, FRQS, Courtois foundation and Parkinson HospitalGeneral Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain. Canada C. Michaud: None. C. Hernandez Paredes: None. R. Baltha- Distal Arthrogryposis with Impaired Proprioception and Touch zard: None. L. Andriamboavonjy: None. A. Laplante: None. S. (DAIPT, MIM #617146) is a rare disease characterized by a partial Audet:None. M. Tétreault: None. D.Matheoud: None. lossofmechanosensation.Itcanresultinataxia,muscleweakness, dysmetria and other alterations on walk and movement. It is recessively inherited and caused by homozygous or compound 
P10 .047.C Prediction of Parkinson’s disease risk based on heterozygous mutations in PIEZO2 gene. This gene codes a large genetic proﬁle andestablished riskfactors transmembrane protein having a role in the conversion of mechanicalstimuli into currents insomatosensory neurons. Paraskevi Chairta1, Andreas Hadjisavvas2,3, Maria A. Loizidou2,3, A4yearoldchildwasreferredwithsymptomscompatiblewith Kristia Yiangou2,3, Andrea N. Georgiou4, Christiana A. Demetriou5, the disease, including (among other symptoms) impaired Yiolanda P. Christou1, Marios Pantziaris1,2, Kyriaki Michailidou2,6, proprioception, congenital malformation of the Central Nervous EleniZamba-Papanicolaou1,2 Systemand hypotony. A ﬁrst study found variants in genes SCN9A and SPTAN1, both 1Neurology Clinics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, related with neurological pathologies, but the subsequent segrega- Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Cyprus School of Molecular Medicine, Nicosia, tion study discarded them as the cause of the pathology. A further Cyprus, 3Department of Electron Microscopy and Molecular Pathol- analysis found a novel mutation in PIEZO2 gene (Cr. 18p11, ogy,TheCyprusInstituteofNeurologyandGenetics,Nicosia,Cyprus, c.3539_3572delAGTATTTCATCTGCATTGGCATCCCACCTGCTCC, p.(Gln 4Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, School of Medicine, 1180Leufs*19)),combined with a second mutation (c.18885G>T, p. University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, 5Department of Primary (Glu*))foundinlessthan0.001%ofpopulation.Ourin-silicostudyof Care and Population Health, University of Nicosia Medical School, thevariant’seffectontheproteinshowedthatthesealterationscause Nicosia,Cyprus,6BiostatisticsUnit,TheCyprusInstituteofNeurology an important truncation of the protein. Also, the segregation study andGenetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. demonstrated that each mutation was inherited from a different parent. All together, we concluded that the combination of both Introduction: Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative variantsisthemostlikelycauseofthediseaseinthechild. disorder and literature suggests that genetics and lifestyle/ Although there is no treatment at the moment for this environmental factors may play a key role in the triggering of pathology, this knowledge can be useful in genetic counseling the disease. Polygenic risk scores (PRS) provide an aggregate in this family and in the case of further research could provide scoreofvariantsthathavebeenshowntobeassociatedwitha newtreatmentsfor patients. speciﬁc disease in GWAS. This study aimed to evaluate the J. Torres: None. F. Macho: None. M.L. Quintanilla: None. E. predictive performance of a 12-SNPs PRS in combination with Simarro:None. M.C.Carrascosa: None. L.Navarro: None. already established PD-environmental/lifestyle factors. MaterialsandMethods:Genotypic,demographicandlifestyle dataon235PD-patients and464healthycontrols wereobtained 
P10 .049.A<FrequencyofcarrierofAAGGGrepeatexpansionsin from a case-control study previously carried out in the Cypriot RF
C1 geneinpatientswithsensorialperipheralneuropathy.> population. Logistic-regression analysis was used to assess the association of PRS with PD-status and each risk factor with PD- MaríaFenollar-Cortés1,2,CarmenCotarelo-Pérez1,2,RalucaOancea- status. Stepwise-regression analysis was used to select the best Ionescu1,2,AlejandroHorga3,2,AntonioGuerrero-Sola3,2,LucíaGalán- predictive-model for PD combining environmental/lifestyle and Dávila3,2,Clara Herrero-Forte1,2 geneticfactors. Results: The 12-SNPs PRS was signiﬁcantly increased in PD 1Unidad de Genética Clínica. Servicio de Análisis Clínicos. Instituto de cases compared to controls OR(95%CI). Logistic-regression ana- Medicina del Laboratorio. Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, lysesshowedthatage,headinjury,familyhistoryanddepression 2Instituto de Investigación ClínicoSan Carlos (IdISSC). Hospital Clínico were positively associated with PD risk, while BMI was inversely SanCarlos,Madrid,Spain,3UnidaddeEnfermedadesNeuromusculares, associated with PD risk. Stepwise-regression suggested that a ServiciodeNeurología,HospitalClínicoSanCarlos,Madrid,Spain. modelwhichcontainseight-independentfactorsincludingPRSis mostpredictive of PD. Introduction:BiallellicintronicAAGGGexpansionintheRF
C1 gene Conclusions: These results suggest an association between cause cerebellar ataxia, neuropathy, and vestibular areﬂexia bothgeneticandenvironmentalfactorsandPD,andhighlightthe syndrome (CANVAS). It has been estimated that allele frequency potentialfortheuseofPRSincombinationwiththeclassicalrisk fortheheterozygousAAGGGexpansioninthegeneralpopulationis factorsforriskpredictionofPD.Furtherinvestigationwithalarger between 2-4%. In this study, we aimed to evaluate the carrier cohort and a PRS with additional variants may increase the frequency of AAGGG and AAAGG repeat expansions in RF
C1  in a statistical-power and conﬁrm that the combination of these cohortofpatientswithidiopathicsensoryperipheralneuropathy. factorscould be used for prediction. MaterialsandMethods:ConventionalPCRandrepeat-primed P.Chairta:None.A.Hadjisavvas:None.M.A.Loizidou:None. PCR (as described by Cortese et al) in the RF
C1  gene were K.Yiangou:None.A.N.Georgiou:None.C.A.Demetriou:None. analyzed in 95 patients with sensory peripheral neuropathy with Y.P.Christou:None.M.Pantziaris:None.K.Michailidou:None. or without additional clinical features. Patients with previously E.Zamba-Papanicolaou: None. conﬁrmedCANVAS wereexcluded. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 321 Results:Sixteenpatients(16.8%ofalltestedpatients)carrieda and cardiac muscles. Herein, we describe clinical and molecular heterozygous, pathogenic AAGGG repeat expansion, and ﬁve ﬁndings of a female patient analyzed by clinical exome sequen- patients (5.3%) carried a heterozygous, uncertain pathogenicity cing(CES). AAAGG repeat expansion. Overall, 22.1% of patients carried a Patient and Methods: In this study, we report the case of a heterozygousAAGGG orAAAGG repeatexpansion inRF
C1 . consanguineousMoroccanchildaged2yearsand5monthsatthe Conclusions: In our cohort, the carrier frequency of AAGGG time of her genetic assessment. She was referred to our medical repeatexpansionsinpatientswithsensoryneuropathywashigher genetic center for clinical features of a congenital myopathy than the expected from general population estimates. Although associated with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), in favor of Salih previouslyreportedheterozygouscarriersareasymptomatic,ithas myopathy. CES was performed to screen among the neuromus- been recently described that the carrier frequency of AAGGG culargenes,thedisease-causing mutation moreprecisely. repeatexpansionsisupto21.2%amongpatientswithlate-onset Results:Bioinformaticsanalysisidentiﬁedanovelhomozygous ataxia. Further studies are needed to conﬁrm the observed high truncating mutation NM_001267550.2; LRG391_t1:c.106541delA, carrier frequency of heterozygous RF
C1  repeat expansions in p.(Asp35514ValfsTer32)inexon361oftheTTNgene.Ithasnever patients with sensory neuropathy and to improve the under- been reported previously in public human databases. Prediction standingofits clinicalimplications. websitesconsideredthismutationasapathogenicvariant.Sanger M. Fenollar-Cortés: None. C. Cotarelo-Pérez: None. R. sequencingconﬁrmeditintheaffectedpatientandshowedthat Oancea-Ionescu:None.A.Horga:None.A.Guerrero-Sola:None. bothparents wereheterozygous. L.Galán-Dávila: None.C.Herrero-Forte: None. Conclusions: Nowadays, the application of next-generation sequencingtechnologyinMoroccanmedicalpracticeisbecoming possible. Molecular diagnosis of clinical and genetic heteroge- 
P10 .050.B Rhabdomyolysis-myalgia-syndrome in a family- neous diseases such as titinopathies, allows the detection of a clinical,molecular andtherapy features speciﬁcvariantinthecausativegeneandexpandsthemutational spectrumof Moroccanpatients. DorotheaWand Y.ElKadiri:None.I.Ratbi:None.A.Labiad:None.J.Lyahyai: None.A. Seﬁani: None. Institut für Medizinische Genetik und Pathologie, Basel, Switzer- land. 
P10 .052.DPathogenicSAMD9Lvariants:Differentialdiagnosis Rhabdomyolysis (RM) is deﬁned as an acute elevation of plasma ofCMTandpotential pitfallin trio-exome analysis creatine kinase (CK>10 000 U/L) with painful muscles. The most frequentcausearetoxic,traumaorexternalphysicalactivity.The Katja Eggermann1, G. Christoph Korenke2, Ingo Kurth1, Matthias commoncauseofgeneticmuscledisorderswithRMandmyalgia Begemann1,Daniela Dey1, Cordula Knopp1 are metabolic myopathies (e.g. McArdle, muscle glycolysis). Mutation in the ryanoidine receptor 1 gene (RYR1) is suggest to 1Institute of Human Genetics RWTH University Hospital, Aachen, the common cause. We present the medical history, clinical, Germany,2Klinikum Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany. ancillary ﬁndings and an important therapy of two brothers and her family with hyperCKemia, RM and myalgia. In the metabolic Introduction: Autosomal dominant mutations in SAMD9L cause myopathic panel (64gene) was identiﬁed a heterozygous patho- Ataxia-pancytopenia (ATXPC-) syndrome characterized by a genic mutation c.7360C>T in the RYR1- gene. Mutations in this variable hematological (pancytopenia, predisposition to bone gene are causal for various congenital myopathies including marrow failure, myelodysplasia, and myeloid leukemia) and maligne hyperthermia and susceptibility RM. A possible prophy- neurological (cerebellar ataxia and atrophy, nystagmus, mild lactictreatmentforRYR1-relatedRMarediscussedDantrolene.It pyramidal signs and white matter abnormalities) phenotype. is a muscle relaxant that selectively blocks the RYR1 channel. In Association of peripheral neuropathy has rarely been described our family was diagnosed a muscle ryanodine receptor - and a pathogenic SAMD9L variant causing Charcot-Marie-Tooth rhabdomyolysis- myalgia- syndrome. (CMT) disease has been reported only once. Case Report: A 37- D.Wand:None. year-old female presented with demyelinating neuropathy and axonal involvement. High arched feet and brisk reﬂexes at the knees were reported. The 14-year-old daughter was similarly 
P10 .051.C Identiﬁcation by NGS of a novel mutation in the affected and had an unremarkable brain MRI at age 10 years. TTNgene ina Moroccanpatient withSalih myopathy Therewas nohistory ofhematological abnormalities. Results: Trio whole-exome-sequencing was performed in the YoussefElKadiri1,2,IlhamRatbi1,AbdellatifLabiad3,JaberLyahyai1, mother and her unaffected parents without conclusive results. Abdelaziz Seﬁani1,2 Inclusionofthedaughterledtotheidentiﬁcationofapreviously reported likely pathogenic variant in the SAMD9L gene 1ResearchTeaminGenomicsandMolecularEpidemiologyofGenetic (NM_1512703.4:c.2956C>T; p.(Arg986Cys)). Re-analysis of the Diseases,GenomicCenterofHumanPathologies.FacultyofMedicine mother’sdatashowedlow-grademosaicismforthisvariant,which and Pharmacy, Mohammed V University, Rabat, Morocco, 2Depart- wasbelow thethreshold ofthe analysispipeline. ment of Medical Genetics, National Institute of Health, Rabat, Conclusions: 1) The clinical picture of our patients conﬁrms Morocco,3Pediatric practice, Meknes, Morocco. that mutations in SAMD9L may present as demyelinating neuropathy and need to be considered as differential diagnosis Introduction: Titin is a giant protein encoded by the TTN gene of CMT. This is of particular importance as there is a need for with 364 exons. It is considered a principal regulator of the surveillance of potential hematologic manifestations in patients contractile behavior of striated muscle. Several pathologies are with SAMD9L mutations. 2) Low-grade mosaicism of de-novo caused by pathogenic variants in the TTN gene and constitute a mutations may be missed in trio-exome sequencing approaches, heterogeneousgroupofdiseases.Salihmyopathy,alsoknownas whichshould carefully be taken into account. early-onset myopathy with fatal cardiomyopathy (EOMFC), is an K.Eggermann:None.G.C. Korenke:None. I.Kurth:None.M. autosomalrecessivecongenitaltitinopathyaffectingbothskeletal Begemann: None.D.Dey: None. C.Knopp:None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 322 
P10 .053.A Differential diagnosis of SMA and congenital Interestingly, SMN is strongly, accumulating within the nucleolus myopathies usingthe targeted MPSpanel after DNA repair and concomitantly, we revealed a strong interaction between SMN and FBL after the completion of DNA Polina Chausova, Oksana Ryzhkova, Elena Dadali, Victoria repair. Zabnenkova,Aleksandr Polyakov Conclusions: Our ﬁndings identify a new function for SMN in the re-establishment of the proper nucleolar organization after ResearchCentreforMedicalGeneticsnamedafteracademicianN.P. DNA repair. These results may have important implications in Bochkov,Moscow, Russian Federation. identifying the biological origins of spinal muscular atrophy disorder. Introduction:Spinalmuscularatrophy(SMA)isthemostcommon S.musawi:None. L.Donnio:None. G.Mari: None. hereditary disorder, one of the key symptoms of which is hypotension since birth or early childhood. The basic method for diagnosing SMA is the study of extended deletions in the 
P10 .055.C Detection of multiple variants in complex family SMN1 gene with an estimate of the number of copies of the trio withneurodegenerative diseases pseudogene using the MLPA method. For some patients (about 50%),itisnotpossibletoconﬁrmthediseasebymoleculargenetic SebastienAudet1,2, EricSamarut1, Martine Tetreault1,2 methods, which indicates the presence of another pathology in thisgroup ofpatients. 1CHUM Research Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Department of Materials and Methods: Using the MPS method, using the Neurosciences, University ofMontreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. congenital muscular dystrophies target panel, a sample of unrelated patients with a referring SMA diagnosis without Afterthoroughyetinconclusiveclinicalgenetictestingtouncover deletionsintheSMN1gene(78patientsaged0to2)wasstudied. the cause of neurodegenerative symptoms in a father and his Results: Pathogenic and probably pathogenic variants were daughter, our lab was tasked to do a more in-depth genomic detected in the LAMA2 gene in 3 probands, in two in the ACTA1 investigationofthefamily.Previousassessmentofphenotypesby and MTM1 genes, single patients had mutations in the CO
L12 A1, medical professional suggested a probable shared pathology, LMNA,LMOD,CO
L6 A1,CO
L6 A3genes.Inaddition,in8patientsin albeit with an anticipation effect, since the daughter exhibited thegenesLAMA2,CO
L5 A1,CCD
C78 ,CO
L12 A1,MTMR14,variantsof worsenedandearlieronsetofdisease.Arepeatexpansionvariant uncertainclinicalsigniﬁcancewereidentiﬁed,whicharethemost wastherefore suspected. promising from the point of view of converting them into Weextracted DNA from the salivaof the two patients and the probablypathogenic onesafter additional studies. mother. Whole-Genome Sequencing (WGS) was performed. We Conclusion: It has been shown that, in a sample of SMA used bioinformatics tools for alignment, quality control, and patients without an extended deletion of exon 7 in the SMN1 calling of single nucleotide polymorphism, copy number variants gene, in more than 15.4% of cases, the molecular cause of the andrepeatexpansions.Long-readandSangersequencing,aswell diseaseismutationsinthegenesresponsibleforthedevelopment as qPCR, were performed to validate the potential pathogenicity ofcongenital myopathies. ofthecandidate variants. P. Chausova: None. O. Ryzhkova: None. E. Dadali: None. V. Although both patients underwent multiple gene panels for Zabnenkova:None. A. Polyakov: None. neurologicandneuromusculardiseasespriortoWGS,wedetected a non-synonymous (R499H) mutation in the SPAST gene of the daughter. A diagnosis could then be made as the variant was 
P10 .054.B Role of SMN in the nucleolar reorganization after previouslyreportedasprobablypathogenicforspasticparaplegia DNArepair type4.Ontheotherhand,thefatherpresentedabi-allelicrepeat expansion in RF
C1  locus, presumably causing CANVAS disorder, Shaqraamusawi1,2,Lise-Marie Donnio1,Giuseppina Giglia Mari1 whilethedaughtercarriedonlyoneexpandedallele.Sangerand long-readsequencing respectively conﬁrmed thevariants. 1Institut NeuroMyoGène, LYON, France, 2Department of medical While the father had been previously tested for SPAST, the laboratory technology, Jazan,Saudi Arabia. assumption of a common genetic cause prohibited an early diagnosis of the daughter for spastic paraplegia. These results Introduction:Mostcellulartranscriptionalactivityiscarriedoutby highlight the importance of unbiased genetic analyses in clinical the RNA polymerase I (RNA
P1 ), which transcribe ribosomal DNA settings. (rDNA) into ribosomal RNA (rRNA) needed in the ribosome CIHR, FRQS, NationalAtaxia Foundation biogenesis. During DNA Repair of UV-lesions, rDNA/RNA
P1  are S.Audet: None. E.Samarut:None. M. Tetreault: None. both reorganized within the nucleolus, namely, they migrate at the periphery of the nucleolus during DNA repair reactions and comebackwithinthenucleolusafterDNArepaircompletion.The 
P10 .056.D Phenotype in Associated SMA mutations - experi- proteins and exact mechanism behind these movements remain enceof5years notunderstood. Materials and methods: We employed various cellular and Ramona Babici1, Maria Tonu1, Mihaela Danila1, Doina Ursan1, molecular biology methods, combined with confocal microscope Roxana Popescu2,3, Lacramioara Butnariu2,3, Monica Panzaru2,3, procedures on knockdown Survival Motor Neurons (SMN) cells, Eusebiu Vlad Gorduza1,3, Cristina Rusu2,3 and on cells of patients affected by Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA),toinvestigatewhetherSMNmayplayaroleinthenucleolar 1"Cuza Voda" Maternity Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 2“Saint Mary” reorganizationduringDNA repair. Emergency Children’s Hospital - Regional Medical Genetics Centre, Results: Our results clearly demonstrate the involvement of Iasi, Romania, 3“Grigore T. Popa” University of Medicine and the SMN in the nucleolar reorganization after DNA repair. In Pharmacy- Department of Medical Genetics, Iasi,Romania. fact, in the absence of SMN, RNA
P1  and Fibrillarin (FBL), an essentialnucleolarprotein,donotreturninsidethenucleolusafter Introduction: Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal DNA repair completion while transcription is fully restored. recessive neuromuscular disorder due to homozygous loss of EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 323 function in SMN1 gene. The phenotypic severity of the disease S.Habibollah: None. L.S.Matsa: None. may be inﬂuenced by several modifying factors: SMN2 gene and other genes like: BIR
C1 , NAIP, RAD17, GTF2H2, SERF1A, N- Cadherin-like. Our aim was to describe the phenotype-genotype 
P10 .058.BDeep analysis ofsplicing variants in DMD gene correlationinSMApatientswhoassociatemutationsinmodifying genes. MikhailYuSkoblov, Ksenia Davydenko, Alexandra Filatova Methods: We have analyzed 23 patients from North-Eastern Romania diagnosed clinically with SMA in Iasi Regional Medical ResearchCenterforMedicalGenetics,Moscow,RussianFederation. GeneticsCenterinthelast5years.Allpatientswereinvestigated byMLPAusingthe
P021 -A1SMAprobemixkit.Thisisamolecular Introduction: Mutations in the DMD gene, which encodes the genetic screening test to identify variations in the number of proteindystrophin, leadtosevereDuchenne muscular dystrophy copies (deletions / ampliﬁcations) of 37 sequences in the 5q13 andmilderBeckermusculardystrophy.Thetypeofmutationand region. The main genes targeted are SMN1, SMN2, and other the current molecular mechanism determine the development genesfromthis regionthat mayinﬂuence thephenotype. and progression of the disease. Splicing variants are one of such Results:From23patientsclinicallydiagnosedwithSMA,22had types of mutations that are not easy to reveal and predict its homozygousdeletionsofexons7and8oftheSMN1gene,while1 effect, and functionalanalysis isrequired for theirvalidation. patient had a normal number of copies of exon 8 in SMN1. Only Materials and methods: SpliceAI (Illumina, USA) and Max- onepatientinthisgrouphadheterozygousdeletionintheSMN2 EntScan(MIT,USA)wereusedtopredictthesplicingeffectofSNV. gene,therestpresented2-4copiesoftheSMN2gene.10patients ToevaluatethefunctionaleffectofSNVs,theminigeneexpression associated changes in at least one of the genes: NAIP, GTF2H2, assaywasperformedinHEK293Tcells.SNVswereintroducedinto SERF1B. Nineofthem had severeSMA subtypes(I andII). expressionplasmids by site-directedmutagenesis. Conclusion: The presence of homozygous or heterozygous Results:Wecarriedoutdeepinsilicomutagenesisoftheentire deletions identiﬁed in the NAIP, GTF2H2, SERF1B genes may DMD gene sequence to search for all possible splicing variants suggestamore severephenotype. withSpliceAI.About8000candidatesplicingvariantswerefound R. Babici: None. M. Tonu: None. M. Danila: None. D. Ursan: in introns and in exons of the gene. We overlapped our splicing None.R.Popescu:None.L.Butnariu:None.M.Panzaru:None.E. SNVswithvariantsfromtheHGMDdatabaseandfound90exoniс Gorduza: None. C.Rusu:None. variantsandmorethan300SNVsinintrons.Onlyforafewofthem theeffectonsplicingbeenconﬁrmedexperimentally.Wecreated 20 minigene systems with coding exons of DMD and performed 
P10 .057.A Genomic Precision Diagnosis of a Genetically thefunctionalanalysisformorethan30SNV(missense,nonsense Complex Caseof Spinocerebellar Ataxia and synonymous). For each variant it was demonstrated the molecular mechanismofsplicing disruption. SabaHabibollah1, Lova SatyanarayanaMatsa2 Conclusion: Ouranalysis revealed allpossible splicing variants in the DMD gene. Functional analysis with minigene systems 1Iranian Hospital, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 2Igenomix FZ LLC, conﬁrmedtheexistenceofhundredsofmisannotated variantsin DubaiHealthcare City,Dubai, United Arab Emirates. HGMD. M.Y.Skoblov: None.K. Davydenko: None. A.Filatova: None. A26-year-oldmalepresentedwithprogressiveataxiaforthepast 3 years, with muscle weakness, exercise intolerance, and slurred 
P11  Multiple Malformation/Anomalies Syndromes speech. Brain CT showed cerebellar atrophy and expression of prominentcisterns,cerebellarandvermianfolia,givencloveleaf- 
P11 .001.
C10 q26 deletion syndrome:aFrench cohort study like appearance consistent with hereditary cerebellar degenera- tion.Hewasborntoahealthyconsanguineouscouple.Hehastwo Hugo Thorn1, Sylvie Odent2,3, Jonathan Levy4,5, Anne-Claude healthy siblings while one of his maternal cousins suffers from Tabet4,6, Julien Thevenon7,8, Cedric Le Caignec9, Elise Schaefer10, severetremorsandataxiaprecededbyfever.Hewasfoundtobe Thierry Frebourg11, Caroline Schluth-Bolard12,13, Morgane Plutino14, negative for the most common trinucleotide repeats expansions Salima El Chehadeh10, Anais Philippe10, Sophie Scheidecker15, in spinocerebellar ataxia genes. Through whole-exome sequen- Nadege Calmels15, Audrey Schalk15, Alice Goldenberg11, Anne-Marie cing, he was found to carry a homozygous frameshift variant in Guerot11, Nathalie Le Meur16, Kevin Cassinari16, Lyse Ruaud4,5, exon 51 of the SYN
E1  gene (NM_182961.4:c.7557delC). Biallelic MyriamRachid17,LouisJanuel12,Marie-NoëlleBonnet-Dupeyron12,18, SYN
E1  mutations are known to cause autosomal recessive Maryline Carneiro19, Eric Bieth20, Julie Plaisancie20, Charles Cout- spinocerebellar ataxia-8 (SCAR8), which is a slowly progressive ton21,22, Radu Harbuz21, Klaus Dieterich23,24, Gwenaël Nadeau25, neurodegenerative disorder characterized by gait ataxia with GaelleVieville26,MelanieFradin27,CelinePoirsier1,MartaSpodenkie- cerebellar signs, such as nystagmus and dysarthria. The age at wicz1, Emilie Landais28,Martine Doco-Fenzy1,28,29 onsetishighlyvariable,usuallyintheseconddecade.Theclinical proﬁle of the index is more appropriate with the SCAR8 1Département de Génétique, CHU de Reims, Reims, France, 2Service phenotype, and the family history also suggests an autosomal deGénétique,CHUdeRennes,Rennes,France,3UMR6290Université recessive disorder. Additionally, a heterozygous donor splice site deRennes,Rennes,France,4DépartementdeGénétique,APHPNord, variant in intron 5 of the MME gene (NM_000902.3:c.439+1G>A) Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 5Université de Paris, UMR 1141 was detected. Heterozygous mutations in the MME gene cause NEURODIDEROT, INSERM, Paris, France, 6Département de neuros- autosomaldominantspinocerebellarataxia-43(SCA43),whichisa ciences, Unité GHFC, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, 7Department of slowly progressive neurologic disorder characterized by adult- Genetics and Reproduction, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de onset gait, limb ataxia, and often associated with peripheral Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 8CNRS UMR 5309, INSERM, U1209, neuropathy. Both these identiﬁed mutations are novel and Institute of Advanced Biosciences, Université Grenoble-Alpes CHU classiﬁed as likely pathogenic as per ACMG guidelines. Segrega- Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 9Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU de tionanalysisisrequiredtoconﬁrmtheirﬁnalsigniﬁcance,whichis Toulouse,Toulouse,France,10ServicedeGénétiqueMédicale,Institut underprocess. de génétique médicale d’Alsace (IGMA), Hôpitaux Universitaires de EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 324 Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 11Service de Génétique Médicale, busra goksel tulgar, fahrettin duymus, deniz esin, ebru marzioglu CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France, 12Service de Génétique, Centre de ozdemir, nadirkocak Biologie et de Pathologie Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, 13Institut Neuromyogène, Equipe Métabolisme énergétique et dével- SelcukUniversity, Konya,Turkey. oppement neuronal, CNRS UMR 5310, INSERM U1217, Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France, 14Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de Chromosome 13q deletion syndrome is a rare chromosomal l’Archet II, CHU Nice, Nice, France, 15Laboratoires de Diagnostic disorder. The patient’s clinic varies depending on the size and Génétique, Unité de Cytogénétique Chromosomique et Moléculaire, localizationofthedeletion.Asfaraschromosome13isknown,it Institutdegénétiquemédicaled’Alsace(IGMA),HôpitauxUniversitaires contains about 300 genes that synthesize active proteins. The de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 16Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, diseasecreatesabroadspectruminaffectedindividuals,including Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France, developmental delay, intellectual disability, low birth weight, 17Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Département de Génétique, APHP skeletal abnormalities, and other congenital malformations. For Nord, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 18Service de Cytogénétique, thesereasons,itisdifﬁculttodeﬁneaspeciﬁcclinicalphenotype Centre Hospitalier de Valence, Valence, France, 19Service de Neuropé- in these patients. We aimed to present the deletions in the 13q diatrie, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, regionofourpatientandtheirclinicalimplicationsinourcase.Our France, 20Département de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Toulouse, case was a 4-year-old male patient at the time of his admission. Toulouse,France,21CHUGrenobleAlpes,UMdeGénétiqueChromoso- Basically,wewereconsulted withthecomplaintofspeechdelay. mique,Grenoble,France,22Univ.GrenobleAlpes,INSERMU1209,CNRS Physical examination revealed a triangular face, broad and ﬂat UMR 5309, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Team Genetics nasal bridge, micrognathia, large ears, short neck, undescended Epigenetics and Therapies of Infertility, Grenoble, France, 23CHU testis, growth retardation. There was retardation in the neuro- GrenobleAlpes,UMdeGénétiqueClinique,Grenoble,France,24INSERM motorstagesofdevelopment.Thereisnoconsanguinitybetween U1216 Grenoble Institut des Neurosciences, Cellular Myology and his parents. Two Secundum ASDs were found on echocardio- Pathology,Grenoble,France,25LaboratoiredeGénétiqueChromosomi- graphy.13qdeletionwasdetectedinthechromosomeanalysis.In que, Centre Hospitalier Métropole Savoie, Chambery, France, 26CHU the microarray analysis performed on this, it was conﬁrmed that Grenoble Alpes, UF de Génétique Chromosomique, Grenoble, France, therewasadeletioninthechromosome13q21.1q31.1region.His 27ServicedeGénétiqueCHURennes,CentredeRéférenceAnomaliesdu parent’schromosomeanalysisisnormal.Geneticconsultationwas Développement, Rennes, France, 28Laboratoire de Cytogénétique et given to the family of the patient and referred to the relevant Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Reims, Reims, France, 29EA381 SFR CAP departments.13qdeletionisararephenomenonandeachpatient SantéReims,Reims,France. should be evaluated individually. Unfortunately, there is no deﬁnitive treatment. It is typically not inherited. The loss of part 10q26 deletion syndrome (OMIM #609625) is a rare autosomal ofthechromosomeoccursduringgametogenesis,makingitade dominant genetic disorder with about 100 patients reported. Most novomutation.Wheninherited,itisusuallycausedbyamosaicor cases are sporadic. Global development delay, short stature, balanced translocation parent. As the genes in the deletion area microcephaly and typical facial appearance with triangular face, areenlightened, patients canbe diagnosed moreeasily. large forehead, low-set malformed ears, hypertelorism, prominent B. goksel tulgar: None. F. duymus: None. D. esin: None. E. noseandathinvermilionoftheupperlipconstitutethemainclinical marziogluozdemir: None.N.kocak: None. features.Theclinicalspectrumisveryheterogeneousandneurobe- havioral manifestations, deafness, limb malformations, cardiac and urogenital abnormalities can be associated. Thus, patients with 
P11 .003.AFirstcasereportofdeletion13q22.2q31.1-expand- 10q26 chromosomal deletion need multidisciplinary management ing phenotype spectrum of chromosome 13q deletion strategiesfrombirth.Oneofthemainreasonsforthisheterogeneity syndrome is the variety of 10qter region chromosomal deletions summarized intothe“10q26deletionsyndrome”.Variousstudiesproposedcritical Mijana Kero1,2, Leona Morožin Pohovski1, Adriana Bobinec1,2, regions to explain the main phenotype (Yatzenko et al., 2009; NikolinaVidanRogulj1,Ana-MariaMeašić1,2,LjubicaBoban1,2,Ivona Choucairetal.,2015;LinSetal.,2016)ormorespeciﬁcfeatures(Vera- Sansović1,2,Ingeborg Barišić1,2 Carbonelletal.,2015;Choucairetal.,2015).Inaddition,thesestudies proposed about 20 genes of interest such as DOCK1 and FGFR2 to 1Children’sHospitalZagreb,Zagreb,Croatia,2DepartmentofMedical explain the different clinical features observed. We report a French Genetics and Reproductive Health, Children’s Hospital Zagreb, ACLF cohort of 35 patients from 9 centers presenting 10q26 Scientiﬁc Centre of Excellence for Reproductive and Regenerative complete or partial deletions (size: 64kb to 12.5Mb), complex Medicine(CERRM),University ofZagreb SchoolofMedicine, Zagreb, chromosomal rearrangement and derivative chromosomes diag- Croatia. nosed using DNA-array, to bring a further insight of the genotype/ phenotypecorrelation. Introduction:Interstitialdeletions13qarerareandcharacterized H.Thorn:None.S.Odent:None.J.Levy:None.A.Tabet:None. byvariablephenotype includingpsychomotor and growthdelay, J. Thevenon: None. C. Le Caignec: None. E. Schaefer: None. T. retinoblastoma,dysmorphicfacialfeatures,andvariousassociated Frebourg:None.C.Schluth-Bolard:None.M.Plutino:None.S.El malformations, still without clear correlation between the 13q Chehadeh: None. A. Philippe: None. S. Scheidecker: None. N. deletionintervals todistinct phenotypes. Calmels: None. A. Schalk: None. A. Goldenberg: None. A. PatientsandMethods:Fifteen-monthgirl,bornpremature(29 Guerot: None. N. Le Meur: None. K. Cassinari: None. L. Ruaud: weeks) with IUGR, birth weight 560 g, and hypoxia signs, spent None. M. Rachid: None. L. Januel: None. M. Bonnet-Dupeyron: 262 days in the intensive care unit due to recurrent sepsis, None.M.Carneiro:None.E.Bieth:None.J.Plaisancie:None.C. pancytopenia,andmultiplecomplicationsofprematurebirth.She Coutton:None.R.Harbuz:None.K.Dieterich:None.G.Nadeau: has a signiﬁcant global developmental delay, microcephaly, mild None. G. Vieville: None. M. Fradin: None. C. Poirsier: None. M. hypertelorism, broad nasal bridge, nystagmus, partial corpus Spodenkiewicz: None. E.Landais: None. M. Doco-Fenzy:None. callosum dysgenesis, hypothyroidism, and bilateral inguinal hernias.ThegenomicDNAwasisolated,andarrayCGHwithNext Generation Sequencing (NGS) analysis, focusing on 1937 genes 
P11 .002.D Chromosome 13q deletions syndrome and clinical associated withclinical features, weredone. reﬂections in ourcase:a casereport EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 325 Results: Array CGH detected a de novo interstitial deletion Conclusion: Array-CGH in neonate with hypotonia, feeding 13q22.2q31.1 (6,13 Mb). NGS revealed a novel heterozygous difﬁculties, short-length and craniofacial dysmorphisms could missensevariant(c.1235G>A,p.Cys412Tyr)inexon12oftheCU
L5  allowearlydiagnosisofmicrodeletionsyndromes.Thiscasecould gene (OMIM #601741), categorized as VUS according to ACMG/ expandtheclinicalspectrum of16p12.2 patients. AMPclassiﬁcation, inherited froma healthymother. P. Paglia: None. M. Falco: None. D. Di Salvio: None. P. Conclusion:Toourknowledge,thisistheﬁrstpatientdescribed Pignataro: None. A. Frascogna: None. M. Corbo: None. R. in the literature with deﬁned breakpoints 13q22.2q31.1. Prema- Genesio: None. D.Melis: None. turity, pancytopenia, recurrent sepsis, hypothyroidism, and inguinal hernia have not been described so far in patients with 13q deletions. Clinical and molecular characterization of further 
P11 .006.D Clinical ﬁndings in 22q11.2 microdeletion syn- patients with 13q deletions might contribute to its better drome:case series genotype-phenotypecorrelationandunderstandingofpathogen- esis.ThisstudywassupportedbyCERRM,RepublicofCroatia,and Sule Altıner, Timur Tuncalı, Nüket Yürür Kutlay, Halil G. Karabulut, by the EU through ERDF, under grant agreement No. HaticeIlgın Ruhi KK.01.1.1.01.0008, project,,Reproductive and Regenerative Medi- cine-Exploring NewPlatforms and Potentials”. Ankara University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical M.Kero:None.L.MorožinPohovski:None.A.Bobinec:None. Genetics, Ankara,Turkey. N. Vidan Rogulj: None. A. Meašić: None. L. Boban: None. I. Sansović: None.I. Barišić:None. Introduction: 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome is the most common microdeletion syndrome with an incidence of 1 in 4,000 live births. The syndrome is caused by a 1.5 to 3.0-Mb 
P11 .005.C Neonatal diagnosis of 16p12.2 microdeletion deletioninq11.2regionofchromosome22.Althoughphenotypic syndrome ﬁndingsarehighlyvariable,immunedeﬁciency,congenitalcardiac anomalies, speech delay and palatal anomalies are the most Pamela Paglia1, Mariateresa Falco2, Dario Di Salvio3, Piero common. Pignataro4, Anna Rita Frascogna5, Maria Grazia Corbo5, Rita Materials and Methods: A retrospective study investigating Genesio4, DanielaMelis1 medical records of 22q11.2 microdeletion cases whose deletion was conﬁrmed with FISH assay in Ankara University School of 1Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry “Scuola Medica Medicine,Department ofMedical Genetics between1999-2020. Salernitana”, Section of Pediatrics, University of Salerno, Baronissi Results:Atotalof28patients(male,n=22andfemale,n=6) (SA), Italy, 2Clinical Pediatrics, University Hospital “San Giovanni di wereenrolledinthisstudy.Meanageofthepatientswas4,6years DioeRuggiD’Aragona”,Salerno,Italy,3DepartmentofTranslational at the diagnosis (median:0,675, range:0-33). The most common MedicalSciences,SectionofPediatrics,UniversityofNaples“Federico clinical ﬁndings were immunodeﬁciency/recurrent infections II”, Napoli, Italy, 4Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical (75%, 21/28), congenital cardiac defects (75%, 21/28) and Biotechnology, University of Naples “Federico II”, Napoli, Italy, hypocalcemia (57,1%, 16/28). Also, typical dysmorphic features 5Department of Maternal-Infant, Neonatalogy and Intensive Care were noted in 75% (21/28) of patients. Learning difﬁculties, Unit, University Hospital “San Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi D’Aragona”, developmental delay and urogenital defects were subsequent Salerno,Italy. common ﬁndings. Co-occurrence of psychiatric ﬁndings with dysmorphic features was the common cause of referral in adult Introduction: 16p12.2 microdeletion syndrome is characterized patient group. Family study could be performed in 10 cases and by minor facial abnormalities, developmental delay, behaviour 10%ofthem were foundtobe familial. disorders and other variable systemic features, with incomplete Conclusion: The results of this study are compatible with penetrance. It is usually diagnosed in children with neuro- current literature. The frequency of psychiatric, neurologic and behavioral disorders; diagnosis in neonatal period has been skeletal ﬁndings may increase with follow-up data of current described in only few patients.Clinical report. We report a patients. Further detailed multidisciplinary studies will better newborn of healthy nonconsanguineous parents, born after a elucidate22q11.2 microdeletionsyndrome. pregnancy complicated with polyhydramnios, at 36 weeks, by S.Altıner:None.T.Tuncalı:None.N.YürürKutlay:None.H.G. urgent cesarean delivery. Birth weight was 3,200 g (75-90th), Karabulut: None. H.IlgınRuhi:None. length 43 cm (<3th), and OFC 34 cm (75th). At birth, he showed generalized cyanosis, hypotonia and poor respiratory activity which required non-invasive ventilation and admission in 
P11 .007.A Interstitial deletion of 2q32.3q33.3: Two case Intensive Care Unit. Poor sucking was also present. Physical reports of SATB2-Associated-Syndrome and Immune System examinationshowedplagiocephaly,bilateraltemporaldepression, alterations hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral ﬁssures, low-set ears, depressed nasal root, bulbous nasal tip, anteverted nostrils, Joana Adelaide Catanho1, Ana Isabel Cordeiro2, Teresa Kay1, Inês retrognathy with chin dimple, short neck, sacral dimple with Carvalho1 hypertrichosis. Brain ultrasound revealed hyperechoic lobulated areasintheleftventriclewithextensionintothesubcorticalarea. 1Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Dona Estefânia, Centro Echocardiographyshowedaslightaccelerationoftheﬂowonthe Hospitalar e Universitário de Lisboa Central, Lisboa, Portugal, pulmonary branches. Audiologic evaluation, electroencephalo- 2Unidade de Imunodeﬁciências Primárias, Hospital Dona Estefânia, gramandabdominalultrasonographyshowednormaldata.Array- Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Lisboa Central, Lisboa, comparativegenomehybridization (array-CGH) showeda478 Kb Portugal. pathogenetic deletion in 16p12.2 region (critical region for 16p12.2 microdeletion syndrome), a deletion in the Xp22.33/ Introduction: Interstitial deletions of the long arm of chromo- Yp11.32regionof13.5KbandaduplicationintheXq12regionof some2involvingthe2q32q33regionencompassSATB2gene.Its 671Kb, containing partof theARgene. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 326 haploinsuffuciency results in SATB2-Associated-Syndrome (SAS), thevariantaffects thechemo-attractivefeatureofCL-
L1 , asHeLa characterized by neurodevelopment disorders, behavioral issues, cellsarelesssensitivetothemutantproteincomparedtotheWT palatal abnormalities and facial dysmorphism. Within this region, one,resulting ina reducedmigratory response. genes involved in Immune Disorders can be identiﬁed, among Conclusions: We report a patient affected by 3MC syndrome them, CTLA4. CTLA4 haploinsufﬁciency is associated with auto- who, besides typical phenotypic signs, presents a patent ductus immune cytopenia, hypogammaglobulinemia, recurrent infec- arteriosus,neverdescribedinassociation toCOLE
C10 before.The tions,diarrhea or inﬂammatorybowel disease. variant causative role was functionally conﬁrmed in an in vitro Clinical Data: 
P1  is an 11-year-old boy, born at 36 weeks of assay, where the mutated protein failed to act as a chemo- gestation with cleft palate, micrognathia, left inguinal hernia and attractant.WethusprovidefurtherevidenceforCL-
L1 roleduring interatrial communication (IAC). He has psychomotor delay, embryonicdevelopment. hypotonia, hyperactivity, aggressiveness, epileptogenic activity, M.Migliorero:None.S.Kalantari:None.V.Bracciamà:None. severeintellectual disability (ID), autoimmune thrombocytopenia, M.Sorbini:None.F.Arruga:None.L.Peruzzi:None.E.Biamino: neutropeniaandhemolyticanemiadiagnosedatage3.
P2 isa5- None.A. Amoroso: None. T.Vaisitti: None. S.Deaglio: None. year-old boy, born at 38 weeks, with cleft palate, micrognathia, and IAC. He has severe psychomotor delay, behavior abnormal- 
P11 .009.CAKT3 variantin apatient withmacrocephaly ities,failuretothrive(at14-monthswasplacedwithpercutaneous endoscopicgastrostomy), epilepsy and recurrent infections. Florina Victoria Nazarie1, Simona Bucerzan1,2, Monica Mager3,2, Methods and Results: 
P1  microarray analysis identiﬁed a 12.2 Diana Miclea1,2 Mb heterozygous deletion involving the interstitial chromosome region2q32.3q33.3.
P2 carrieda10.62Mbheterozygousdeletion 1GeneticDepartment,EmergencyHospitalforChildren,Cluj-Napoca, involving the interstitial chromosome region 2q33.1q33.3. Both Romania, 2Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, deletionsencompass SATB2and CTLA4genes. Cluj-Napoca,Romania,3PediatricNeurologyDepartment,Emergency Conclusions: We believe the haploinsufﬁciency of both genes Hospitalfor Children, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. SATB2andCTLA4,by2q32q33.3microdeletion,mightexplainthe phenotype of these patients. This report brings to our attention Introduction: Megalencephaly-polymicrogyria-polydactyly- that 2q32q33.3 microdeletion can be associated with immune hydrocephalus syndrome 2 (MPPH2) is an overgrowth syndrome alterations. Recognition of this clinical signs and symptoms is of comprising megalencephaly, hydrocephalus and polymicrogyria; the most importance for patients’ early referral for Immune polydactylymayalsobeseen.ActivatingmutationsinAKT3gene Disorder Specialist. are a rare cause of megalencephaly. AKT3 is one of 3 closely J.A. Catanho: None. A.I. Cordeiro: None. T. Kay: None. I. related serine/threonine-protein kinases (AKT1,AKT2 and AKT3) Carvalho: None. whichregulateprocessesincludingmetabolism,proliferation,cell survival, growthand angiogenesis. Materialsandmethods:Wepresentacaseofafourmonthold 
P11 .008.B COLE
C10  and 3MC syndrome: expanding the girl, who was referred to the genetic department because of genotypicandphenotypic spectrum ofavery raredisease macrocrania (50cm, Z score=+7.44 SDS, >p98), frontal bossing, generalised hypotonia, delay in motor acquisitions. Clinical exam Martina Migliorero1, Silvia Kalantari2, Valeria Bracciamà2, Monica revealedlargeanteriorfontanelle4x6cmandbluesclerae.Transfon- Sorbini1, Francesca Arruga1, Licia Peruzzi3, Elisa Biamino4, Antonio tanellleultrasoundwasperformedandnohydrocephaluswasfound. Amoroso1,2,Tiziana Vaisitti1, Silvia Deaglio1,2 Multiplediagnoseswerediscussed:SotosSyndrome,Glutaricaciduria type I, Megalencefaly-Capillary Malformation-Polymicrogiria Syn- 1Department of Medical Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, drome.MultiplexLigationProbeAmpliﬁcation(MLPA)withProbemix 2ImmunogeneticsandTransplantBiologyService,CittàdellaSalutee 
P245 -B1MicrodeletionSyndromeswasdoneforSotossyndrome,but della Scienza University Hospital, Turin, Italy, 3Pediatric Nephrology came back with no modiﬁcation.The level of urinary glutamic acid Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, Città della Salute e della Scienza wasalsonormal.Wholeexomesequencing(WES)wasproposedand UniversityHospital,Turin,Italy,4DepartmentofPediatrics,AOUCittà performedonIlluminaHiSeqplatform. della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, University of Torino, Turin, Results:WESrevealedalikelypathogenicvariantinAKT3gene: Italy. exon4:c.250G>A:p.Glu84Lys(hg38),locatedinafunctionalregion, “PH”AKT3_HUMAN domain. Introduction: 3MC syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder Conclusions: Mutations of the AKT3 gene have beenreported encompassingavariablespectrumofabnormalities,amongwhich in a few individuals with brain malformations, activating variants facial dysmorphisms are characteristic. Mutations in genes which are associated with diffuse megalencephaly with intellectual encode proteins involved in the lectin complement pathway disability and/or autism spectrum disorder. Early diagnose can MAS
P1 , COLE
C11  and recently COLE
C10  have been identiﬁed in providetheappropriatemanagementofthecaseandmaybeﬁnd patientswith3MCsyndrome,supportingtheirroleduringhuman asuitabledrug amonginhibitors ofPI3K-AKT-MTOR pathway. development. We present a 5 years old patient with typical 3MC F.V. Nazarie: None. S. Bucerzan: None. M. Mager: None. D. phenotypic characteristics, including blepharophimosis, tele- Miclea:None. canthus, high arched eyebrows, ﬁfth ﬁnger clinodactyly and horseshoekidneys.Thediagnosiswasconﬁrmedbysequencingof COLE
C10 geneandtheputativepathogenicvariantwasfunction- 
P11 .010.D Identiﬁcation and characterisation of two novel allyvalidatedthrough invitro assays. mutations in the MAN2B1gene in middle-agedsiblings MaterialsandMethods:COLE
C10 genewasanalyzedthrough Sanger sequencing. The variant was introduced by a site-speciﬁc Márta Szegedi1, Gábor Rácz2, Ágnes Palásti1, Zoltán Grosz1, Mária mutagenesisapproachintoaplasmidencodingwild-typehuman JuditMolnár1 CL-
L1 .HeLacellsweretransfected withthemutated orwild-type plasmidand culture supernatant evaluated ina migration assay. 1Semmelweis University, Institute of Genomic Medicine and Rare Results:Ahomozygousframeshiftvariantc.807_810delCTGT;p. Disorders, Budapest, Hungary, 2University of Szeged, Department of (Cys270Serfs*33)wasidentiﬁedinthepatient.Segregationstudies Pediatrics,Szeged, Hungary. conﬁrmed the parents’ carrier status for the variant. Functionally, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 327 Introduction: Alpha-mannosidosis is a rare inherited disorder serum urea after a 12-month treatment of mice with 4-PBA have caused by mutations in the MAN2B1 gene that encodes the notreachedthehighvaluesdemonstratedbythenon-treatedAS lysosomal alpha-mannosidase. Our aim was to describe the mice(p-value <0.01). phenotypes of a middle-aged siblings with alpha-mannosidosis Conclusions: The 6-12-month treatment with 4-PBA could type 2and twocausative mutations. effectively restore to a sufﬁcient degree the morphology of GBM inbothASmousemodels.Grants:FundedbytheAlportSyndrome Patients and Methods: A 45-year old man (Patient A) and his Foundation, Inc. (ASF), Pedersen Family and the Kidney Founda- 51-year old sister (Patient B) were investigated. Neurological, tionofCanada(KFOC)andbytheCyprusResearchandInnovation psychiatric, electrophysiological, biochemical and genetic tests Foundation. were performed. MAN2B1 gene was analysed by Sanger sequen- P. Ioannou: None. C. Odiatis: None. A. Malatras: None. K. cing.Segregation analysis wascompleted inthe mother. Antoniadou: None. M. Pieri: None. G. Papagregoriou: None. K. Results:PatientAhadmacrocephaly,coarseface,hypacusisand Stylianou:None. C.Deltas: None. hepatomegaly in early childhood. Gait and limb ataxia, mild cognitive impairment occured in adulthood. Patient B has prominent forehead, hypacusis, generalized muscular atrophy 
P11 .013.C Detection of giant chromosomal material on 7p+ and lower limb paresis in early childhood. Delusions with a withconventional karyotyping andaCGH diagnosisofschizophreniaandmultiplejointdeformitiesappeared at young adulthood. Brain MRI detected cerebellar atrophy, X-ray G. Ilieva, E. Sukarova-Angelovska, D. Nestoroska, Lj. Muaremoska- showedmultiplesclerotic-edgedcystsinhumerus.Signiﬁcantloss Kanzoska, M.Pesevska, V. Anastasovska ofaxonofmotoneuronswasfoundinlowerlimbsaccordingtothe ENG.The alpha-mannosidase activities were decreased, under 2% Genetic laboratory, University Clinic for Pediatrics, Ss. Cyril and ofthehealthcontrol.Theserumandurineoligosaccharideanalysis Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, showed abnormal patterns. The siblings are compound hetero- Macedonia, The Former YugoslavRepublic of. zygous for c.283G>C(Ala95Pro) and c.523G>A(Gly175Arg), which arelikelypathogenicvariantsaccordingtothescientiﬁcdatabases. Introduction:ArrayCGHiswidelyusedincytogeneticscentersfor Themotherisheterozygousforc.283G>C(Ala95Pro). postnatal constitutional genome analysis with higher resolution Conclusions:Basedonfamilyandclinicalhistory,type2alpha than conventional karyotyping in patients with intellectual mannosidosiswasconﬁrmedinthesiblingswithnovelcompound disabilitiesandmultiplemalformations.Thetechniquerepresents heterozygousmutationsclassiﬁedaspathogenic.Theresultofthe anunsurpassedtoolfordetectingcopynumbervariations(CNVs) segregation analysis strengthened the mutations in trans.This andreveal origin ofderivative chromosomes. studywassupportedbyKTIA_13_NAP-A-III/6;KTIA_NAPandwith Materials and Methods: aCGH analysis was performed on a FIKPprogram. DNA sample from a 5-year-old child using the Affymetrix® M. Szegedi: None. G. Rácz: None. Á. Palásti: None. Z. Grosz: CytoScanTM 750K Array (Applied Biosystems). Each array was None.M.J. Molnár: None. consisted of 200k SNP and 550k non-polymorphic markers. The data was analyzed and interpreted using Chromosome Analysis Suite(ChAS)Software (v4.0). 
P11 .011.A Preclinical studies on Alport Syndrome mice Results:Theclinicalmanifestationofthepatientincludedmajor treated withchemical chaperons developmental delay, hypotonia, inability to sit and walk independently, absence of speech and facial dysmorphia. PavlosIoannou1,ChristoforosOdiatis1,ApostolosMalatras1,Kyriaki Karyotype showed mosaic presentation of 46,XY,der(7)(p+) in Antoniadou1, Myrtani Pieri2, Gregory Papagregoriou1, Kostas Stylia- 10% of the cells. Since the mother had normal karyotype and nou3,Costantinos Deltas1 father was unavailable for eventual translocation, array CGH was performedwiththepresenceofmajorduplicationof7p21.3p11.2 1UniversityofCyprus,Nicosia,Cyprus,2UniversityofNicosia,Nicosia, encompassing 46,925 kbp, with 334 genes, estimated as 90% of Cyprus, 3University of CreteMedical School, Heraklion, Greece. thecells.Duplicationof7pisrarelydescribedintheliterature,with variable phenotypic spectrum depending on mosaicism and Introduction: Alport Syndrome (AS) is a severe inherited duplicatedregion. glomerulopathy caused by mutations in the genes encoding the Conclusion:Microarray-basedcomparativeGenomicHybridiza- α-chainsoftypeIVcollagen,themostabundantcomponentofthe tion(aCGH)isessentialforevaluatingderivativechromosomesof glomerular basement membrane (GBM). Alport patients lack unknown origin. The reason for different level of mosaicism of effective therapies beyond blockade of the renin-angiotensin partial trisomy 7p in our case with both techniques remains system. unexplained. One of theexplanations is that cells with derivative Materials and Methods: This work describes the repurposing chromosomes divide rarely in cell cultures, leading to conclusion oftwoFDA-approvedchemicalchaperones(4-PBAandTUDCA)to that aCGH is more accurate technique for detecting mosaic therescueoftwoASmousemodels:onethatcarriestheCol4a3-p. chromosomal imbalances. Gly1332Glu in homozygosity and one that carries the Col4a3-p. G. Ilieva: None. E. Sukarova-Angelovska: None. D. Nestor- Gly1332Glu substitution in compound heterozygosity with a oska: None. L. Muaremoska-Kanzoska: None. M. Pesevska: Col4a3 knocked-out allele. Mice from each group were treated None.V. Anastasovska: None. withchaperones orvehiclefor 2,6 or12months. Results: Electron microscopy studies showed that the GBM of the 4-PBA treated AS mice after the 6-12-month treatment has a 
P11 .014.D Clinical and genomic characterization of 7q31.1 considerable improvement in the morphology, compared with microduplication in a patient with developmental and placebo-treatedorTUDCA-treatedmiceASmice.Importantly,EM neurological disabilities measurements displayed a 43% reduction of lesions and a signiﬁcant decline of the lesions-severity in the GBM of 4-PBA Dragica Nestoroska1, V. Anastasovska1, E. Sukarova-Angelovska1, treated mice. No adverse effects were noted in the GBM of the M.Pesevska1, A. Veseli2, G. Ilieva1 chaperone-treated wild type mice. Additionally, albuminuria and EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 328 1Genetic Laboratory, University Clinic for Pediatrics, Ss. Cyril and France, 7Service de Neurophysiologie Clinique Adultes et Enfants, Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, Hôpitald’Enfants,CHUDijon,Dijon,France,Dijon,France,8Centrede Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2University Institute Compétences Maladies Endocriniennes De La Croissance et du ofClinicalBiochemistry,Ss.CyrilandMethodiusUniversityinSkopje, Développement, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, Dijon, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav France, 9Pneumologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Republic of. Dijon, France, Dijon, France, 10Pédiatrie pluridisciplinaire, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, Dijon, France, 11Inserm Introduction: Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) UMR1231 GAD, Génétique des Anomalies du Développement, represents molecular cytogenetic approach for genome-wide Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, Dijon, France, 12Rare & detection of copy number variants (CNVs) that allows efﬁcient Inherited Disease Laboratory, London North Genomic Laboratory genetic diagnosis of pathological conditions, such as develop- Hub, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation mentaldelayandneurologicaldisabilities.Thistechniqueishighly Trust,London W
C1 N 3BH,UK, London, United Kingdom. recommended as a ﬁrst-tier diagnostic test for clinically relevant CNVsduetoitscostandtimeefﬁciency,aswellitshighdetection Introduction:TheASC
L1 -HOX2A-PHOX2Bdevelopmentalcascade ratecompared toconventional karyotyping. hasbeenproposedasacandidatepathwayforCongenitalcentral Materials and Methods: The aCGH technique was used to hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) and Haddad syndrome (CCHS determinethegeneticbackgroundofdysmorphic,developmental associated to Hirschprung disease). ASC
L1  has been described in andneurologicalabnormalitiesina5-year-oldfemaleMacedonian associationwithbothCCHSandHaddadsyndrome.However,only patient. The blood-derived DNA sample was analyzed using 3 patients have been described in the literature to date (OMIM# Affymetrix® CytoScanTM 750K Array (Applied Biosystems) that 100790). includes550knon-polymorphicand200kSNPmarkers.Thedata Patients and methods: A French and a UK patient were were interpreted using Chromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS) Soft- referred to their genetic centres for investigation of syndromic ware(v4.0). Hirschsprung disease. Trio whole exome or genome sequencing Results: The patient showed the following clinical conditions: wasperformedanddetailsoftheASC
L1 variantssubmittedtothe developmental delay, epileptic seizures, frequent convulsions, as GeneMatcher datasharingplatform inbothcases. well several dysmorhological features (macrocephaly, dolichoce- Results: The patients were two boys aged 9 and 6 years old phaly, аntimongoloid slanted eyes and micrognathia).The karyo- respectively. Their common phenotype includes Hirschprung typing demonstrated 47,XXX result, which did not correspond to disease, strabismus, cardiac dysautonomy and learning disability the phenotype. The aCGH analysis revealed additional CNV withspeechdelay.NeitherpatienthasCCHS.Theolderpatientis represented as pathological microduplication occurring at the under investigation for sleep apnea and has stable T2 hyper- 7q31.1 cytoregion (513 kb, including IMM
P2 L and LRRN3 genes). intensityinthedentatenucleionbrainMRI.Theyoungerpatient According to OMIM and ClinVar database for pathological gene hasanormalsleepstudyandbrain MRIscan.Bothpatientshave expression, microduplication of the IMM
P2 L gene could be the same de novo heterozygous missense ASC
L1  variant responsible for the severe neurodevelopmental disorders of the (NM_004316.3:c.379G> A p.(Glu127Lys)). This variant is absent patient. from the population database GnomAD and affects a conserved Conclusion:TheaCGHtechniqueisahigh-resolutionlaboratory aminoacidlocatedinthefunctionaldomainHLH.Multipleinsilico settingthatallowsdetectionofpathologicalCNVs.Furtherstudies toolspredict pathogenicity. areneededforcompleteunderstandingofthemechanismrelated Conclusion: We report two patients with the same de novo togeneduplicationintheonsetandprogressionofthepresented heterozygous ASC
L1  variant and a strikingly similar clinical developmentaland neurological disorders. phenotype. This observation suggests that the phenotypic D. Nestoroska: None. V. Anastasovska: None. E. Sukarova- spectrum associated with ASC
L1  gene variants is broader than Angelovska:None.M.Pesevska:None.A.Veseli:None.G.Ilieva: previously reported. Additional patients, as well as functional None. studieswill be required. M. Grisval: None. E. Walkeling: None. O. Boespﬂug-Tanguy: None. H. Trang: None. A. Garde: None. C. Philippe: None. A. 
P11 .016.B Further delineation of the clinical spectrum of Rega: None. M. Mourot De Rougemont: None. V. Darmency: variants in the ASC
L1 gene None. C. Ben Signor: None. A. Houzel: None. F. Huet: None. Y. Duffourd: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. T. Taylor-Miller: Margot Grisval1, Emma Walkeling2, Odile Boespﬂug-Tanguy3, Ha None.L.Busby: None. L.Faivre:None. Thi-Tuyet Trang4, Aurore Garde1, Christophe Philippe5, Adélaide Rega6, Marie Gabrielle Mourot De Rougemont6, Véronique Dar- mency7,CandaceBenSignor8,AnneHouzel9,FrédéricHuet10,Yannis 
P11 .017.C Baraitser-Winter cerebrofrontofacial syndrome the Duffourd5, Christel Thauvin-Robinet1,11, Tashunka Taylor-Miller12, ﬁrstproved case in Bulgaria LouiseBusby12, LaurenceFaivre1,11 Tsvetina Ivanova Veleva, Hadil Kathom, Trayan Delchev, Daniela 1Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Avdjieva-Tzavella Malformatifs, FHU TRANSLAD, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France,2ConsultantinClinicalGenetics,NorthEastThamesRegional SBALDB,Medical university - Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria. Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, Great Ormond Street, London, United Kingdom, Introduction: Baraitser-Winter cerebrofrontofacial syndrome 3Centre de référence des leucodystrophies, service de Neurologie (BWCFFS)isararemultisystemdevelopmentaldisordercharacter- Pédiatrique etMaladies métaboliques, HôpitalRobertDebré, AP-HP, ized by distinctive craniofacial features, intellectual disability, Paris, France, Paris, France, 4Service de Physiologie – Explorations ocularcolobomata,hearingloss,shortstature,brainmalformation, Fonctionnelles, Hôpital Robert Debré, AP-HP, Paris, France, Paris, epilepsy, structural anomalies of palate, heart and kidneys. France,5InsermUMR1231GADetUF6254,CHUdeDijonetUniversité BWCFFS is caused by mutations in two different genes - ACTB de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, Dijon, France, 6Service de Radiologie and ACTG1, that encode β- and γ-actins. Individuals with ACTB Pédiatrique, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, Dijon, mutations seem to have more severe phenotype but ACTG1 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 329 pathogenic variants appear to have more frequent CNS Conclusions: We found a 22% of UPD(11)pat in our cohort, a involvement. fraction consistent with naturally conceived BWSp and strongly Materials and Methods: We present a 13-year-old boy with contradicting literature, reporting almost invariably only I
C2 -LoM typical craniofacial characteristics (coarse facial features, highly cases in ART-BWSp cohorts. Since UPD(11)pat likely results from arched eyebrows, widely spaced eyes, prominent nasal bridge, postfertilizationrecombination,thisﬁndingallowstohypothesize wide mouth, retrognatia, dysplastic ears, skeletal abnormalities) that complex molecular mechanisms, besides methylation dis- and mild intellectual disability. The patient had a normal male turbances,mayunderlieBWSpincreasedriskinARTpregnancies. karyotype. Results from multiplex ligation-dependent probe D. Carli: None. J. Spina: None. S. Russo: None. G. Cocchi: ampliﬁcation analysis, glucosaminoglycans in urine, echocardio- None.D.Milani:None.E.Prada:None.D.Melis:None.L.Tarani: graphy,renalultrasoundscanning,X-rayexaminationofthespine None. M. Macchiaiolo: None. A. Sparago: None. L. Pignata: andcranium werenormal. None. P. Tannorella: None. S. Cardaropoli: None. A. Bartuli: Results:ThemoleculargeneticanalysiswasperformedbyNGS None.A. Riccio: None. A.Mussa: None. G.B.Ferrero: None. (Baraitser-Winter Cerebrofrontofacial Syndrome Panel). This diag- nostic test evaluated 3 genes - ACTB, ACTG1 and ANKRD11. The datainterpretationrevealedalikelypathogenicvariant-c.220G>A 
P11 .019.A 11p15 imprinting defects and phenotype expres- (p.Gly74Ser) inACTB gene. sion in12 patients withBeckwith-Wiedemann syndrome Conclusions: Nearly all reported cases of BWFFS syndrome occurasaresultofdenovomutations.Theidentiﬁedvariantisnot IvonaSansovic,Ljubica Boban, MijanaKero, Ingeborg Barisic presentinpopulationdatabases.Ourstudyfurtherexpandedthe genotypic spectrum and genotype-phenotype correlations of Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Scientiﬁc Centre of Excellence for BWCFFS. Reproductive and Regenerative Medicine (CERRM), University of T.I. Veleva: None. H. Kathom: None. T. Delchev: None. D. Zagreb Schoolof Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia. Avdjieva-Tzavella: None. Introduction:Beckwith-Wiedemannsyndrome(BWS)iscausedby geneticorepigeneticchangesthatmodifyexpressionofgenesin 
P11 .018.D Clinical and molecular characterization of the imprinted region of chromosome 11p15.5. Although recent Beckwith-Wiedemann spectrum patients conceived through studiesprovedtheassociationbetween11p15.5regiondefectand assistedreproductive technology BWS clinical features the complex genotype-phenotype relation- shipis still challenging. DianaCarli1,JenniferSpina1,SilviaRusso2,GuidoCocchi3,Donatella Materials and method: The phenotypes of 12 BWS patients Milani4, Elisabetta Prada4, Daniela Melis5, Luigi Tarani6, Marina with molecular defect in imprinted 11p15.5 region, detected by Macchiaiolo7, Angela Sparago8, Laura Pignata8, Pierpaola Tannor- Methylation-SpeciﬁcMultiplexLigation-dependentProbeAmpliﬁ- ella2,SimonaCardaropoli1,AndreaBartuli7,AndreaRiccio8,Alessan- cation method, were compared with the literature reports on droMussa1,Giovanni B.Ferrero1 genotype-phenotype correlations in four molecular subclasses: lossofmethylationatimprintingcenter2(I
C2 -LoM,n=8),gainof 1University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 2Istituto Auxologico Italiano, methylationatimprintingcenter1(I
C1 -GoM,n=1),chromosome Milano, Italy, 3University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Ca’ Granda 11p15paternaluniparentaldisomy(UPD,n=2)andduplicationof Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 5Federico II University, paternal I
C1 (I
C1 -dup, n=1). Napoli,Italy,6"Sapienza"University ofRome,Roma,Italy,7Bambino Results:Macrosomia,macroglossiaandneonatalhypoglycemia Gesù Children’s Hospital, Roma, Italy, 8Università degli Studi della were dominant ﬁndings across all subclasses. Hemihyperplasia Campania"Luigi Vanvitelli", Caserta, Italy. was present in both UPD patients. Renal and urinary anomalies, umbilical hernia, organomegaly and increased cancer risk typical Introduction:Beckwith-Wiedemannspectrum(BWSp)prevalence for I
C1 -GoM cases were observed in I
C1 -GoM patient. Omphalo- is tenfold increased in children conceived through assisted cele,earanomalies,nevusﬂammeus,pretermbirth,andtheuseof reproductive techniques (ART). More than 90% of ART-BWSp assisted reproductive technologies were more common in I
C2 - patients reported so far carry Imprinting Center 2 Loss-of- LoM genotype. I
C1 -dup patient have a few BWS characteristic Methylations(I
C2 -LoM),versus≃50%ofnaturallyconceivedBWSp features. patients. Conclusion: Our ﬁndings are in accordance with the largest Methods: clinical and molecular features of 50 ART-BWSp recentcorrelationstudiesonBWSandsupportthehypothesisthat patientswere reviewed. different 11p15 alterations are associated with speciﬁc pheno- Results: Thirty-ﬁve patients (70%) carried I
C2 -LoM, 11 (22%) types in BWS. Acknowledgment: This work was supported by chromosome11paternaluniparentaldisomy(UPD(11)pat),1(2%) ScientiﬁcCenterofExcellenceforReproductiveandRegenerative ImprintingCenter 1Gain-of-Methylation (I
C1 -GoM);2(4%) tested Medicine and by the EU through the European Regional negative and 1 (2%) refused testing (the latter were clinically Development Fund, under grant agreement No. diagnosedwithBWSpscore≥4).Macroglossiawasobservedin39 KK.01.1.1.01.0008, project, Reproductive and Regenerative Medi- patients(78%),lateralizedovergrowthin30(60%),omphalocelein cine-Exploring NewPlatforms and Potentials”. 9(18%)andprolongedhyperinsulinismin1(2%).Malignancies(1 I. Sansovic: None. L. Boban: None. M. Kero: None. I. Barisic: Wilms tumor and 1 hepatoblastoma) occured in 2 patients (4%) None. carryingUPD(11)pat.DataonthetypeofARTwereavailablein22 patients:13werebornfromhomologousinvitrofertilization(IVF), 4fromhomologousintracytoplasmicsperminjection(ICSI),4from 
P11 .020.B Phenotypically concordant but epigenetically dis- ICSIwitheggdonation,and1fromintra-uterineinsemination(IUI). cordant monozygotic dichorionic diamniotic twins with Infertilitycausewasunknownin13/22cases(59.1%),maternalin Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome 4/22 cases (18.2%; 3 bilateral salpingectomies and 1 endome- triosis) and paternal in 5/22 cases (22.7%; all presenting oligo/ Hidenobu Soejima1, Feifei Sun1,2, Hitomi Yatsuki1, Ken Higashi- azoospermia). moto1,Satoshi Hara1 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 330 1SagaUniversity,Saga,Japan,2ShengjingHospitalofChinaMedical G.M.Beaman:None.W.G.Newman:None.W.S.Adrian:None. University, Shenyang, China. R.M.Cervellione: None. D.Keene: None. I.Mushtaq: None. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is an imprinting disorder 
P11 .022.D Understanding the new BRD4-related Cornelia de with complex and diverse phenotypes caused by (epi)genetic Lange-like syndrome: clinical, genomic and bioinformatic alterations. The incidence of monozygotic (MZ) twins in BWS delineation withan international cohort study patients is higher thanin the general population. Most MZ twins with BWS are female and have phenotypical discordance: one of Guillaume Jouret1, Solveig Heide2, Arthur Sorlin1,3,4, Laurence thetwinsisclinicallydiagnosedwithBWS,whiletheothershowsa Faivre3,4,SandrineChantot-Bastaraud5,MarieDenis-Musquer6,Peter mild phenotype or a completely normal phenotype. The most D. Turnpenny7, Charles Coutton8, Gaëlle Vieville8, Julien Thevenon8, frequent(epi)geneticalterationinMZtwinsislossofmethylation Austin Larson9, Florence Petit10, Elise Boudry11, Thomas Smol11, ofimprintingcontrolregion2(ICR2-LOM)at11p15.5.Intriguingly, Bruno Delobel12, Bénédicte Duban-Bedu12, Chiara Fallerini13, Fran- ICR2-LOMisusuallyfoundintheperipheralbloodleukocytes(PBL) cesca Mari13, Caterina Lo Rizzo14, Alessandra Renieri13,14, Jean- of both twins, even if they are clinically discordant. Here, we Hubert Caberg15, Frederic Tran Mau-Them4,16, Isabelle Maystadt17, presentararepairofMZdichorionicdiamnioticfemaletwinswith Philippe Theis1, Christian Müller1, Didier Menzies18, Dominique BWS and concordant phenotypes (a Beckwith-Wiedemann spec- Bourgeois1, Emmanuel Scalais19, BarbaraKlink1 trum (BWSp) score of 5 in each twin). Molecular analysis of genomic DNA from PBL revealed ICR2-LOM in one twin but not 1National Center of Genetics (NCG), Laboratoire national de santé theother.OuranalysessuggestthatICR2-LOMoccurredbetween (LNS),Dudelange,Luxembourg,2ServicedeGénétiqueCytogénétique days1and3afterfertilization,followedbytwinningandaneven Embryologie Hôpital Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France, 3Centre de mosaic distribution of ICR2-LOM cells at the tissue levelbetween Génétique, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 4Génétique des Anomalies the twins, except in hematopoietic stem cells, during du Développement, Inserm 1231 GAD, Université de Bourgogne, embryogenesis. Dijon, France, 5Service de génétique et embryologie médicales, CHU H. Soejima: None. F. Sun: None. H. Yatsuki: None. K. ParisEst,Hôpitald’EnfantsArmand-Trousseau,Paris,France,6Service Higashimoto:None. S.Hara: None. d’AnatomieetCytologiePathologiques,Hôpital-Dieu,Nantes,France, 7Clinical Genetics Department, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter, United Kingdom, 8Service de Génétique Médicale, Grenoble, 
P11 .021.C Reﬁnement of the 22q11 duplicated phenocritical France, 9Clinical Genetics Department, Children’s Hospital Colorado, locus inbladder exstrophy epispadias complex Littleton,CO,USA,10CliniquedeGénétique«GuyFontaine»,CHUde Lille,Lille,France,11InstitutdeGénétiqueMédicale,CHUdeLille,Lille, GlendaMariaBeaman1,2,WilliamG.Newman1,2,WoolfS.Adrian1,2, France, 12Centre de Génétique Chromosomique, GH de l’Institut RaimondoM. Cervellione2, David Keene2, Imran Mushtaq3 Catholique de Lille, Lille, France, 13Medical Genetics Department, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 14Genetica Medica, Azienda 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Manche- OspedalieraUniversitaria Senese,Siena,Italy,15CentredeGénétique ster University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, Humaine, CHU de Liège, Liège, Belgium, 16Unité Fonctionnelle 6254 3Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, d’Innovation en Diagnostique Génomique des Maladies Rares, Pôle London,United Kingdom. de Biologie, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 17Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique (IPG), Thebladderexstrophy-epispadiascomplex(BEEC)comprisesof Gosselies,Belgium,18NationalCenterofPathology(NCP),Laboratoire aspectrum of anterior midline defectsaffectingthe bladderor national de santé (LNS), Dudelange, Luxembourg, 19Pediatric urethra. Despite its clinical importance, the causes of bladder Neurology Unit, Pediatric Department, Centre Hospitalier de exstrophy remain undeﬁned. BEEC affects 1 in 10,000 births, Luxembourg,Luxembourg, Luxembourg. with a twofold higher incidence in males. Duplications of chromosome22q11.2havebeenidentiﬁedinapproximately3% Introduction:Todate,onlythreepatientshavebeenreportedin of BEEC cases. This is the strongest reported association with the literature with BRD4 point mutations. However, a small but BEEC,conferringagreaterthantwelvefoldrisk.Acomparisonof growing body of scientiﬁc literature is emerging about clinical eight previously reported 22q11.21 duplications in individuals ﬁndingsinpatientswith19p13.12deletionsoverlappingBRD4,of with CBE deﬁned a 414 kb ‘phenocritical’ region, harboring 10 which nine patients have been described. They share a candidateproteincodinggenes.ByundertakingCNVanalysisin characteristic common phenotype including growth retardation, BEEC patients using the Inﬁnium CytoSNP-850K v1.2 Beadchip microcephaly, intellectual disability, cardiac defects and facial Kit(Illumina),weidentiﬁedaBritishfemalewithclassicbladder dysmorphism suggestive of Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS). exstrophy (CBE) with a maternally inherited 313kb duplication, Interestigly,CdLSisoftencausedbymutationsinNIPBL,whichhas which reﬁnes the phenocritical region, to include only ﬁve of recentlybeenshown tointeract closely withBRD4. the protein coding genes previously identiﬁed: CRKL, AIFM3, Methods: To characterize this novel syndrome, we formed an LZTR1, THA
P7  and 
P2 RX6. The duplication lies within a single internationalcollaborativestudy,andcollectedtwelvenewpatients: regulatory chromosomal topographical active domain. Subse- six with 19p13.12 deletions overlapping BRD4 and six with BRD4 quentcopynumberanalysisusingTaqManassaysfortheseﬁve point mutations. We performed phenotype and genotype analysis, genes in 116 individuals with BEEC revealed no evidence of criticalregiondelineationandassessmentoftheimpactofstructural single gene duplications. RNA array data from embryonic mice variants on three-dimensional chromatin interactions by Topologi- in GenitoUrinary Development Molecular Anatomy Project cally Associating Domains (TADs) analysis. We assessed the (GUDMAP) detected CRKL, LZTR1 and THA
P7  expressed in participation of contiguous genes never associated with human embryonic kidney mesenchyme and interstitium and tubules, diseases before, by using the data-mining software Manteia to embryonicureterandembryonicbladder.Thesedatareﬁnethe comparewithphenotypesobservedinmurineknockoutmodels. size of the duplication at the 22q11.21 also suggesting that Results:WereporttheﬁrstcohortofpatientswithBRD4-related CRKL, THA
P7 , and LZTR1 are CBE candidate genes and Cornelia de Lange-like syndrome and describe new cardinal contribute to the potential disease-associated mechanism clinical ﬁndings. By integrating prenatal ﬁndings from fetopatho- predisposing to BEEC at this locus. logicalexaminations,phenotypesofpediatricpatientsandadults, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 331 wedescribethespeciﬁcevolutionofdysmorphicfeatures during Instituteof Nuclear Sciences "Vinca", Belgrade, Serbia. thedifferentstages oflife. Conclusion: BRD4-related phenotype is part of the CdLS Introduction: miR-548 family members, located on all human spectrum but is characterized by clinically relevant speciﬁcities chromosomes except chr19 and chrY, regulate podocyte differ- that distinguish itfromother cohesinopathies. entiation in vitro, important for kidney development. Rare copy G. Jouret: None. S. Heide: None. A. Sorlin: None. L. Faivre: number variants (rCNVs) are the common genetic cause of None.S.Chantot-Bastaraud:None.M.Denis-Musquer:None.P. Congenital Anomalies of the Kidney and Urinary Tract (CAKUT) D. Turnpenny: None. C. Coutton: None. G. Vieville: None. J. and could harbour miRNAs. The aim of this study was to Thevenon: None. A. Larson: None. F. Petit: None. E. Boudry: investigatetowhichextentrCNVsassociatedwithCAKUTharbour None.T.Smol:None.B.Delobel:None.B.Duban-Bedu:None.C. miR-548members. Fallerini: None. F. Mari: None. C. Lo Rizzo: None. A. Renieri: Materials and Methods: Extensive literature review was None. J. Caberg: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. I. Maystadt: conducted to collect data of pathogenic and likely pathogenic None. P. Theis: None. C. Müller: None. D. Menzies: None. D. rCNVs in CAKUT patients. UCSC genome browser tool was Bourgeois: None. E.Scalais: None. B.Klink:None. employedformappingofmiR-548membersontocollectedrCNV regionsandgnomADSVcontrolsdatabase.Bioinformaticanalysis wasconducted using miRPathDB2 tool. 
P11 .023.A miRNA-free rare pathogenic CNVs could drive Results:WegeneratedCAKUTdatabaseofpathogenicCNVsin toward variable CAKUT phenotypes 79 chromosome regions from 191 patient and likely pathogenic CNVs in 74 regions from 87 patients. Pathogenic rCNVs of Ivan Zivotic, Ivana Kolic, Kristina Popic, Jelena Filipovic Trickovic, seventeenpatients,locatedon7chromosomes,containedatleast AnaDjordjevic,MajaZivkovic,AleksandraStankovic,IvanJovanovic one miR-548 member. Likely pathogenic rCNVs of 4 patients, locatedon 3 chromosomes, contained one of miR-548 members. "Vinca"Instituteofnuclearsciences,Insltituteofthenationalinterest Bioinformatic analysis implied therole ofmapped miRNAs in the oftheRepublicofSerbia,UniversityofBelgrade,Belgrade,Serbia. regulation of processes associated with CAKUT. In controls, only hsa-mir-548i-3(outof73precursors)wasmappedonpolymorphic Introduction: Genetic studies of congenital anomalies of the CNVs (af>1%)and wasn’t identiﬁed inpatients. kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) have demonstrated variable Conclusions: miR-548 members located in rCNVs should be penetrability and expressivity of the associated genetic defects. investigated in future studies as potential genetic drivers of Previously, it was shown that deletions of 17q12 and 22q11.2 CAKUT development, beyond protein coding genes. Acknowl- regionswerespeciﬁcforkidneyanomalies(KA)while16p11.2and edgements: This research was supported by the Science Fund of 1q21.1 loci showed extensive pleiotropy in CAKUT phenotypes. theRepublicofSerbia,PROMIS,#6066923,miFaDriCa,andSerbian CNVsaffectingmiRNAgenedosagehavebeendescribedtohave Ministry ofEducation, Science andTechnological development. functional inﬂuence on gene expression. We aimed to conduct K. Mitrovic: None. I. Kolic: None. I. Zivotic: None. J. Filipovic comprehensiveinsilicoanalysisusingpubliclyavailabledatabases Trickovic: None. A. Djordjevic: None. M. Zivkovic: None. A. to analyze miRNA content of CAKUT-associated CNVs in quoted Stankovic:None. I. Jovanovic: None. chromosomal lociwith regard topleiotropy. Methods: Extensive literature review was conducted to collect data about pathogenic rCNVs associated with CAKUT. UCSC 
P11 .025.CPreeclampsiaasapotentialclinicalfeatureinCantú genome browser tool was employed for mapping miRNAs onto syndrome collectedrCNV regions. Results: Analysis of CNVs in CAKUT included four studies EirnyThorolfsdottir, Svanborg Gisladottir, Hans T. Bjornsson countingmorethan2500patients.Infurtheranalysisweincluded 191 patients harboring pathogenic CNVs. Surprisingly, CAKUT Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland. pleiotropic regions (16p11.2, 1q21.2) did not contain any miRNA. 22q11.2showed thedensestmiRNAs content (n=21). Introduction: Cantú syndrome (CS) is caused by gain-of-function Conclusions: Absence of miRNAs may potentially pronounce pathogenicdisease-causingvariantsinthegenescodingforABC
C9  the pleiotropy of the CAKUT genetic defects, thus leading to the and KCNJ8, which together form an ATP-sensitive potassium varietyofphenotypes.Contrary,abundancyofmiRNAsin22q11.2 channel. CS is a rare systemic syndrome with a great clinical might be associated with reproducible phenotype, such as KA, variability,characterizedbycoarsefacies,hypertrichosis,osteochon- producing the functional effect when deleted. This assumption drodysplasiaandcardiacanomalies.Wepresentafamilywitheight agrees with recent results of miRNA expression variability in individuals with CS for which the proband was initially diagnosed 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Acknowledgements: This research with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. Whole genome trio sequen- was supported by the Science Fund of the Republic of Serbia, cing revealed a likely pathogenic missense variant in the ABC
C9  PROMIS,#6066923,miFaDriCa,andSerbianMinistryofEducation, gene (NM_005353286.2); c.1745T>A (p.Val582Asp), which the boy Scienceand Technologicaldevelopment. shareswithsevensimilarlyaffectedfamilymembers(patentductus I. Zivotic: None. I. Kolic: None. K. Popic: None. J. Filipovic arteriosus, pericardial effusion, cardiomegaly, coarse facial features Trickovic: None. A. Djordjevic: None. M. Zivkovic: None. A. andhypertrichosis).Prematurebirths,polyhydramniosandlargefor Stankovic:None. I. Jovanovic: None. gestational age newborns are perinatal factors also seen in the family.Furthermore,maternalpreeclampsia(n=4)orhypertension during pregnancy (n=1) is observed in 5 of 6 cases (83%) in this 
P11 .024.B Are miR-548 family members potential genetic family,whenCSmotherscarryCSfetuses. driversofCAKUT Discussion:Over-activityoftheK channelanddysregulation ATP ofrenin-angiotensin signaling(RAS)triggerscardiachypertrophy, KristinaMitrovic,IvanaKolic,IvanZivotic,JelenaFilipovicTrickovic, anddysregulationofRASisalsooneofmultiplefactorsthoughtto AnaDjordjevic,MajaZivkovic,AleksandraStankovic,IvanJovanovic contributetothedevelopmentofpreeclampsia.Herewepresent EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 332 three CS mothers who experience preeclampsia when carrying 1Scuola Medica Salernitana, University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy, affectedCS fetuses. 2Pediatric Unit San Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi d’Aragona University Conclusion:Preeclampsiaaswellasmaternalpreeclampsiahas Hospital,Salerno,Italy,33.OphtalmologyDepartment,SanGiovanni previously been described for other syndromes, but to our di Dio e Ruggi d’Aragona University Hospital, Salerno, Italy, 44. knowledgepreeclampsiahasnotbeenassociatedwithCSbefore, Department of Maternal-Infant, Pediatric Section, University of and we speculate that maternal preeclampsia might be an Naples Federico II,Naples, Italy. expansion of the CS phenotypic spectrum. If true, studies of CS mayyieldinsights into themechanisticbasis of preeclampsia. Introduction: Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC syndrome) E. Thorolfsdottir: None. S. Gisladottir: None. H.T. Bjornsson: is a congenital disorder belonging to RASopathies, a group of None. syndromes caused by mutations in the Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. BRAF, MEK1 and MEK2 are the most frequently genes involved. The major clinical manifestations 
P11 .026.D AT
P1 A3 gene is responsible for isolated and includecraniofacialdysmorphicfeatures,growthretardationwith syndromic auditory neuropathy (CAPOS syndrome) shortstature,congenitalheartdiseases,neurodevelopmentdelay, hypotonia and dermatologic abnormalities. Ocular involvement Margaux Serey-Gaut1, Sophie Achard2, Laurence Jonard3, Marine occurs in the majority of individuals and include: strabismus, Parodi2,NatalieLoundon2,ChristinePoncet4,BrunoEymard5,Naima refractive errors, nystagmus, ptosis, and optic nerve hypoplasia. Deggouj6,Yves Sznajer7, SandrineMarlin1 Case report. We describe a 5-year-old girl with a heterozygous pathogenicvariant[c.1741A>Gp.(Asn581Asp)]inBRAFgene.The 1HopitalNecker,ServicedeGénétiqueClinique,Paris,France,2Hopital patient presents typical dysmorphic features (thin and curly hair, Necker, Service d’ORL, Paris, France, 3Hopital Necker, Service de bilateral epicanthum, macrostomia, macroglossia), congenital Génétique Moléculaire, Paris, France, 4Hopital Rothschild, Centre de heart defects (atrial septal defect, pulmonary valve stenosis), and RéglagedesImplantsCochléaire,Paris,France,5InstitutdeMyologie, moderate developmental delay. MRI brain detected thinning of Unité clinique de pathologie neuromusculaire, Paris, France, thecorpuscallosumandenlargedperiventricularspaces.Shealso 6Cliniques Universitaires Saint Luc UCL, service d’ORL, Bruxelles, presents dental caries, follicular keratosis and laterocervical Belgium, 7Cliniques Universitaires Saint Luc UCL, service de infantile hemangioma. Eye examination showed exotropia, Génétique, Bruxelles,Belgium. anomalies of the visual evoked potentials and, in particular, excavation of optic disc. Excavation of optic disc is an ocular CAPOS syndrome combines progressive hearing loss (auditory manifestation that has not been yet described in patients with neuropathy type, (AN)), optic atrophy, hypotonia, and cerebellar CFCsyndrome. Thisﬁnding could beassociated withoptic nerve ataxia. The disorder is described as appearing in childhood, with atrophy,previously foundinsome casesof CFC syndrome. acute episodes of febrile neurological deterioration resembling Conclusions:Thiscasereportsuggesttocarryoutanaccurate encephalitis.We conducted a cohort study of 39 families (43 funduscopic examination in order to highlight alterations of the patients) with isolated (73%) or syndromic (27%) AN without optic disc in patients with RASopathies to obtain a precocious cochlear nerve malformation. Their DNA was analyzed by Next diagnosisofoptic nerveinvolvement. Generation Sequencing using a panel of 216 genes involved in M. Tessitore: None. G. Abbinante: None. M. Falco: None. F. isolated or syndromic deafness.Four unrelated patients had the Gallo: None. C. Plaitano: None. D. Di Salvio: None. A. Magli: same heterozygous pathogenic variant of the AT
P1 A3 gene, None.D.Melis: None. c.2452G>A, p.(Glu818Lys), already reported as responsible for CAPOS syndrome (OMIM-601338). The diagnosis of the hearing loss was made in post-lingual period from 5 to 12 years old. The 
P11 .028.B Identiﬁcation of Cenani-Lenz syndrome due to deafness progressively worsened with very low word recognition compound heterozygous variantin APC (10%) despite a classical hearing aid. A single or bilateral cochlear implantationallowedrecoveringawordrecognitionscorecloseto Jair A. Tenorio-Castaño1,2, Pedro Arias1,2, Julian Nevado1,2, Natalia 100%(up to 12years post-implant). Two patients have never had Gallego1, Cristina Silvan1, Sergio Ramos1, Sixto García-Miñaúr1,2, any of the febrile episodes classically described. Optic nerve NuriaRodriguez-Salas3, Leopoldo Martínez4,PabloLapunzina1,2 damage was not present in two patients, one of whom was 16 yearsold.TheataxiadescribedintheCAPOSsyndromeisattributed 1MedicalandMolecularGeneticsInstitute(INGEMM),Madrid,Spain, tocerebellardamagebuttheimplicationofavestibulardeﬁcitwas 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras presentin2/3ofthepatientstested.WehaveidentiﬁedtheAT
P1 A3 (CIBERER),Madrid,Spain,3Hereditarycancerunit,Oncology,Hospital p.(Glu818Lys) variant in patients with isolated neuropathy with or Universitario la Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), withoutinauguralfebrileepisodes.Balancedisorderscouldinvolve 28046., Madrid, Spain, 4Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital peripheral vestibular damage. Cohort studies should conﬁrm Universitario La Paz,Madrid, Spain. efﬁcacyinauditoryperceptioninthesepatients. M. Serey-Gaut: None. S. Achard: None. L. Jonard: None. M. Cenani-Lenz (CLS) is an infrequent congenital malformation Parodi: None. N. Loundon: None. C. Poncet: None. B. Eymard: characterized by syndactyly of the hands with abnormalities of None.N.Deggouj: None. Y.Sznajer: None. S.Marlin: None. the forearm bones that can be also present in the lower limbs, renal abnormalities and dysmorphism. It is usually caused by autosomalrecessivevariantsinLR
P4 ,andduplicationencompass- 
P11 .027.A A new ocular phenotype in cardiofaciocutaneous ing GREM1 and FMN1. More recently, APC pathogenic variants, syndrome mostly truncating, have been also suggested to be related with CLS. APC acts on the WNT signaling pathway as well as LR
P4 , Maria Tessitore1, Giulia Abbinante1, Mariateresa Falco2, Flavio which seems to be the canonical pathway associated with CLS. Gallo1, Carnem Plaitano3, Dario Di Salvio4, Adriano Magli1, Daniela Here, we report a family in which the index case was diagnosed Melis1 with multiple adenomatous polyposis, syndactyly, xerosis cutis EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 333 and ADHD. Whole exome sequencing revealed that the proband Materials and Methods: We have performed a retrospective have two variants in the APC gene, one nonsense analysis on the phenotype of all reported cases presenting with (NM_001354906.2:c.1564C>T: p.Arg522*) at exon 17 and one MVA2andpathogenic variants inCE
P57  anddescribe theclinical intronic variant NM_001354906.2:c.-191T>A. One variant was de ﬁndings of 2 additional unrelated patients with MVA2 identiﬁed novoandthesecondoneinheritedfromthemother.Noneofthe through WES. variantsweredetectedinthepseudocontrolpopulationdatabases Conclusions: Analysis of these 12 cases delineates a complex (gnomADexomes,gnomADgenomes,1000G,ESP,Kaviar)andthe phenotype that includes pre and postnatal growth retardation majority of the pathogenic predictors suggested a pathogenic and characteristic facial features. Cardiac, vascular and skeletal effect for the nonsense variant. In silico analysis of the intronic malformations also seem to be part of the phenotype, as well as variantsuggestedthatremovedtheATG,thushavingadamaging endocrine abnormalities such as hypothyroidism and growth effect at the ORF, based on the 5’UTR location of the variant. In hormone deﬁcit with or without pituitary anomalies. The this region, other variants have been previously reported as identiﬁcation of these manifestations will improve the clinical pathogenic.Altogethersuggestthatfortheﬁrsttime,acompound management of these patients. Grants: Raregenomics network, heterozygous variant in APC is described in a case with Cenani- ﬁnanced by the Consejería de Educación de la C. de Madrid Lenz,expandingthephenotypeandmolecularfeaturesassociated (
S2017 /BMD-3721), ISC III, Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación withthedisease.Grants: FIS-PI20/01053 (PI19/01681)and theEuropean SocialFund. J.A.Tenorio-Castaño:None.P.Arias:None.J.Nevado:None. M. Palomares-Bralo: None. M. Pacio-Míguez: None. A. Cueto- N. Gallego: None. C. Silvan: None. S. Ramos: None. S. García- González: None. S. García-Miñaúr: None. Á. del Pozo: None. J. Miñaúr: None. N. Rodriguez-Salas: None. L. Martínez: None. P. Menéndez Suso: None. F.J. Climent Alcalá: None. E. Mansilla: Lapunzina: None. None.C.Schuffelmann:None.M.Lledín:None.M.Solís:None.T. López: None. P. Valcorba: None. S. Siccha: None. M. Valenzuela Palafoll:None.F.LópezGrondona:None.F.NietoAranda:None. 
P11 .030.D Vascular, skeletal and endocrine anomalies in E.Tizzano:None.P.Lapunzina:None.F.Santos-Simarro:None. mosaicvariegatedaneuploidysyndrome2causedbybiallelic variants in CE
P57  
P11 .031.A Familial cervical ribsassociated withazygos lobe María Palomares-Bralo1,2,3, Marta Pacio-Míguez1, Anna María Cueto-González4,5,6, Sixto García-Miñaúr1,2,3, Ángela del Pozo1,2, NouhaBouayed ABDELMOULA, Amir Karra, Balkiss ABdelmoula Juan José Menéndez Suso7, Francisco J. Climent Alcalá8, Elena Mansilla1,2,3, Cristina Schuffelmann7, María Dolores Lledín9, Mario Genomics of signalopathies at the service of medicine UR17E
S36 , Solís1,2, Teresa López1, Patricia Valcorba1,2,3, Sofía Siccha10, María Medical University of Sfax,Sfax,Tunisia. Irene Valenzuela Palafoll4,11, Fermina López Grondona4, Francisca Nieto Aranda1,11, Eduardo Tizzano4,11, Pablo Lapunzina1,2,3, Fer- Objective: Cervical rib is a congenital over-development of the nandoSantos-Simarro1,2,3 costal process of the 7th cervical vertebra (1 to 2% of the population)whichisknowntocausebrachialplexopathyinupto 1Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM) Hospital 10% of the affected individuals. Cervical ribs may cause thoracic Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Centro de Investiga- outlet syndromes by compression. Their origin is not well ciónBiomédicaenReddeEnfermedadesRaras,ISCIII,Madrid,Spain, elucidated but it seems that genetic (HOX genes) and environ- 3European Reference Network Congenital Malformations & Rare mentalfactors(maternalexposuretochemicalsorstress)maybe Mental Disability (ERN -ITHACA), Madrid, Spain, 4Departamento de involved. Familial cases with a suspected autosomal dominant Genética Clínica y Molecular, Campus del Hospital Vall d’Hebron, inheritancewerereported.Here,wedescribeaTunisianpedigree Barcelona,Spain,5GrupodeGenéticaMédica,InstitutodeInvestiga- inwhichayoungfemalewasdiagnosedashavingfamilialbilateral ción Vall Hebron (VHIR), Campus del Hospital Vall d’Hebron, cervical ribs. This congenital abnormality was associated with Barcelona,Spain,6EuropeanReferenceNetworkCraniofacialAnoma- another congenital variation of the lung (0.2-1.2% of the lies and ENT disorders (ERN-CRANIO), Barcelona, Spain, 7Servicio de population)which wasan azygos lobeof theright lung. Cuidados Intensivos Pediátricos, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Material and Methods: A Tunisian 29-years-old female was Madrid, Spain, 8Unidad de patología compleja pediátrica, Hospital referred to us for brachial plexopathy. Thoracic X-ray as well as Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 9Unidad de hepatología cervicalspine thoracic MRI and scanwereperformed. pediátrica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 10Servicio Results: The interpretation of the chest X-ray revealed the depediatría,HospitalUniversitarioLaPaz,Madrid,Spain,11Grupode presenceofbilateralcervicalribsaswellasapulmonaryopacityof Genética Médica, Instituto de Investigación Vall Hebron (VHIR), the right apex. The MRI conﬁrmed the presence of two Barcelona, Spain. supernumerary cervical ribs at the 7th cervical vertebra. There was also a Tornwaldt cyst which is a common incidental benign Introduction:Mosaicvariegatedaneuploidy(MVA)syndromeisa midline nasopharyngeal mucosal cyst. More over, there was a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by a variable pulmonary nodule at the apical segment of the right lung. The percentage of chromosome gains and losses in somatic cells, thoracic scanidentiﬁed thepulmonary lesionasan azygos lobe. leading to constitutional mosaic aneuploidies. Biallelic mutations Conclusion: Our patient had cervical ribs inherited from her inBUB1B,CE
P57 andTRI
P13 havebeenidentiﬁedastheunderlying father associated tomultiple other congenital conditions. causeofMVA1(OMIM257300),MVA2(OMIM614114)andMVA3 N.B. Abdelmoula: None. A. Karra: None. B. ABdelmoula: (OMIM 617598) respectively. Patients with MVA present with a None. non-distinctive phenotype with pre- and postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, intellectual disability, skeletal anoma- lies,facial dysmorphisms, heartdefects, seizures,hypothyroidism, 
P11 .032.BDiagnosticWES-basedgenepaneltestingin(non)- ocular defects and childhood cancers associated to BUB1B and syndromic patients with cleft lip and/or palate in the TRI
P13 . Biallelic CE
P57  variants have only been described in 10 Netherlands patientsso far, and thephenotype is poorlyknown. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 334 Inge L. Cox1, Lisca F. Fockema Wurfbain1, M F. van Dooren2, V Romania, 4University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Carol Davila”, Verhoeven2,EK.Bijlsma3,AvanHagen4,MHeijligers5,SM.Maas6,H Bucharest, Romania. E.Veenstra-Knol7,HK.PloosvanAmstel1,MMassink1,Marie-JoseH. vanden Boogaard1,Aebele Mink vander Molen1 Introduction: Complex constitutional chromosomal rearrange- ments(CCRs)describestructuralrearrangementsinvolvingatleast 1Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital, University Medical Center, Utrecht, 2chromosomesand3breakpoints.Dependingontheirstructure, Netherlands, 2Erasmus University Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands, CCRs can be classiﬁed as: three-way exchange, double two-way 3LeidenUniversity Medical Centre,Leiden, Netherlands,4Amsterdam exchangeandexceptionalCCRs.Mostdoubletwo-waytransloca- University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Maastricht tions are de novo rearrangements, with a few familial cases University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 6Amsterdam reported. We present two new unrelated familial cases of University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7University imbalanced transmission for double two-way CCRs, one of Medical CenterGroningen, Groningen, Netherlands. maternal origin involving chromosomes 4, 5, 10 and 13, and another one of paternal origin involving chromosomes 6, 10, 12 Introduction:Cleftlipand/orpalate(CL/P)arethemostcommon and18. craniofacialcongenitalmalformationsinhumansinvolvingvarious Materials and methods: Peripheral blood karyotyping and genetic and environmental risk factors and can be divided into FISH using whole chromosome, subtelomeric and mFISH probes isolated non-syndromic and syndromic forms. Many CL/P syn- wasapplied fortesting ofprobands and theirfamilies. dromesarecharacterizedasclinicallyvariable,geneticallyhetero- Results: Proband I is a 1 year 3 months old boy with geneousdisorders,makingitdifﬁculttodistinguishsyndromicand neuromotordelay,facialdysmorphism,failuretothrive,hypospa- non-syndromiccases.Recognitionofasyndromic/geneticcauseis dias, behaviour problems. Conventional karyotype showed a add importantforpersonalizedtailoredcare,including(unrecognized) (10)(q26). Subsequent parental karyotype and FISH analysis co-morbidities and accurate genetic counselling. Therefore, gene described a maternal balanced CCR t(4;13)(q26-28;q22),t(5;10) paneltestingisincreasinglyconsideredinthediagnosticwork-up (q34;q25).Proband II is a 1 month 3 weeks old boy that showed ofCL/P.Inthisretrospectivestudyweevaluatetheyieldofgene- facial dysmorphism, hypospadias, pre- and postnatal growth and panelCL/Ptesting. developmental delay. The karyotype result indicated a add(18) MaterialandMethods:Weincluded212CL/Pcaseseligiblefor (q21.1). Cytogenetic investigation and FISH testing identiﬁed a WES-basedgenepaneltestingbetween2015and2020aspartof paternalbalanced CCR t(6;12)(p21;p13),t(10;18)(p13;q21.1). routine care. All cases were included after pre-test genetic Conclusions: Accurate characterization of CCRs by molecular counselling. Medical records including family history were cytogenetic methods is important because carriers of such evaluated. rearrangements can display a wide array of phenotypes. Genetic Results: In 24 cases (11,3 %) causative variants underlying the counselling for families with CCR is difﬁcult and should consider CL/P were identiﬁed, including rare genetic causes requiring the fact that the risk of imbalances probably varies greatly with speciﬁcmonitoringandfollow-up.Forexample,identiﬁcationofa the nature of the rearrangement, the number of chromosomes pathogenic KCNJ2 variant (Andersen-Tawil syndrome) led to involvedand thenumber ofbreakpoints. cardiac follow-up in a CP patient and his parent, revealing a D.A.Ozunu:None.V.Plăiaşu:None.G.Motei:None.M.Ivan: cardiac arrhythmia phenotype. Also in apparently non-syndromic None. A. Dobre: None. A. Caia-Hoanăș: None. I. Apostol: None. casesageneticdiagnosiswasmadeaftertesting.In8cases(3,8%) L.Ghiță:None. T.Ciomârtan:None. a causative genetic diagnosis was conﬁrmed by performing additional genetic testing, including trio WES analyses and SNP array. 
P11 .035.A Clinical relevance of postzygotic mosaicism in Conclusions:ThisstudyexempliﬁesthebeneﬁtofWES-based Cornelia de LangeSyndrome gene panel analyses in CL/P patients in Dutch experts centres. Earlydiagnosesledtopersonalizedcareforpatientsandaccurate AnaLatorre-Pellicer1, Marta Gil-Salvador1, Cristina Lucia-Campos1, geneticcounselling of theirfamilies. Rebeca Antoñanzas-Perez1, Laura Trujillano2, Maria Arnedo1, Ilaria I.L. Cox: None. L.F. Fockema Wurfbain: None. M.F. van Parenti3, Paulino Gómez-Puertas4, Beatriz Puisac1, Frank J. Kaiser5,6, Dooren: None. V. Verhoeven: None. E.K. Bijlsma: None. A. van Feliciano J. Ramos1,2, JuanPié1 Hagen: None. M. Heijligers: None. S.M. Maas: None. H.E. Veenstra-Knol:None.H.K.PloosvanAmstel:None.M.Massink: 1Unit of Clinical Genetics and Functional Genomics, Department of None. M.H. van den Boogaard: None. A. Mink van der Molen: Pharmacology-Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Zara- None. goza, CIBERER-GCV02 and IIS-Aragon, Zaragoza, Spain, 2Unit of Clinical Genetics, Service of Paediatrics, University Hospital "Lozano Blesa", Zaragoza, Spain, 3Institute of Science and Technology (IST) 
P11 .034.D Two cases of complex constitutional chromosomal Austria,Klosterneuburg,Austria,4MolecularModellingGroup,Centro rearrangements - familial implications and genetic de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CBMSO (CSIC-UAM), Madrid, counselling Spain, 5Institute for Human Genetics, University Hospital Essen, UniversityofDuisburg-Essen,Essen,Germany,6SectionforFunctional DianaA.Ozunu1,VasilicaPlăiaşu1,GabrielaMotei1,MihaelaIvan1, Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, University of Lübeck, Lubeck, Adelina Dobre2, Ana-Maria Caia-Hoanăș2, Irina Apostol2, Lucica Germany. Ghiță3, Tatiana Ciomârtan2,4 Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS, OMIM #122470, #300590, 1Genetics Departament, Regional Center of Medical Genetics, #610759, #614701, #300882) is a multisystemic genetic spectrum National Institute for Mother and Child Care “Alessandrescu- characterized by a recognizable craniofacial phenotype, limb Rusescu”, Bucharest, Romania, 2Pediatrics Departament, National malformations, intellectual disability and a wide range of other Institute for Mother and Child Care “Alessandrescu-Rusescu”, healthconditions.Todate,CdLShasbeenmainlyassociatedwith Bucharest, Romania, 3Neurology Departament, National Institute loss-of-functionpathogenicvariantsingenesofproteinsrelatedto for Mother and Child Care “Alessandrescu-Rusescu”, Bucharest, the cohesin complex (NIPBL, SM
C1 A, SM
C3 , RAD21, HDA
C8 , BRD4, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 335 ANKRD11 or MAU2). Three main genetic subgroups of CdLS AllWales Medical Genomics Service, Cardiff, United Kingdom. patients are currently recognized based on heritability: patients with hereditary pathogenic variant, with a de novo mutation Costellosyndrome(CS)isarareconditioncausedbyheterozygous (DNM)orwithapost-zygoticmutation(PZM).Incontrasttowhat gain-of-function germline alterations in HRAS. CS typically causes is normally seen in other conditions, most of the affected coarse facial features, macrocephaly, growth and developmental individuals with mosaicism have a clinical phenotype at least as difﬁcultiesandskeletal,ocularandneurologicalproblems.Cardiac severe as those with constitutional pathogenic variants. Here we features are present in the majority of individuals, with will discuss and expand the crucial role of genetic mosaicism in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) occurring in approximately CdLSby reviewingacohort of40CdLS patientswith clinicaland 2in3.Typically,CSarisesdenovoonthepaternalallele.However, moleculardiagnosis.Weassesedtheprevalenceofmosaicismand there are two previous reports of inheritance from parents with present three additional patients with mosaic disease-causing heterozygousgermline HRASalterations. variants in NIPBL. Overall, the high prevalence of mosaicism in We present a family who share a rarely observed pathogenic CdLSaswellasthedisparityintissuedistributionshouldbetaken variant in HRAS (NM_005343.2; c.173C>T, p.(Thr58Ile)). This has intoaccountwhenmoleculardiagnosisandfamilialcosegregation been reported in four other individuals previously, often in studiesare planned. associationwithanattenuatedphenotype.Ourprobandhasshort A. Latorre-Pellicer: None. M. Gil-Salvador: None. C. Lucia- stature,feedingandlearningdifﬁculties,aborderlinelongQTand Campos:None.R.Antoñanzas-Perez:None.L.Trujillano:None. right-sided ptosis. He has distinctive features consistent with a M. Arnedo: None. I. Parenti: None. P. Gómez-Puertas: None. B. Rasopathy,butnottypicalofCS.Thereisavariablephenotypein Puisac: None.F. Kaiser: None. F. Ramos: None.J. Pié: None. thefamily.Theproband’sfatherhaslongstandingHCM,adilated aorticrootandatrialﬁbrillation.Theproband’spaternalunclehas HCM and previously had a normal HCM gene panel through his 
P11 .036.B A functional mutation in HDA
C8  gene as novel Cardiology team. Cascade testing in the family has identiﬁed the diagnosticmarker forcornelia delange syndrome c.173C>T p.(Thr58Ile) variant in the proband’s father, uncle and cousin. XuerenGao This report expands the phenotype caused by c.173C>T missense variants. It emphasises that HRAS variants should be ShanghaiInstitute for Pediatric Research, Shanghai, China. considered in individuals with a broad phenotype, including individualswithunexplainedandapparentlyisolatedhypertrophic Introduction: Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is a rare cardiomyopathy. It also reinforces the importance of familial genetic disorder classically characterized by distinctive facies, testing despite the high de novo mutation rate, to enable growth retardation, intellectual disability, feeding difﬁculties, and appropriate accessto screening,particularly cardiac screening. multiple organ system anomalies. Previously, the diagnosis of E.Sloper: None. O.Murch: None. A.Kamath:None. CdLS was based mainly on identifying the typical phenotype in patients.However,withtheadvancesinclinicalmoleculargenetic diagnostic techniques, more patients, especially patients with 
P11 .038.DAcaseofmoyamoyadiseaseinachildwithCostello milder phenotypes, are being diagnosed from detecting patho- syndrome: Expanding phenotype and proposed genotype- genicmutation. phenotype correlation Materials and Methods: Pathogenic mutation in a female patientwithamilderphenotypewasdetectedusingwhole-exome NorahAlsaleh1, AbdulazizAlGhamdi2, AmalAlhashem1,3, Abdullah sequencing, and was further characterized using bioinformatic MAlhashem4,Fowzan SAlkuraya5,3 analysis and in vitro functional experiments, including X-chromosome inactivation analysis, sodium dodecyl sulfate- 1Division of Genetics and Metabolic Medicine, Department of polyacrylamide gelelectrophoresis, and enzymeactivity assay. Pediatric, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Results: This patient was found to harbor a novel missense 2Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatric, Prince mutation (c.806T>G, p.I269R) in the coding region of the HDA
C8  Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Department of gene, which was predicted to be pathogenic. Compared with Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, other CdLS patients with HDA
C8  mutation, the patient lacked Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4Division of Neuroradiology, Department of typical facies, including synophrys and arched eyebrows. In vitro Radiology,PrinceSultanMilitaryMedicalCity,Riyadh,Riyadh,Saudi functional experiments showed the presence of skewed Arabia,5DepartmentofTranslationalGenomics,CenterforGenomic X-chromosome inactivation. Furthermore, the novel mutation Medicine,KingFaisalSpecialistHospitalandResearchCentre,Riyadh, decreased the dissolubility and enzymatic activity of HDA
C8  SaudiArabia. protein. Conclusions: The present study identiﬁed a novel missense Background: Costello syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant mutation(c.806T>G,p.I269R)intheHDA
C8 geneleadingtoCdLS, RASopathy typically caused by de novo variants in HRAS. It is which not only provided strong evidence for diagnosis in this characterized by coarse facial features, central nervous system present patient, but also expanded the spectrum of pathogenic involvement and multiple congenital anomalies including con- mutations for CdLS. The information on grants: the “National genital heart defects and skeletal anomalies.CNS anomalies that Natural ScienceFoundation of China”(No.81800780) have been reported include cerebral atrophy, ventriculomegaly, X. Gao:None. hydrocephalus and progressive posterior fossa crowding.Moya- moya disease is a progressive cerebral angiopathy characterized bybilateralinternalcarotidarterystenosisandabnormalcollateral 
P11 .037.C Dominantly transmitted HRAS p.(Thr58Ile) patho- vessels resemble a ‘puff of smoke’ (moyamoya) on angiogram. genic variants associated with a variable phenotype and Several inherited disorders have been associated with increased hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in four individuals in a single risk for development of moyamoya disease including the two family RASopathies neuroﬁbromatosis and Noonan syndrome. Only two cases of Costello syndrome have been reported with moyamoya EmilySloper,Oliver Murch, ArveenKamath disease. However, one lacked molecular conﬁrmation and the EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 336 other had limited clinical and molecular information.Case Study: University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Internal Department, Wereporta13-year-oldfemalewithhistoryofpsychomotordelay Third Faculty of Medicine and Thomayer Faculty Hospital, Charles mostsigniﬁcantlyspeech,focalepilepsy,congenitalheartdisease, University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Institute of Medical myopia, thin sparse hair with brittle nails, relative macrocephaly, Genetics, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, short stature and coarse facial features. Chromosomal microarray Prague,CzechRepublic,5DepartmentofPaediatricHaematologyand wasnormal. MRAbrain revealed moyamoyadisease. Oncology, Second Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague Result: A previously described disease-causing variant in the andMotol University Hospital,Prague, CzechRepublic. HRAS gene consistent with the diagnosis of Costello syndrome wasdetected onwhole exomesequencing. Background: Autosomal dominant craniometaphyseal dysplasia Conclusion: Here we report the ﬁrst case of a clinically and (AD-CMD) is a rare condition deﬁned by the occurrence of molecularly conﬁrmed Costello syndrome presented with moya- progressive diffuse hyperostosis of cranial bones with manifesta- moya disease. We propose a genotype-phenotype correlation tion as a broad nasal bridge, widely spaced eyes, paranasal relatedto Gly13Cys variant. bossing and prominent mandible. Clinical diagnosis is based on N.Alsaleh:None.A.AlGhamdi:None.A.Alhashem:None.A. radiographic ﬁndings and phenotypic features. ANKHis known to Alhashem: None.F. Alkuraya: None. be the only gene associated with AD-CMD so far. We present a case of a 17-months boy with macrodolichocephaly, hypertelor- ism,paranasalthickeningandgingivalhypertrophy,comingfrom 
P11 .039.A Allelic heterogeneity and clinical polymorphism in thephysiological gravidity. patients withCowdensyndrome Methods:Thepatientwasreferredwithapresumeddiagnosis of osteopetrosis for genetic examination. Physical examination, Varvara A. Galkina1, Lyudmila A. Bessonova1, Tatyana A. X-ray and DNA analysis were performed. All exons and ﬂanking Vasilyeva1, RenaA. Zinchenko1,2 intron regions (min. 10 bp) of ANKH were ampliﬁed by PCR and directly sequenced using Sanger method. The presence of the 1ResearchCentreforMedical Genetics,Moscow, RussianFederation, deletionvariantwasalsosupportedbydetectionofacorrespond- 2N.A. Semashko National Research Institute of Public Health, ing electrophoretic mobility shift using polyacrylamide gel Moscow, RussianFederation. electrophoresis. Results: X-ray of the skull showed diffuse sclerotization in the Thesyndromesofmultiplecongenitalmalformations(MVP)area area of facial skeleton and skull base. On X-rays of limbs club- large group of clinical forms of hereditary diseases. More than shapedenlargementofthemetaphysisofthedistalfemurandthe 3000 associated variants have been described. Currently, the proximal tibia were described. The DNA analysis showed that conceptofMVPsyndromesisdeﬁnedas"astablecombinationof patientisaheterozygouscarrieroftheCTCdeletioninexon9of two or more non-induced by each other malformations in the ANKH gene, resulting in a serine deletion at position 375 different systems”. 4 patients from 3 unrelated families were (rs121908406_c.1122-4delCTC_p.Ser375del). This mutation has consultedtoclarifythediagnosis.Onlyonepatienthadaguiding beenalreadydescribed inpatients withCMD. diagnosis of Cowden syndrome. The rest of the patients had Conclusion: We present a case report of successful molecular different guiding diagnoses, Sotos syndrome (patient A), Lermitt- genetic diagnosis of rare CMD, that shows the important role of Duclos syndrome (C), psycho-speech development disorder with X-raydiagnosisintargetedmoleculargeneticdiagnosisofskeletal convulsive syndrome (B), macrocephaly (D). Sanger sequencing dysplasia. revealed de novo pathogenic variant c.830C>A in exon 8 in the N. Friedova: None. A. Baxova: None. A. Sipek Jr.: None. B. PTENgeneinpatientD.Sequencingof"hereditarynonsyndromal Chylikova: None. R. Formankova: None. E. Fronkova: None. F. mentalretardation"genespanelbyNGSmethodfoundmutations, Liska:None. c.445_450delCAAGASinsGGTinexon5ofthePTENgeneinpatient A in heterozygous state, the variant arose de novo, c.388C> in exon5ofthePTENgeneinheterozygousstateinpatientB,itwas 
P11 .042.D Small deletion in the CREBBP gene detected in a inheritedfromhisaffectedmother,c.59delGinexon1ofthePTEN fetus with short long bones, abducted thumbs and nuchal geneinheterozygousstateinpatientС,thevariantarosedenovo. edema Perhaps, allelic heterogeneity in Cowden syndrome determines the clinical polymorphism of the disease, and the molecular Silvia Seraﬁm1, Barbara Marques1, Sonia Pedro1, Ana R. Tarelho1, genetic analysis by NGS allows to clarify the diagnosis and to Cristina Ferreira1, Laurentino Simao1, Cristina Alves1, Marisa Silva1, counselaffectedfamiliesonthepossibilitiesofprenataldiagnosis Jose Furtado1, Sara Rangel1, Ricardo Peliano1, Neuza Silva1, and risk of fetus pathology. Research was partially supported by Filomena Brito1, Ines Carvalho2, Ana Bernardo2, Alvaro Cohen2, RSFgrant№17-15-01051andwithinthestatetaskoftheMinistry Hildeberto Correia1 ofeducation and science ofRussia. V.A. Galkina: None. L.A. Bessonova: None. T.A. Vasilyeva: 1InstitutoNacionaldeSaúdeDoutorRicardoJorge,Departamentode None.R.A.Zinchenko: None. Genética, Unidade de Citogenética, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Maternidade Alfredoda Costa,Lisboa, Portugal. 
P11 .041.C Importance of X-rays diagnostic for targeted Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is an extremely rare auto- molecular genetic analysis: Case report of rare craniometa- somal dominant genetic disease, with an estimated prevalence physeal dysplasia of one case per 100,000-125,000 live births and it´s not usually diagnosed by prenatal ultrasound. Nevertheless, pregnancies Natalie Friedova1,2,3, Alice Baxova1, Antonin Sipek Jr.1,2,4, Blanka with ultrasound abnormalities are more likely to have a fetus Chylikova1,Renata Formankova5, Eva Fronkova5, Frantisek Liska1 affected by a genetic alteration, and chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) is still the recommended genetic test in use 1InstituteofBiologyandMedicalGenetics,FirstFacultyofMedicine, allowing the identiﬁcation of small pathogenic deletions/ CharlesUniversityandGeneralUniversityHospitalinPrague,Prague, duplications. Here we report a fetus referred for prenatal Czech Republic, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Thomayer diagnosis due to an increased nuchal translucency in the 1st- EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 337 trimester, and nuchal edema, abducted thumbs and short long O.Grechanina: None. bones,inthe2nd-trimesterultrasound.AffymetrixCytoscan750 CMArevealeda128Kbinterstitialdeletionat16p13.3,inamale fetus: arr[GRCh37] 16p13.3(3840720_3969211)x1. The deletion 
P11 .044.BA rareduplication in 8p11 region includestheﬁrstfourexonsofCREBBP.Pathogenicmutationsin CREBBPordeletionsinthe16p13.3regionincludingCREBBPare MartaSouto1,PedroBotelho1,MárciaMartins2,OsvaldoMoutinho3, causal for RSTS. Patients with RSTS mainly exhibit distinctive RosárioPinto Leite1 facialfeatures,broadandoftenangulatedthumbsandhalluces, intellectual disability, and postnatal growth retardation. The 1Laboratório de Genética, Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e Alto syndrome isalmost always sporadic,and after parentalanalysis Douro,VilaReal,Portugal,2ConsultadeGenética,CentroHospitalar thisdeletionwasshowntobedenovo.Aftergeneticcounseling de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, 3Serviço de the parents opted to terminate the pregnancy. Even if Ginecologia/Obstetrícia, Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e Alto ultrasound abnormalities not always suggest a speciﬁc syn- Douro, VilaReal, Portugal. drome,afterapathogenicCNVisidentiﬁedacorrelationmaybe possible.Inthiscasetheabductedthumbshavebeenpreviously Introduction: The partial duplication of the short (p) arm of observed in patients and the short long bones may already chromosome 8 is a rare syndrome. Clinical manifestations vary reﬂect the short stature often typical only in adulthood, from healthy to several degrees of mental retardation, multiple suggesting it can be more common prenatally. congenital anomalies - like hypotonia, heart defects, brain S. Seraﬁm: None. B. Marques: None. S. Pedro: None. A.R. malformations (Dandy-Walker syndrome, dilation of the third Tarelho:None.C.Ferreira:None.L.Simao:None.C.Alves:None. ventricle and agenesis of the corpus callosum) and facial M. Silva: None. J. Furtado: None. S. Rangel: None. R. Peliano: dysmorﬁsm. The authors presented a rare duplication involving None. N. Silva: None. F. Brito: None. I. Carvalho: None. A. 8p11 region. Clinical Report: 12 years old girl with mental Bernardo: None. A.Cohen:None. H.Correia: None. retardation and agenesis of the corpus callosum. Cytogenetics analysisrevealedextramaterialontheshortarmofchromosome 8.Parentskaryotype werenormal.Fluorescence insituhybridiza- 
P11 .043.A Diet nutrition of patients with mitochondrial tion(FISH)techniqueidentiﬁedtheextramaterialaschromosome dysfunctions against the background of persistent microbial 8. Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) technique andviralinfections revealed a duplication of 8p11.23 to 8p11.1. The segment duplicated had 6.4 Mbp and involved 62 genes. The karyotype OlenaGrechanina was 46,XX,dup(8)(p11.23p11.1). arr 8p11.23p11.1 (37,348,105- 43,754,516)x3. Interregional Specialized Medical Genetic Center - Center of Rare Discussion: The present case has a 6.4Mb duplication in (Orphan) Diseases, Kharkiv, Ukraine. 8p11.23p11.1 region. The phenotypic characteristic observed in the girl included mental retardation and agenesis of the corpus Рurpose: to study the effect of complex treatment of mitochon- callosum,whichareconsistentwithpartialtrisomy8pphenotype. drial dysfunction using cofactor-vitamin and dietary therapy, There are only ten cases described with, complete or partially, rehabilitation. 8p11.23p11.1regionduplication,mostofthemhigherthan20Mb Materials and methods: over the past 10 years, 1754 patients andconsequently withmore severeclinicalmanifestations. withmitochondrialdysfunction.ThegeneticepidemiologyofmtDNA Conclusion: Every new case of a rare chromosomal alteration haplotypeswasstudiedinthepopulationandpatientswithclinically should be reported in order to obtain a more precise genotype/ establisheddiagnosisofMtD.Among236examinedpatients,36.5% phenotype correlation, improving risk evaluation and genetic have mitochondrial syndromes (MERRF, MELAS, NARP, Leigh,Leber, counselling. Kearns-Sayre, Fahr) and mtDNA polymorphisms (tRNA gene-lysine, M. Souto: None. P. Botelho: None. M. Martins: None. O. mutations 8836A/G (met/val), 8472C/T(pro/leu2), 8614T/C; tRNA Moutinho: None. R.Pinto Leite: None. gene-leucine,mutations3624A/G,3705G/A;fullsequence -mtDNA, mutations 1888G/A, 2706A/G, 8697G/A, 8860G(thr/ala), 11251A/G, 11719G/A, 11812A/G, 14687A/G, 14766C/T, 14905G/A, 15326A/G, 
P11 .045.C New case of Dyskeratosis congenita 4 mimicking 15452C/A, 15607A/G, 15928G/A). Persistent viral and microbial Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome with novel TERT gene infectionsweredetectedin73%ofpatients. mutation Results: clinical and genetic features of mtDNA polymorphism carriers were characterized by multiple organisms, clinical poly- EceÇepni1,SahinAvci2,N. Bilge Satkın2,Hülya Kayserili1,2,3 morphisms, predominant involvement of energotropic organs. It was suggested that inﬂuence of mtDNA polymorphisms on MtD 1Institute of Health Sciences, Koç University School of Medicine, expression occurs as a result of adaptive role replacement by a Istanbul, Turkey, 2Diagnostic Center for Genetic Diseases, Koç pathogenicone,duetoalteredmethylation.Cofactor-vitaminand University Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Medical Genetics Department, dietary therapy was used. An individual diet was developed, the KoçUniversity Schoolof Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. natureofchangesinbiomarkersconﬁrmingthedisorder(levelof aminoacids,organicacids,traceelements,carbohydrates,metals, Dyskeratosis congenita(DC) is a rare, multisystemic telomere vitamins), which provided evidence of treatment, constant biology disorder classically characterized by a triad of mucocuta- monitoring of specialists. The results were highly effective (up to neousfeatures:abnormalskinpigmentation,oralleucoplakia,nail 83%). A new understanding of the integrated energy network of dysplasia;accompaniedbyvarioussomaticﬁndings.Bonemarrow cells gives new understanding of the need for an integrated failure, pulmonary disease and predisposition to malignancy are approach to restore cellular energy (D.Wolles). Conclution: We theprimarycausesofmortality.Weherereportaconsanguineous considerthatproblemsolutionisassociatedwithtrinityrealization DC family, displaying autosomal recessive inheritance. Index, 9- of genome, microbiome and virome, external environment, month-old girl, was consulted due to growth retardation of epigeneticstatus interaction. antenatal onset with delayed achievement of developmental EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 338 milestones.Shehadmicrocephaly,hypoplasticlabiaminora,mild Thegenes,SETD5, SL
C6 A1 andSL
C6 A11, havebeenproposed as facialdysmorphismcomprisingbitemporalnarrowing,strabismus, the main candidates that when deleted contribute to the key prognathism(mild), prominent nasal root(mild), smooth philtrum features associated with3p25 deletion syndrome. and low-set ears. The family had undergone genetic counseling Conclusions:TheaCGHanalysisasawidelyacceptedtoolthat butdeferredmoleculartestingatthatmoment.At22months,she supplementsconventionalkaryotypingallowedgeneticdiagnosis presented immunodeﬁciency, complicated with recurrent infec- ofour patient with signiﬁcant psychomotor retardation. tions/intractable diarrhea and anemia. Physical examination V. Anastasovska: None. E. Sukarova-Angelovska: None. D. showed oral leukoplakia, thin/sparse hair, lacy reticular hyperpig- Nestoroska: None. N. Zdraveska: None. G. Ilieva: None. M. mentationonleftaxillaryregionandrighthemithorax;cranialMRI Pesevsa: None. I.Stojanova: None. showed cerebellar hypoplasia. WES revealed a homozygous 
P11 .047.A Evaluation of the diagnostic rate in children with missense variant in the reverse transcriptase domain of the TERT dysmorphic features-one genetic centerexperience gene. Short relative telomere length(TL), measured by ﬂow-FISH, was compatible with infancy-onset short telomere syndrome. Milena Stoyanova1,2, Mari Hachmeriyan1,2, Mariya Levkova1,2, Detailed pedigree analysis showed no clinical evidence of DC ValentinaMiteva1,2, Lyudmila Angelova1 except premature hair graying, anemia and cancer in blood relatives across three generations. Identiﬁcation of heterozygous 1Medical University, Varna, Bulgaria, 2University Hospital Saint TERT mutation and short TL in extended family members, Marina, Varna, Bulgaria. segregatingwiththephenotype,highlighteddiseaseanticipation and further conﬁrmed the diagnosis of DC. Our ﬁndings expand Introduction:Dysmorphicfeatures/multiplecongenitalanomalies the genotype-phenotype correlation of DC; thus underline the inchildrenarecommonindicationforgeneticcounseling.Insome importanceofintegratingclinicalinformation,moleculardataand patientsthecauseisarecognizablesyndrome,butinmostcases TLtofacilitatetherecognitionoftheetiopathogenesisoftelomere theinitialdiagnosisisunclear,theprocessistime-consumingand syndromes. difﬁcult. Moreover, the condition often cannot be conﬁrmed E. Çepni: None. S. Avci: None. N. Satkın: None. H. Kayserili: etiologically.Theaimofthestudyistosummarizeourexperience None. inestablishingthediagnoses in dysmorphic children. Materials and methods: The study includes 706 pediatric patients (0-18 years), referred to the Genetics Unit of the 
P11 .046.D Detection of 3p25 microdeletion syndrome in the University Hospital Saint Marina, Varna for a period of ﬁve years Macedonianpatientwithsigniﬁcantpsychomotorretardation (2015-2019). Clinical phenotyping, imaging examinations, appro- priate genetic and metabolic investigations were offered to Violeta Anastasovska1, Elena Sukarova-Angelovska1, Dragica childrenwithdysmorphicfeatures/multiplecongenitalanomalies. Nestoroska1, Nikolina Zdraveska2, Gordana Ilieva1, Milica Pesevsa1, Specialized computer programs/dysmorphology databases were IvanaStojanova3 applied. Results: 336 out of 706 (47.5%) consulted children (mean age 1Genetic Laboratory, University Clinic for Pediatrics, Ss. Cyril and 3.9 years) with multiple congenital anomalies with or without Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, developmentaldelayweresuspectedofmalformative/dysmorphic Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2Department of syndrome.Karyotyping,moleculargeneticormetabolictestswere Neonatology,UniversityClinicforPediatrics,Ss.CyrilandMethodius performed in 306 (92%) children (≥ 2 genetic tests were University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, Macedonia, The appropriately applied to 104 patients). Based on these analyses, Former Yugoslav Republic of, 3In vitro Fertilization and Andrology 121(36%) children were genetically diagnosed: 70 patients (25%) Laboratory, University Clinic of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Ss. Cyril with chromosomal pathology, 32 (9.5%) with single-gene pathol- and Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, ogy and 19 (5.6%) with microdeletion/microduplication disorder. Macedonia, The Former YugoslavRepublic of. Other 41(12%) children were clinically diagnosed based on speciﬁcphenotype. Introduction: The array Comparative Genomic Hybridization Conclusion: The role of themedical geneticist inachieving an (aCGH) is a ﬁrst tier diagnostic tool for detection of sub- accurate diagnosis among children with dysmorphic features is microscopic genomic changes and pathogenic copy number essential. Once conﬁrmed, it could affect the disease manage- variants (CNVs) in the patients with pathological conditions and ment, as well as provide more personalized approach and widerangingphenotypes. contribute families withproper evaluationof therecurrencerisk. MaterialsandMethods:aCGHwasperformedina7.5-year-old M. Stoyanova: None. M. Hachmeriyan: None. M. Levkova: femaleMacedonianpatientwithclinicalsignsofdysmorphiaand None.V. Miteva: None. L.Angelova: None. signiﬁcantdevelopmentaldelayusingtheAffymetrix®CytoScanTM 750K Array (Applied Biosystems), that comprises 550 k non- polymorphicand200kSNPmarkers.Thedatawasanalysedusing 
P11 .048.B A new heterozygous c.730T>A, p.(Cys244Ser) ChromosomeAnalysis Suite (ChAS)Software (v4.0). variant in T
P63  associated with severe hydronephrosis and Results: The child was referred for further evaluation on 8th volar nails postnataldaybecauseofdysmorphicfeatures.Shewasbornsmall forgestationalage,after39weeksofgestationwithabirthweight MarianaTomásio Neves,Patricia Dias,AnaB. Sousa of 2340g and birth length of 45cm. Hypertelorism and anti- mongoloid eye slant, micrognathism, webbed neck, pyelonidal CHULN-Hospital de SantaMaria, Lisbon, Portugal. cystandpreaxialpolydactilybothontheleftfootandrighthand were noticed. During the follow up the child had several Introduction:T
P63 -relatedpathologiesareagroupofautosomal hospitalizations because of failure to thrive requiring a tube dominant phenotypes with variable features of ectodermal feeding, anemia and signiﬁcant psychomotor retardation. The dysplasia,distallimbmalformations/dysplasiaandlip/palateclefts. karyotype was normal (46,XX). aCGH analysis showed deletion of Thesecanoccurasdistinctsyndromes(AEC,ADULT,EE
C3 ,LMS)or 3,243segmenton3p25.3chromosome(30OMIMgenes)classiﬁed has isolated malformations (split-hand/foot malformation and as pathogenic according to aDGV, ClinVar and OMIM databases. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 339 isolated cleft lip/ palate). Although these conditions exhibit werefound,incases1and2throughtargetedgenesequenceand variable expressivity, incomplete penetrance and clinical overlap, incase 3through exome sequence. somegenotype-phenotypecorrelationshavebeendescribed.We Conclusion:ExpandingtheclinicalheterogeneityofMFDMand reportacase of EE
C3  syndrome withminor hand/foot anomalies its connection with major congenital defects. Additionally, we and severe prenatal hydronephrosis associated with a new T
P63  report the ﬁrst prenatal case diagnosed with the disease and variant.Casereport:A3-month-oldgirl,whowasdiagnosedwith clinicalﬁndings notyet described inthephenotypic spectrum. severe bilateral hydronephrosis at 15 weeks of gestation, S. Ourani: None. E. Gabau: None. N. Capdevilla: None. M. presented post-natally with cleft palate, bilateral volar nails of Guitart:None. N.Baena:None. A. Ruiz: None. theﬁfthﬁngerandsecondtoeandlacrimalductobstruction.Left ureterostomy and right ureter endoscopic dilation were per- 
P11 .050.D High prevalence of gene dosage anomalies in formed at 2 months. On follow-up, subtle ectodermal dysplasia patients withEllis VanCreveld syndrome was noticed. Sequencing of T
P63  (NM_003722.4) identiﬁed a heterozygous c.730T>A, p.(Cys244Ser) variant, located in a FRANCESCAPICECI-SPARASCIO1,2,IsabellaTorrente1,MariaCecilia mutational hot-spot intheDNA bindingdomain. D’Asdia1, Valentina Guida1, Federica Consoli1, Annamaria Onori1, Discussion: This patient’s phenotype is best classiﬁed as EE
C3  Barbara Torres1, Laura Bernardini1, Tommaso Mazza3, Paolo syndrome.Volarnailsareapeculiarminoranomalyandconstitute Versacci4, Maria Cristina DiGilio5, Bruno Marino4, Alessandro De an important clue to this speciﬁc diagnosis. This case highlights Luca1 the association of severe congenital genitourinary malformations withEE
C3 syndrome,afeaturenotdescribedinotherT
P63 -related 1Medical Genetics Division, Fondazione IRCCS Casa Sollievo della pathologies.Severalpatientscarryingavariantintheadjacent243 Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2Department of Experi- codonarepublishedpresentingEE
C3 (predominantly)andADULT mental Medicine, Sapienza University, Roma, Italy, 3Laboratory of phenotypes.Onfollow-up,itwillbeinterestingtocheckwhether Bioinformatics,FondazioneCasaSollievodellaSofferenza,IRCCS,San thispatientdevelopsfeaturesofADULTsyndrome,namelybreast Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 4Department of Pediatrics, Sapienza hypoplasia and skin freckling. University, ROMA, Italy, 5Medical Genetics Unit, Bambino Gesù M.T. Neves:None. P. Dias:None. A.B. Sousa:None. Children’s Hospital andResearch Institute, IRCCS,ROMA,Italy. Ellis-Van Creveld syndrome (EvC) is a rare autosomal recessive 
P11 .049.C Mandibulofacial Dysostosis with Microcephaly due skeletalciliopathy presentingwithpostaxialpolydactyly, ectoder- to EFTUD2 gene mutation. Expanding phenotypic spectrum maldysplasiaandcongenitalheartdisease.EvCisduetobiallelic withﬁrstprenatal case reported mutations in EVC or EV
C2 . We scanned for mutations by Next- Generation-Sequencing(NGS)theEVCandEV
C2 genesinacohort SoﬁaOurani1,ElisabethGabau2,NuriaCapdevilla2,MiriamGuitart3, of 99 suspected EvC individuals. Analysis identiﬁed the cause of NeusBaena3, Anna Ruiz3 thediseasein49patients(49%).33/49(67%)weremutatedinEVC and 16/49 (33%) in EV
C2 . Mutation-negative patients underwent 1Pediatric Neurology, Hospital Vall d´Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, NGS analysis using an extended ciliary targeted panel. Analysis 2PaediatricUnit,ParcTaulíHospitalUniversitari,Institutd’Investiga- allowedtogenetically-characterizingadditional14patients,found cióiInnovació ParcTaulí I3PT,Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, tobemutatedinciliarygenesrelatedtoskeletalciliopathiesother Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain, 3Genetics Laboratory, UDIAT-Centre thanEvC.Tosearchforgene-dosageanomalies,theremaining36 Diagnòstic, Parc Taulí Hospital Universitari, Institut d’Investigació i mutation-negative patients were further tested by Multiplex Innovació Parc Taulí I3PT, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Ligation-Dependent Probe Ampliﬁcation (MLPA), Chromosomal Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain. Microarray (CMA), or both. MLPA/CMA analysis identiﬁed com- pound heterozygous or homozygous deletions in 9 patients. In Introduction: Mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly particular,6haddeletionsinEVCand3inEV
C2 .Ofnote,twoEVC (MFDM)isamultiplemalformationsyndromeduetohaploinsufﬁ- recurrent deletions were identiﬁed, affecting 4 and two patients ciencyofEFTUD2gene.Majorclinicalcharacteristicsincludemalar respectively. Present study shows that gene-dosage anomalies andmandibularhypoplasia,variableintellectualdisability,external representasigniﬁcantproportion(approximately15%)oftheEVC/ earmalformations,andhearinglossmainlyconductive.Associated EV
C2  mutation spectrum. Considering the clinical overlapping craniofacial malformations include cleft palate, choanal atresia, between skeletal ciliopathies, and the prevalence of EVC/EV
C2  zygomatic arch cleft and facial asymmetry. Other ﬁndings gene-dosage anomalies, we recommend a two-tier diagnostic reported are cardiac anomalies, thumb anomalies, esophageal approach integrating a primary search for point mutations by a atresia,short stature, spine anomalies. ciliary targeted NGS analysis, followed by a quantitative assay Materialandmethods:Wepresentthephenotypeandgenetic (MLPA/CMA), waiting for reliable pipelines for the detection of ﬁndings of three unrelated patients with MFDM conﬁrmed by intragenic CNVs throughout NGS technologies.This research was EFTUD2 mutations. Case 1: girl of healthy nonconsanguineous funded by the Italian Ministry of Health, grant numbers R
C2019 / parentsdeliveredat35+5weeksofgestationanddiagnosedwith R
C2020  esophageal atresia type I, macroglossia, hemifacial microsomia, F.Piceci-sparascio:None.I.Torrente:None.M.D’Asdia:None. cleft palate, muscular ventricular septal defect, severe global V. Guida: None. F. Consoli: None. A. Onori: None. B. Torres: developmental delay. Case 2: eight month toddler asked for None.L.Bernardini:None.T.Mazza:None.P.Versacci:None.M. genetic evaluation for antecedents of prenatal polyhydramnios, DiGilio: None.B.Marino: None. A. DeLuca: None. esophageal atresia type III, cleft palate and moderate develop- mental delay. Case 3: fetus of pregnancy interrupted at 19 +4weeks of gestational age for ultrasound ﬁndings of hydro- 
P11 .051.A A case of ESCO2 spectrum disorder without limb cephalus, cerebellum hypoplasia, retrognathia, lumbar lordosis, reduction defects varus feet. Autopsy conﬁrmed ecographic ﬁndings and addition- ally revealed microstomia, tongue agenesis and fusion of ﬁve Sofía M. Siccha-Arancibia1,2, María Palomares-Bralo1,3, Marta thoracic vertebras, corpus callosum agenesis, esophageal atresia Pacio-Miguez1, Gloria Lopez-Sobrino2, Carmen Rodríguez-Jimenez1, type III. Three different pathogenic mutations in EFTUD2 gene EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 340 Ángela del Pozo1,3, Elena Mansilla1,3,4, Fé García-Santiago1,3,4, Sixto Results:BasedonthoroughreanalysisofexistingWESdata,we García-Miñaúr1,3, FernandoSantos-Simarro1,3,4 identiﬁed six variants of unknown signiﬁcance (VUS) in PHF12, SYNPO2L,KCNJ16andXKR6genesthatcouldexplainthepatients´ 1InstituteofMedical&MolecularGenetics(INGEMM)-IdiPAZ,Hospital phenotype; three pathogenic variants in SCN2A, DPYS and MVK Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Department of Pediatrics, related to phenotypes not described for them until now; two HospitalUniversitariolaPaz,Madrid,Spain,3CentrodeInvestigación pathogenicvariantsinBB
S1 /ALG8andPOGZ/TRIOgenesthatcould BiomédicaenReddeEnfermedadesRaras(CIBERER,U753),Instituto explain aparticular mixedphenotype of two patients. Finally, we Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 4Skeletal Dysplasia Multidisciplinary Unit report ﬁve novel pathogenic variants in SMARCA2, MEC
P2 , KRT14, (UMDE) and ERN BOND, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, NOTCH3and SHANK3,not present inany database. Spain. Conclusions: The results highlight the clinical diagnostics potential of a thorough reanalysis of previously negative WES Introduction:Robertssyndrome(MIM268300)atthesevereend cases. Based on the identiﬁcation of new candidate genes, the and SC phocomelia syndrome (MIM 269000) at the mildest end increaseofphenotypicspectrumofthediseasesdiagnosed(even belong to the RBS/SC or ESCO2 (establishment of cohesion1 homolog 2) spectrum disorder, a rare limb reduction defect reporting cases with a dual diagnosis) and the ﬁnding of novel pathogenicvariants,in5%ofcases,werecommendgoingbeyond syndrome, caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in the ESCO2 the basic guided genetic analysis for HPO terms, especially in gene. ESCO2 encodes an essential protein that establishes the sisterchromatidcohesionduringSphase,thereforethepremature caseswithastrongsuspicionofanunderlyinggeneticdiseaseand aprevious inconclusive WES result. centromere separation (PCS)/heterochromatin repulsion (HR) is a J. López: None. M. Roca: None. L. González: None. D. typical cytogenetic anomaly of the condition. Mortality is high Trujillano: None. C. Camprubí: None. I. Royo: None. X. Pinasa: among the severely affected patients, while SC phocomelia individualsusuallysurvivetoadulthood.Phocomeliaisuniversally None.L.Aparicio: None. R. Nava: None.A. Torrents: None. described. Interestingly, there is one case published, with mild clinicalfeaturesandnolimbreductionabnormalities(Goghetal., 
P11 .054.DTheWalesInfants’andchildreN’sGenomeService’ 2010).Wereportacaseofan8-year-oldgirlwithmilddysmorphic facialfeatures and no major structural defects. (WINGS): Diagnostic rapid whole genome sequencing for unwell children withasuspected raregenetic diagnosis Materials and Methods: We performed a NGS custom panel containing1663genesinvolvedincommongeneticdisorders(RD Emily Sloper, Oliver Murch, Jana Jezkova, Megan Fealey, Joseph seq(R)v6.0),andakaryotypeusingG-andC-bandingtechniques. Halstead, Thomas Stoneman, Elle McNeil, Angharad Williams, Results: Our patient shows limb rhizomelic shortening and a Michelle Wood, Katherine Burke, Siva Oruganti, Jennifer Calvert, progressivebrainleukopathywithnormalneurologicexamination. Hywel Williams, Caroline Pottinger, Francis H. Sansbury, Sian M. We found a homozygous ESCO2 variant (NM_001017420.2: Morgan, SianCorrin c.307_311del;p.Lys103Glufs*2), classiﬁed as pathogenic, following ACMG guidelines (Richards et al., 2015). Her consanguineous AllWales Medical Genomics Service, Cardiff, United Kingdom. parents were both heterozygous for the variant. The patient’s karyotype conﬁrmed premature centromere separation (PCS)/ Asigniﬁcantproportionofunwellneonatesandchildrenhavean heterochromatinrepulsion (HR). underlying, rare genetic diagnosis. Rapid whole genome sequen- Conclusions: Our case supports a wider clinical spectrum of cing (rWGS) has a positive impact on care by reducing the need manifestationsinRBS/SCspectrum, highlightingthat phocomelia formultiplediagnostictestsandfacilitatingtreatmentdecisions.It might not be universally present. In addition, it illustrates the may also reduce the length of time infants and children require importance ofcytogenetics inthe diagnosisofthis disorder. intensivecareand prevent repeat inpatientadmissions. S.M. Siccha-Arancibia: None. M. Palomares-Bralo: None. M. In 2019, the All Wales Medical Genomics Service formed a Pacio-Miguez: None. G. Lopez-Sobrino: None. C. Rodríguez- multidisciplinary working group to establish a rWGS service for Jimenez:None.Á.delPozo:None.E.Mansilla:None.F.García- acutely unwell infants and children. The group consisted of Santiago: None. S. García-Miñaúr: None. F. Santos-Simarro: intensive care clinicians, geneticists and laboratory staff. A None. diagnosticpipelinewasdevelopedusingpreviousresearchresults and laboratory testing procedures were validated. Variants are interpreted and reported by applying the latest ACGS/ACMG 
P11 .052.BGetting the most outofExome sequencingdata guidelines. In April 2020, the ‘Wales Infants’ and childreN’s GenomeService’(WINGS)was launched. Javier López, María José Roca, Laura González, Daniel Trujillano, WINGS is the ﬁrst commissioned, diagnostic rWGS service for Cristina Camprubí, Irina Royo, Xavier Pinasa, Luisa Aparicio, Raquel acutelyunwellchildrenintheUKNationalHealthService.Patients Nava, Albert Torrents are eligible if a monogenic cause for their illness is suspected, a trio structure is available, and a timely genetic diagnosis might Reference Laboratory, Barcelona, Spain. alterclinical management. Fourteen families have completed testing to date. Pathogenic Introduction: Exome sequencing (WES) currently is a solid or likely pathogenic variants were identiﬁed in 5 probands. diagnostic tool for heterogeneous genetic diseases. However, a Additionally,a‘hot’variantofuncertainsigniﬁcanceinacandidate partial and insufﬁcient analysis of WES data could lead to genewasreportedinanotherpatient.Meantimetoreportingwas misdiagnoses. We compiled 13 cases with previous negative 11calendardays (range6-26 days). WES results, in which a thorough reanalysis of the data yielded In summary, we have introduced the UK’s ﬁrst national newcandidate geneswithdiagnostic potential. diagnostic rWGS service for acutely unwell children. We will Materials-and-Methods:Ourcohortincluded300patientswith presentearlyserviceoutcomesandtheimpactfromalaboratory syndromicneurodevelopmentalabnormalities.WESanalyseswere andclinical perspective. guidedbyHPOtermsandcustomgenepanelsbasedonliterature. E.Sloper:None.O.Murch:None.J.Jezkova:None.M.Fealey: For those inconclusive results, a secondary and more objective None.J.Halstead:None.T.Stoneman:None.E.McNeil:None.A. inspectionwas performed. Williams: None. M. Wood: None. K. Burke: None. S. Oruganti: EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 341 None.J.Calvert:None.H.Williams:None.C.Pottinger:None.F. 1Genetics Department and Reference Center for Developmental H.Sansbury:None. S.M.Morgan:None. S.Corrin: None. Disorders and Malformative Syndromes for East France, Dijon 
P11 .055.A Full penetrance of craniofacial midline traits in a University Hospital, Dijon, France, 2Inserm UMR 1231 GAD, Faculty large multigenerational family with a nonsense GLI2 variant of Health Sciences, University of Burgundy and Franche-Comté, andhighlyvariable phenotypic expression Dijon,France,3ServicedeGénétiqueMédicale,CHUToulouse,France, Toulouse, France, 4Département de Génétique Médicale, Maladies Francisco J. Rodríguez-Contreras1,2, Puriﬁcación Ros-Pérez3, Fe A. Rares et Médecine Personnalisée, Univer Montpellier, CHU de GarcíaSantiago1,ElenaVallespín1,4,ÁngelaDelPozo1,5,MarioSolís- Montpellier, CLAD ASOOR Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 5Fédéra- López1,Angel Campos-Barros1,4 tion des Services de Cardiologie, CHU Toulouse-Rangueil, Toulouse, France, 6UMR UT3 CNRS 5288 Evolutionary Medicine, Obesity and 1INGEMM, IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, heart failure: molecular and clinical investigations. INI-CRCT F-CRIN, 2Centro de Salud Galapagar, Galapagar, Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital GREAT Networks, Toulouse, France, 7Université Paul Sabatier- Universitario Puerta deHierro, Majadahonda, Madrid,Spain,4CIBER Toulouse III; Faculté de Médecine, Toulouse, France, 8Unité de de Enfermedades Raras (U753), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 5CIBER de Génétique Moléculaire, Strasbourg University Hospital, Strasbourg, Enfermedades Raras (U753), Madrid, Spain. France, 9Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Institut de Génétique Médicaled’Alsace,HôpitauxUniversitairesdeStrasbourg,Strasbourg, GLI2 encodes a transcription factor involved in the Sonic Hedge- France. hog signaling pathway which plays a key role in pituitary development. Loss of function pathogenic GLI2 variants have Grange syndrome (GRNG - MIM#135580) is a rare recessive been implicated in the etiology of congenital hypopituitarism disorder associating variable features including diffuse vascular spectrum and Culler-Jones syndrome (MIM#615849) with incom- stenoses, brachysyndactyly and osteopenia with increased bone pletepenetranceandahighlyvariableclinicalexpression.Aim:To fragility.Someindividualsalsopresentwithcardiacmalformations identifycommonphenotypictraits,especiallymidlinecraniofacial as well as mild to moderate mental retardation. Since its ﬁrst anomalies (hypotelorism and palate alterations), in a family with descriptionin1998,only12individualsfrom7familieshavebeen multiple members presenting with a pathogenic heterozygous reported, carrying homozygous or compound heterozygous nonsense GLI2 variant, NM_005270.4:c.3676C>T, p.(Arg1226*), frameshiftor nonsensevariants inYY1A
P1 . detected in a proband with combined pituitary hormone Weperformed exomesequencing in apatient presentingwith deﬁciency (CPHD). cutaneousandbonesyndactylyandnegativearray-CGHandlimb Methods: Targeted NGS analysis (custom panel HIPOPIT_V3; malformationspanelresults.Afterahemorrhagicstrokeattheage 310 genes) of three generations family members (n=12). of 16 months, a clinical diagnosis of GRNG was hypothesized. Phenotypic evaluation by physical examination and/or medical Copy number variant analysis from exome data, identiﬁed a records review. Evaluation of internal, external and interpupillary homozygous intragenic non in-frame deletion of 1.84 Kb interchantal distances (by transparent ruler and comparison with encompassing exons 8 and 9 of YY1A
P1  conﬁrming a molecular referencetables)andpalate(bydirectvisualexaminationandon diagnosis of GRNG. Genetic data revealed several regions of images). homozygosityindicatingapossibleconsanguinity.Theresearchof Results:8outof12familymemberspresentedthepathogenic smallintragenicYY1A
P1 deletionsinourlocaldatabaseidentiﬁed GLI2 variant. Although they presented with highly variable the same homozygous variant in another individual presenting phenotypicfeatures,includingholoprosencephaly(unbornfetus), with cutaneous syndactyly, cardiac malformation and intellectual CPHD (index case), postaxial polydactyly (grandfather, grand- disability and referred for an unspeciﬁc malformative syndrome. uncle),syndactyly(probandsisters),orcongenitalrenaldysplasias, Familial analysis revealed a close relatedness between the two all 8 shared common midline craniofacial defects, such as individuals and the identiﬁcation of additional members of the decreased inner- and/or outer interchantal distance and high family compatible withGRNG. archedor narrow palate. Here, we describe the ﬁrst familiar case of GRNG caused by a Conclusions:Loss-of-functionGLI2mutationsarecharacterized smallhomozygousintragenicdeletioninYY1A
P1 .Takentogether, by highly variable expressivity, which suggests the oligomeric our results advocate the interest in applying exome or genome contribution of additional genetic determinants. In contrast to sequencing to detect causative variants not identiﬁable by other phenotypic traits such as polydactyly and hypopituitarism, which methods inheterogeneousmalformative genetic disorders. showincompletepenetrance,midlinecraniofacialanomaliesseem E. Viora-Dupont: None. A. Denommé-Pichon: None. M. to segregate with complete penetrance, with variable severity, Chevarin:None.O.Patat:None.M.Willems:None.J.Albuisson: amongtheexamined family members. GRANT: PI18/00402ISCIII None. A. Bruel: None. M. Aubert-Mucca: None. M. Galinier: F.J. Rodríguez-Contreras: None. P. Ros-Pérez: None. F.A. None.R.Itier:None.A.Piton:None.B.Gerard:None.P.Callier: García Santiago: None. E. Vallespín: None. Á. Del Pozo: None. None. C. Thauvin: None. C. Philippe: None. L. Faivre: None. A. M.Solís-López: None. A. Campos-Barros:None. Vitobello: None. 
P11 .056.B Familial Grange syndrome: 1st case report of 
P11 .057.C H3.3 variants: from cancer to neurodevelopmental YY1A
P1 homozygousdeletion disorders Eléonore Viora-Dupont1, Anne-Sophie Denommé-Pichon1,2, Martin Fernando Santos-Simarro1,2,3, Marta Pacio-Míguez1, Ángela del Chevarin2, Olivier Patat3, Marjolaine Willems4, Juliette Albuisson1, Pozo1,2, Carmen Jiménez Rodríguez1, Cristina Cruz Castellanos4, Ange-LineBruel2,MarionAubert-Mucca3,MichelGalinier5,6,7,Romain MarioSolís1,VictoriaEugeniaF.Montaño1,MaríaVictoriaGomezdel Itier5, Amélie Piton8, Bénédicte Gerard9, Patrick Callier2, Christel Pozo1, Natividad Gallego Onís1, María Esther Rubio Martín1, Pablo Thauvin1,2, Christophe Philippe2, Laurence Faivre1,2, Antonio Lapunzina1,2,3, María Palomares-Bralo1,2,3,Sixto García-Miñaúr1,2,3 Vitobello2 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 342 1Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM) Hospital elongation of the vessels of the circle of Willis withaneurysmal Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Centro de Investiga- dilatation,andShortdysgeniccorpuscallosum.Babyhasabnormal ciónBiomédicaenReddeEnfermedadesRaras,ISCIII,Madrid,Spain, lipid proﬁle.Genetic testing done showed homozygous variant in 3EuropeanReferenceNetwork,ERNITHACA,Madrid,Spain,4Servicio ALDH18A1(ARcutislaxatypeIII)inadditiontoheterozygousvariant deOncologíaMédica,HospitalUniversitarioLaPaz,Madrid,Spain. inLDLR(AD familialhypercholesterolemia). Conclusion: phenotypic features of De Barsy syndrome A Introduction: In the past years, somatic mutations affecting include CNS malformation asCerebellar atrophic changes, hypo- H3F3A and H3F3B genes coding for Histone 3 variant H3.3 have plastic pons, vascular tortuosity and elongation of the vesselsof beenestablishedaswell-knowndriversfortumourdevelopment. thecircle ofWillis,and corpus callosummalformation. In addition, de novo germline missense variants in these genes H.S.Abdelraouf: None. A.M.Alhashem: None. have been recently associated with a novel neurodegenerative disorder apparently not related with cancer development. However, the complete phenotypical impact of these germline 
P11 .059.A Detection of a rare ADNP variant causing mutations remains unknown. Here we describe the ﬁrst case Helsmoortel-van der Aasyndrome:A Case Report carrying a H3F3B de novo germline variant showing the neurologicalphenotype associated withlungcarcinoma. Boban Dobrevski1, Aleksandar Petlichkovski1, Meri Kirijas1, Gorjan Materialsandmethods:WeperformedaWESstudythrougha Milanovski1,TodorArsov1,TeodoraBrnjarchevskaBlazevska1,Olivija trio approach (SureSelect Human All Exon V6 technology) in a Eﬁnska-Mladenovska1, Olgica Sibinovska1, Elena Shukarova HiSeq4000 platform (Illumina, SanDiego, CA). Angelovska2 Results:Adenovo,heterozygous,germlinemissensevariantin H3F3B NM_005324.4:c.71A>G p.(Lys24Arg) was identiﬁed in a 36 1Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine- year-old woman presenting with severe intellectual disability, Skopje, Institute of Immunobiology and Human Genetics, Skopje, dysmorphicfacialfeaturesandcongenitalanomalies.Interestingly, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2Ss. Cyril and she developed a typical carcinoid tumour of the pulmonary Methodius University in Skopje, Faculty of Medicine-Skopje, PHI middlelobeattheageof32,althoughthepatientdidnotreport University Clinic for child diseases, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former toxic habitsor afamily history ofcancer. YugoslavRepublic of. Conclusions: Given the well-known role of H3.3 somatic mutationsinoncogenesis,the descriptionof thisnewcasewithan Introduction: Helsmoortel-van der Aa syndrome, or Intellectual H3F3B germline variant and an unusual form of cancer, should Disability AutosomalDominant 28(MDR28,OMIM615873)isa rare promptustoinvestigateandfollowupthesepatientsaccordinglyin neurodevelopmental genetic disorder affecting about 1-9/100 000 ordertotrytoascertainthepreciseroleofgermlineH3.3variantsin individuals(0.17%ofpatientswithintellectualdisabilityandautism). cancer predisposition. MPM is supported by the Raregenomics Thebroadandvariablespectrumofclinicalmanifestationsincludes network(
S2017 /BMD-3721).ThisworkispartiallyfundedbytheISCIII, globaldevelopmentaldelay,autisticfeaturesandneuropsychiatricor MICINN(PI19/01681)andtheEuropeanSocialFund. behavioralissues,seizuresanddistinctdysmorphicfacialfeatures.We F.Santos-Simarro:None.M.Pacio-Míguez:None.Á.delPozo: report a case of a nine-month old girl with delayed motor None. C. Jiménez Rodríguez: None. C. Cruz Castellanos: None. development (delays in sitting and holding head up), general M.Solís:None.V.F.Montaño:None.M.GomezdelPozo:None. hypotonia,dysmorphicfacialfeatures(prominentforehead,discrete N. Gallego Onís: None. M. Rubio Martín: None. P. Lapunzina: strabismus)andnoticeablehappydemeanor. None.M. Palomares-Bralo: None.S. García-Miñaúr: None. MaterialsandMethods:Theinitialmetabolicscreenandarray- CGH results were normal and the additional genetic testing included an NGS gene panel of 37 spinal muscular atrophy 
P11 .058.DNovelCNSmalformations inDe Barsysyndrome A associated genes (AAR
S1 , ASAH1, ASC
C1 , AT
P7 A, BICD2, BSC
L2 , CHCHD10,DCTN1,DNAJB2,DYN
C1 H1,EMILIN1,EXOS
C3 ,EXOS
C8 , HanemS. Abdelraouf, Amal M.Alhashem FBXO38, GAR
S1 , HEXA, HSPB1, HSPB3, HSPB8, IGHMB
P2 , LA
S1 L, PLEKHG5,RBM7,REE
P1 ,SCO2,SETX,SIGMAR1,SL
C25 A21,SL
C5 A7, PrinceSultan Military Medical City,Riyadh, SaudiArabia. SPTAN1,SYT2,TRI
P4 ,TRPV4,UBA1,VAPB,VRK1,WAR
S1 )including ADNPusingIlluminaNGSplatform,SMN1/SMN2deletion/duplica- Title: Novel CNS malformations in De Barsy syndrome A.Author: tion byMLPAand AR-repeat by PCRanalysis. AbdelraoufHanem1,AlhashemAmal1(1)Genetic Division, pediatric Results: The genetic testing identiﬁed a heterozygous patho- Department, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh, SaudiAr- genic ADNP frameshift variant c.539_542delTTAG, p.Val180- abiaIntroduction: De Barsy syndrome was ﬁrst reported in 1968. Glyfs*17, not present in the databases of human genetic The disorder is now classiﬁed asautosomal recessive cutis laxa variation (gnomAD) and reported as pathogenic in 6 other cases type3A.This disorder involves a wide spectrum of symptoms (ClinVar). The variant is predicted to create a premature stop andsignsthatresultfromdefectsinconnectivetissue.Mostcases codon and protein truncation and results in a loss-of function of are characterized by cutis laxa, aprogeria-like appearance, and ADNP,affectingchromatin packingand transcription. ophthalmologicabnormalities. Conclusion:Newsequencingtechnologies,suchasgenepanel Method: Observational studyResult: A full term baby with testing, allow early diagnosis and better management of rare intrauterinegrowthretardation.Hehasdysmorphicfacialfeatures; geneticdiseases. hypertelorism, large low set ears, thin lips, and prominent hairy B.Dobrevski:None.A.Petlichkovski:None.M.Kirijas:None. forehead.He has the classic picture of cutis laxa type lllA in the G. Milanovski: None. T. Arsov: None. T. Brnjarchevska form of bilateral corneal clouding,strabismus, bilateral inguinal Blazevska:None.O.Eﬁnska-Mladenovska:None.O.Sibinovska: hernia,micropenis,hypotonia,hyperreﬂexia, clonus, multiplejoints None.E. Shukarova Angelovska: None. hypermobility,adducted thumbs with ﬁxed extension of inter phalangeal joint of thethumb and clenched hands, abnormal fat pad at buttocks and upper thighs,and developmentaldelay. The 
P11 .060.B HHAT-related multiple congenital anomalies: patient has laryngomalacia and brain malformations ;cerebellar Report of an additional family and delineation of the atrophic changes,hypoplastic pons, vascular tortuosity and syndrome EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 343 Shruti Pande1, Periyasamy Radhakrishnan1, Naveenchandra M. involved in RNA expression of human development homeobox Shetty2, AnjuShukla1, KattaM. Girisha1 and T-box genes. All the reported patients present truncating variants of HNRNPR, except one with the same heterozygous 1Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Udupi, India, 2Mediscan missense variantp.Arg588His asour patient. Diagnostic Centre,Mangalore, Manglore, India. Discussion: The aim of this work is to report a patient with a Introduction: HHAT (Hedgehog acyl-transferase) mediates the HNRNPRvariantandtoestablishthepathogenicityofthisdenovo post-translational modiﬁcation of downstream proteins in the missense HNRNPR variant p.Arg588His. Less than 10 patients are reported in literature to date, we thus collect patients for hedgehog (Hh) signalling pathway. There are two reports from collaborative clinical research on HNRNPR variants in order to twounrelatedfamilieswithsequencevariantsinHHAT.Wehereby reportthethird family withthreeaffected conceptuses. understand thephenotypic spectrum ofthis disease. M. Massier: None. M. Spodenkiewicz: None. N. Bednarek: Methods: We performed clinical evaluation of a seven years None. B. Keren: None. E. Landais: None. L. Hérissant: None. C. femalechildborntoaconsanguineouscouplewhoalsohadtwo Poirsier-Violle: None. M. Doco-Fenzy: None. other affected pregnancies. We did chromosomal analysis followed by exome sequencing for the living proband and her parents. 
P11 .062.D A novel frameshift variant in PIEZO1 responsible Results: The proband had severe microphthalmia, microce- forhydropsfetalis in aCypriot family phaly, skeletal dysplasia (bell-shaped thorax, short and angel shaped epiphyses of hands and feet), midface retrusion, short Andri Miltiadous1, Petroula Gerasimou1, Ioannis Kyprianou1, columella,depressednasalbridge,evertedlowerlip,andasingle Jianxiang Chi2, Carolina Sismani3, Paola Evangelidou3, Angelos central incisor. Her karyotype is 46, XY. Exome sequencing Alexandrou3, Violetta Christophidou Anastasiadou4, Paul Costeas1 revealed a novel biallelic in-frame deletion, c.365_367del; (p. Thr122del) in exon 5 of HHAT (NM_001122834.3). Additionally, in 1Molecular Hematology-oncology, Karaiskakio Foundation, Nicosia, this family, one of the affected fetuses had alobar holoprosence- Cyprus, 2The Center for the Study of Haematological Malignancies, phaly. The key features of the HHAT-related multiple congenital Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Cytogenetics Department, Cyprus Institute of anomaly syndrome are anophthalmia/microphthalmia, short Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Department of Clinical stature, skeletal dysplasia, microcephaly, holoprosencephaly, Genetics,Archbishop MakariosIIIMedical Centre,Nicosia,Cyprus. cerebellar vermishypoplasia and sex reversal. Conclusion: We describe the third family with multiple Introduction: Hydrops fetalis is a life threatening condition malformations in three conceptuses with identiﬁcation of the characterised by accumulation of ﬂuid in a fetus’ or a newborn’s biallelic variant c.365_367del; (p.Thr122del) in exon 5 of HHAT in body compartments. The most common type is non-immune the living proband. It appears that the defective functioning of hydropsfetalis(NIHF)whichhasvariouscausesincludingcardiovas- HHAT affects the downstream proteins in the pathway including cular and haematological defects and chromosomal aberrations. theSonic(SHH),Indian(IHH),andDesert(DHH),thealterationsin PIEZO1, a mechanosensitive ion channel has been linked to NIHF whichareassociatedwithabnormalitiesoftheeyes,face,nervous casesinanautosomaldominantandrecessivemanner. system, skeleton and the genitourinary system during the Materials and Methods: Family with three recurrent stillbirths embryonicdevelopment. and a newborn that deceased a few days after birth. DNA was S.Pande:None.P.Radhakrishnan:None.N.M.Shetty:None. extractedfromskintissueofonestillbirthandperipheralbloodof A.Shukla: None. K.M.Girisha: None. the newborn, both presenting with hydrops. Exome sequencing wasperformedwithSureSelectClinicalResearchExomeanddata analysed with SureCall (Agilent) and ClinicalVarsome (Saphetor). 
P11 .061.CVariantinHNRNPRleadingtodevelopmentaldelay Sanger sequencing conﬁrmed ﬁndings. Parents and their ﬁrst with facial dysmorphism and bone abnormalities: a case degreerelativeswere testedby Sangersequencing. report Results: A PIEZO1 intron-exon junction pathogenic variant, (c.4496-3_4499dupCAGGCCG) was found in homozygous state in Marie Massier1, Marta Spodenkiewicz1, Nathalie Bednarek2, Boris thetwo probandswithhydrops fetalisand inheterozygous state Keren3, Emilie Landais1, Lucas Hérissant1, Céline Poirsier-Violle1, in their parents. The variant was inherited from the maternal Martine Doco-Fenzy1 grandfather,whileitwasnotpossibletodetermineitsoriginfrom thepaternalside(grandfatherdeceased).Allthreematernalaunts 1Department of Genetics, Reims University Hospital, Reims, France, did not give any hydrops fetalis births and did not carry this 2Department of Pediatrics, Reims University Hospital, Reims, France, variant. 3Department of Genetics, La Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Assistance Conclusions: The PIEZO1 variant presents as an important Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris,France. candidate for the cause of the hydrops fetalis in an autosomal recessivemannerinthisCypriotfamily.FunctionalstudiesonRNA Case report: The patient is a boy aged 14 years with a severe levelwillshed light on theeffect ofthis variant onsplicing. developmental delay, feeding problems and behavioral disorder. A.Miltiadous:None.P.Gerasimou:None.I.Kyprianou:None. He also presents microcephaly, facial dysmorphism, strabismus J. Chi: None. C. Sismani: None. P. Evangelidou: None. A. and ﬁfth digits with bilateral hypoplastic distal phalanges. Using Alexandrou: None. V. Christophidou Anastasiadou: None. P. Exome sequencing a heterozygous de novo missense variant in Costeas: None. HNRNPR,p.Arg588His wasidentiﬁed. Literature: Only ﬁve individuals carrying de novo variants in HNRNPR gene are reported to date (F.A. Duijkers et al. 2019). All 
P11 .063.ARoleofimprintingdisordersinshortchildrenborn patients share a similar phenotype to our patient, with develop- SGA andSilver-Russell syndrome spectrum mental delay, hypotonia, feeding problems, behavioral disorder, microcephaly, strabismus, digits abnormalities and facial dys- Masayo Kagami1, Tomoko Fuke1, Akie Nakamura1,2, Takanobu morphism. Additional symptoms as epilepsy also reported. Inoue1, Sayaka Kawashima1, Kaori Isno-Hara1, Shinichiro Sano1,3, HNRNPR code the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein R, KazukiYamazawa1,4, MakiFukami1,Tsutomu Ogata1,3 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 344 1National Research Institute for Child Health and Development, maternal uniparental disomy chromosome 16; UPD(11)mat, Tokyo, Japan, 2Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, maternaluniparental disomy chromosome 11. Sapporo, Japan, 3Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, M. Kagami: None. T. Fuke: None. A. Nakamura: None. T. Hamamatsu,Japan,4NationalHospitalOrganizationTokyoMedical Inoue:None.S.Kawashima:None.K.Isno-Hara:None.S.Sano: Center,Tokyo, Japan. None.K. Yamazawa: None. M. Fukami: None. T.Ogata: None. Background: (Epi)genetic disorders associated with small-for- 
P11 .065.C Oxidative stress elicited by a DNA-demethylating gestational-age with short stature (SGA-SS) include imprinting teratogen 5-azacytidine in the mammalian placenta can be disturbance(IDs).Silver-Russellsyndrome(SRS)isarepresentative alleviated by antioxidant pretreatment IDin SGA-SSand hasheterogenous(epi)genetic causes. Subjects and Methods: To clarify the contribution of IDs to NikolaSobocan1,2,AnaKatusic-Bojanac3,2,MartaHimelreich-Peric3,2, SGA-SS and the molecular and phenotypic spectrum of SRS, we Nino Sincic3,2, Jure Krasic3,2, Ljiljana Serman3,4, Davor Jezek5,4, recruited 249 patients with SGA-SS consisting of 92 and 157 FlorianaBulic-Jakus3,2 patientswithoutstructuralabnormalitiesreferredtousforgenetic testing for SGA-SS and SRS, respectively. 249 patients were classiﬁed into three subgroups based on the Netchine-Harbison 1Department of Gastroenterology, School of Medicine, University clinical scoring system (NH-CSS), diagnostic criteria for SRS. We HospitalMerkur,Zagreb,Croatia,2CenterofExcellenceinReproduc- screened various IDs by methylation analysis for differentially tiveandRegenerativeMedicine,SchoolofMedicine,Zagreb,Croatia, methylated regions related to known IDs. We also performed 3Department of Medical Biology, University of Zagreb School of clinicalanalysis. Medicine,Zagreb,Croatia,4CenterofExcellenceinReproductiveand Results:These249patientswithSGA-SSwereclassiﬁedintothe RegenerativeMedicine,SchoolofMedicine,Zagreb,Croatia,Zagreb, SRS-compatible group (n=148), non-SRS with normocephaly or Croatia, 5Department of Histology and Embryology, University of relative macrocephaly at birth group (n=94), and non-SRS with Zagreb Schoolof Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia. relativemicrocephalyatbirthgroup(n=7)accordingtoNH-CSS. Various IDsweredetected ineach group(Table). Introduction: Our experiments showed that the DNA- Conclusion:WeclariﬁedthecontributionofIDsas(epi)genetic demethylating epigenetic drug 5-azacytidine (5azaC) is a terato- causesofSGA-SSandthemolecularandphenotypicspectrumof gen causing oxidative stress and intrauterine growth restriction SRS. Various IDs constitute underlying factors for SGA-SS, (IUGR), alleviated in rat fetuses by an antioxidant-pretreatment. includingSRS. Wehypothesizedsuch effects will beconﬁrmed intheplacenta. MaterialsandMethods:Onday12and13ofgestation,Fisher ratdamsreceivedintravenouslyN-tert-Butyl-α-phenylnitron(PBN) (40mg/kg)andonehourlaterintraperitoneally5azaC(5mg/kg)or only 5azaC. Controls received PBN or were untreated. Placentas were isolated on the gestation day 15 and day 20. Immunohis- tochemicalsignalsoftheProliferatingCellNuclearAntigen(PCNA) and markers of oxidative/nitrosative processes (8-oxoDG and nitrotyrosine, respectively) were stereologically quantiﬁed by the numerical density (Nv). The apoptotic index was calculated, and DNA-methylation wasassessed by pyrosequencing. Results: Pretreatment with PBN of 5azaC-treated dams during the trophoblast invasion and intense proliferation phases sig- niﬁcantly improved the weight of 15- and 20-days old placentas. In20-days-oldplacentas,theapoptoticindexandNvof8-oxoDG and nitrotyrosine were signiﬁcantly higher in placentas of dams treatedby5azaCthaninthosepretreatedwithPBN.NvforPCNA wassigniﬁcantlylowerinallplacentasof5azaC-treateddamsthan incontrols. Conclusions: In the placenta, we conﬁrmed the association of DNA-demethylating agent’s growth restriction with oxidative/ nitrosativestress.Theseexperimentalresultsareofimportancefor understanding the mechanism of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and its prevention by antioxidant activity. Financed by EU project, ERDF, Operational Programme Competitiveness and Cohesion, No. KK.01.1.1.01.0008, Reproductive and Regenerative Medicine-Exploring NewPlatforms and Potentials. N.Sobocan: None. A. Katusic-Bojanac: None. M. Himelreich- Peric:None.N.Sincic:None.J.Krasic:None.L.Serman:None.D. Jezek: None.F. Bulic-Jakus: None. 
P11 .066.D Diagnosis and veriﬁcation of the autosomal Abbreviations: SRS, Silver-Russell syndrome; H19LOM, loss of dominant form of Kabuki makeup syndrome in a child with methylation of the H19/IGF2:intergenic differentially methylated congenitalheart disease. Clinical case region; UPD(7)mat, maternal uniparental disomy chromosome 7; UPD(20)mat, maternal uniparental disomy chromosome 20; UPD IrynaLastivka1,VitaAntsupova2,LjudmilaBrisevac3,LarysaSheiko3, (6)mat,maternaluniparentaldisomychromosome6;UPD(16)mat, IanaUshko2, Volodymyr Davydiuk4 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 345 1Bukovinian State Medical University, Chernivtsi, Ukraine, 2Bohomo- nonsense and one missense variants). One female patient had a lets National Medical University, Kyiv, Ukraine, 3Shupyk National nonsensevariantintheKDM6Agene.FourvariantsintheKMT2D Medical Academy of Postgraduate Education, Kyiv, Ukraine, gene (p.Cys1534Ter, p.Leu3542ValfsTer13, p.Gln4412Ter and p. 4National Pirogov MemorialMedical University, Vinnitsa, Ukraine. Glu4422Ter)werenovel. Conclusions: Most Malaysians with Kabuki syndrome in our Introduction:KabukiMakeupSyndrome(KMS)OMIM147920isa cohort had truncating mutations leading to haploinsufﬁciency in rare genetic disease characterized by phenotypic traits, mental the KMT2D and KDM2A protein. This study expanded our retardation,andautisticsymptoms.KMSiscausedbypathogenic knowledge of the clinical and molecular features of Kabuki mutations in the genes KMT2D, KDM6A. Mutation of the KMT2D syndrome intheSouth East Asianpopulation. gene is inherited by autosomal dominant type; mutation of the H.Y. Leong: None. M.A. Haniffa: None. M.Y. Chan: None. S. KDM6Ageneis inherited X-linkeddominantly. Sivapatham: None. H.B.Chew:None. L.H.Ngu: None. MaterialsandMethods:AclinicalcaseofKMSina2-year-old girl. Syndromological, "Face2gene", cytogenetic, molecular genetic,instrumental methods of examinationwereused. 
P11 .068.B Two distinct recessive conditions in two Pakistani Results: Girl from the third planned pregnancy; which was on sisters: molecular diagnosis using targeted gene panels may the background of the threat of miscarriage, polyhydramnios, require subsequent whole exome sequencing in sibs of hypothyroidism. The baby was born at 36 weeks of pregnancy consanguineous parents weighing 2930 g, length 49 cm, on the Apgar scale 8/8 points. Phenotype: cleft palate, protruding ear shells, arched eyebrows, FRANCESCA PELUSO1, Stefano G. Carafﬁ1, Roberta Zuntini1, long oblique eye slits, blue sclera, epicanthus, ectropion of the Gabriele Trimarchi1, Ivan Ivanovski1,2, Veronica Barbieri1, Maria lowereyelids,widetipofthenose,hypoplasiaofthenailsonthe Marinelli1,AlessiaPancaldi3,NivesMelli3,ClaudiaCesario4,Emanuele V-ﬁngers of the wrists of the hands, congenital, muscular Agolini4, Elena Cellini5, Renzo Guerrini5, Antonio Novelli4, Giancarlo hypotension,delayofstato-kineticdevelopment.Syndromological Gargano3,Orsetta Zuffardi6, Livia Garavelli1 diagnosticswasperformedusingthediagnosticprogram"Face2- gene";suspected KMS;cytogenetic, moleculargeneticresearchis 1MedicalGeneticsUnit,AziendaUSL,IRCCS,ArcispedaleSantaMaria recommendedtoverifythediagnosis.Karyotypeofachild46,XX. Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 2Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Molecular genetic analysis revealed a pathogenic mutation UniversitätZürich,Zürich,Switzerland,3NeonatalIntensiveCareUnit (c.11884C>T)(p.Gln3962*)intheKMT2Dgene,whichisassociated (NICU), Obstetric and Pediatric Department, Azienda USL, IRCCS, withanautosomaldominanttypeofKMS(MedGenUID:893727). Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova,Reggio Emilia, Italy,4Laboratory of Conclusions: Diagnosis of KMS is possible by speciﬁc pheno- Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, IRCCS, Roma, typic characteristics. Veriﬁcation of the diagnosis is based on the Italy,5PediatricNeurology,NeurogeneticsandNeurobiologyUnitand resultsofmoleculargeneticanalysis.Theprognosisofthisdisease Laboratories, Meyer Children’s Hospital, University of Florence, dependson theseverity ofheart disease and intelligence. Florence, Italy, 6Unit of Medical Genetics, Department of Molecular I. Lastivka: None. V. Antsupova: None. L. Brisevac: None. L. Medicine, University ofPavia, Pavia, Italy. Sheiko: None.I. Ushko:None. V. Davydiuk: None. We describe two sibilings with two different autosomal recessive conditions born to consanguineous parents. The older sister 
P11 .067.A Clinical features of Malaysians with Kabuki syn- featured the homozygous c.1416+1del variant in KATNB1 gene, dromeandidentiﬁcationofKMT2DandKDM6Amutationsby whiletheyoungerhadthehomozygousc.9729delTvariantinFAT1 exomesequencing gene. The diagnosis in the ﬁrst sister was achieved by a NGS microcephalygenespanel.Afterbirthofthesecondsibling,dueto HY.Leong,MA.Haniffa,MY.Chan,SSivapatham,HB.Chew,LH. the different clinical features not consistent with phenotypic Ngu heterogeneity of a KATNB1-related syndrome in the same family, we performed Trio Whole Exome Sequencing (WES). The clinical HospitalKuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. picture in the ﬁrst child corresponds to Autosomal recessive Lissencephaly 6 and microcephaly (MIM 616212). However, the Introduction: Kabuki syndrome 1 and 2 (OMIM #147920 and clinical features of the younger sister consist of bilateral #300867)characterizedbydistinctivefacies,learningdisabilityand anophthalmia,congenitalheartdefect(CHD),rightsplitfootwith multiple congenital anomalies are caused by pathogenic muta- 4 toes and 5 metatarsal, second toe polydactyly, right hand tions in the lysine-speciﬁc methyltransferase 2D (KMT2D) and preaxialpolydactylyandmildbilateraldeafness.Theconstellation lysine-speciﬁcdemethylase 6A(KDM6A)genesrespectively. of these features is entirely compatible with a very rare FAT1- Methods: This is a descriptive cohort study of Malaysians related condition hitherto described in only 5 families, but diagnosedwithKabukisyndromeinHospitalKualaLumpur.Whole including previously unreported clinical features, namely split exome sequencing was performed for variant detection and foot,preaxialpolydactylyandCHD.Weexpandthephenotypeof conﬁrmedby Sanger sequencing. thiscondition,speciﬁcallyregardingtheinvolvementofthelimbs Results: There were seven Malaysians diagnosed with Kabuki andheartnotpreviouslyreported.Inthecaseofconsanguineous syndrome, 57% males. Their ethnicity were Malay (5/7) and parents,TrioWESshouldbeprioritisedwithrespecttoapanelof Chinese (2/7). All had global developmental delay and learning genes, since parents could be carriers for two or more different difﬁculty. Five patients had attention deﬁcit and/or hyperactivity. autosomal recessive conditions, and in order to fully delineate Common dysmorphic features in at least 50% of the cohort recurrencerisk for prenatalcounselling. includedlongpalpebralﬁssures,archedeyebrows,broadnasaltip, F. Peluso: None. S.G. Carafﬁ: None. R. Zuntini: None. G. prominent ears and brachydactyly. Other systemic anomalies Trimarchi: None. I. Ivanovski: None. V. Barbieri: None. M. reportedwereshortstature(5/7),infantilefeedingdifﬁculties(3/7), Marinelli: None. A. Pancaldi: None. N. Melli: None. C. Cesario: hearing loss (3/7), cleft lip/ palate (2/7), high arched palate (2/7), None. E. Agolini: None. E. Cellini: None. R. Guerrini: None. A. developmentaldysplasiaofthehip(2/7),kyphosis/scoliosis(2/7), Novelli:None.G.Gargano:None.O.Zuffardi:None.L.Garavelli: pulmonary artery stenosis (1/7) and multicystic kidney (1/7). Six None. patients had heterozygous pathogenic KMT2D variants (ﬁve EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 346 
P11 .069.CNew pathogenicvariant in GP
C4  gene inapatient study,previoustoundergoartiﬁcialreproductivetechniqueswith withKeipertsyndrome preimplantation genetictest. MaterialandMethods:SangersequencingofGJB2,NGSpanel Katarzyna Wojciechowska1, Borys Styka2, Wiktor Wojczakowski1, forerythrokeratodermia andclinical exome wereperformed. Anna Lipińska3, Aleksandra Pietrzyk3,Monika Lejman2 Results: GJB2 Sanger study did not detect any mutation. We performed an erythrokeratodermia panel and then a clinical 1Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Transplantol- exome. Mutation G45E in GJB2 gene was detected in 31.25% of ogy, Children’s University Hospital, Lublin, Poland, 2Laboratory of reads. Sanger sequencing conﬁrmed the mosaicism for the Genetic Diagnostics, Medical University of Lublin, Poland, Lublin, mutation. Poland,3MedGenMedicalCentre,Warsaw,Poland,Lublin,Poland. Conclusion:ThisistheﬁrstcaseaffectedbyKIDsyndromedue toG45EGJB2mosaicismmutation.HeterozygouscarriersofG45E Background:KeipertsyndromeisarareX-linkeddisordercaused GJB2 mutation, suffer a severe disease and die in infancy. We bypathogenicvariantsinGP
C4 gene.Inliterature,thereareonlya speculatethatonlyinthemosaicformitispossiblethesurvivalof fewsuchcasesdiscussed.Amongthemostdistinctivefeaturesof heterozygous carriers. This information is decisive for genetic the patients with Keipert syndrome are: craniofacial and digital counseling since the risks for their offspring are extremely low, abnormalities,learningdifﬁcultiesandsensorineuraldeafness.Our duetothelowprobabilitythatgerm-linecellscarrythemutation. aim is to discuss the case of a patient with a new hemizygous A.SánchezDíaz:None.P.Aguilera:None.M.Gracia:None.C. mutation inGP
C4 gene. Vidales:None. C.Badenas: None. Methods: Molecular analysis showed a new hemizygous mutation p. Ser236Phe in GP
C4 gene. The genetic analysis was performedbywhole-exomesequencing.Thelibrarywasprepared 
P11 .071.A Expanding the KIF4A-associated phenotype using Agilent Sureselect VI exome Kit and analyzed with a NovaSeq sequencing platform. The presence of the detected Silvia Kalantari1,2, Norah Alsaleh3, Ghada M. H. Abdel-Salam4, variantwas conﬁrmedby Sanger sequencing. Fowzan Alkuraya5, Mitsuhiro Kato6, Naomichi Matsumoto7, Satoko Results: Our patient was born of healthy, nonconsanguineous Miyatake8, Lucas Fares-Taie9, Caleb Bupp10, Lia Zitano10, Marcello parents at 39 weeks of gestation by cesarian section. His birth Niceta11, Claudia Cesario12, Roberta Milone13, Bill Dobyns14,15,16, weight was 3040g, length- 52 cm, OFC-35 cm. After birth, IsabelFilges2,17,18 dysmorphic facial features were diagnosed. The patient also did not have the right testicle in the scrotum. Karyotyping and array 1ImmunogeneticsandTransplantBiologyService,CittàdellaSalutee CGHtestingshowednormalbalancedmalekaryotype.Thewhole- della Scienza University Hospital, Turin, Italy, 2Medical Genetics, exome sequencing showed mutation in GP
C4 gene. Among the Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, University Hospital mainhealthproblemsofourpatientattheageoftwoyearswere: Basel,Basel,Switzerland,3DivisionofMedicalGeneticsandMetabolic shortstature(<3rdcentile),delayedmotordevelopment(hestarted Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan Military Medical sitting without support at the age of 12 months, walking at the City,Riyadh,SaudiArabia,4DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,Human ageof 24months) and distinctive dysmorphic facialfeatures. Genetics and Genome Research Division, National Research Centre, Conclusion: Thecase of our patient contributes tothe studies Cairo, Egypt, 5I4Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist ofthephenotypesofpatientswithKeipertsyndromewhichoccur Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 6Department asaresultof GP
C4 mutation. of Pediatrics, Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, K. Wojciechowska: None. B. Styka: None. W. Wojczakowski: 76Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University None.A. Lipińska: None. A.Pietrzyk: None. M. Lejman:None. Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 8Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 97INSERM UMR1163, Imagine – 
P11 .070.D Mosaicism for a lethal GJB2 mutation causes InstituteofGeneticDiseases,ParisDescartesUniversity,Paris,France, Keratitis-Ichthyosis-Deafness (KID)syndrome 10Spectrum Health, Grand Rapids, MI, USA, 11Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Aurora Sánchez Díaz1,2, Paula Aguilera3,2, Marta Gracia1, Concha Rome, Italy, 12Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Ospedale Pediatrico Vidales4, CeliaBadenas1,2 Bambino Gesù, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 13I11Department of Develop- mental Neuroscience, IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Calambrone, 1Servicio de Bioquímica y Genética Molecular Hospital Clínic, Italy, 14Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children’s Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBER de enfermedades raras (CIBERER), Barce- Research Institute, Seattle, WA, USA, 15Department of Pediatrics lona, Spain, 3Servicio de Dermatología Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, (Genetics),UniversityofWashington,Seattle,WA,USA,16Department Spain,4DNA data Biomedical Company, SanSebastian, Spain. ofNeurology,UniversityofWashington,Seattle,WA,USA,17Depart- ment of Clinical Research, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzer- Keratitis-ichthyosis-deafness (KID) syndrome is a rare congenital land, 18University of Basel, Basel,Switzerland. disorder caused by autosomal dominant gain of function mutations in the GJB2 gene that encodes connexin 26 (Cx26). Introduction: KIF4A belongs to the family of kinesins which are Affected individuals typically are born with erythrokeratoderma molecularmotorsinvolvedinintracellulartrafﬁcking,whosefunction and may develop degrees of sensorineural hearing loss and/or is critical during human development. KIF4 is involved in the progressivevascularizingkeratitis.LossoffunctionGJB2mutations anterograde transport of non-synaptic membrane organelles in arerelatedwithnonsyndromicdeafness.SomeGJB2mutationsare developing neurons including the transport of 
L1  glycoprotein- related with lethal course of KID syndrome by abnormalities in containingvesicles,beingpartof
L1 CAM(
L1 )-pathway.Adisruptive organsotherthanskin,corneaorinnerearwhichmaycontribute variant in KIF4A has been described to cause X-linked intellectual to infant death more than severe skin infections. We present a disabilityandepilepsy.KIF4Awasalsoproposedasacandidategene clinicallyaffectedKIDsyndromepatientwhoiscarrieroftheG45E for congenital hydrocephalus. Our aim is to describe the clinical mutation in GJB2 gene in mosaicism. The patient requested the spectrumassociatedwithKIF4Avariants. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 347 Materials and Methods: Through GeneMatcher we collected analysis or preserved for future research. The left hemisphere was clinicaldataof13patientsharboringlikelycausalvariantsinKIF4A. submittedforpathology. Wecompared phenotypesand genotypes inthis case series. Results: We have recruited 18 fetuses (55,5% affected from Results: We identiﬁed 6 patients presenting with congenital aneuploidies) in the ﬁrst year. Participation in the study was hydrocephalus and/or ventriculomegaly with or without asso- offeredto21families,ofwhich19accepted.Welost3casesdue ciated brain anomalies. 7 Patients had intellectual disability totechnicalproblems.Inallbutonecase,thequalityoffetalbrain without evidence for brain anomalies. Associated CAKUT, ocular, tissue was good, as assessed in the gross dissection and in later skeletal and dental anomalies were variably observed. Except for histologicexamination. one splice site variant, all other were hemizygous missense Conclusion:1.Settingupacollectionoffetalbrainisacomplex variants affecting the kinesin motor or PR
C1  binding domain of processwhichrequiresacoordinatedandmotivatedteam.2.The KIF4A. biobankfacilitatesthemanagementofsuchacollectionmakingit Conclusion: This case series allows to extend the phenotypic technicallyand ethically suitableforresearch. spectrum associated with KIF4A in broadly two categories. P. Marin Reina: None. I. Lara Cantón: None. Á. Solaz García: Although the number of patients is small, we provide evidence None. M. Torres Cuevas: None. I. Millán Yañez: None. J. Ferrer for the role of KIF4A in congenital hydrocephalus and brain Lozano:None.V.HerranzPérez:None.M.UlloaNavas:None.S. anomalies.Thefunctionalrelationshipbetween
L1 CAMandKIF4A Gonzalez Granero: None. F. Martínez Castellanos: None. A. supports this evidence, but the mechanism needs to be further GimenoNavarro:None.J.RubioMoll:None.R.GómezPortero: elucidated. Genotype-phenotype comparison betweenthe group None.R.QuirogadelaCruz:None.R.AmigoMoreno:None.J. of patients with intellectual disability versus structural brain GarcíaVerdugo: None. M.Vento Torres: None. anomaliesso farremains inconclusive. S. Kalantari: None. N. Alsaleh: None. G.M.H. Abdel-Salam: None.F.Alkuraya:None.M.Kato:None.N.Matsumoto:None.S. 
P11 .073.C Two novel presentations of KCNMA1-Related Miyatake: None. L. Fares-Taie: None. C. Bupp: None. L. Zitano: Pathology - Expanding the Clinical Phenotype of a Rare None. M. Niceta: None. C. Cesario: None. R. Milone: None. B. Channelopathy Dobyns:None. I. Filges:None. JotteRodriguesBento1,CandiceFeben2,MarliesKempers3,Maartje Van Rij3,4, Mallory Woiski4, Koenraad Devriendt5, Luc De Catte6, 
P11 .072.B Implementation and comprehensive management Marcella Baldewijns6, Josephina Meester1, Aline Verstraeten1, Willy ofa colletion of fetal brain samples obtained from volunteer Hendson7,Bart Loeys1,3 terminationofpregnancies 1Centre of Medical Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital/University PuriﬁcacionMarinReina1,InmaculadaLaraCantón2,ÁlvaroSolaz ofAntwerp,Antwerp,Belgium,2DivisionofHumanGenetics,National García2, M Isabel Torres Cuevas2, Iván Millán Yañez2, Jaime Ferrer Health Laboratory Service & The School of Pathology, University of Lozano3, Vicente Herranz Pérez4, Mª José Ulloa Navas4, Susana the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa, 3Department of Gonzalez Granero4, Francisco Martínez Castellanos5, Ana Gimeno Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Navarro6, Juan Rubio Moll7, Rosa Gómez Portero7, Ramiro Quiroga Netherlands, 4Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Radboud de la Cruz8, Raquel Amigo Moreno9, Jose María García Verdugo4, University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Department of Maximo VentoTorres10 Human Genetics, Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 6Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Catholic University of 1Hospital UyP La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 2Instituto de Investigación Leuven,Leuven,Belgium,7DepartmentofPaediatrics,RahimaMoosa SanitariaLaFe, Valencia,Spain, 3PathologyDepartment. Hospital Mother and Child Hospital & The University of the Witwatersrand, LaFe,Valencia,Spain,4CavanillesInstitute.UniversityofValencia, Johannesburg, SouthAfrica. Valencia, Spain, 5Genetics Department. Hospital UyP La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 6Neonatology Department. Hospital UyP La Fe, Background: KCNMA1 mutations have recently been associated Valencia, Spain, 7Prenatal Diagnosis. Obstetric Department. with a wide range of dysmorphological, gastro-intestinal, cardio- HospitalUyPLaFe,Valencia,Spain,8PrenatalDiagnosis.Obstetric vascularand neurologicalmanifestations. Department. Hospital UyP La FeHospital UyP La Fe, Valencia, Methods:Wholeexomesequencingwasperformedinorderto Spain, 9Biobank. Hospital UyP La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 10Perinatol- identify the underlying pathogenic mutation in two cases ogy Research Unit. Instituto de investigación Sanitaria La Fe., presentingwith diverse phenotypical manifestations that did not Valencia, Spain. ﬁt into well-known clinicalentities. Results: In an 8-years old boy presenting with severe aortic Introduction: Obtaining fetal brain samples requires a coordi- dilatation,facialdysmorphismandovergrowthatbirthadenovo nated multidisciplinary approach. Therefore, a comprehensive p.Gly375Arg KCNMA1 mutation, which has been reported pre- management within the framework of an authorized and viously in association with gingival hypertrophy, aortic dilatation certiﬁed biobank is crucial. and developmental delay, was identiﬁed. Secondly in a 30-week Materials and methods: Prospective and observational study oldfetuswithseveregrowthretardationandduodenalatresiaade started in September 2019. It included fetuses from legal termina- novop.Pro805LeuKCNMA1mutationwasidentiﬁed.Thelatterhas tionofpregnancies(TOP)from12weeksofgestationonwards,with also been reported before in a boy with severe neurological prenatal diagnosis of genetic abnormalities and major malforma- manifestations,includingspeechdelay,developmentaldelayand tions. The candidates were identiﬁed by the obstetricians, and cerebellar dysfunction. familieswere recruitedbyneonatologistsbeforedelivery.After the Conclusion: The current report presents the ﬁrst antenatal expulsion, fetuses were either immediately autopsied or preserved presentation of pathogenic KCNMA1 mutation and conﬁrms the overnight at 4ºC and transferred to the Pathology Department speciﬁc association of the p.Gly375Arg variant with early onset within maximum 12 hours. An in toto extraction of the brain was aortic root dilatation, gingival hypertrophy and neonatal made in each case. The right hemisphere was sliced and samples overgrowth. were preserved in 4% paraformaldehyde for ultrastructural studies J.RodriguesBento:None.C.Feben:None.M.Kempers:None. or snap-frozen at -80ºC, for omic studies, immunohistochemistry M. Van Rij: None. M. Woiski: None. K. Devriendt: None. L. De EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 348 Catte: None. M. Baldewijns: None. J. Meester: None. A. M. Wéber: None. A. Denommé-Pichon: None. A. Vitobello: Verstraeten:None. W.Hendson: None. B.Loeys: None. None.P. Callier: None.N.Hanna: None. P. Arnaud:None. C.Le Goff:None.P.Marzin:None.C.Boileau:None.A.Bloch-Zupan: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. L. 
P11 .075.A An atypical phenotype in a patient carrying a Faivre:None. deletion and a missense variant of LTPB3: search for over- 
P11 .076.BLuscan-Lumish Syndrome, afataldisease lapping casesforfurther delineation ofthe disease SusanaGarcía-Linares1,AntonioMiguelPoyatos-Andújar1,Margar- Mathys Wéber1, Anne-Sophie Denommé-Pichon2,3, Antonio Vito- ita Martínez-Atienza2, Irene Sofía Machado-Casas1, Antonio Emilio bello2,3,PatrickCallier4,3,NadineHanna5,PaulineArnaud5,CarineLe Jerez-Calero1, Susana Pedrinaci-Rodríguez2, María Luz Bellido-Díaz2, Goff6,PaulineMarzin7,8,CatherineBoileau5,6,AgnèsBloch-Zupan9,10, Matías Pérez-Sánchez2 Valérie Cormier-Daire7,8, Christel Thauvin-Robinet11,3, Laurence Faivre1,3 1HospitalUniversitarioClínicoSanCecilio,Granada,Spain,2Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada,Spain. 1Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, FHU TRANSLAD, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, Introduction: Luscan-Lumish syndrome is a rare disorder France, 2Unité Fonctionnelle d’Innovation en diagnostic des maladies characterized by macrocephaly, intellectual disability, speech rares (UF6254), FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 3Inserm delay, low sociability and behavioral problems. More variable UMR1231GAD,GénétiquedesAnomaliesduDéveloppement,Université features include postnatal overgrowth, obesity, advanced carpal de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 4Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Plateau ossiﬁcation, developmental delay, and seizures. The recurrent Technique de Biologie, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 5Centre National de c.5218C>Tp.(Arg1740Trp)variantintheSETD2geneappearstobe Référence pour le syndrome de Marfan et apparentés, Hôpital Bichat, associated with a severe neurodevelopmental disorder with APHP,Paris,France,6InsermU1148Laboratoirederecherchevasculaire multiple congenital anomalies involving several organ systems. translationelle, Maladies structurelles cardiovasculaires, Hôpital Bichat, We describe a patient with this variant and fatal outcome (she APHP,Paris,France,7CentredeRéférenceMaladiesRaresMOC,Hôpital diedfrom complications ofcardiovascular surgery). Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France, 8INSERM U1163 Institut Material and Methods: We present a 7-months-old girl who Imagine, Bases moléculaires et physiopathologiques des chondrodys- wasbornafteracomplicatedpregnancyat37weeksofgestation plasies, IMAGINE - Institut des Maladies Génétiques, Paris, France, (screening of ﬁrst trimester of high risk and anormal Doppler, 9CentreNationalpourlesManifestationsBucco-DentairesdesMaladies aberrant subclavian artery and intrauterine growth restriction in Rares, ERN CRANIO, Hôpital Civil, CHU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, ecography).Thepatientpresentatbirthabsenceofsuctionreﬂex, France, 10INSERM U1258, CNRS-UMR7104, Institut de Génétique et de hypotonia, perimembranous VSD with increased pulmonary Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), Université de Strasbourg, pressures, severe retrognathia and cleft palate. All molecular Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France, 11Centre de Référence Déﬁciences Intel- studies performed during the fetal period were normal. We lectuelles de Causes Rares, FHU TRANSLAD, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU performedaclinical exome sequencing (CES) analysisatbirth. Dijon,Dijon,France. Results: We found the pathogenic variant c.5218C>T p. (Arg1740Trp) in the SETD2 gene, this variant was determined as Background: LTB
P3 , involved in the TGF-beta signaling path- denovo withthesegregation analysis. way, is known to be associated with two autosomal dominant Conclusions: Has been described phenotypic heterogeneity diseases (Geleophysic Dysplasia (GD) and Acromicric Dysplasia associatedwithSETD2.Ourpatienthaveavariantaffectingcodon (AD))andanautosomalrecessivedisease(DentalAnomaliesand 1740 of SETD2, in this case the variant appears to be associated ShortStature(DASS)).Herewereportapatientwithanatypical with a severe multisystemic disorder with multiple congenital DASS phenotype. anomaliesinvolvingseveralorgansystems,especiallyheart,witha Material and methods: The patient is an 18-year-old male fataloutcome. referred for developmental disorders. Since birth, nail and toe S. García-Linares: None. A. Poyatos-Andújar: None. M. brachydactylywithmarkedhypoplasiaofthe3rdand4thraysand Martínez-Atienza: None. I. Machado-Casas: None. A. Jerez- hallux were noted. At tooth eruption stage, microdontia, Calero: None. S. Pedrinaci-Rodríguez: None. M. Bellido-Díaz: dyschromia, agenesis and amelogenesis imperfecta appeared. None.M. Pérez-Sánchez: None. Clinically at age 17, he had short stature (160 cm; -2.5 SD) and a triangular face with severe maxillary prognathism. He also developed ascending aorta dilatation, white matter anomalies, 
P11 .077.C Biallelic truncating variants in MAPKAPK5 cause a dilatated Virchow-Robin spaces and syringomyelia. Besides, his new developmental disorder involving neurological, cardiac, mother had toe amputations compatible with amniotic bands, andfacialanomalies combined withsynpolydactyly dentinedefects, syringomyelia and Arnold-Chiari malformation. Results: Genetic investigations identiﬁed two compound Denise Horn1, Elisa Fernández-Núñez2, Ricardo Gomez-Carmona2, heterozygous variants in LTB
P3 . Array CGH ﬁrst uncovered a Ana Rivera-Barahona2,3, Julian Nevado3,4,5, Sarina Schwartzmann1, maternalinheritedheterozygous3’partialdeletionthatcouldnot Nadja Ehmke1, Pablo Lapunzina3,4,5, Ghada A. Otaify6, Samia alone explain the patient’s phenotype as his asymptomatic sister Temtamy6, MonaAglan6,Felix Boschann1, VictorL. Ruiz-Perez2,4,5,3 also carried it. Targeted re-evaluation of exome sequencing enabled the discovery of a heterozygous missense variant 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité – inherited from the father, chr11:g.65308661G>C. This result Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Instituto de Investiga- correlated with the published literature can explain some of the cionesBiomédicas“AlbertoSols”,ConsejoSuperiordeInvestigaciones patient’s phenotype. However, cerebral, spinal and lower limb Cientíﬁcas (CSIC)-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Madrid, abnormalities haven’t beendescribed inDASS. Spain, 3CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Conclusion:Wewonderedwhetherthesemanifestationscould Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain, 4ITHACA, European Reference broaden the LTB
P3  phenotype spectrum especially for hetero- Network on Rare Congenital Malformations and Rare Intellectual zygous patients. Description of further patients with similar Disability, Paris, France, 5Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular ﬁndingswould be neededtodraw any inferences. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 349 (INGEMM)-IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autón- psicomotor delay, microcephaly, dysmorphisms, seizures, skills of oma, Madrid, Spain, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, Division of behavioraldisturbanceandcardiopathy,amongthemostfrequently Human Genetics and Genome Research, Center of Excellence for observed.Eightofthepatientscarrythemostcommonduplication HumanGenetics, National Research Centre,Cairo, Egypt. extending between LCR22A-LCR22D, one of them the duplication betweenLCR22A-LCR22B,twoofthepatientstheatypicalduplication The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways between LCR22B-LCR22D and other two the duplication between are involved in key physiological processes such as cell prolifera- LCR22D-LCR22E. When available parents were studied, a maternal tion,differentiation, apoptosis, survival, gene expression, and cell origin was observed in four patients and paternal origin in one. motility.Usingexomesequencing,wedetectedbiallelictruncating Attendingthepnenotypicvariabilityofthepatients,evenwithsimilar variants in MAPKAPK5 in three individuals from two unrelated genomic regions involved, a better clinical characterization is consanguineous families with a novel syndromic form of important particularly in duplications sharing a smaller subset of neurocardiofaciodigitalanomalies.Weidentiﬁedthehomozygous genes. In the more atypical 22q11.2 duplications, like the ones frameshift variant c.207_208dupTG; p.(Ala70Valfs*7) in the two involving LCR22B-LCR22D or LCR22D-LCR22E, a detailed character- affected members of family 1 and the homozygous 1-bp ization can expand and provide valuable information in the duplicationc.1077dup,p.(Leu360Serfs*21)inthepatientoffamily phenotype-genotypeinterpretationandinvestigatecandidategenes 2. The affected individuals showed a clinically recognizable thatmayberelevanttodistinctclinicalfeatures. phenotypecharacterizedbyseveredevelopmentaldelay,variable E.Matoso:None.A.Estevinho:None.S.I.Ferreira:None.L.M. brain anomalies, congenital heart defects, dysmorphic facial Pires:None.J.B.Melo:None.F.Ramos:None.L.Ramos:None.J. features, and a distinctive type of synpolydactyly. Features also M.Saraiva: None. I.M. Carreira:None. included ophthalmologic abnormalities, hearing impairment, and EEGanomalies.NoexpressionofMAPKAPK5proteinisoformsand reduced levels of the MAPKAPK5-interacting protein ERK3 were 
P11 .079.AMID1genevariationsinaBraziliancohortwithcleft detectable in patient derived cells. Furthermore, F-actin recovery lip with or without palate and ocular hypertelorism. Implica- after latrunculin B treatment was impaired, indicating that tion fordiagnosis MAPKAPK5 is implicated in F-actin polymerization. Together, our ﬁndings show that biallelic loss-of-function variants in MAPKAPK5 Roseli M. Zechi-Ceide1, Nancy M. Kokitsu-Nakata1, Camila Wence- resultinaseveredevelopmentaldisorderanddemonstrateakey slau Alvarez1, Chiara Migliore2, Marina Bigeli Rafacho1, Maria roleof this geneinhuman brain,heart,and limb development. Eugênia Siemann1, Rosana M. Candido-Souza1, Siulan Vendramini- D. Horn: None. E. Fernández-Núñez: None. R. Gomez- Pittoli1,CristianoTonello3,LucianaP.Maximino4,GermanaMeroni5, Carmona: None. A. Rivera-Barahona: None. J. Nevado: None. Maria Leine Guion-Almeida6, John M. Opitz7, Antonio Antonio S. Schwartzmann: None. N. Ehmke: None. P. Lapunzina: None. Richieri-Costa11 G. A. Otaify: None. S. Temtamy: None. M. Aglan: None. F. Boschann: None. V.L.Ruiz-Perez: None. 1Department of Clinical Genetics and Molecular Biology, Hospital for Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies (HRCA), University of São Paulo, Bauru, SP, Brazil., Bauru, Brazil, 2Department of Life Sciences, 
P11 .078.DVariableexpressivityof22q11.2microduplications: University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, Trieste, Italy, 3Craniofacial Team, an investigation of 13 cases toward a phenotype-genotype HospitalforRehabilitationofCraniofacialAnomalies(HRCA,University correlation ofSãoPaulo,Bauru,Brazil,Bauru,Brazil,4DepartmentofAudiologyand Speech-Language Pathology, School of Dentistry, University of São EuniceMatoso1,2,3,AlexandraEstevinho2,SusanaI.Ferreira4,LuísM. Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, Bauru, Brazil, 5Department of Life Sciences, Pires4, Joana B. Melo3,4,5, Fabiana Ramos6, Lina Ramos6, Jorge M. UniversityofTrieste,Trieste,Italy.,Trieste,Italy,6HospitalforRehabilita- Saraiva1,6, IsabelM. Carreira3,4,5 tion of Craniofacial Anomalies, University of São Paulo (HRCA-USP)., Bauru, Brazil, 7Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, 1University of Coimbra, Faculty of Medicine, Coimbra, Portugal, HumanGenetics,Pathology,andObstetrics&Gynecology,Universityof 2Cytogenetics Laboratory, Medical Genetics Unit, Pediatric Hospital, Utah,SaltLakeCity,Utah,USA.,SaltLakeCity,UT,USA. Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3iCBR- CIMAGO/CACC – Center of Investigation on Environment Introduction: Orofacial clefts is the most common craniofacial Genetics and Oncobiology of iCBR/ Clinical Academic Center of anomalies. It occur isolated or associated to other anomalies. The Coimbra, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, combinationofcleftlipandocularhypertelorismcanrepresentsthe Portugal, 4Cytogenetics and Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of Opitz G/BBB syndrome, a rare genetic condition with hypospadia, Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5CIBB- Center laryngo-tracheo-esophageal abnormalities, and heart and brain forInnovativeBiomedicineandBiotechnology,UniversityofCoimbra, defect.TheX-linkedformiscausedbyMID1gene. Coimbra,Portugal,6MedicalGeneticsUnit,PediatricHospital,Centro Methods: Screening of the MID1 gene variation (Sanger Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra,Coimbra, Portugal. Sequencing) or deletion (MLPA) was performed in 44 patients withcleftlipwithorwithoutcleftpalateandocularhypertelorism, The 22q11.2 microduplication syndrome shows highly variable enrolled in HRCA-USP. All patients and their families were phenotypes with reduced penetrance. This region harbors eight evaluated bya craniofacialclinical geneticist. segmental duplicated genomic regions termed low-copy repeats Results:MID1genevariationswerefoundin22individuals(21 A-H (LCR22A-LCR22H) that mediate nonallelic homologous maleand1female).Fourmissensevariationswerenotpreviously recombination resulting in rearrangements of 22q11.2. The most reported and were considered of unknown signiﬁcance. The frequently reported are imbalances with the breakpoints encom- heterozygousvariationsc.1305A>Gwasfoundinanaffectedgirl. passing LCR22A to LCR22D. Atypical deletions and duplications About 95% of the patients had a bilateral cleft lip and palate. arerareandcanprovidevaluableinformationofdosageeffectsof Other frequent clinical signs were hypospadia (~85 %), brain asubsetofgeneswithinthe22q11.2genomicdisorderregion.We anomalies(100%of11imagesevaluated)andlearningdifﬁculties report the identiﬁcation by array-CGH of 13 patients with (42%).Dandy-Walker malformation waspresent in72%of the11 microduplications within the 22q11.2 region. Ten of the patients imagesevaluated. weremaleandonlythreefemale,theclinicalphenotypesrangefrom EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 350 Conclusion:MID1genecontributeswithoccurrenceofcleftlip Giada Moresco1, Ornella Rondinone1, Jole Costanza1, Carlo associatedtoocularhypertelorismandthiscombinationcanbea Santaniello1, Laura Fontana1,2, Alessia Mauri1, Marco Venturin3, mild form of the G/BBB syndrome. The expanding of frontonasal Odoardo Picciolini4, Roberta Villa5, Monica Miozzo1,2, Maria processcanbecontributedwiththefusionofupperlipandpalate Francesca Bedeschi5 failure.DespiteofDandy-Walkermalformationispresentin100% of the images evaluated, the development was normal in most 1Research Laboratories Coordination Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca patientsand learningdifﬁcultieswasa frequent feature. GrandaOspedaleMaggiorePoliclinico,Milano,Italy,2Departmentof R.M. Zechi-Ceide: None. N.M. Kokitsu-Nakata: None. C. Health Science, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, WenceslauAlvarez:None.C.Migliore:None.M.BigeliRafacho: 3Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, None. M. Siemann: None. R.M. Candido-Souza: None. S. Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy, 4Pediatric Physical Vendramini- Pittoli: None. C. Tonello: None. L.P. Maximino: Medicine and Rehabilitation Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda None. G. Meroni: None. M. Guion-Almeida: None. J.M. Opitz: Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 5Medical Genetic Unit, None.A. Antonio Richieri-Costa1: None. FondazioneIRCCSCa’GrandaOspedaleMaggiorePoliclinico,Milano, Italy. 
P11 .080.B MN
S1  gene alterations are associated with situs Moebius syndrome (MBS; OMIM #157900) is a rare congenital inversus andmaleinfertility disorder characterized by nonprogressive facial and ocular abduction paralysis, and impairment to the facial (cranial VII) Joseph Leslie1, Lettie E. Rawlins1,2, Barry A. Chioza1, Oluwaseun R. and abducens (cranial VI) nerves, respectively, possibly due to Olusanya1,ClaireG.Salter1,JamesFasham1,HaroldE.Cross3,Simon hindbrain defects. Additional features can include hearing loss, Lam1,GauravV.Harlalka1,MartinaM.A.Muggenthaler1,4,EmmaL. othercranialnervedysfunctions,motor,orofacial,musculoskeletal, Baple1,2,Andrew H.Crosby1 neurodevelopmental and behavioral complications. Most are sporadic cases, but familial occurrence has also been reported, 1Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, RILD Wellcome Wolfson withbothautosomaldominant/recessiveandX-linkedinheritance. Centre, University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, Diagnosticmolecularcriteria forMBS arestill undeﬁned.De novo 2Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, Royal Devon & Exeter Hospital, heterozygous pathogenetic variants of REV3L and PLXND1 genes Exeter,UnitedKingdom,3DepartmentofOphthalmology,Universityof areconsideredtobecausativeforMBS,althoughtheyoccurina Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson, AZ, USA, 4Department of minorityofcases.Withtheaimtouncovernovelgenesassociated Cardiology, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, with this condition, we recruited a cohort of 35 Moebius and UnitedKingdom. Moebius-like patients and performed trio-WES. No de novo variantswereidentiﬁedintheREV3LandPLXND1genes,strongly Motileciliaarehairlikestructuresonthecellsurfacethatprotrude suggesting the need to discover possible additional causative intotheextracellularspaceandbeatinacoordinatedmanner.This genes. We selected the most frequently mutated genes among performs a number of important roles in the body including the the35probands,andperformedIngenuityPathwayAnalysis(IPA) clearanceofmucus,thepropulsionofspermandthedetermination to identify possibly altered pathways. Our preliminary results of left-right patterning during development. Ciliopathy disorders suggest that axon guidance pathways, such as the Semaphorin arise due to abnormalities in the function of motile cilia and and Netrin signaling pathways, are likely to be involved in the encompass a group of autosomal recessive conditions typiﬁed by diseasepathogenesis,aswellasG
P6 ,nNOSandproteinkinaseA chronicotosinopulmonarydisease,infertilityandsitusabnormalities. signaling pathways. We used a combination of genetic studies to investigate the G.Moresco:None.O.Rondinone:None.J.Costanza:None.C. causeofaciliopathydisorderidentiﬁedinfourAmishindividuals Santaniello: None. L. Fontana: None. A. Mauri: None. M. withsitusinversusandmaleinfertility.Genome-wideSNPmapping Venturin: None. O. Picciolini: None. R. Villa: None. M. Miozzo: identiﬁed a single small (2.34Mb) autozygous region common to None.M. Bedeschi: None. all four affected individuals of on chromosome 15q21.3, demar- cating the likely disease locus. Whole exome sequencing identiﬁed a single candidate variant genome wide, located in 
P11 .082.D Expanding the phenotype of NADSYN1 associated the autozygous region, in the MN
S1  gene (NM_018365.2: congenital NAD deﬁciency disorder - the ﬁrst reported adult c.407_410del;p.(Glu136Glyfs*16)). Genotyping of members of the patient extended family identiﬁed randomisation ofthe laterality defects inotheraffectedindividualshomozygousfortheMN
S1 alteration, EmilieErbs1,Claus Lohmann Brasen2,3, Maria Rasmussen1,3 whileallunaffected individuals werewildtype or heterozygous. Our studies in the Amish are consistent with previous 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Lilebælt Hospital, Vejle, Denmark, investigations of MN
S1  deﬁcient mice, which display situs 2Department of Biochemistry and Immunology Lillebælt Hospital, randomisationandmaleinfertility.Importantly,anumberofother Vejle,Denmark,3DepartmentofRegionalHealthResearch,University studieshaverecentlybeenpublishedidentifyingMN
S1 mutations ofSouthern Denmark, Odense,Denmark. in individuals worldwide with situs abnormalities and/or male infertility. Together these ﬁndings identify MN
S1  alterations as a Introduction: Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) is an potentialunderrecognisedcauseofmaleinfertilityandhighlight essential coenzyme in multiple cellular redox processes and a theimportanceofincludingMN
S1 ongenetestingpanelsglobally. substrateforsignallingenzymesinnon-redoxreactions.NADSYN1 J. Leslie: None. L.E. Rawlins: None. B.A. Chioza: None. O.R. encodesNADsynthetase1anenzymeintheﬁnalstepoftheNAD Olusanya:None.C.G.Salter:None.J.Fasham:None.H.E.Cross: de novo synthesis pathway and part of the Preiss-Handler None.S.Lam:None.G.V.Harlalka:None.M.M.A.Muggenthaler: pathway. Szot et al. recently reported ﬁve patients from four None.E.L. Baple:None. A.H. Crosby: None. families with bi-allelic deleterious variants in NADSYN1. These patients all had kidney anomalies and some had additional malformations of the heart, vertebrae and limbs. Neither of the 
P11 .081.C Unraveling the genetic causes of Moebius patientshad survived past threemonths postnatally. syndrome EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 351 Materialsandmethods:Herewepresenta30-year-oldmale 
P11 .084.BThreeNanceHoransyndromefamiliesfromTurkey; patient with a height of 130 cm and numerous skeletal Threedifferent approaches formolecular diagnosis malformations including segmentation defects of the spine, rib anomalies and unequal leg length. Additionally, the patient HilalPırılP.Saraçoğlu1,YelizGüven2,SerminDiceAksakal2,Tuğba had bilateral ptosis, cleft palate and asymmetric dysmorphic Kalaycı3, Umut Altunoğlu4,5, Zehra Oya Uyguner6, Serpil Eraslan5, facial features. The patient underwent surgery for an aortic EsraBörklü-Yücel5, Hülya Kayserili Karabey4,5,7 stenosis due to a bicuspid valve, but no malformations of the kidneys or urinary tract have been identiﬁed. Intelligence was 1Koç University, Graduate School of Health Science, Cellular and normal. Molecular Medicine, İstanbul, Turkey, 2İstanbul University, Faculty of Results:TrioexomesequencingrevealedavariantinNADSYN1 Dentistry, Department of Pedodonty, İstanbul, Turkey, 3İstanbul c.1717G>A(p.Ala573Thr)inhomozygousform.Bothparentswere University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, carriers ofthe variantin heterozygousform. İstanbul, Turkey, 4Koç University, School of Medicine, Department of Conclusion:Thismissensevariantwasreportedinthreeofthe Medical Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey, 5Koç University Hospital, Genetic patientsdescribedbySzotetal.Previousfunctionalanalyseshave Diseases Evaluation Center, İstanbul, Turkey, 6İstanbul University, supported the pathogenicity of the variant. We report the ﬁrst FacultyofMedicine,DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,İstanbul,Turkey, adultpatientwithNADSYN1associatedcongenitalNADdeﬁciency 7KoçUniversity,GraduateSchoolofHealthSciences,İstanbul,Turkey. disorder and thus greatly expand the phenotypic spectrum. PhotosofthepatientandmeasurementsofNADmetaboliteswill Nance-Horan Syndrome (NHS,MIM: #302350) is an X-linked domi- beprovided. nant disease, featuring ocular abnormalities (congenital cataracts, E.Erbs:None. C.Brasen: None. M.Rasmussen: None. microphthalmia), dental abnormalities, facial dysmorphisms and intellectualdisabilityand/orautism.Malesshowfullpenetrancewith variableexpressivitywhilecarrierfemalesmanifestmildfeatures.Itis 
P11 .083.AFunctionalanalysisofanovel5’UTRvariantofthe caused by loss-of-function variants in NHS (Xp22.2). A regulator of LMX1B gene associated with a familial case of Nail-Patella actin remodeling, NHS may orchestrate actin regulatory protein Syndrome function in response to signaling events during development. It is ultra-rare,with60reportedcasestill2018.Patient1(
P1 )wasclinically Serena Cappato1, Aldamaria Puliti1,2, Maria Teresa Divizia2, diagnosed with NHS at 15 years, due to bilateral cataracts and Margherita Lerone2,Federico Zara1,2, Renata Bocciardi1,2 microcornea, Hutchinson incisors, mild intellectual defect. His mother had mild cataracts. Both had heterochromia iridis as 1Dept of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, additional ﬁnding. Their diagnoseswere conﬁrmed by sequencing. Maternal and Child Sciences (DINOGMI), University of Genova, Patient2(
P2 ), boy aged 6 months, was evaluated due to global Genova, Italy, 2UOC Genetica Medica, IRCCS Giannina Gaslini, developmentaldelayaccompanyingmicrophthalmia,cataracts,VSD. Genova, Italy. SNP-array testing was performed, with preliminary diagnosis of syndromicmicrophthalmia,revealingadeletionencompassingNHS. Introduction: Nail-Patella Syndrome (NPS, MIM#161200) is an In Family3(F3), maternal half-brothers [23(
P3 ), 36(
P4 )] and their autosomaldominantdisorderduetomutationorpartial/complete maternal uncle(
P5 ), had congenital cataracts. Additionally, F3 was deletionoftheLMX1Bgene,causinghaploinsufﬁciency.Dysplasia consulted due to neurobehavioral ﬁndings. 
P3 ’s solo-WES analysis of the nails, absent/hypoplastic patellae, presence of iliac horns revealedanNHSvariant,segregatingwiththephenotype. and elbow deformities are the cardinal features. Glaucoma and Patient Methods renal involvement from subclinical hematuria/proteinuria to end stagerenalfailurecanbealsopresent.Afamilywithrecurrenceof 
P1 ;Mother Sequencing c.246C>T(hemizygote;heterozygote) NPS was negative for canonical molecular and cytogenetic 
P2  SNP-Array 2.26Mbdeletion analysis of the LMX1B gene. The screening of the 5’UTR of the 
P3  WES c.1867delC gene revealed the presence of a novel heterozygous c.-174C>T variant, segregatingwith thephenotype. MaterialsandMethods:Investigationoftheroleofthevariant Here, we report ﬁve affected males and a manifesting female followed this workﬂow: in silico analysis of the 5’UTR; study of fromthreeunrelatedfamilies.Whiledirectsequencingconﬁrmed allele-speciﬁc expression in patients derived cells; evaluation of the clinical diagnosis of NHS in 
P1 , 
P2  not showing distinct the impact of 5’UTR variant, relative to the WT allele, on LMX1B featuresofNHS,algorithmicdiagnosticapproachwasapplied.F3 expressionin heterologous cell-based assays. hadpedigreesuggestiveforX-linkedinheritanceandWES,widely Results: In postnatal life, expression of LMX1B is restricted to used technique,wasutilized. poor accessible tissues. Therefore, we established a protocol to H.P. Saraçoğlu: None. Y. Güven: None. S. Aksakal: None. T. induce its expression in patients and controls derived lympho- Kalaycı:None.U.Altunoğlu:None.Z.Uyguner:None.S.Eraslan: blastsandobservedthatthemutatedallelewaslessexpressedat None.E. Börklü-Yücel: None.H.Kayserili Karabey:None. RNA level. The analysis of the WT and 5’UTR variant in heterologous cell-based assays demonstrated a negative effect of the variant on LMX1B protein expression, according to 
P11 .085.C Genetics of neural tube defects: new candidate haploinsufﬁciency mechanisms suggested for NPS. genesandcomplex mode ofinheritance Conclusions: 5’UTR sequences play an important role in the regulation of gene expression by different mechanisms. We Marie Faoucher1,2, Artem Kim1, Marie Beaumont1, Wilfrid Carre1,2, provideevidence thatavariantinthe5’UTRofLMX1Bcanaffect Hubert Journel3, Linda Akloul4, Laurent Pasquier4, Mélanie Fradin4, expressionofthegeneandmaybeinvolvedinNPSpathogenesis. ChloéQuelin4,AndreaManunta5,ErwanWatrin2,MarieDeTayrac1,2, S. Cappato: None. A. Puliti: None. M.T. Divizia: None. M. Sylvie Odent4,2, Christèle Dubourg1,2, Valérie Dupé2, Véronique Lerone:None. F. Zara: None.R. Bocciardi: None. David1,2 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 352 1Genetics laboratory, CHUPontchaillou, Rennes, France,2UMR 6290 canspeculateontwodifferenteffectsofTyr289Argmutation.First, CNRS,IGDR,UnivRennes1,Rennes,France,3Geneticsdepartment,CH mutation of aromatic bulky Tyr to non-aromatic much less bulky Vannes, Vannes, France, 4Genetics department, CHU Pontchaillou, Cys amino acid may inhibit the NARS homodimer formation or Rennes, France, 5Urology department, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, weaken the interaction between chains of the homodimer. France. Second, since Tyr289 is in the tRNA and NARS binding region, Tyr289Cys mutation may attenuate the speciﬁc tRNA-enzyme Neural tube defects (NTDs) are developmental disorders that binding. affect approximately 1 out of 1000 pregnancies and result in an S.G. Temel: None. S. Ozemri Sag: None. E. Eren: None. E. incomplete closure of the neural tube. Defects in the planar cell Deniz:None. polarity (PCP) and the folates metabolism pathway have been 
P11 .087.APositioneffectandofmodiﬁerRaspathwaygenes strongly associated with NTDs in animal models and recent inNeuroﬁbromatosis type Imicrodeletion syndrome studies of human cohorts. Furthermore, multifactorial and oligogenic pattern of inheritance have been suggested for this Paola Bettinaglio1,2, Viviana Tritto1, Eleonora Mangano3, Roberta raredisease.Wepresenthighthroughputsequencingresultsfrom Bordoni3, Chiara Castronuovo3, Marinella Volontè1, Claudia Cesar- acohortof102patientswithNTDs.MedicalExomeSequencingor etti4, Giulia Anna Cagnoli4, Cristina Battaglia1,3, Veronica Saletti5, WholeExomeSequencingwasperformedon74solocasesand28 Donatella Bianchessi6, Federica Natacci4, Marica Eoli6,Paola Riva1 families.Variantsanalysiswasfocusedonaninsilicopanelof250 genes previously implicated in NTDs.Deleterious variants in 1Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, candidate genes have been detected in more than half of the UniversitàdegliStudidiMilano,Segrate,Italy,2UniversitàdegliStudi cohort. Most represented pathways in terms of mutational di Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 3Institute of Biomedical Technologies, frequencies are: PCP (32% of variants), folate metabolism (15%), Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Segrate, Italy, 4Medical Genetics embryonic development (11%), SHH pathway (8.4%), apoptosis Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, genes(7%)andprimarycilia(4.2%).Themostrecurringgenesare Milano, Italy, 5Developmental Neurology Unit,Fondazione IRCCS CELSR1(8patients),FREM2(5),GLDC(4)orAPAF1(3).Moreover,we IstitutoNeurologicoCarloBesta,Milano,Italy,6MolecularNeuroncol- describe oligogenic mode of inheritance in 33% of our families. ogyUnit,FondazioneIRCCSIstitutoNeurologicoCarloBesta,Milano, These results conﬁrm the main implication of PCP and folate Italy. genesandenhancetheroleofSHHpathway,apoptosisandcilium genesinNTDs.Functionalexplorationsareneededtoconﬁrmthe Introduction: Neuroﬁbromatosis type1(NF1) microdeletion syn- implication of these genes and oligogenic combination analysis drome(MD)accountingfor5-11%ofNF1patientsischaracterized on our cohort is necessary to investigate the complex mode of by a severe phenotype.70% of patients show the 1.4 Mb type1 inheritance ofNTDs. deletion and variable expressivity of the phenotype suggesting M. Faoucher: None. A. Kim: None. M. Beaumont: None. W. theinvolvement ofdifferent mechanisms. Carre: None. H. Journel: None. L. Akloul: None. L. Pasquier: Materials-And-Methods: We studied 19 NF1-type1-MD None. M. Fradin: None. C. Quelin: None. A. Manunta: None. E. patients by targeted-NGS analysis with a panel of RAS/MAPK Watrin:None.M.DeTayrac:None.S.Odent:None.C.Dubourg: pathway genes, genes within and ﬂanking the 17q11.2 micro- None.V. Dupé: None. V.David: None. deletion, to investigate pseudo-dominance and genetic modiﬁer effect.We assayed position effect of deleted region by gene expressionanalysisof10genesﬂankingthedeletionbyRT-PCRon 
P11 .086.D Novel homozygous missense mutation in NAR
S1  RNAfromperipheralbloodcomparingasubgroupof15NF1-MD gene:Anewneurodevelopmentaldisorderwithmicrocephaly patients with 15 patients with an NF1 gene mutation.Haploinsuf- ﬁciency was established by evaluating the probability of LoF Sehime Gulsun TEME
L1 , Sebnem Ozemri Sag1, Erdal Eren1, Engin intolerance. Deniz2 Results: We identiﬁed 14rare variants(Table1) and classiﬁed “likely pathogenic”two variants in Ras pathway genes RAF1 and 1Bursa Uludag University, BURSA, Turkey, 2Yale University, New RASA1.The RAF1 variant is present in a patient with a cerebro- Haven,CT,USA. vascular pathology while the RASA1 in a patient with an uncommon glioma of the brainstem developed during infancy. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (ARSs) are enzymes essential for Expression analysis showed ﬁve hypo-expressed(IFT20,SSH2, protein translation. Asparaginyl-tRNA synthetase1 (NAR
S1 ) RHOT1,ZNF207,PSMD11) and two over-expressed genes(ABHD15, belongs to the class IIa family, based upon a 7 beta-strand BLMH)inNF1-MDpatientscomparedtoclassicalNF1patients,with protein structure, and functions in the cytoplasm responsible for a statistical signiﬁcance of p<0.05.Furthermore,we found that asparaginetRNAchargingintheselocations.Morerecentlyitwas ATAD5,NF1,OMG,RAB11FI
P4 ,andSUZ12 genes are intolerant to reportedthatdeNovoandBi-allelicpathogenicvariantsinNAR
S1  haploinsufﬁciency. Cause neurodevelopmental delay due to toxic gain-of-function Conclusions: Besides haploinsufﬁciency,position effect of NF1 and partial loss-of-function effects. We report 10 month old microdeletionandpossiblemodiﬁergenevariantsofRaspathway deceased boy who initially presented with microcephaly and could have a role in phenotype severity.Further genetic and dismorphic features. He was the second-born from a consangui- functional studies in a larger cohort of NF1-type1-MD will be neous marriage at 33+5 week gestational age. Clinical ﬁndings performedtoimprove genotype-phenotype correlation. included resistant epilepsy, neurodevelopmental delay, neonatal diabetes, inguinal hernia, hydrocele testis, humoral immunodeﬁ- ciency. Multiple cavernous malformation were observed on his brain tomography. ECHO ﬁndings revealed VSD and pulmonary stenosis. Exome sequencing revealed a homozygous missense mutation c.866A>G, (p.Tyr289Cys) in the NAR
S1  gene. The segregation of this rare variant in the family was conﬁrmed by Sanger sequencing. The 3D structure of the mutant protein was predicted computationally. Based on our modeling analyses we EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 353 and FISH analysis were used to asses skewed X-inactivation patterns. Expression of involved genes was evaluated by ddPCR- based Taqmananalysis frombloodRNA. Results: We characterized the breakpoint position in Xp22.13, witha15pbdeletion,disruptingtheintron1ofNHS.InXq27.3,the breakpointissituatedinanintergenicregion.Amicrohomologyof 5pb(TTATA)wasfoundinbothsides.SkewedX-inactivationwas not detected in his clinically unaffected mother. Topologically associated domains (TADs) aredisrupted bytheinversion. Conclusions: We report the ﬁrst chromosomal inversion disrupting the NHS gene, efﬁciently characterized by WGS, likely caused by microhomology‐mediated end‐joining mechanism. Moreover, we discussed the implication of ﬂanking genes and X inactivation on the differential features or expressivity of the phenotype. A. Damián: None. R. Ionescu: None. M. Rodríguez de Alba: None.A.Tamayo:None.M.Trujillo:None.M.Cotarelo:None.O. Pérez: None. L. de la Fuente: None. P. Mínguez: None. C. Villaverde:None. C.Ayuso: None. M.Corton: None. 
P11 .089.C Prenatal detection of a new disease-causing mutationin apreterm neonatewithNP-C disease SinjeGeuer Bioscientia, Ingelheim, Germany. Niemann-Pick C disease (NP-C) is an ultra-rare, autosomal *Novelvariants,notreportedinanyoftheconsulteddatabases recessive, neurovisceral lysosomal lipid storage disorder (LSD) P. Bettinaglio: None. V. Tritto: None. E. Mangano: None. R. with impaired intracellular lipid trafﬁcking, and an estimated Bordoni: None. C. Castronuovo: None. M. Volontè: None. C. incidence of at least 1/120 000 live births. The ﬁrst neurological Cesaretti:None.G.Cagnoli:None.C.Battaglia:None.V.Saletti: symptoms vary with age of onset and include delay of None. D. Bianchessi: None. F. Natacci: None. M. Eoli: None. P. developmental motor milestones, gait disturbances, increased Riva: None. falls, clumsiness, cataplexy, supranuclear gaze palsy, school problems and ataxia. Other common features are seizures and dystonia as well as dementia. Due to the extreme rarity of NP-C 
P11 .088.BWholegenomesequencingrevealsthebreakpoints disease, establishing a correct diagnosis is challenging, and is disrupting the NHS gene on a balanced pericentric inversion often realizedwith a substantial delay.Herewereport apreterm inapatient withNance-Horan syndrome male with postnatal severe respiratory problems, hepatospleno- megaly, bilateral hydroceles, anemia, hyperbilirubinemia, but no Alejandra Damián1,2, Raluca O Ionescu3, Marta Rodríguez de neurologicalabnormalities.Prenatally,antenatalscansat25weeks Alba1,2, Alejandra Tamayo1,2, María José Trujillo1,2, María Carmen of gestation demonstrated ascites. Prenatal trio whole exome Cotarelo3, Olga Pérez3, Lorena de la Fuente1,2, Pablo Mínguez1,2, sequencing (WES) detected two compound-heterozygous frame- Cristina Villaverde1,2, CarmenAyuso1,2, Marta Corton1,2 shift mutations in the gene NP
C1  of which one was novel (c.3294dup p.(Ile1099Tyrfs*22)). This result yielded to the diag- 1Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Fundación Jiménez Díaz, nosis of NP-C disease. Thus early diagnosis of rare and ultra-rare Madrid, Spain, 2Centre for Biomedical Network Research on Rare metabolicdiseases(eg,LSDs)canbefacilitatedbyusing(prenatal) Diseases, Madrid, Spain, 3University Hospital Clínico San Carlos, trioexome analysis, thusestablishingan early deﬁnite diagnosis. Madrid,Spain. S.Geuer:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest;Bioscientia. Introduction: Inversions are structural genomic variants that are generally balanced and detected by cytogenetic approaches. 
P11 .090.D Genetic and phenotypic spectrum in the NONO- However, they could lead to gene disruptions or even have associated syndromic disorder positionaleffectsleadingtodiseases.Nance-Horansyndromeisan X-linked disorder characterized by congenital cataracts, dental Franziska Roessler1, Tobias Bartolomaeus2, Norman Delanty3, anomalies,andotherfeatures.ItiscausedbymutationsintheNHS Marie T Greally4, Chiara Klöckner1, Bernt Popp1, Michael Weiden- gene on chromosome Xp22.13. Here, we present a strategy to bach5, Dominik Westphal6,Cordula MWolf7, VincentStrehlow1 characterize the breakpoints by Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) on an apparently balanced pericentric inversion X 1University of Leipzig Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany, 2Praxis für (p22.13-q27.3), maternally inherited, in a child with syndromic Humangenetik, Tübingen, Germany, 3FutureNeuro SFI Research bilateral cataracts and itsimplications inthephenotype. Centre, The Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland, Material and methods: 30X short-read Illumina paired-end 4School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, The Royal College WGS was performed in the proband and inversion breakpoints of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland, 5Department of Pediatric were conﬁrmed by PCR of the speciﬁc fragment junctions and Cardiology, Helios Leipzig Heart Center, Leipzig, Germany, 6Institute Sanger sequencing. EdU incorporation on lymphocytes culture EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 354 of Human Genetics, Technical University of Munich, Munich, MA
P2 K2, NF1, NRAS, RAF1, RASA2, RIT1, SHO
C2 , SO
S1 , SO
S2 , Germany, 7Department of Congenital Heart Defects and Pediatric SPRED1)orWES were applied. Cardiology, German Heart Center Munich, Technical University Results: We retrospectively reviewed the mutation spectrum Munich,DZHK(GermanCentreforCardiovascularResearch),partner and clinical outcome of patients with Noonan phenotype, site MunichHeart Alliance, Munich, Germany. conﬁrmed by molecular testing. Phenotypic data recorded included all clinical characteristics: abnormal growth, facial, The non-POU domain-containing octamer-binding (NONO) cardiac, thorax, and other features: learning difﬁculties, ocular protein is involved in multiple steps of gene regulation such anomalies, cryptorchidism, and disorders of pubertal timing, as RNA metabolism and DNA repair. Hemizygous pathogenic lymphatic anomalies. Our study highlights the role of molecular variants in the underlying X-chromosomal NONO gene were genetictestingintheprocessofdifferentialdiagnosisofNoonan conﬁrmed to cause a rare syndromic disorder. Through our in- syndrome. Among these mutations, the majority were previously house diagnostics and subsequent matchmaking, we identiﬁed reported and predicted to be pathogenic: PTPN11-c.923A>G for three unrelated male individuals with pathogenic NONO twocases,SHO
C2 -c.4A>G,RAF1-c.788T>C,KRAS-c.178G>C,except variants. For detailed comparison, we reviewed all published oneofSHO
C2 genewithpaternalinheritancec.1582C>Twhichis characterizations of theNONO-associated disorder.Todate,ten unknown. live-born and seven prenatal cases with either maternally Conclusions:Early,accuratediagnosisofNoonansyndromehas inheritedordenovovariantsinNONOwerereportedinfourteen importantimplicationsforgeneticcounselingandmonitoringfor families. All live-born individuals demonstrated global develop- alargenumberofpotentialhealthconditions.Theclinicalproﬁle mentaldelay.Mosthadheartmalformations(7/10),consistently and the genetic heterogeneity of RASopathies could make includingnon-compactioncardiomyopathy(7/7).Brainabnorm- choosingbetween paneltestingand WES analysisdifﬁcult. alities were reported in 8/10, consistently including dysgenesis V. Plaiasu: None. D. Ozunu: None. G. Motei: None. M. Ivan: or thickening of the corpus callosum (8/8). Seizures were None.C.Procopiuc: None. I.Gherlan: None. L.Vitan:None. described once in an individual additionally carrying a de novo 15q13.3 microdeletion. Prenatal cases were deﬁned by their cardiac phenotype encompassing non-compaction cardiomyo- 
P11 .092.B European Medical Education Initiative on Noonan pathy (5/7), cardiomegaly (1/7) and hypoplastic left heart Syndrome: A clinical practice survey assessing the diagnosis syndrome (1/7). Variant spectrum comprised truncating (10/14) and clinical management of individuals with Noonan Syn- and splice (4/14) variants. Our three patients carry two unique dromeacross Europe frameshiftingvariantsandanovelsplicevariant.RT-PCRshowed that the c.651-1G>C variant causes an in-frame deletion of 32 SixtoGarcía-Miñaúr1,EmmaBurkitt-Wright2,AlainVerloes3,Guftar aminoacids(p.Phe218_Lys249del).Modellingindicatedthatthe Shaikh4,JanLebl5,IngegerdÖstman-Smith6,CordulaWolf7,Eduardo aberrantproteinislikelymisfoldedanddegraded.Basedonour Ortega Castelló8, Marco Tartaglia9, Martin Zenker10, Thomas cohort and literature review, we provide a comprehensive Edouard11 overviewofthegeneticandphenotypicspectrumintheNONO- associated syndromic disorder. We further undermine loss-of- 1Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital function as the pathomechanism and extend the phenotypic Universitario La Paz Research Institute (IdiPAZ), Madrid, Spain, spectrumthroughasecondcasewithepilepsybutwithoutheart 2Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University malformations. NHS Foundation Trust and University of Manchester, Manchester, F. Roessler: None. T. Bartolomaeus: None. N. Delanty: None. United Kingdom, 3Department of Genetics, Hospital Robert Debré, M. Greally: None. C. Klöckner: None. B. Popp: None. M. Assistance Publique des Hopitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France, Weidenbach: None. D. Westphal: None. C. Wolf: None. V. 4Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Royal Hospital for Strehlow:None. Children, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 5Department of Pediatrics, CharlesUniversity, 2ndFaculty ofMedicine, Prague,CzechRepublic, 6Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, Gothenburg 
P11 .091.A Molecular and clinical spectrum of patients University, Gothenburg, Sweden, 7Department of Pediatric Cardiol- includedinRASopathiesgroupwithNoonanphenotypefrom ogyandCongenitalHeartDiseases,GermanHeartCenterMunichat aRomaniancohort the Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany, 8Department of Statistics and Data Science, Faculty of Statistical Studies, Complu- VASILICAPLAIASU1,DianaOzunu1,GabrielaMotei1,MihaelaIvan1, tense University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 9Genetics and Rare CameliaProcopiuc2,Iuliana Gherlan2, LuizaVitan3 Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, IRCCS,Rome,Italy,10InstituteofHumanGenetics,UniversityHospital 1INSMCAlessandrescu-Rusescu,RegionalCenterofMedicalGenetics, Magdeburg,Magdeburg, Germany,11Endocrine, Bone Diseases, and Bucharest,Romania,2NationalInstituteofEndocrinologyCIParhon, Genetics Unit, Children’s Hospital, Toulouse University Hospital, Bucharest, Romania,3ClinicalHospital CF2, Bucharest, Romania. Toulouse, France. Background: The RASopathies are a group of rare genetic Introduction:Noonansyndrome(NS)isadevelopmentaldisorder conditions caused by mutations in genes of the Ras-MAPK caused by Ras/MAPK signalling pathway gene variants, with pathwaybuttogetherrepresentoneofthemostcommongroups variable features including cardiac defects, short stature, distinc- of genetic disorders, affecting approximately 1 in 1,000 indivi- tive facial appearance, skeletal abnormalities, variable cognitive duals. Most individuals with RASopathies share common pheno- deﬁcits, and predisposition to certain cancers. Little is known types, such as a short stature, heart defects, facial abnormalities, about differences in the diagnosis and clinical management of andcognitiveimpairments,butwithvastheterogeneityinclinical individualswith NS across Europe. andgenetic features. Materials and Methods: The European Medical Education Materials and Methods: We describe 7 unrelated probands InitiativeonNSdevelopeda60-questionclinicalpracticesurveyto with clinical features highly suggestive of Noonan syndrome. examine the diagnosis and clinical management of NS across Genetic analyses using RASopathy genetic panel comprising 18 Europe. Physicians from specialities particularly involved in the genes (PTPN11, BRAF, CBL, HRAS, KAT6B, KRAS, LZTR1, MA
P2 K1, management of these patients (clinical geneticists, paediatric EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 355 endocrinologists,paediatriccardiologists)wereinvitedviaSurvey- werecombinedtogiveinsightintheprevalence,casereportsand Monkey,withsupportfromseveralEuropeansocieties.Differences case series were used to analyze the clinical presentation and betweenspecialties and countries were statistically assessed. severityof these abnormalities. Results: Data were analysed from 364 respondents from 20 Results: Searches through Pubmed and EMBASE resulted in 451 Europeancountries.MostrespondentscamefromFrance(20.9%), and608publications,respectively.Intotal,59publicationscouldbe Spain (17.6%), Italy (15.4%), Germany (15.7%), UK (8.2%) and the included.Amongthesearticleswere23casereports,17caseseries Czech Republic (5.8%). Respondents were evenly distributed and 19 cohort studies. The prevalence of lymphatic disorders was across clinical genetics (29.7%), paediatric endocrinology (40.1%) described in 14 cohorts. Prenatal lymphatic anomalies had a andpaediatriccardiology(30.2%).Ahighdegreeofconcordance prevalence of 25% for increased NT, 19% for pleural effusions and about care practices was apparent across participating countries. 33% for cystic hygroma in Noonan Syndrome. The prevalence of Whiledelayeddiagnosisdidnotemergeasacriticalissue,unmet postnatallymphaticdisorderscausedbypathogenicvariantsinRIT1 needs regarding transition and increased awareness of family was 32.6%, caused by pathogenic variants in SO
S1  44.4% and in supportgroups wereidentiﬁedascommon challenges. pathogenicPTPN1variants16.5%. Conclusion: Resultsfromthis survey provideacomprehensive Conclusion: Based on the available published literature about diagnosisandclinicalmanagementoverviewforpatientswithNS genetically proven Noonan Syndrome, it appears likely that the across Europe. Work is ongoing to further analyse the results to lifetimeprevalenceoflymphaticdisordersinNoonansyndromeis identifykeytargetsforimprovementofpatientcare.Theinitiative morethanthegenerally accepted 20%. was supported by an unrestricted grant from Novo Nordisk J. Draaisma: None. L. Kleimeier: None. J. Sleutjes: None. E. EuropeA/S. leenders: None.W. Klein: None. S. García-Miñaúr: None. E. Burkitt-Wright: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert wit- ness); Modest; Novo Nordisk, Springer. A. Verloes: None. G. 
P11 .094.D Lymphatic problems in patients with Noonan Shaikh: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Greater Syndrome Glasgow & Clyde NHS trust. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as Jos Draaisma1, Jessie Swarts2, Lotte Kleimeier1, Erika Leenders3, wellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;SolenoTherapeutics,Inc, Willemijn Klein1 OPKO Health. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Novo Nordisk, Pﬁzer, 1Rradboudumc Amalia children’s hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Ferring. J. Lebl: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, 2Radboudumc Amalia children’s hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Novo Nordisk, Pﬁzer, 3Rradboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Merck,Sandoz.I.Östman-Smith:None.C.Wolf:B.ResearchGrant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending Introduction:Noonansyndrome(NS)hasbeenassociatedwithan grants as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; German increasedriskoflymphaticproblems.Anestimatedprevalenceof Society Congenital Heart Disease and Pediatric Cardiology, 20% has commonly been reported, however, cohort studies are Deutsche Herzstiftung, Deutsche Stiftung für Herzforschung, scarce. The prevalence of lymphatic problems seem to differ Stiftung Kinderherz, Else Kröner-Forschungs-Stiftung, Deutsches between genes. Therefore, this study provide an overview of the Zentrum Herz-Kreislauf-Forschung. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; clinical presentation and prevalence of lymphatic problems in Modest; Novo Nordisk, Adrenomed AG, SIRS Therapeutics, Pliant, patient with NS and Noonan-like syndromes. In addition, KLIFO, Myokardia. E. Ortega Castelló: None. M. Tartaglia: E. genotype-phenotype correlations will be investigated. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Methods: This retrospective cohort study included patients intellectual property); Modest; Icahn School of Medicine. F. from the Radboud University Medical Center, who were clinically Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Novo Nordisk. M. Zenker: D. and genetically diagnosed with NS or Noonan-like syndrome till Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and September 2020. expert witness); Modest; Novo Nordisk, AstraZeneca. F. Consul- Results:Thestudypopulationconsistedof267patients,witha tant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest;NovoNordisk,FDNA.T.Edouard:C. median age of 18 years (IQR: 9-34). Prenatal lymphatic problems OtherResearchSupport(supplies,equipment,receiptofdrugsor mostoftenpresentedasanincreasednuchaltranslucencyand/or otherin-kind support); Modest; NovoNordisk. chylothorax. Prenatal lymphatic problems increased the risk of lymphatic problems during infancy (odds ratio 10.5, 95% conﬁdence interval 3.6-30.1). Postnatal lymphatic problems most 
P11 .093.C A systematic review of lymphatic disorders in often presented as lymphedema. The lifetime prevalence of NoonanSyndrome: lymphatic problems was 21%. Genotype-phenotype correlations showed a higher lifetime prevalence in patients with a SO
S2  or Jos Draaisma1, Lotte Kleimeier1, Julia Sleutjes1, Erika leenders2, SHO
C2  variants compared to NS patients with a PTPN11 variant Willemijn Klein1 (NSPTPN11 vsSO
S2 :p=0.01;NSPTPN11 vsSHO
C2 :p=0.02). Conclusion: Prenatal and postnatal lymphatic problems are 1Rradboudumc Amalia children’s hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands, commoninNSandNoonan-likesyndromepatients.Patientswith 2Rradboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands. prenatal lymphatic problems had an increased risk of lymphatic problemsduringinfancy.Anespeciallyhighlifetimeprevalenceof Introduction: This review aims to give an overview of the lymphaticproblems wasfoundinpatients withaSO
S2  orSHO
C2  prevalence and clinical presentation of lymphatic disorders in variant. genetically provenNoonansyndrome. J. Draaisma: None. J. Swarts: None. L. Kleimeier: None. E. Methods:LiteraturesearchthroughPubmedandEMBASEwas Leenders: None.W. Klein: None. performed until May 2020. All articles that included one or more genetically proven RASopathy and described the lymphatic phenotype were included. Quality assessment was performed 
P11 .095.A Clinical and molecular characterization of a group usingchecklistsdevelopedbytheJoannaBriggsInstitute.Cohorts ofSpanishand Germanpatients withNoonansyndrome EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 356 Vanesa López González1, Mary Ballesta-Martínez1, M. José Jean-François Deleuze16, Damien Sanlaville15,17, Christophe Phi- Sánchez-Soler1,AnaTeresaSerrano-Antón1,GuillermoGlover-López2, lippe1,3, Christel Thauvin-Robinet1,3,7, Laurence Faivre1,7,18, Antonio Begoña Ezquieta-Zubicaray3, Alma Küchler4, Beate Albrecht4, Dag- Vitobello1,3 mar Wieczorek5, Esther Zorio6, Christina Lissewski7, Martin Zenker7, EncarnaGuillén-Navarro1 1UFR Des Sciences de Santé, INSERM-Université de Bourgogne UMR1231 GAD « Génétique des Anomalies du Développement », 1Sección de Genética Médica. Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Clínico FHU-TRANSLAD,Dijon,France,2ServicedeGénétiqueMédicale,CHU Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 2Centro de d’Angers, Angers, France, 3Unité Fonctionnelle Innovation en BioquímicayGenéticaClínica.HospitalClínicoUniversitarioVirgende Diagnostic Génomique des Maladies Rares, FHU-TRANSLAD, CHU la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 3Laboratorio de Diagnóstico Molecular. Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 4CHU Nantes, Service de Génétique Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain, Médicale,Nantes,France,5INSERM,CNRS,UNIVNantes,CHUNantes, 45Institut für Humagenetik, Universtitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Ger- l’institut du thorax, Nantes, France, 6Department of Genetics and many, 5Institüt für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Düsseldorf, ReferenceCenterforDevelopmentalDisorders,NormandyCenterfor Düsseldorf, Germany, 6Servicio de Cardiología. Hospital Universitari i Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Politècnic La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 7Institut für Humangenetik, InsermU1245andRouenUniversityHospital,Rouen,France,7Centre UniversitätsklinikumMagdeburg,Magdeburg,Germany. de Référence Maladies Rares Anomalies du Développement et syndromes malformatifs, Centre de Génétique, FHU-TRANSLAD, Introduction: Noonan syndrome represents one of the most CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 8CHU Rennes, Service de Génétique prevalent disorders of multiple congenital anomalies.Objective. Clinique, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares CLAD-Ouest, Rennes, Clinical and molecular characterization of patients with NS. Estima- France, 9Service de Génétique Moléculaire et Génomique, CHU, tionofitsprevalenceandgenotype-phenotypecorrelationanalysis. Rennes, Rennes, France, 10Univ Rennes, CNRS, IGDR, UMR 6290, Materialandmethods:Retrospective,descriptiveandinterna- Rennes, France, 11Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de tional collaborative study. Review of medical records of patients Hautepierre, CHU Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 12Metabolic Unit- witha molecularly conﬁrmed NS diagnosis. DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,CHU&UniversityLiègeDomaineL Results: 88 cases. Main referral units: General Pediatrics and Sart-Tilman Bât B35, Liège, Belgium, 13Université de Reims Cham- Pediatric Cardiology. Mean age at referral: 12.2 years. Estimated pagne-Ardenne, Reims, Reims, France, 14Service de Génétique, CHU prevalence for NS: 1/6054 live newborns. Main ﬁndings: heart Reims,Reims,France,15DepartmentofGeneticsandReferenceCenter defects (76%), short stature (53%), microcephaly (40%) and for Developmental Disorders, Lyon University Hospital, Groupement intellectual disability (ID) (35%). All those classiﬁed as typical Hospitalier Est, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 16Université met van der Burgt diagnostic criteria compared to 75% of the Paris-Saclay, CEA, Centre National de Recherche en Génomique atypical ones (p=0.003). Association between low weight, short Humaine,Evry,France,17GENDEVTeam,CRNL,INSERMU1028CNRS stature, microcephaly, motor delay and cardiac surgery with ID, UMR5292UCB
L1 ,Lyon,France,18InstitutGIMI,CHUdeDijon,Hôpital also between central nervous system abnormalities and seizures. d’Enfants, Dijon, France; Oncogénétique, Centre de Lutte contre le PTPN11 was the most frequently mutated gene (74%). Higher CancerGeorges François Leclerc, Dijon, France. percentage of microcephaly in PTPN11 and hypertrophic cardio- myopathy in RAF1. Neurodevelopment and height were less Developmental disorders are extremely heterogeneous, but affectedin SO
S1 . typical clinical features reminiscent of recognizable OMIM Conclusions:WepresentawideseriesofNScaseswithclinical syndromes, associated with well-known causative genes, repre- manifestations, mostly, in accordance with previous publications. sent a valuable help in the identiﬁcation of causative genetic There is a large prevalence of microcephaly, higher in PTPN11, variants.However,ﬁrst-linegeneticinvestigationssuchastargeted associated with ID and behavioral alteration, not previously sequencing,genepanelorexomesequencingmayfailtoreacha reported. There appears to be greater severity of systemic molecular diagnosis, resulting in a multiplication of diagnostic involvement accompanying the severity of the craniofacial tests. phenotype. The estimated prevalence in Murcia is lower than We recruited 15 individuals with typical clinical diagnosis of previouslyreported,thedevelopmentofstrategiestoimproveits OMIMdiseaseswithautosomalrecessivemodeofinheritanceand detectionbeing necessary. Greater awarenessofadult specialties asingleheterozygousvariant(9/15),orwithX-linkedrecessiveor towards this groupofdiseases isnecessary. autosomal dominant inheritance and no causative variant (6/15), V. López González: None. M. Ballesta-Martínez: None. M. identiﬁedbyﬁrst-linegenetictests.Weappliedatwo-stepanalysis Sánchez-Soler:None.A.Serrano-Antón:None.G.Glover-López: includingsingletongenomesequencing(GS)complementedwith None. B. Ezquieta-Zubicaray: None. A. Küchler: None. B. transcriptomics analysis in blood or ﬁbroblasts samples when Albrecht: None. D. Wieczorek: None. E. Zorio: None. C. required. Lissewski:None. M. Zenker: None.E. Guillén-Navarro: None. GSaloneidentiﬁedﬁvecausalsinglenucleotidevariants(SNVs)/ indels, four of which missed by ﬁrst-line targeted tests, and four structuralvariants(includingtwodeletions(6,5kband4,2kb),one 
P11 .096.B Typical clinical diagnosis and negative ﬁrst-line balanced translocation and one complex rearrangement). mRNA- molecular results: when genome sequencing and transcrip- seqanalysispermittedtovalidatethedeleteriousoutcomeoftwo tomics integration helps untangle unexplained rare Mende- complex rearrangements detected by GS and also ﬁnd one lian diseases structural variant and one deep intronic SNV not previously identiﬁedby GS alone. EstelleColin1,2,YannisDuffourd1,PatrickCallier1,3,EmilieTisserant1, We show that typical OMIM disorders with negative or Thomas Besnard4,5, Alice Goldenberg6, Benjamin Cogné4,5, Bertrand inconclusive ﬁrst-line results can be solved by a sequential Isidor4,5, Arthur Sorlin1,7, Sébastien Moutton1,7, Julian Delanne1,7, deployment of GS and mRNA-seq. These approaches allowed us Ange-Line Bruel1,3, Frédéric Tran Mau-Them1,3, Anne-Sophie to conﬁrm a molecular diagnosis in 87% (13/15) of our cohort. Denommé-Pichon1,3, Mélanie Fradin8, Christel Dubourg9,10, Magali Overall, GS and mRNA-seq can be integrated in the diagnostic Gorce2,SalimaElchehadeh11,François-GuillaumeDebray12,Martine routine, allowing to establish new molecular diagnoses not Doco Fenzy13,14, Kévin Uguen15, Anne Boland16, Robert Olaso16, otherwise identiﬁable bystandard approaches. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 357 E. Colin: None. Y. Duffourd: None. P. Callier: None. E. 1Hospital Clinico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 2Unidad de Genética Tisserant: None. T. Besnard: None. A. Goldenberg: None. B. Clínica, Servicio de Análisis Clínicos, Instituto de Medicina del Cogné:None.B.Isidor:None.A.Sorlin:None.S.Moutton:None. Laboratorio, Madrid, Spain, 3Servicio de Neonatología, Instituto del J. Delanne: None. A. Bruel: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. A. Niño y Adolescente., Madrid, Spain, 4Nimgenetics New Integrated Denommé-Pichon: None. M. Fradin: None. C. Dubourg: None. Medical Genetics, Madrid, Spain, 5Sistemas Genómicos Grupo M.Gorce:None.S.Elchehadeh:None.F.Debray:None.M.Doco Biomédico ASCIRES,Valencia, Spain. Fenzy:None.K.Uguen:None.A.Boland:None.R.Olaso:None. Introduction: The hemifacial microsomia (HMF) is a heteroge- J. Deleuze: None. D. Sanlaville: None. C. Philippe: None. C. neous genetic disorder affecting the development of the Thauvin-Robinet: None. L.Faivre: None. A.Vitobello: None. structures derived from the ﬁrst and second branchial arches such thejaw, thebuccal structures and thehearing system. 
P11 .097.CContributionofgenomiccopy-numbervariationsin Material and methods: The patient is a 7-month-old female aBrazilian cohort ofsyndromic orofacial clefts whopresentsthefollowingclinicalmanifestations:rightHMF;left preauricular tag; microtia and absence of auditory canal in the Rosana M. Candido-Souza1, Roseli M. Zechi-Ceide1, Nancy M. rightearwithhearingloss;absenceofrightascendingramusand Kokitsu-Nakata1, Camila W. Alvarez1, Siulan Vendramini-Pittoli1, mandibularbody;rightzygomaticarchhypoplasiawithdeviation Juliana F. Mazzeu2, Hubertus J. Eussen3, Annelies de Klein3, of the mouth commissure; mild micrognathia; normal palate and Fernanda S.Jehee3 aninterventricularcommunicationspontaneouslyclosed.Cerebral ultrasoundwasnormal.X-rayshowed novertebralabnormalities. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Hospital for Rehabilitation of Next-generationsequencingusingavirtualpanelof55genesfor CraniofacialAnomalies(HRCA),UniversityofSãoPaulo,Bauru,Brazil, HMFand/orpreauricular tags andarray-CGH were performed. 2FederalUniversityofBrasília,Brasília,Brazil,3DepartmentofClinical Results: Both tests detected a de novocopy numbervariation Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Nether- consisting in a pathogenic interstitial gain of one copy at band lands. 14q22q23.1, which is at least 1,33 megabases. It involves four OMIMgenes,ofwhichtheOTX2standsoutbecauseitsduplication Background: Orofacial clefts represent ~30% of all congenital was previously associated with HMF as it is shown in following malformations being 30% of cleft lip with or without cleft palate table: and 50% of cleft palate cases syndromic. Chromosomal abnorm- Conclusions: This result and the previous cases suggest that alities, mainly in chromosomes 13, 18 and 22, are found in 11 to the gain of one copy at band 14q22.3q23.1 is one of the 23% of syndromic cases. Incomplete penetrance and the of etiological region of HMF and the OTX2 is the most likely causal investigation in large cohorts make it difﬁcult to identify other gene.DeterminingtheHFMetiologyallowsanaccuratediagnosis chromosomal regions highly related to this malformation. Aims: andoffers reproductive andfamilial geneticadvice. Investigate thecontribution of CNVs insyndromic orofacial clefts R. Oancea-Ionescu: None. C. Herrero-Forte: None. M. Fenol- andidentify new regionsand genesherewithassociated. lar-Cortés: None. E. Criado-Vega: None. M. Calvente -Garcia: Methods:62syndromic orofacial clefts patientswere analyzed None.D.Diego-Álvarez: None. C.Cotarelo-Pérez: None. using MLPA for subtelomeric and common microdeletion/micro- duplication syndromes. Patients with normal or inconclusive results wereanalyzedwith microarray. 
P11 .099.A PAC
S2 , PAC
S1 and VACTERLaclinical overlap Results: MLPA detected six abnormalities (9.7%): two deletion 22q11.21, two unbalanced translocations (dup 3p/del 7q; del 4p/ Hannah Massey, JohnDean, Dawn O’Sullivan, Stephen Tennant dup11p)andtwoterminaldeletions(del18p;del18q).Microarray showed pathogenic CNVs in 11 patients (17.7%): deletions at 1q, Aberdeen royalinﬁrmary, Aberdeen, United Kingdom. 16p11.2, 18q, 19p13.2, distal 22q11.21 and Xp11; duplications at 15q13 and 18q12 and a complex rearrangement in chromosome Whole exome sequencing (WES) has led to the discovery of new 13. One patient had a deletion at NRXN1 and six patients (9.7%) genes involved in developmental delay. Two of these are the presented variants of unknown signiﬁcance. A strong suggestion evolutionarylinkedproteinsPAC
S1 andPAC
S2 ,whichfunctionas ofconsanguinity was foundin8.9% ofthecases. metabolic switches. We present a case of patient with the Conclusion: Genomic microrearrangements (27.4%) play an previously described PAC
S2  c.624G>A; p.Glu209Lys variant. importantroleinsyndromicorofacialclefts.WedetectedCNVsin However, while our patient has the infantile epilepsy, develop- regionsnotfrequentlyrelatedtooralclefts(1q,15q13,16p11)and mental delay and cerebella hypoplasia previously described, he describe cleft lip in Malan syndrome (19p13.2). Consanguinity also had novel features. This included anal atresia, Tetralogy of plays an important role in onset of orofacial clefts, by increasing Fallot and vertebral abnormalities, meaning he was previously theriskof arecessive disease or incrementing risk alleles. diagnosed with VACTERL. Cardiac abnormalities are more R.M. Candido-Souza: None. R.M. Zechi-Ceide: None. N.M. commonly seen in PAC
S1  variants and this case strengthens the Kokitsu-Nakata: None. C.W. Alvarez: None. S. Vendramini- phenotypic similarities between the two conditions. There are Pittoli:None.J.F.Mazzeu:None.H.J.Eussen:None.A.deKlein: plausible genetic mechanisms causing the cardiac and anal None.F.S. Jehee:None. anomalies seen in our patient and suggest the PAC
S2  disease spectrumshould be expanded. H. Massey: None. J. Dean: None. D. O’Sullivan: None. S. 
P11 .098.D A gain of one copy at band 14q22.3q23.1 that Tennant: None. involvestheOTX2geneisimplicatedinhemifacialmicrosomia Raluca Oancea-Ionescu1,2, Clara Herrero-Forte1,2, Maria Fenollar- 
P11 .101.C Low risk of embryonal cancer in PIK3CA-Related Cortés1,2, Enrique Criado-Vega1,3, Maria Calvente -Garcia4, Dan OvergrowthSpectrum:impactonscreeningrecommendations Diego-Álvarez5, CarmenCotarelo-Pérez1,2 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 358 Laurence Faivre1,2, Jean-Charles Crépin1,3,4, Manon Réda5, Sophie every3monthshasbeendiscussedfortheriskofWT.Weaimed Nambot5, Virginie Carmignac1,4, Caroline Abadie6, Audrey Putoux7, todeterminetheriskofcancerinpatientswithconﬁrmedPROSto Juliette Mazereeuw-Hautier8, Aude Maza8, Maxime Luu9, Yannis evaluatetherelevance ofscreening recommendations. Duffourd1, Christophe Philippe1, Christel Thauvin-Robinet1, Martin Patients and methods: The development of a cancer was Chevarin1, Claire Abasq-Thomas10, Jeanne Amiel11, Stéphanie searched within 267 PROS patients. A literature review of cancer Arpin12, Geneviève Baujat13, Didier Bessis14, Emmanuelle Bourrat15, reports inPROS wasperformed. OdileBoute16,Anne-ClaireBursztejn17,NicolasChassaing18,Christine Results: Median age at last visit was 11.2 years (range 4 Coubes19, Patrick Edery7, Salima El Chehadeh20, Alice Goldenberg21, months-68years).Fivepatientsdevelopedcancer(1.9%):nephro- Smail Hadj-Rabia22, Damien Haye23, Bertrand Isidor24, Marie-Line blastoma at age 9; granulosa juvenile tumor at age 16; gastric Jacquemont25,DidierLacombe26,BrunoLeheup27,LudovicMartin28, adenocarcinoma at age 52 ; myelodysplasic syndrome at 55 and Anabel Maruani29, Fanny Morice-Picard26, Florence Petit16, Alice basocellular carcinoma at 59 in the same patient; clear cell renal Phan30,LucillePinson19,EvePuzenat31,MassimilianoRossi7,Renaud carcinomaatage38.Intheliterature,6casesofWT(0.12%)and4 Touraine32, Clémence Vanlerberghe16, Marie Vincent24, Catherine cases of other cancers have been reported out of 483 PIK3CA Vincent-Delorme16, Sandra Whalen33, Marjolaine Willems19, Tristan patients, carying p.His1047Leu/Arg in particular (15 patients with Mirault34,Paul Kuentz1,35, Pierre Vabres1,3,4,2 WT, 40 with other cancer out of 820 patients with no molecular conﬁrmation). A focus has been given to the location of the 1Equipe INSERMUMR1231,Génétique desAnomaliesduDéveloppe- hypertrophy. ment, Université Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France, 2Fédéra- Discussion: The risk of WT in PROS appears lower than 5%, tion Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translationnelle et Anomalies therefore with insufﬁcient evidence to recommend routine duDéveloppement,CHUDijonBourgogne,Dijon,France,3Servicede abdominal imaging. Long-term follow-up studies are needed to Dermatologie, CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 4Centre de concludeforothercancertypes,aswellasarelationshipwiththe référenceMaladiesRaresGénétiquesàExpressionCutanée(MAGEC), extentof tissue mosaicism. CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 5Service de génétique, CHU Dijon L. Faivre: None. J. Crépin: None. M. Réda: None. S. Nambot: Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 6Département d’Oncologie Médicale, None.V.Carmignac:None.C.Abadie:None.A.Putoux:None.J. Saint-Herblain, France, 7Département de Génétique, Hospices Civils Mazereeuw-Hautier: None. A. Maza: None. M. Luu: None. Y. de Lyon, Lyon, France, 8Service de Dermatologie, CHU Toulouse, Duffourd: None. C. Philippe: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. Toulouse, France, 9Centre d’Investigation Clinique – module plur- M. Chevarin: None. C. Abasq-Thomas: None. J. Amiel: None. S. ithématique,CHUDijonBourgogne,Dijon,France,10Départementde Arpin:None.G.Baujat:None.D.Bessis:None.E.Bourrat:None. Pédiatrie et Génétique Médicale, CHU Brest Morvan, Brest, France, O. Boute: None. A. Bursztejn: None. N. Chassaing: None. C. 11Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Coubes: None. P. Edery: None. S. El Chehadeh: None. A. Paris,France,12ServicedeGénétiqueClinique,CHRUdeTours,Tours, Goldenberg: None. S. Hadj-Rabia: None. D. Haye: None. B. France, 13Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Isidor: None. M. Jacquemont: None. D. Lacombe: None. B. Malades, Paris, France, 14Département de Dermatologie, CHRU de Leheup: None. L. Martin: None. A. Maruani: None. F. Morice- Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 15Service de dermatologie, CHU St- Picard:None.F.Petit:None.A.Phan:None.L.Pinson:None.E. LouisLariboisière,Paris,France,16ServicedeGénétiqueClinique,CHU Puzenat: None. M. Rossi: None. R. Touraine: None. C. Lille,Lille,France,17ServicedeDermatologie,CHUdeNancy,Nancy, Vanlerberghe: None. M. Vincent: None. C. Vincent-Delorme: France, 18Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Toulouse, Toulouse, None. S. Whalen: None. M. Willems: None. T. Mirault: None. P. France, 19Département de Génétique Médicale, Maladies rares et Kuentz:None. P. Vabres: None. Médecine Personnalisée, CHRU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 20Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France,21ServicedeGénétique,CHUdeRouenetCentreNormandde 
P11 .102.DA3,195kbduplicationat2q14.3inaprobandwith Génomique Médicale et Médecine Personnalisée, Rouen, France, a t(17;19)(p13.1;p13.3)mat is most likely associated with 22ServicedeDermatologieetCentredeRéférencedesMaladiesRares craniofacial dimorphisms, developmental and neurological Génétiques à Expression Cutanée (MAGEC), Université Paris anomalies Descartes-SorbonneParisCité,InstitutImagine,HôpitalUniversitaire Necker-EnfantsMalades,Paris,France,23ServicedePédiatrie,CHUde Natália Oliva-Teles1,2,3, Mariana Marques4, Manuela Mota- Tours, Tours, France, 24Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Freitas1,2, Cristina Candeias1,2, Joana Fino4, Ana Fortuna1,2, Dezso Nantes, Nantes, France, 25Unité de Génétique Médicale, CHU de la David4 Réunion, Saint Pierre, France, 26Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU deBordeaux,Bordeaux,France,27ServicedeGénétiqueClinique,CHU 1Centro de Genética Médica Doutor Jacinto Magalhães/Centro de Nancy, Nancy, France, 28Service de Dermatologie, CHU d’Angers, Hospitalar Universitário do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Unit for Multi- Angers, France, 29Service de Dermatologie, Unité de Dermatologie disciplinary Research in Biomedicine, Institute of Biomedical Sciences Pédiatrique,Tours,France,30ServicedeDermatologie,CHUdeLyon, Abel Salazar, University of Porto (UMIB/ICBAS/UP), Porto, Portugal, Lyon, France, 31Service de Dermatologie, CHU Besançon, Besançon, 3DepartamentodeMedicinadaComunidadeInformaçãoeDecisãoem France,32ServicedeGénétiqueClinique,CHUdeSaint-Etienne,Saint- Saúde, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, Etienne,France,33UnitéFonctionnelledeGénétiqueClinique,Hôpital 4NationalHealthInstitute“DoutorRicardoJorge”,Lisbon,Portugal. Armand-Trousseau,Paris,France,34Centrederéférencedesmaladies vasculairesrares,CentreEuropéenGeorgesPompidou,Paris,France, Introduction: Characterization of naturally occurring, cytogenomi- 35Génétique Biologique Histologie, CHRU de Besançon, Besançon, cally visible or cryptic structural variants associated with human France. disorders is important for identifying pathogenic alterations that otherwisecouldbedifﬁcultorimpossibletoidentify. Introduction: The PIK3CA-Related Overgrowth Spectrum (PROS) Case Report/Methods: Proband DGR
C0021  presents with a encompasses various conditions caused by mosaic activating familialapparently balanced t(17;19)(p13.1;p13.3)mat, craniofacial PIK3CA mutations. PIK3CA somatic mutations are frequently dysmorphisms, global developmental delay and aggressive involved in various cancer types. Some overgrowth syndromes behavior. Her carrier mother and grandmother were phenotypi- are associated with an increased risk of Wilms’ tumour (WT) cally normal, whereas her father died of a cerebral aneurysm warranting screening. In PROS,abdominal ultrasound monitoring rupture in his late 20s. Long-insert genome and Sanger EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 359 sequencing were performed for identifying structural variants in Compleja pediátrica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, theirresponsible for theclinicalphenotype. 6Unidaddecuidadosintensivosneonatales,HospitalUniversitarioLa Results:The17p13.1breakpointatg.9,819,770disruptsIV
S1 of Paz, Madrid, Spain, 7Servicio de pediatría, Hospital Universitario La GSG1
L2 , whereas the 19p13.3 breakpoint at 6,573,218, is Paz,Madrid, Spain. within a low-complexity region. Based on deletions at the breakpoint regions the seq[GRCh38/hg38] t(17;19) Introduction: Genetic disorders contribute signiﬁcantly to the (19pter→19p13.3::17p13.1→17qter;17pter→17p13.1::19p13.3 mortality and morbidity of affected paediatric patients, requiring →19qter)mat is considered unbalanced. Neither the disrupted prolonged admissions in NICU, PICU or complex hospitalization genenorthoselocalizedinthedisruptedtopologicallyassociated facilities. Early identiﬁcation of the genetic cause favour the domains(TADs)explainedthereportedphenotype.Subsequently efﬁcient management of these children, provide prognostic a 3,195 kb duplication was identiﬁed at 2q14.3. Two genes information and allow genetic counselling of families. We have associated with autosomal dominant disorders, PROC testedandsetuparapidworkﬂowmethodforachievingagenetic (OMIM*612283) and H
S6 ST1 (OMIM*604846) are localized within diagnosis through rapid whole exome sequencing (rWES) in theduplicatedregion.Thisalterationiseitherpaternallyinherited critically ill or children with high complexity with a suspected orde novo. genetic disorder in the environment of a tertiary paediatric Conclusions: We showed that the translocation is nonpatho- hospitalof theSpanishNationalHealth System. genicandidentiﬁedamostlikelypathogenicpaternallyinherited MaterialsAndMethods:Overthelastyear,ourworkinggroup duplication. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst reported case identiﬁed and implemented the clinical and laboratory needs to leading to duplication of PROC. While the pathogenic effect of achieve a genetic diagnosis through rWES. Thirteen children PROCdeﬁciencyiswellknown,theeffectofapossibleduplication meetingtheinclusioncriteriawerestudiedusingatrioapproach. of PROC is unknown. Nevertheless, we propose that the clinical Results: We found a causative variant in genes known to be phenotypes in the proband and her father are caused by this associated with developmental disorders in 6 of the 13 cases duplication. (46%). Additionally, we found variants of potential research N. Oliva-Teles: None. M. Marques: None. M. Mota-Freitas: interest in 3 cases. Mean time for achieving a genetic result was None. C. Candeias: None. J. Fino: None. A. Fortuna: None. D. 30,8days(median=30,std=9.2) after enrolmentin thestudy. David:None. Conclusions:Wehavesetupaworkﬂowtoassesstheimpactof rWES in paediatric patients admitted to NICU, PICU or complex paediatric unit. A genetic result was achieved in a mean time of 
P11 .103.A Implementation and assessment of a rapid Whole 30,8 days. The diagnostic and clinical utility is veriﬁed by a ExomeSequencingprotocolinpaediatricpatientsadmittedto diagnosticrateof46%.Impactinpatientmanagementand costs intensive care units or highly complex paediatric units in a derivedfromthisprotocolduringtheﬁrstyearofimplementation tertiaryhospital ofthe SpanishNational Health System willbe discussed. M.PacioMiguez:None.S.García-Miñaúr:None.Á.delPozo: Marta Pacio Miguez1, Sixto García-Miñaúr1,2,3, Ángela del Pozo1,2, None. J. Menéndez Suso: None. F. Climent Alcalá: None. P. Juan José Menéndez Suso4, Francisco J. Climent Alcalá5, Patricia Álvarez García: None. M. Sánchez Holgado: None. C. Jiménez Álvarez García6, María Sánchez Holgado6, Carmen Jiménez Rodrí- Rodríguez: None. J. Manuel Montejo: None. R. Mena: None. S. guez1, Juan Manuel Montejo1, Rocío Mena1, Sofía Siccha7, Mario Siccha:None.M.Solís:None.V.FernandezMontaño:None.M. Solís1,VictoriaEugeniaFernandezMontaño1,MªVictoriaGomezdel Gomez del Pozo: None. N. Gallego Onís: None. M.E. Rubio Pozo1, Natividad Gallego Onís1, María Esther Rubio Martín1, Pablo Martín:None.P.Lapunzina:None.S.RodríguezNovoa:None.F. Lapunzina1,2,3, Sonia Rodríguez Novoa1, Fernando Santos- Santos-Simarro: None. M. Palomares-Bralo: None. Simarro1,2,3, María Palomares-Bralo1,2,3 1Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular, INGEMM, Madrid, Spain, 
P11 .104.B Spectrum of mutations in Ras-MAPK pathway in 2CIBERER, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enferme- Russian probands dadesRaras,ISCIII,Madrid,Spain,3EuropeanReferenceNetwork,ERN ITHACA,Madrid,Spain,4ServiciodeCuidadosIntensivosPediátricos, Anna Orlova, Alexander Polyakov, Polina Gundorova, Oksana Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 5Unidad de Patología Ryzhkova Clinicalphenotypecomparisonsbetweenourpatientandthepreviouscaseswithgainofonecopyatband14q22q23.1thatincludeOTX2gene Our Ballesta-MartínezMJ,2013PMID:23794319 ZielinskiD,2014PMID:24816892 Ehrenberg patient M,2019PMID: 31814694 Familyrelationship Index Index Father Uncle Cousin Cousin Cousin´s Maternal Maternal Mother Brother index Indexcase Father case case ´sson daughter grand- great-uncle case mother Facialasymmetry + + + - - + + + + + + + + + Facialcleft - + + - - + - + + + + + - ND Temporo-mandibular + + - - ND ND ND + + + + + - ND jointabnormality Earconstriction/cleft/ + + - - - + + - - - - + + ND microtia Auricularpits - + - - - + + ND ND ND ND ND - ND Pre-orpost-auricular + + + + + + + + - + + + - ND tags Stenoticnarrowear + + - ND ND + + ND ND ND ND ND - ND canals Abnormalpalate - - - - - - - ND ND ND ND ND - ND Micrognathia + + - - - - - - + - + + + ND Hearingloss + + - - ND - - ND ND ND ND ND + ND EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 360 Federal State Budgetary Scientiﬁc Institution "Research Centre for 5MolecularGeneticsUnit,FondazioneCasaSollievodellaSofferenza, Medical Genetics", Moscow, RussianFederation. IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy, 6Department of Medicine, University "Magna Graecia", Catanzaro, Italy, 7Genetics Introduction:VariantsingenesrelatedtotheRas-MAPKpathway and Rare Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino causediseasesthatformthelargegroupofrasopathies.Themost Gesù, Rome, Italy, 8Department of Translational Medical Sciences, common syndrome in this group is Noonan syndrome. To date, University of Naples Federico II & Institute of Endocrinology and the incidence of rasopathiesis 1-2 per 20000 newborns. It is Experimental Oncology, National Research Council, Naples, Italy. difﬁcult toclinically differentiate Rasopathies. MaterialsandMethods:DNAof308unrelatedprobandswith Introduction: Abnormalities of the immune system are rarely Rasopathies were analysed with a custom panel (23 genes) for reportedin patientswith RASopathies. Theaim ofthis study was newgenerationsequencingonIonTorrent
S5 .Thecoveragewas toinvestigatetheprevalenceofimmunesystemdysfunctionina 91-100%ofthemajor Ras-MAPK genes. cohort ofpatients affected byRASopathies. Results:Outof308probands,pathogenicandlikelypathogenic MaterialsandMethods:Acohortof69patientsandage-and variants were found in 121 cases. The results are shown in the sex-matchedcontrolgroupwereenrolled.Autoimmunedisorders table.NovelvariantsclassiﬁedasVOUSwerefoundin5,2%cases were investigated according to international consensus criteria. andthey requirefurther research. Immuneframeworkwasalsoevaluatedbyimmunoglobulinlevels, lymphocyte subpopulations, autoantibodies levels and panel of Gene Number(percent)of Numberofmutations inﬂammatory molecules, inboth patients and controls. pathogenicandLikely haven’tbeendescribed Results: Frequent upper respiratory tract infections were pathogenicvariants earlier recorded in 2 patients (2.89%), psoriasis was diagnosed in 1 PTPN11 63(52%) 1 (1.45%),aswellasalopecia.LowIgAlevelsweredetectedin8/44 SO
S1  11(9%) 2 patients (18.18%), low CD8 T cells in 13/35 (37.14%). Anti-tg and BRAF 11(9%) anti-TPO antibodies were detected in 3/24 patients (12.5%), anti r-TSHin2(8.33%),allineuthyroidism.Alltestedpatientsshowed NF1 9(7.4%) 3 increased inﬂammatory molecules compared to controls. Serum SHO
C2  8(6.6%) 1 IgA and CD8 levels were signiﬁcantly lower in patients than in HRAS 4(3.3%) controls (p0,00685;p 0,000656 respectively). RIT1 3(2.5%) Conclusions. A major tendency to autoimmune phenomena than to immunodeﬁciency was recorded in patients as demon- KRAS 3(2.5%) 1 strated by the ﬁnding of circulating autoantibodies, low levels of MA
P2 K1 3(2.5%) 2 CD8 T cells and high levels of inﬂammatory cytokines. These SPRED1 2(1.65%) 1 ﬁndings may anticipate the detection of overt autoimmune CBL 1(0.83%) disease.Inordertorecommendroutinescreeningforautoimmu- nity in asymptomatic patients, continuous monitoring will be LZTR1 1(0.83%) 2 requiredfor possible emergenceof autoimmunedisease. NRAS 1(0.83%) M.A. Siano: None. M. Falco: None. V. Marchetti: None. S. RAF1 1(0.83%) 3 Pagano: None. F. Di Candia: None. D. De Brasi: None. A. De Luca: None. V. Pinna: None. S. Sestito: None. D. Concolino: None. M. Tartaglia: None. P. Strisciuglio: None. V. D’Esposito: Conclusions: The proportions of diseases and mutation None.S.Cabaro:None.G.Perruolo:None.P.PietroFormisano: spectrum in the group of patients with Rasopathies from the None.D.Melis: None. Russia were determined. Most of the the cases (52%) are due to mutationsinthePTPN11gene,followedbythefrequencyofSO
S1 , 
P11 .106.D Novel mutation and report of two new physical BRAF, NF1, SHO
C2  and others. This data is comparable with the ﬁndingsin renpenning syndrome incidenceinotherpopulations.Itwasnotpossibletoidentifythe causeof thedisease in61%of cases. Hande Kaymakcalan1, Adife Gulhan Ercan Sencicek2, Ayse Nurcan A.Orlova:None.A.Polyakov:None.P.Gundorova: None.O. Cebeci3,Ali Seyﬁ YalimYalcin4 Ryzhkova: None. 1Demiroglu Bilim University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Masonic Medical Research Institute, Utica, NY, USA, 3Private practise, Erlangen, 
P11 .105.C Risk of autoimmune diseases in patients with Germany,4Private practise, Istanbul,Turkey. RASopathies: systematic study of humoral and cellular immunity Introduction: We report a novel deleterious hemizygous X chromosome variant in PQB
P1  (NM_001167989:p.Arg153fs) that MariaAnnaSiano1,MariateresaFalco2,ValeriaMarchetti3,Stefano leadstoRenpenning syndrome (OMIM#309500). Pagano3, Francesca Di Candia3, Daniele De Brasi4, Alessandro De Materialsandmethods:17yearsoldTurkishmalepatientwith Luca5,ValentinaPinna5,SimonaSestito6,DanielaConcolino6,Marco tetrology of fallot and pulmonary atresia was seen due to Tartaglia7, Pietro Strisciuglio3, Vittoria D’Esposito8, Serena Cabaro8, dysmorphic features and short stature. Fishtest was negativefor GiuseppePerruolo8, PietroPietroFormisano8,Daniela Melis1 DiGeorge Syndrome when he was 2 years old. Whole exome sequencing wasdone. 1PostgraduateSchoolofPediatrics,DepartmentofMedicine,Surgery Results: On physical examination, his height was 149,4 cm and Dentistry "Scuola Medica Salernitana", University of Salerno, (-3,92 SDS), weight was 38,2 kg (-4,43 SD). His body mass index Salerno,Italy,2PediatricUnit,SanGiovannidiDioeRuggid’Aragona was 17.11 kg/m2 (-2,5 SD). His head circumference was 48 cm UniversityHospital,Salerno,Italy,3PostgraduateSchoolofPediatrics, (-6,34 SD). He had long narrow face, bulbous nose, sparse lateral Faculty of Medicine University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy, eye brows and strabismus. He had webbed neck. He had lean 4Unit of Pediatrics, AORN Santobono-Pausilipon, Naples, Italy, bodybuild,muscularatrophyofupperbackandscoliosis.Hehad EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 361 slenderfeetandoverriding5thrighttoeover4thtoe.Thisfeature Emanuela Ponzi, Paola Orsini, Romina Ficarella, Antonia Lucia has not been described before. On genital examination his left Buonadonna, Maria Fatima Antonucci, Mattia Gentile testiscouldnotbepalpatedinscrotumandininguinalcanal.His righttestiswas20cc.Thisfeaturehasnotbeendescribedbefore DiVenere Hospital-Unitof Medical Genetics, Bari, Bari, Italy. either. He also had mild intellectual deﬁciency. Unfortunately, he died due to endocarditis complication. Sanger sequencing Introduction: Ritscher-Schinzel Syndrome (RSS) is a rare devel- conﬁrmed that he had deleterious hemizygous X chromosome opmental disorder characterized by intellectual disability, cere- variant in PQB
P1  (NM_001167989:p.Arg153fs) inherited from an bellar/brain-malformations, congenital heart defects and unaffected heterozygous mother. Three unaffected sisters all craniofacialabnormalities. inherited thevariant. MaterialsandMethods:Wereportamaleinfantwithprenatal Conclusion: Patients with previous inconclusive genetic test history of fetal ascites and postnatal typical dismorphic facial results must be reevaluated. Diagnosis is important for manage- features, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, enlarged cisterna magna mentandgeneticcounselling.Grant:Thisworkwassupportedby and hepatomegaly. Karyotype and CGH-array were performed U54HG006504(Yale Centerfor MendelianDisorders, to MG). prenatally and whole-exome sequencing (WES), performed H. Kaymakcalan: None. A. Ercan Sencicek: None. A. Cebeci: postnatally. None.A. Yalcin: None. Results: Karyotype and CGH-array were normal. WES detected a novel maternal X-linked missense variant (c.49A>C; p.Thr17Pro) in exon1oftheCCD
C22 gene.Thevariant,notpreviouslyreported,has 
P11 .107.A Unpredictable results of undiagnosed patients via been classiﬁed as uncertain/likely pathogenic (ACMG criteria). Allelic exomesequencing: Ribosomopathies variant in the same position c.49A> G (p.Thr17Ala) is reported in ClinVar as pathogenic. CCD
C22  is a highly conserved and broadly Saide Betül Arslan Satılmış1, Busranur Cavdarli1, Ahmet Cevdet expressed protein that has been shown to interact through its Ceylan2, Ebru Tuncez1, CavidanNur SemerciGündüz2 N-terminal part with COMMD proteins that take part in multiple processesincludingregulationofNF-kBsignaling,copperexportfrom 1Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ankara Yildirim Beyazit theliverandsodiumtransport.PatientswithRSS,c.49A>GinCCD
C22  University, Ankara, Turkey. gene and elevated serum copper and ceruloplasmin concentration havebeenpreviouslyreported.Recently,murinemodelstudyshowed Introduction: Ribosomopathies caused by abnormalities of thatCOMMDproteindeﬁciencyleadstoadefectinthetransportof ribosomal proteins and on biogenesis factors are a broad AT
P7 B(coppermembranetrasporter)fromcytosolicvesciclestothe spectrum that affects various tissues including the nervous plasmamembrane,resultinginhepaticcopperaccumulation.Serum system, bone marrow, and ectoderm or causes developmental- andurinarycopperandceruloplasmindosageareprogresstotestthis delay or cancer-susceptibility. Although the most common hypothesis. ribosomopathies are Diamond-Blackfan anemia, 5q-Syndrome, Conclusion: on the basis of the recent scientiﬁc evidence we Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, Dyskeratosis Congenita, Carti- speculate that the prenatal ﬁnding of ascites and the postnatal lage hair hypoplasia, new diseases have been deﬁning by the ﬁndingofhepatomegalycouldbeanadditionalclinicalfeaturesof developmentof newtechnologies. RSS. Material/Method: Five undiagnosed patients with growth E. Ponzi: None. P. Orsini: None. R. Ficarella: None. A. retardation, epilepsy, cerebellar hypoplasia, hepatic dysfunction Buonadonna: None. M.Antonucci: None. M. Gentile:None. ormetabolicdiseasewereexamined.Conventional-karyotypeand microarray analyses were normal. Whole-exome-sequencing was performedvia XGEN. 
P11 .110.DTruncatingmutationsinMAGE
L2 causealterations Results:Thedeterminedvariantswereevaluatedaccordingtothe inAβ1-40levels andgene expression in ﬁbroblasts patients’clinicalfeatures.OnepathogenicvariantoftheEIF2B3gene fora7-year-oldboywithleukodystrophyandonelikelypathogenic LauraCastilla-Vallmanya1,2,MónicaCenteno-Pla1,2,HéctorFranco- variantoftheMRM2geneforan18-year-oldmalewithhepatosple- Valls1,2,AinaPrat-Planas1,2,ElenaRojano3,PedroSeoane3,2,JamesR. nomegaly and tremor were thought to be causative, respectively. Perkins3,2,4, Juan A. García-Ranea3,2,3, Clara Oliva5, Aida Ormaza- Threevariantsofuncertainsigniﬁcance(VUS);inthePOLR3Agene(3- bal5,2, Rafael Artuch5,2, Raquel Rabionet1,2, Daniel Grinberg1,2, year-oldgirlwithcerebellaratrophyandepilepsy),TAF6gene(3-year- Susanna Balcells1,2,Roser Urreizti1,2,5 oldboywithdevelopmentaldelayandmentaldeﬁciency),andPARN gene(3-year-old girl with microcephaly and cerebellar vermis 1Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, Faculty of atrophy),weredetected.AlthoughthesevariantsareVUS,theywere Biology, University of Barcelona, IBUB, IRSJD, 08028, Barcelona, thought to be clinically responsible in the light of segregation Spain,2CentrodeInvestigación BiomédicaenReddeEnfermedades analysesinthefamily. Raras (CIBERER)- Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain, Conclusion:Ribosomopathiesareabroad-spectrumofdiseases 3Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of those molecular basis has been better understood as the whole- Malaga, 29010, Málaga, Spain, 4Institute of Biomedical Research in exome-sequencingbecomesviable.Therefore,thenewmutations Malaga (IBIMA), Málaga, Spain, 5Clinical Biochemistry Department, reportedandtheirclinicalrelevanceisimportant.Thespectrumof HospitalSantJoandeDéu,08950,EspluguesdeLlobregat,Spain. ribosomopathieswillbeextendedbyreportingthenewmutations inthegenesontheribosomal-pathwayandbyenlighteningtheir Introduction: Truncating mutations in MAGE
L2 , a gene mapping reﬂections onthephenotypes. inthePrader-Williregion(15q11-q13),areassociatedwithSchaaf- S.B. Arslan Satılmış: None. B. Cavdarli: None. A.C. Ceylan: Yangsyndrome(#MIM6615547;SYS),asevereultra-rareneurode- None.E. Tuncez: None.C.N. SemerciGündüz: None. velopmental disease. SYS patients show a clinical phenotype partly overlapping the one typically observed in Prader-Willi syndrome patients (#MIM 176270;PWS). MAGE
L2  contributes to 
P11 .108.B Novel missense variant in CCD
C22  causes X-linked the regulation of the retrograde transport and protein recycling Ritscher-Schinzel/3C syndrome: further evidence on the pathwaysandpreviousstudiesshowthatimpairmentofVP
S35 ,a prenatalandpostnatal clinical phenotype EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 362 MAGE
L2 partnerinretromerfunction,leadtodysregulationofAPP described clinical features such as facial dysmorphisms, intellec- transport and cleavage. tualdisability,epilepsy,andcongenitalheartdefects,butalsoless Materials&Methods:InﬁbroblastsfromSYSandPWSpatients frequent features asumbilicalhernia. andhealthycontrols,weanalysedtheexcretionlevelsofamyloid- Conclusions: SHS is a distinct neurodevelopmental disorder β1-40peptide(Aβ ).Wealsoanalysedtargetedmetabolomics with multiple congenital anomalies, and the identiﬁcation of 1-40 patterns (by mass spectrometry) and gene expression (by additionalcasesincreasesthecurrentunderstandingofitsclinical mRNAseq). ExpHunter Suite was used to identify differentially spectrum. To our knowledge, these cases represent the ﬁrst expressedgenes(DEGs)andco-expressionmodulesand perform molecular conﬁrmedSHS patients inPortugal. functionalenrichment. S.L.Ferreira:None.P.M.Almeida:None.C.S.Rosas:None.M.S. Results: We observed a signiﬁcant decrease of Aβ levels in Melo:None.S.B.Sousa:None.M.Amorim:None.T.Kay:None. 1-40 the extracellular media of SYS ﬁbroblasts compared to both PWS patients and controls. Preliminary results show small but statisti- cally signiﬁcant metabolomic alterations, being glycine especially 
P11 .112.B Heterozygous mutation in SCRIB gene in adult relevant.Weidentiﬁed132DEGs,someofthemrelatedtomitotic patientwithmyelomeningocele andprimary infertility mechanismsandextracellularmatrixformationandorganization. Conclusions:Aβ excretionlevelisapromisingbiomarkerfor ZohorAsaadAzher 1-40 SYS,andcouldhelptobetterunderstanditspathophysiology.The identiﬁedDEGsinSYSﬁbroblastssuggestapotentialnovelrolefor UmmAl-Qura university, Makkah, Saudi Arabia. MAGE
L2  in mitosis and extracellular matrix homeostasis that shouldbe furtherstudied.Funding:Associació Síndrome OpitzC, Abstract: SCRIB gene is a member of planar cell polarity (PCP) Spain; Spanish Government (CIBERER -U720; PID2019-107188RB- geneswhichareinvolvedintheprocessofneuraltubeclosure(1). 
C21 , SAF2016-75948-R, FECYT-PRECIPITA); Catalan Government HomozygousScribmutationsinmicecausecraniorachischisis,the (PERISSLT002/16/00174). most severe typeof NTD. In humans, SCRIB mutations are L. Castilla-Vallmanya: None. M. Centeno-Pla: None. H. associated with craniorachischisis (2). Recently, ﬁve deleterious Franco-Valls: None. A. Prat-Planas: None. E. Rojano: None. P. mutations were identiﬁed in ﬁve infants with spins biﬁda, Seoane: None. J.R. Perkins: None. J.A. García-Ranea: None. C. indicating that heterozygous SCRIB mutations may underlie Oliva:None.A.Ormazabal:None.R.Artuch:None.R.Rabionet: thepathogenesis of human spina biﬁda (3).Here, we describe a None.D.Grinberg: None. S.Balcells:None. R. Urreizti:None. 29 year- old male presenting with primary infertility due to non- obstructive azoospermia. In addition, he is suffering from urinary and fecal incontinence and club foot due to sacral myelomenin- 
P11 .111.A The ﬁrst two Portuguese patients with Schuurs- gocelewhichwasoperatedduringtheﬁrstweeksofhislife.WES Hoeijmakerssyndrome:casereportandreviewoftheliterature revealed de novo heterozygous variant p.(Arg277Trp) in SCRIB gene. In silico analysis imply potentially deleterious effect of this Susana Lemos Ferreira1, Pedro Maia Almeida2, Catarina Silva change. Mutations in SCRIB gene have been reported in few Rosas2, Mafalda Santos Melo1, Sérgio Bernardo Sousa2, Marta infantswithvariableNTDs.Toourknowledge,thisistheﬁrstcase Amorim1,Teresa Kay1 tobereportedinadultpatient.SCRIBgeneroleinspermatogenic failure has not been reported. Additional studies are required to 1Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Dona Estefânia, Centro evaluateitsrole inmale infertility. Hospitalar e Universitário de Lisboa Central, Lisboa, Portugal, References: 1. Juriloff DM, Harris MJ (2012) A consideration of 2Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico, Centro Hospitalar theevidencethatgeneticdefectsinplanarcellpolaritycontribute eUniversitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. to theetiology of human neural tube defects. BirthDefects Res A ClinMolTeratol94:824-840.2.RobinsonA,EscuinS,DoudneyK,.3. Introduction:Schuurs-HoeijmakersSyndrome(SHS,OMIM#615009) Lei,Y.,Zhu,H.,Duhon,C.,Yang,W.,Ross,M.E.,Shaw,G.M.,Finnell, is a rare cause of developmental delay with distinctive dysmorphic R.H.Mutations in planar cell polarity gene SCRIB are associated features. SHS is characterized by variable degrees of intellectual withspinabiﬁda. disability with language skills typically affected, hypotonia, epilepsy, Z.A.Azher: None. behaviour issues, feeding difﬁculties, constipation, cryptorchidism, short stature, and structural malformations (cardiac, brain, ocular, kidney and skullanomalies).Themajority ofcasesresultsfrom ade 
P11 .113.C SCUB
E3  loss-of-function causes a recognizable novo heterozygous pathogenic variant in PAC
S1  c.607C>T p. developmentaldisorderduetodefectivebonemorphogenetic (Arg203Trp).Sofar,only52individualswerereportedintheliterature. protein(BMP) signaling Here,weaimtobettercharacterizeSHSphenotype. Methods:WeinquiredallPortuguesemedicalgeneticsdepart- Marcello Niceta1, Yuh-Charn Lin2,3, Valentina Muto1, Barbara ments, collected clinical data and compared with previous Vona4,5, Alistair T. Pagnamenta6, Reza Marooﬁan7, Christian Beetz8, describedcases. Hermine van Duyvenvoorde9, Maria Lisa Dentici1, Peter Lauffer10, Results: One patient, a 2-year-old male, presented with Sadeq Vallian11, Andrea Ciolﬁ1, Simone Pizzi1, Peter Bauer8, Nana- developmentaldelay, facialdysmorphisms, hypotonia, coloboma, MariaGrüning8,EmanueleBellacchio1,AndreaDelFattore1,Stefania cryptorchidism,plagiobrachycephalyandsingleumbilicalartery.A Petrini12,RanadShaheen13,14,DovTiosano15,16,RanaHalloun15,Ben secondpatient,a4-year-oldmale,wasreferredfordevelopmental Pode-Shakked17,18, Hatice Mutlu Albayrak19, Emregül Işık20, Jan M. delay, epilepsy, facial dysmorphisms, prenatal macrocephaly, Wit20, Marcus Dittrich4,21, Bruna L. Freire22, Debora R. Bertola23, congenital heart defect, cryptorchidism, umbilical hernia and Alexander A. L. Jorge22, Ortal Barel24, Ataf H. Sabir25,26, Amal M. Al priorhistoryofconstipation.Inbothcases,previousinvestigation Teneiji27, Sulaima M. Taji27, Nouriya Al-Sannaa28, Hind Al- was normal and molecular conﬁrmation of SHS was obtained by Abdulwahed28, Maria Cristina Digilio1, Melita Irving25, Yair Anik- exomesequencingthatidentiﬁedadenovopathogenicvariantin ster17,18,29, Gandham SL Bhavani30, Katta M. Girisha30, Thomas PAC
S1  c.607C>T p.(Arg203Trp).The overall phenotypes were Haaf4, Jenny C. Taylor6, Bruno Dallapiccola1, Fowzan S. Alkuraya13, consistent with the reported cases, sharing the most frequent Ruey-BingYang2,31,32, Marco Tartaglia1 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 363 1Genetics and Rare Diseases Research Division, IRCCS, Ospedale function,andtheirdysregulatingeffectBMPsignaling.Weshowthat Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Physiology, SCUB
E3 isanauxiliaryproteinthatactsasaBM
P2 /BM
P4 co-receptor, School of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, recruits the BMP receptor complexes into raft microdomains, and 3Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, positivelymodulatessignalingpossiblybyaugmentingthespeciﬁc 4Institute of Human Genetics, Julius Maximilians University, Würz- interactionsbetweenBMPsandBMPtypeIreceptors.Scube3-/-mice burg, Germany, 5Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck showed craniofacial and dental defects, reduced body size and Surgery,EberhardKarlsUniversity,Tübingen,Germany,6NIHROxford defective endochondral bone growth due to impaired BMP- Biomedical Research Centre, Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, mediated chondrogenesis and osteogenesis, recapitulating the University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 7Genetics and human disorder. Our ﬁndings identify the ﬁrst human disease Molecular Cell Sciences Research Centre, St George’s University of causedbydefectivefunctionofamemberoftheSCUBEfamily,and London,CranmerTerrace,London,UnitedKingdom,8CentogeneAG, link SCUB
E3  to processes controlling growth, morphogenesis, and Rostock, Germany, 9Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden Uni- boneandteethdevelopmentthroughmodulationofBMPsignaling. versity Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 10Department of Grant:FondazioneBambinoGesù(ViteCoraggiose). Paediatric Endocrinology, Emma Children’s Hospital, Amsterdam M.Niceta:None.Y.Lin:None.V.Muto:None.B.Vona:None. UniversityMedicalCenter,Amsterdam,Netherlands,11Departmentof A.T.Pagnamenta:None.R.Marooﬁan:None.C.Beetz:None.H. Cell and Molecular Biology & Microbiology, University of Isfahan, V.Duyvenvoorde:None.M.L.Dentici:None.P.Lauffer:None.S. Isfahan,Iran,IslamicRepublicof,12ConfocalMicroscopyCoreFacility, Vallian:None.A.Ciolﬁ:None.S.Pizzi:None.P.Bauer:None.N. Research Laboratories, IRCCS Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Grüning: None. E. Bellacchio: None. A. Del Fattore: None. S. Rome,Italy,13DepartmentofGenetics,KingFaisalSpecialistHospital Petrini:None.R.Shaheen: None.D.Tiosano:None.R.Halloun: and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 14Qatar Biomedical None.B.Pode-Shakked:None.H.Albayrak:None.E.Işık:None. Research Institute, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar, J.M.Wit:None.M.Dittrich:None.B.L.Freire:None.D.R.Bertola: 15Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Ruth Rappaport Children’s Hospital, None.A.A.L.Jorge:None.O.Barel:None.A.H.Sabir:None.A.M. Rambam Healthcare Campus, Haifa, Israel, 16Ruth and Bruce Al Teneiji: None. S.M. Taji: None. N. Al-Sannaa: None. H. Al- Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Israel Institute of Abdulwahed: None. M.C. Digilio: None. M. Irving: None. Y. Technology, Haifa, Israel, 17Edmond and Lily Safra Children’s Anikster:None.G.S.Bhavani:None.K.M.Girisha:None.T.Haaf: Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel, 18The Sackler None. J.C. Taylor: None. B. Dallapiccola: None. F.S. Alkuraya: FacultyofMedicine,Tel-AvivUniversity,Tel-Aviv,Israel,19Department None.R. Yang: None. M.Tartaglia: None. of Pediatric Endocrinology, Gaziantep Cengiz Gökcek Maternity & Children’s Hospital, Gaziantep, Turkey, 20Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 21Institute of 
P11 .114.D Genetic testing algorithms for fetal malformations Bioinformatics, Julius Maximilians University, Würzburg, Germany, malformations 22Unidade de Endocrinologia Genética, Hospital das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Viorica Radoi1, Radu-Ioan Ursu1, Cristina Dragomir2, Andreea Brazil, 23Unidade de Genética do Instituto da Criança, Hospital das Ionescu2, Iuliana Chelu2, Laurentiu CamilBohiltea1 Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 24Sheba Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical 1INSMCAlessandrescu-Rusescu,Bucharest,Romania,2SynevoRoma- Center,Tel-Hashomer,Israel,25DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,Guy’s nia,Bucharest, Romania. and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 26Birmingham Women’s and Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, Fetal abnormalities are diagnosed in 3-5% of all pregnancies. In University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 27Depart- thecaseofperinataldeath,congenitalanomaliesoccurin20-25% ment of Paediatrics, Sheikh Khalifa Medical City, Abu Dhabi, United ofthepatients.TheprenatalgenetictestsrecommendedareQF- ArabEmirates,28JohnsHopkinsAramcoHealthcare,Dhahran,Saudi PCR for rapid aneuploidy testing, the G‐banded karyotyping and Arabia, 29Wohl Institute for Translational Medicine, Sheba Medical arraycomparativegenomichybridization(aCGH)forthedetection Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel, 30Department of Medical Genetics, ofchromosomalanomaliesandCNVs.QF-PCRidentiﬁestrisomies Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, India, 31Ph.D. Program in Drug in around 30% of dysmorphic fetuses. Karyotyping detects Discovery and Development Industry, College of Pharmacy, Taipei pathogenic chromosomal rearrangements in a further 5%. aCGH Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, 32Institute of Pharmacology, ﬁnds additional pathogenic CNVs in 3% to 6.5% of structurally SchoolofMedicine,NationalYang-MingUniversity,Taipei,Taiwan. abnormal fetuses with normal karyotypes. Using these tests in combination,anunderlyinggeneticaetiologycanbeidentiﬁedin In the extracellular microenvironment, auxiliary proteins control upto40%ofdysmorphicfetuses,stillleavingthemajorityofcases cell behavior and coordinate embryo development by acting as undiagnosed.Wholeexomesequencing(WES)offersthechanceof co-receptors or direct antagonists of defective bone morphoge- identifying the ﬁnal genetic diagnosis, accurate estimation of netic protein (BMP), Activin and TGF-β ligands. Pathogenic recurrence risks, but is recommended in speciﬁc selected variantsingenesencodingtheseproteinscandramaticallyaffect situations and comes with certain disadvantages.Case reportPa- development and physiology. Signal peptide-CUB-EGF domain- tient: 27 years old, 23 weeks pregnancy,with negative medical containing protein 3 (SCUB
E3 ) is a member of a small family of family history.Ultrasound revealed strawberry shaped head, mid- multifunctional secreted or cell surface-anchored glycoproteins face hypoplasia Amniocentesis: fetal karyotype and aCGH – functioning as co-receptors for a variety of growth factors. Here normal resultFetal DNA testing by WES identiﬁed TWIST1 gene we report that biallelic inactivating variants in SCUB
E3  have withvariantc.82C>T(p.Gln28Ter)mutation-pathogenic-Saethre pleiotropic consequences on development and cause a previously Chotzen syndromeThe advances of genomic medicine are unrecognized syndromic disorder. Eighteen affected individuals impacting prenatal diagnosis, just like any other medical ﬁeld. from nine unrelated families showed a consistent phenotype Whiletheseinnovationsofferexcitingnewopportunitiesandcan characterized by re growth restriction, skeletal defects, distinctive empower families with increased knowledge about their repro- craniofacial appearance, and dental anomalies. In vitro functional ductiverisksandwithdecision-makingautonomy,theyhavetobe validation studies demonstrated a variable impact of disease- carefully introduced in an evidence-based and ethically respon- causing variants on transcript processing, protein secretion and siblemannerand monitored afterimplementation. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 364 V.Radoi:None.R.Ursu:None.C.Dragomir:None.A.Ionescu: 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santaros None.I. Chelu: None. L.Bohiltea: None. Klinikos, Vilnius,Lithuania. Cofﬁn-Siris syndrome (CSS) is a rare syndrome characterized by 
P11 .115.A Diagnostic utility of next-generation sequencing developmental delay, craniofacial abnormalities, hypoplastic or paneltestsin the diagnosis ofskeletal dysplasias absent ﬁfth digits/nails of the hands and feet and other variable clinical manifestations. CSS is caused by mutations in several Tiia Kangas-Kontio1, Alicia Scocchia2, Satu Valo1, Kimberly Gall2, genes encoding components of the BAF complex. It has been Liisa Pelttari1, Johanna Huusko1, Jonna Tallila1, Inka Saarinen1, demonstratedthatCSSclinicalmanifestationmayvary,depending JohannaSistonen1, JuhaKoskenvuo1, Tero-Pekka Alastalo2 onthevariantsintheparticulargene.Wereportona7-years-old female referred for evaluation because of mild dysmorphic 1Blueprint Genetics, Espoo, Finland, 2Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest features and congenital heart disease - supravalvular aortic Diagnostics Company, Seattle, WA, USA. stenosis. She was born in a normal delivery but with lower birth-weight (2850 g). Psychomotor developmental delay was Introduction: Skeletal dysplasias encompass over 450 heritable observed since infancy, and then she was diagnosed with mixed conditions with signiﬁcant phenotype overlap. In this study, we developmental disorder, learning difﬁculties. The following retrospectively assessed the diagnostic utility of next-generation dysmorphic features were noted: facial coarseness was minimal- sequencing (NGS) panel tests containing genes associated with thickeyebrows,mildmicrognatia,longbroadphiltrum,nosewith skeletaldysplasias and growthdisorders. bulbous tip and anteverted nostrils. Hypoplasia of bilateral ﬁfth Materials and Methods: Clinical reports of 543 patients who toes as well as hypoaplasia of bilateral ﬁfth toenails were underwentpanel testingat Blueprint Genetics with an indication signiﬁcant. Whole exome sequencing analysis of patient’s DNA ofsuspectedskeletaldysplasiaorgrowthdisorderwereexamined. revealed the novel heterozygous nonsense variant c.646C>T, p. The patients received one of three nested paneltests containing (Gln216Ter) in the SMARCA4 gene. The variant was conﬁrmed by 113,251and374genes,respectively.Paneltestingincludedboth Sanger sequencing. This alteration causes a cytosine to thymine sequence and copy number variant (CNV) analyses of NGS data transition, resulting a premature termination codon in the fromaclinically validated exomeassay . SMARCA4 protein. According to in silico analysis, the identiﬁed Results: A molecular diagnosis was established in 42.0% of c.646C>T variant is classiﬁed as pathogenic. Our report futher patients. Diagnostic yield was signiﬁcantly higher among fetal supports the notion that nonsense variants of SMARCA4 cause samples (62.5%, n=55/88) compared to post-natal samples (38%, milddelayphenotypeofCSS.However,furtherstudiesareneeded n=173/455; z=4.2489, P<0.00001). Twelve diagnostic CNVs were in order to better characterize the phenotype and establish reported,ranginginsizefrom241bpto6.7Mb,representing5.3%of genotype-phenotype correlation. diagnosticﬁndings.FivediagnosticCNVsinvolvedlossoftheSHOX B. Aleksiuniene: None. L. Cimbalistiene: None. A. Utkus: gene in the pseudoautosomal region. Diagnostic variants were None. identiﬁedin71genes,withnearlyhalfofthesegenes(n=33,46.5%) contributinguniquelytoamoleculardiagnosisforasinglepatient. Conclusions: This study demonstrates the utility of panel 
P11 .117.C SNP array analysis as a detection tool for single testingforpatientswithasuspected skeletaldysplasiaorgrowth genedisorders disorder, with diagnostic yield of 42%. Additionally, the high diagnosticyieldseeninprenatalcasesisvaluableinformationfor Elanur Yilmaz1,2, EsraBorklu1, UmutAltunoglu1,Sahin Avci1, Serpil genetic counseling regarding natural history and prognosis. Eraslan1, Hulya Kayserili1 Pursuing comprehensive panel testing with high-resolution CNV analysiscanprovideatime-sensitivediagnosticbeneﬁt,giventhe 1Medical Genetics Department, Koç University School of Medicine considerable phenotype overlapamongst skeletal dysplasias. (KUSOM), ISTANBUL, Turkey, 2Koç University Research Center for T. Kangas-Kontio: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁ- Translational Medicine (KUTTAM),Istanbul, Turkey. cant;BlueprintGenetics.A.Scocchia:A.Employment(fullorpart- time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics Inc, a Quest Diagnostics Single Nucleotide Polymorphism array(SNP-a) provides an efﬁ- Company. S. Valo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; cient,powerful, and high-throughput analysis for structural chro- Blueprint Genetics. K. Gall: A. Employment (full or part-time); mosomal variations,microdeletions and microduplications. Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics Inc,a Quest Diagnostics Company. Furthermore,single-gene disorders can also successfully be L.Pelttari:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant;Blueprint detected by SNP-a. SNP-a was performed on 37 postnatal cases Genetics.J.Huusko:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Signiﬁcant; in 2020 to identify the genetic etiopathogenesis of congenital/ Blueprint Genetics. J. Tallila: A. Employment (full or part-time); neurodevelopmental anomalies by Illumina CytoSNP v12. Patho- Signiﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics.I.Saarinen:A.Employment(fullor genic/possibly pathogenic variations were found in 21. Four part-time);Signiﬁcant;BlueprintGenetics.J.Sistonen:A.Employ- microdeletions were considered suggestive for well-delineated ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics. J. single-genesyndromes,namelyNance-Horan(NHS),Phelan-McDer- Koskenvuo: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Blue- mid(PMS),Hand-Foot-Genital(HFGS),and Feingold Type2(F
S2 ).The print Genetics. T. Alastalo: A. Employment (full or part-time); ﬁrstmicrodeletion,harboredtheNHSalongwith21othergenesin Signiﬁcant; Blueprint Genetics Inc, aQuest Diagnostics Company. Xp22.2p22.13(16051468_18313707)(GRCh37/hg19).The boy had microphthalmia/cataract,mild global developmental delay,ventri- cular septal defect which was well overlapped with the clinical 
P11 .116.B Novel SMARCA4 mutation identiﬁed in a patient ﬁndings of NHS. The second microdeletion,7.17Mb,encompassed withamildphenotype ofCofﬁn-Siris syndrome 51 OMIM-genes including the SHANK3 in 22q13.2q13.33 (43996288_51169045)(GRCh37/hg19).The 22q13 microdeletion or BeataAleksiuniene1,2,Loreta Cimbalistiene1,2,Algirdas Utkus1 mutations of the SHANK3 are associated with psychomotor and speech delay.Accompanying features of the case excluded for 1DepartmentofHumanandMedicalGenetics,InstituteofBiomedical Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome were large for gestational age, Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, macroglossia,renal anomalies, asymmetric growth could due to EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 365 theimpactofotherdeletedgenes.Thethirdcasedisplayed0.3Mb 
P11 .120.B Two different syndromic craniosynostosis in the deletion in 7p15.2(26,938,809_27,262,849)(GRCh37/hg19) harbor- same family ingtheHOXA13.Skeletalﬁndings,borderlineintellectualdisability, vesicoureteralreﬂuxofthecasecouldbeexplainedbyHFGS.The Semra Gürsoy1, Filiz Hazan2 fourth, 4.17Mb deletion harbored nine OMIM-genes including MIR17HG in 13q31.3(90513153_94681840)(GRCh37/hg19).The 1DepartmentofPediatricGenetics,Dr.BehcetUzChildren’sHospital, phenotypic features like microcephaly,brachydactylic ﬁngers and Izmir, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Dr. Behcet Uz toes,dysmorphisms,borderlineintellectualdisabilityofthegirlwas Children’s Hospital, Izmir,Turkey. incorrelationwith F
S2  diagnosis. Conclusion: Chromosomal microdeletions/microduplications Introduction:Craniosynostosisischaracterizedbythepremature are one of the key classes of variations that could reveal the fusion of calvarial sutures and can be isolated without any etiopathogenesis of single-gene disorders.In the case of non- additional anomalies, or as a part of a syndrome. Syndromic speciﬁc,or missing pivotal clinical ﬁndings for a syndrome, craniosynostosis with a certain genetic cause is more likely to following an algorythmic diagnostic approach and performing involvemultiplesuturesorbilateralcoronalsutures.FGFR2,FGFR3, theSNP-acanpinpointasingle-genedisordersandtogetherwith FGFR1, TWIST1 and EFNB1 are major causative genes of genetic the reverse phenotyping,the clinical diagnosis can also be syndromes associated with craniosynostosis. Herein, we present determined. twodifferent syndromic craniosynostosis inthe samefamily. E.Yilmaz:None.E.Borklu:None.U.Altunoglu:None.S.Avci: Material and Methods: TWIST1 and EFNB1 genes were None.S. Eraslan: None.H.Kayserili: None. sequenced by usingSanger sequencing. Results: A 7-month-old female patient was referred to our genetic clinic for dysmorphic features including hypertelorism, 
P11 .119.ABeyondtheknownphenotypeofSotosSyndrome: broad forehead, down-slanting palpebral ﬁssures and brachyce- Spanishcohort of31 pediatric patients phaly, compatible with Saethre-Chotzen syndrome. Bilateral coronal synostosis was detected on three dimensional cranial Antonio F. Martinez-Monseny1, Lourdes R. Vega-Hanna1, Mario computed tomography. TWIST1 gene was sequenced and a Sanz-Cuesta2, Didac Casas-Alba1, Mercè Bolasell1, Loreto Martorell1, nonsensemutation (c.301C>T; p.Q101X) wasrevealed. The father LeticiaPias1, Mercedes Serrano1 of the patient who had similar phenotypic features, also had the samemutation.Additionally,theindexpatienthada4,5year-old 1SantJoandeDeuHospital,Barcelona,Spain,2HospitaldeSantBoi, sister whose facial features were compatible with Craniofronto- ParcSanitari Sant Joande Déu, Barcelona, Spain. nasal syndrome. A heterozygous nonsense mutation of EFNB1 gene(c.196C>T;p.R66X)wasdetectedinthispatient.Themother Introduction: Sotos Syndrome (SS, OMIM#117550) is a hetero- had also unilateral coronal craniosynostosis, unilateral proptosis geneous genetic condition, recognized by overgrowth, macro- and unilateral ptosis, longitudinal splitting of nails and clinodac- cephaly,typicalfacialappearanceandintellectualdisability.SScan tyly.ThesameEFNB1genemutationwasdetectedinthemother. be classiﬁed in three different subtypes according to molecular Conclusions: The detailed clinical evaluation is crucial for the ﬁndings in NSD1, NFIX and AP
C2  genes. We aim to expand the correct diagnosis of genetic syndromes associated with craniosy- phenotype studying a cohort of patients, describing their nostosisduetoitsphenotypicalvariability.Furthermore,molecular expected and unexpected clinicalfeatures. diagnosismayhaveanimportantroleforgeneticcouncelingand Methods:descriptiveandretrospectivestudyincludinggeneti- prediction oftheprognosis. callyconﬁrmedSSsubjects,followedatatertiarypediatrichospital S.Gürsoy: None.F. Hazan: None. fromJune2019 toDecember 2020. Results: Thirty-one patients (16 males) with SS were included, 27 with NSD1 variants and 4 with NFIX variants, bearing 
P11 .121.C Analysis of exome data of a nationally identiﬁed predominantly point mutations in both cases. Seven individuals cohort of603patients withsyndromic orofacial clefting werebornprematurely.Allindividualspresentedwithovergrowth, typical dysmorphic features and different degrees of intellectual KateWilson1, Dianne Newbury2, Usha Kini1,3 disability. Although structural cardiac defects are frequent, here we describe a statistically signiﬁcant concomitant presentation 1Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, Oxford University Hospitals with hypotonia (p=0.04), as well as non-structural diseases NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Faculty of Health (pericarditisandarrhythmia)thatwereoutstandinginourcohort. and Life Sciences, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, United Epilepsy was observed in 14 (45.2%) and scoliosis in 11 (40.7%). Kingdom,3SpiresCleftCentre,JohnRadcliffeHospital,Oxford,United Wedescribenoveloncologicalmalignanciesnotpreviouslylinked Kingdom. to SS such as splenic hamartoma, retinal melanocytoma, acute lymphocytic leukemia and prenatal neuroblastoma, which were Introduction:Syndromicorofacialclefting(OC)accountsfor30% more prevalent in patients with missense mutations (p=0.04). ofcleftlipand/orpalate.Wereviewedvariantsidentiﬁedbyexon- Five patients suffered from recurrent onychocryptosis that arrayCGHandexomesequencing(ES)inpatientswithsyndromic requiredsurgicalprocedures,asanunreportedmedicalcondition. OCwithintheDecipheringDevelopmentalDisorders(DDD)study Interestingly, this ﬁnding was more prevalent in patients with toinvestigatemolecularpathwaysassociatedwithsyndromicOC. macrocephaly (p=0.04). Materials and Methods: Patients with HPO terms containing Conclusions:OurstudyfocusesonundescribedfeaturesinSS, ‘cleft’ and ‘biﬁd uvula’ were identiﬁed through a complementary expanding the clinical and molecular spectrum and advising analysisprojectwithintheDDDstudy.Possiblediagnosticvariants clinicians about some unreported clinical complications. We wereidentiﬁedbyautomatedvariantﬁlteringandmanualreview suggestnovel genotype-phenotype correlations. and deposited into DECIPHER. Single nucleotide variants within A.F. Martinez-Monseny: None. L.R. Vega-Hanna: None. M. known disease-causing genes and copy number variants were Sanz-Cuesta: None. D. Casas-Alba: None. M. Bolasell: None. L. classiﬁed according to ACMG guidelines, the ACGS Best Practice Martorell:None. L.Pias: None. M.Serrano: None. Guidelines and consensus opinion. Molecular pathway analyses EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 366 were performed within STRING to investigate patterns of gene variants.Incomparison,all45patientsfromliteraturehadcardiac functionin syndromic OCand across OCtypes. diseasesbutsyndromic features werereported infrequently. Results: 603/13612 (4.4%) patients were identiﬁed of whom Conclusions: This study shows that the 6q25.1 deletion 453/603 (75.1%) had trio ES. 448/603 (74.3%) patients had cleft phenotype is caused by haploinsufﬁciency of TAB2 and that palate,132/603(21.9%)hadcleftlip+/-palateand23/603(3.8%) TAB2 is not just associated with cardiac disease, but also with a had oral clefting. 259/603 (43%) patients had moderate to distinct Noonan-like phenotype. We propose the name “TAB2- profound intellectual disability and/or global developmental relatedsyndrome”. delay. Likely pathogenic or pathogenic variants were identiﬁed A.Engwerda:None.E.K.S.M.Leenders:None.B.Frentz:None. for220/603(36.5%)patientsin124knowndisease-causinggenes P.A. Terhal: None. K. Löhner: None. B.B.A. de Vries: None. T. with SATB2 being the most common (16/220, 7.3%). Gene Djikhuizen:None.Y.J.Vos:None.T.Rinne:None.M.P.vanden ontology and pathway analyses suggested that the molecular Berg: None. M.T.R. Roofthooft: None. P. Deelen: None. C.M.A. mechanismsunderlyingsyndromicOCweredistinctfromthosein vanRavenswaaij-Arts: None. W.S. Kerstjens-Frederikse: None. non-syndromic OC. Conclusions:UsinganESapproachinalargecohortofpatients withsyndromicOCweidentiﬁedmolecularpathwaysandseveral 
P11 .123.A Tenorio syndrome: description of 9new cases and newgenesthatarenottraditionallyknowntobeassociatedwith reviewofthe clinical andmolecular features clefting. K.Wilson: None. D.Newbury: None.U. Kini:None. JairTenorio1,PedroArias1,AlbertoFernandez-Jaen2,GuillermoLay- Son3,AllanBayat4,LaurenceOlivier-Faivre5,NataliaGallego1,Sergio Ramos1, James Lespinasse6, Frederic Tran-Mau-Them7, Fernando 
P11 .122.D TAB2 deletions and loss-of-function variants cause Santos-Simarro1, Lucile Pinson8, Antonio Federico Martinez- aNoonan-likesyndromewithmitralvalvedisease,cardiomyo- Monseny9,María delMarO´Callaghan Cord9, PabloLapunzina1 pathy andhypermobility 1Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM) - Hospital AafkeEngwerda1,ErikaK.S.M.Leenders2,BarbaraFrentz3,Paulien UniversitarioLaPaz,Madrid,Spain,2HospitalUniversitarioQuirónde A.Terhal4,KatharinaLöhner1,BertB.A.deVries2,TrijnieDjikhuizen1, Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 3Pontiﬁcia Universidad Catolica de Chile, Yvonne J. Vos1, Tuula Rinne2, Maarten P. van den Berg5, Marc T. R. Santiago de Chile, Chile, 4Department of Pediatrics, Hvidovre Roofthooft6, Patrick Deelen1,4, Conny M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1, Hospital.UniversityofCopenhagen,Copenhagen,Denmark,5Hôpital Wilhelmina S.Kerstjens-Frederikse1 d’enfants CHU Dijon Bourgogne - Hôpital François Mitterrand 2 bd Maréchal de Lattre de Tassigny 21000 Dijon, Dijon, France, 6Service 1University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, de Cytogenetique, Centre Hospitalier de Chambéry, Chambéry, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Department of France, Chambéry, France, 7UF6254 Innovation en Diagnostic Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Genomique des Maladies Rares Bat B3, 15 boulevard du Maréchal Netherlands, 3Vanboeijen, Assen, Netherlands, 4Department of de Lattre de Tassigny 21000 Dijon, France, Dijon, France, 8Départe- Genetics, Utrecht University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, mentdeGénétiqueMédicale,MaladiesRaresetMédecinePersonna- 5University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, lisée, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, Montpellier, France, Department of Cardiology, Groningen, Netherlands, 6University of 9Hospital Sant Joande Déu, Barcelona, Spain,Barcelona, Spain. Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Beatrix Children’s Hospital, Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Groningen, Nether- Tenorio syndrome (TNORS) is a relatively recent disorder with lands. very few cases described so far. Clinical features include macrocephaly, intellectual disability, hypotonia, enlarged ven- Introduction:TAB2loss-of-functionvariantsanddeletionsinclud- triclesandautoimmunediseases.Molecularunderlyingmechan- ing TAB2 are associated with congenital heart defects and ism included missense variants and large deletions cardiomyopathy. In literature occasionally other features have encompassingRNF125,agenethatencodesforanU3ubiquitin been mentioned, including, short stature, facial dysmorphisms, ligase protein, involved in the regulation of several proteins by connective tissue abnormalities and a variable degree of itsbindinganddegradationthroughtheproteasome.Sincethe developmental delay. However, these features have not been initial description of the disorder and families, several new linkedtoTAB2thusfar.Weaimedtoconﬁrmthatthephenotype patients were diagnosed, adding more evidence of the clinical in 6q25.1 deletion patients is caused by haploinsufﬁciency of manifestations.Thus,theaimofthisprojectistoperformadeep TAB2. phenotypingofthecurrentcasesandreviewallcasesinwhicha Materials and Methods: Within the Chromosome 6 Project, a pathogenicvarianthasbeenfoundinRNF125.Interestingly,not largesocialmedia‒basedstudy,weobservedasharedphenotype all patients with pathogenic variants in RNF125 manifest among6q25.1deletionpatients.Weidentiﬁedourcandidategene overgrowth, but instead, there is a common pattern of TAB2andsubsequentlysequencedTAB2inpatientswithmatching neurodevelopmental disease, with mild to moderate degrees. phenotypes. We also recruited patients with pathogenic TAB2 Segregation analysis showed that in some cases, though the variants detected by exome sequencing. Clinical data were variant was inherited by an apparently normal parent, deep comparedwith literature cases. phenotyping suggested a mild form of the disease in their Results: We identiﬁed 11 patients with a deletion containing progenitors.Themechanismunderlyingthedevelopmentofthis TAB2 (size 1.68-14.31 Mb) and 14 patients from six families with disease is not well understood yet and the description of more noveltruncatingTAB2variants.Twenty(80%)patientshadcardiac caseswillhelptoabetterunderstandingandclinicalcharacter- diseases, often mitral valve defects and/or cardiomyopathy. ization. In summary, we report nine new cases of Tenorio Eighteen(72%)hadshortstatureand18(72%)hadhypermobility. syndrome (MIM, 616260), in patients with a variable degree of Twenty patients (80%) had facial features suggestive for Noonan the disease, and a common concurrent neurodevelopmental syndrome. No substantial phenotypic differences were noted disorder. Not all cases have overgrowth, and this must be between patients with deletions and those with intragenic considering for a correct diagnosis. Grants: FIS-PI20/01053 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 367 J.Tenorio:None.P.Arias:None.A.Fernandez-Jaen:None.G. Emanuel,Portland, OR,USA. Lay-Son: None. A. Bayat: None. L. Olivier-Faivre: None. N. Gallego: None. S. Ramos: None. J. Lespinasse: None. F. Tran- Trinucleotide repeat-containing gene 6A (TNR
C6 A) encodes the Mau-Them:None.F.Santos-Simarro:None.L.Pinson:None.A. GW182 protein, which is involved in miRNA induced gene Martinez-Monseny: None. M. O´Callaghan Cord: None. P. silencing by assembling Argonaute proteins with target mRNA. Lapunzina: None. Studies of the deﬁciency of GW182 in mice and its orthologue gawky in Drosophila demonstrated defects in embryonic development. Patients with GW182 autoantibodies showed 
P11 .124.B Unravelling terminal 6p deletions with the help of neuropathy, ataxia, arthritis, rheumatologic diseases, and socialmedia cancers. Recently, pathogenic heterozygous TTTCA repeat expansioninTNR
C6 Awasidentiﬁedinﬁverelatedpatientswith Eleana Rraku1, Aafke Engwerda1, Jennifer Geurink1, Laura Mon- benign adult familial myoclonic epilepsy. We report three sma1,PaulineBouman2,MorrisA.Swertz1,TrijnieDijkhuizen1,Conny unrelatedmalepatientswithloss-of-functionvariantsinTNR
C6 A M.A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1 and partially overlapping phenotypes. Patient 1 presented with speech delay, autism, frequent headaches, balance problems, 1University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, muscularhypotonia,mild proximalandfacialmuscleweakness, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Chromosome 6 dysarthria, fatigue, scoliosis, connective tissue weakness, joint Facebook Group, Utrecht, Netherlands. hypermobility, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, osteoporosis with compression fractures, arterial hypertension, and obesity. Introduction:Chromosome6deletionsarerare,andinformation NotableﬁndingsforPatient2includeneonatalstroke,develop- on their clinical consequences is scarce. Parents of affected individualsoftenturntotheinternetforinformationandsupport. mental delay, seizures, patent foramen ovale, cervical ribs, unilateral auricular tag, and sacral dimple. Interestingly, these TheChromosome6Projectcollaborateswithparentstostudythe two patients share similar facial features with epicanthic folds phenotypesofchromosome6aberrations.Weherebypresentour and cupped ears. Patient 3 has a history of autism spectrum results onterminal6p deletions. disorder, migraines, chronic fatigue, muscle weakness, and Materials and Methods: Parents were notiﬁed of the study gastroesophageal reﬂux. Whole exome sequencing revealed throughsocialmediaandwererequestedtouploadamicroarray different de novo heterozygous variants in TNR
C6 A: c.4405C>T, report. Phenotype data was collected directly from parents via a p.(Q1469X); c.3474dupA, p.(
E1159 RfsX3) and c.2570G>A, p. multilingual online questionnaire, which was also used for cases (W857X). All variants are absent from the gnomAD database. collectedthroughaliteraturesearch.Foursubgroupswerecreated Inconclusion,wearehighlysuspiciousthatthedenovovariants based on deletion sizes. The phenotypes of the total group and in the candidate gene TNR
C6 A are clinically relevant, however, eachsubgroup weredescribed. additional cases with overlapping ﬁndings and functional Results: Twelve Chromosome 6 Project participants and 32 studies are needed to reach more solid conclusions. Funding: literature cases were included, making this the largest cohort of Estonian Research Council grant PRG471 terminal 6p deletions. Deletion sizes ranged from 0.3 to 22.3 Mb S. Puusepp: None. T. Reimand: None. C. Pruunsild: None. N. (median 4.0 Mb). The total group was characterized by an Powell-Hamilton: None. K. Magnussen: None. G. Anadiotis: Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly, vision problems, hearing impairment, None.K. Õunap: None. hypotonia, dysmorphic features, cardiac and brain defects (cerebellar abnormalities and ventriculomegaly). Developmental delay was mostly mild. These traits were observed in all 
P11 .126.D Unravelling the effects of germline missense subgroups, suggesting a dominant role for the most distally variants in TRAF7 deleted genes. One of these genes is FOX
C1 , known to cause Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome. In the subgroup with the largest Aina Prat-Planas1, Laura Castilla-Vallmanya1, Miguel Subías1, deletions (>7.15 Mb), ventricular septal defects and kidney Mónica Centeno-Pla1, Daniel Grinberg1, Raquel Rabionet1, Roser abnormalities werealso observed. Urreizti1,2, Susanna Balcells1 Conclusions:Themostdistallylocatedgenesplayadetermin- ingroleinthephenotypesofterminal6pdeletions.Furthermore, 1Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, Faculty of we demonstrate the power of social media in studying rare Biology, University of Barcelona, IBUB, IRSJD, CIBERER, 08028, diseases. Barcelona, Spain, 2Clinical Biochemistry Department, Hospital Sant E. Rraku: None. A. Engwerda: None. J. Geurink: None. L. Joande Déu, CIBERER, 08950,Esplugues de Llobregat, Spain. Monsma: None. P. Bouman: None. M.A. Swertz: None. T. Dijkhuizen: None. C.M.A.van Ravenswaaij-Arts: None. Introduction:TRAF7codesforaproteinthatactsas
E3 ubiquitin ligase in several signalling pathways mediated by Tumour Necrosis Factor (TNF) family ligands. Somatic mutations in TRAF7 
P11 .125.C TNR
C6 A is a candidate gene for a phenotype with havebeenassociatedwithtumorigenicprocesses,whilegermline multisystem involvement mutationshave beendescribedasdisease-causing for theTRAF7 syndrome, an ultra-rare disorder characterized by intellectual Sanna Puusepp1,2, Tiia Reimand1,2, Chris Pruunsild3, Nina Powell- disability, motor delay, cardiac alterations and dysmorphic Hamilton4,Kari Magnussen5, George Anadiotis5, Katrin Õunap1,2 features.Ouraimwastoexplorethebiologicaleffectsofgermline missense variantsinTRAF7. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Material and Methods: We performed an mRNA-Seq analysis FacultyofMedicine,UniversityofTartu,Tartu,Estonia,2Department inskinﬁbroblastsfrom3TRAF7syndromepatientsand6controls, of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, with and without TNF-α stimulation. Results were subjected to Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of General Pediatrics and Neurology, differential expression, pathway enrichment analysis and qPCR Children’sClinic,TartuUniversityHospital,Tartu,Estonia,4Divisionof validation.Additionally, weused asiRNAstrategytoknock-down Medical Genetics, Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, TRAF7 in control ﬁbroblasts and analysed the expression of Wilmington, DE, USA, 5Randall Children’s Hospital at Legacy selectedgenesby qPCR. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 368 Results: We identiﬁed 78 differentially expressed genes MartaP.Soares1,MárciaRodrigues1,DanielaP.Silva2,TeresaPinho between patients and controls, 8 of which successfully validated Melo2, AnaBerta Sousa1 by qPCR. Enrichment analysis highlighted several pathways that are associated with the most relevant phenotypes of the 1Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro syndrome (Genet Med 2020; 22:1215-1226). The analysis of the Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa Norte, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Serviço de expression of candidate genes in TRAF7-KD ﬁbroblasts showed Neurologia, Departamento de Neurociências e Saúde Mental, promising results for ANGPT1 and CASK, found downregulated in Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro Hospitalar Universitário Lisboa patientsbut signiﬁcantly upregulatedinTRAF7-silenced cells. Norte,Lisboa, Portugal. Conclusions: Gene expression alterations caused by germline missensevariantsinTRAF7partlyexplainthephenotypeobserved Introduction:TrichorhinophalangealsyndrometypeI(TRP
S1 )isa in patients. TRAF7 knockdown data suggest that these variants rare genetic disorder characterized by distinctive facial features causea gain-of-functioneffect in someof TRAF7functions. (bulbous pear-shaped nose), ectodermal anomalies (sparse hair, Funding:AssociacióSíndromeOpitzC,Spain;SpanishGovern- dentalanomalies,dystrophic nails), andskeletal ﬁndings(brachy- ment (CIBERER-U720; PID2019-107188RB-
C21 ; SAF2016-75948-R, dactyly, cone-shaped epiphyses ofphalanges, shortstature). Less FECYT-PRECIPITA);Catalan Government (PERISSLT002/16/00174). frequently (15%), variable cardiac abnormalities have been A.Prat-Planas:None.L.Castilla-Vallmanya:None.M.Subías: described,includingmitralvalveprolapse(MVP),reportedinonly None. M. Centeno-Pla: None. D. Grinberg: None. R. Rabionet: sevenpatients. None.R. Urreizti: None.S. Balcells:None. Casereport:A36year-oldmanwasreferredtoGeneticsdueto facial dysmorphism, MVP and stroke at a young age. He was the 
P11 .127.A Array CGH conﬁrmation of a de novo reciprocal second child of non-consanguineous parents with no relevant translocation involving X and16chromosomes family history. Pregnancy and birth were uneventful; growth and psychomotor development were normal. At age 5, he was Nouha Bouayed ABDELMOULA, Balkiss Abdelmoula, Sonda Kam- diagnosed and treated for unilateral Perthes disease. He evolved moun,Saloua BenAmor,Souad Kammoun with arterial hypertension, and severe mitral regurgitation with MVP diagnosed at 30 years, requiring mitral valve plasty and Genomics of signalopathies at the service of medicine UR17E
S36 , anticoagulation therapy for two years. At 36 years, he had an Medical University of Sfax,Sfax,Tunisia. ischaemicstroke,causingleft-sidedhemiparesis,treatedwitht-PA. After young stroke investigation, cardioembolic aetiology was Objective: Array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) is consideredandanticoagulationwasreinitiated.Physicalexamina- nowadays the best tool to identify chromosomal abnormalities. tionrevealedshortstature,sparsescalphair,macrocephaly,facial The aim of this study was to identify a de novo reciprocal dysmorphism (down-slanting palpebral ﬁssures, peculiar nose translocation. with broad ridge and tip and underdeveloped alae, and low-set Material and Methods: A Tunisian 13-day-old male newborn ears), andbrachydactyly. was referred to our genetic counselling for complex congenital Results: Skeletal survey showed brachydactyly and cone- heartdisease(CHD)combiningtetralogyofFallotandpulmonary shaped epiphyses of phalanges, corroborating the clinical suspi- arteries hypoplasia. Conventional and molecular cytogenetic cionofTRP
S1 .AcustomskeletaldysplasiaNGSpanelidentiﬁeda analysis were carried out to delineate the genetic aetiology of heterozygous pathogenic variant in TRP
S1 : c.2831G>T, p.(Arg944- his syndromic CHD. Array-CGH was conducted using optimized Met),conﬁrming TRP
S1 . DNA preparations and constitutional chip 4.0 microarray from Conclusion: This case illustrates a rare cardiac anomaly with PerkinElmer, USA. impactonprognosis,warrantingsystematicscreeningforMVPin Results: the newborn had dysmorphic features with dolicho- themanagement ofTRP
S1 . cephaly,micro-retro-gnathism,narrow/high-archedpalate,low-set M.P.Soares:None.M.Rodrigues:None.D.P.Silva:None.T.P. malformed ears, long philtrum, thin superior lip, upturned nares Melo:None. A.B. Sousa:None. and periorbital fullness. Further ﬁndings were right hydrocele testis,and asmallsacral dimple.Karyotyping revealed ade novo unbalanced translocation: 46,XY,der(16) t(?;16). The additional 
P11 .130.D Epileptic encephalopathy as a new feature of materialinthedistalextremityofthechromosome16wasdifﬁcult TSPY
L1  variants, associated with sudden infant death with to identify by RHG banding. Array-CGH analysis identiﬁed theXp dysgenesisofthe testes chromosome origin of the additional chromosomal material translocated to the subtelomeric region of chromosome 16q. It Benoit Mazel1,2,3, Candace Ben Signor4, Véronique Darmency5, was therefore possible to reveal an Xp duplication but without Delphine Mallet6, Valentin Bourgeois7, Margot Grisval1, Alexandra detection of a distal 16q monosomy. However, breakpoints Pillard3,CharlottePoe7,MarieBournez1,ChristelThauvin-Robinet1,2,7, mappingandeventualdeletionofthedistalpartofchromosome Antonio Vitobello3,7, Yannis Duffourd3,7, Christophe Philippe3,7, 16qwerenotpossible.AlthoughpartialXduplication,thepatient LaurenceFaivre1,2,7,Sophie Nambot1,2,7 had no genital ambiguity or psychomotor disabilities until 7 monthsofage. 1Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du Conclusion: Our patient may have a KBG (MIM 148050) DéveloppementetSyndromesMalformatifs,FHUTRANSLAD-Centre overlapping phenotype. HospitalierUniversitaireDijonBourgogne,Dijon,France,2Fédération N.B.Abdelmoula:None.B.Abdelmoula:None.S.Kammoun: Hospitalo-Universitaire Médecine Translationnelle et Anomalies du None.S. BenAmor:None. S.Kammoun: None. Développement (FHU TRANSLAD), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon Bourgogne et Université de Bourgogne-Franche Comté, Dijon, France, 3Laboratoire de Génétique chromosomique et moléculaire, 
P11 .129.C Looking beyond mitral valve prolapse and ischae- UF Innovation en diagnostic génomique des maladies rares, Centre mic stroke - a late diagnosis of trichorhinophalangeal Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 4Centre de syndrome type I référence du syndrome de Prader-Willi et autres syndromes avec EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 369 troubles du comportement alimentaire, Centre Hospitalier Universi- features:vertebraldefects(V),anorectalmalformations(A),cardiac taire Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 5Service de Neurophysiologie defects(C),tracheoesophagealﬁstulawithorwithoutesophageal Clinique, Hôpital d’Enfants, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Dijon atresia(TE),renalmalformations(R),andlimbdefects(L).Recently, Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 6Service d’hormonologie, endocrinologie exomesurveyandlarge-scalere-sequencingconﬁrmedTRA
P1 and moléculaire et maladies rares, CPBE, groupement hospitalier Lyon- ZI
C3 asVATER/VACTERLdiseasegenes.Forthemajorityofaffected Est, Lyon-Bron, France, 7Inserm UMR1231 GAD, Génétique des individuals, thegeneticcause remainselusive. Anomalies du Développement, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, Methods: We performed exome sequencing in a multiplex France. family previously reported by Hilger et al. (2012). Re-sequencing was performed on an Illumina MiSeq® platform. Candidate gene Introduction: Sudden infant death with dysgenesis of the testes characterization was performed using embryonic mouse expres- syndrome(SIDDT)isarareautosomalrecessivedisorderassociat- sionstudies and zebraﬁsh knockdown experiments. ing developmental sex disorder (DSD) in patients with 46,XY Results: Exome survey of the index family prioritized a rare karyotype and visceroautonomic dysfunction responsible for variantintheX-chromosomeresidinggeneSHROOM4(c.940C>A, sudden death before twelve months of age. It has been ﬁrst p.Glu314Lys).Targetedre-sequencingof310maleindividualswith describedin2004andveryfewpatientsweresincereported.We VATER/VACTERL features and use of GeneMatcher identiﬁed two describe here a new patient issued from non-consanguineous additional families with novel variants in SHROOM4. Expression parentswith SIDDTand epilepticencephalopathy. studies in mouse embryos and in zebraﬁsh larvae showed Methods: We provide the phenotypic description and genetic expression in brain, heart, genitourinary tract and developing results of the ﬁrst case carrying compound heterozygous TSPY
L1  cloaca.Knockdownexperimentsinzebraﬁshlarvaeusingasplice variants. We also reviewed the data of the 21 initially described blocking Morpholino revealed cloacal malformations, renal cysts, andthe5 recentlyreported patients withSIDDT. andheartanomalies.Furtheranalysisshowedincreasedapoptosis Results: All literature’s cases carried homozygous variants in in the brain and a higher mortality in comparison with the TSPY
L1  and were issued from consanguineous parents. All 27 controls. These phenotypes which strongly resemble the VATER/ patientspresentedwithsuddeninfantdeathandallpatientswitha VACTERLfeaturescouldberescuedbyhumanwildtypeSHROOM4 46,XYkaryotypehadDSD. Our patient presented at the age of 4.5 RNA. months with repeated seizures. Within a month, his neurological Conclusions: Previously, variants in SHROOM4 have been status deteriorated leading to a severe intractable epileptic reported in Stocco dos Santos syndrome [MIM #300434] causing encephalopathy. He died at age ten months of cardiorespiratory intellectual disability. Our genetic and functional data in mouse arrest. Four other reported patients among two families presented and zebraﬁsh implicate SHROOM4 in the expression of a human with progressive epilepsy, including one with severe epileptic VATER/VACTERLphenotype. encephalopathy. They died between ﬁve and nine months. No C.M. Kolvenbach: None. T. Felger: None. L. Schierbaum: similarphenotypewasdescribedinthe22otherpatients. None. I. Thiffault: None. T. Smol: None. A. Bayat: None. F. Conclusions: These ﬁndings expand the phenotypic spectrum Thieme: None. K.U. Ludwig: None. Ö. Yilmaz: None. T. of SIDDT, by reporting progressive epilepsy and severe epileptic Lindenberg:None.U.Moog:None.A.C.Hilger:None.P.Grote: encephalopathyasapossibleoutcome.Thisinformationmayhelp None. B. Odermatt: None. H. Reutter: None. G.C. Dworschak: inmanagingpatients with SIDDT. None. B.Mazel: None.C.BenSignor:None. V.Darmency: None.D. Mallet: None. V. Bourgeois: None. M. Grisval: None. A. Pillard: None. C. Poe: None. M. Bournez: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: 
P11 .132.B A microdeletion on Xq22.1 in a girl with develop- None.A.Vitobello:None.Y.Duffourd:None.C.Philippe:None. mentaldelayandepilepsymayhelpdeﬁneacriticalregionof L.Faivre:None. S.Nambot: None. pathogenicity StefanoG.Carafﬁ1,GabrieleTrimarchi1,SaraGiangiobbe1,2,Chiara 
P11 .131.AX-linkedvariantsinSHROOM4areimplicatedinthe Cattani1, Benedetta Cavirani1,3, Michela Malacarne4, Francesca C. formation ofVACTERL Radio5,Livia Garavelli1 CarolineM.Kolvenbach1,2,3,TimFelger2,LucaSchierbaum1,3,Isabelle 1Azienda USL-IRCCS di Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 2San Thiffault4, Thomas Smol5, Allan Bayat6, Frederic Thieme3, Kerstin U. RaffaeleHospital,Milano,Italy,3AziendaUSLdiParma,Parma,Italy, Ludwig3, Öznur Yilmaz2, Tobias Lindenberg2, Ute Moog7, Alina C. 4IRCCSIstituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy,5Ospedale Pediatrico Hilger1,3, Phillip Grote8, Benjamin Odermatt2, Heiko Reutter3,9, Bambino Gesù,Roma, Italy. GabrielC. Dworschak1,2,3 DeletionsinthechromosomalregionXq22havebeenassociated 1DepartmentofPediatrics,UniversityHospitalBonn,Bonn,Germany, with intellectual disability, epilepsy and various developmental 2InstituteofAnatomy,UniversityofBonn,Bonn,Germany,3Institute defects in heterozygous female patients, while they are often of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, Bonn, lethalinmales.Recentreportsmainlyfocusonstructuralvariants Germany, 4Center for Pediatric Genomic Medicine, Children’s Mercy encompassingthePL
P1 gene,encodingthemajormyelinprotein, Hospital, Kansas City, KS, USA, 5Institut de Génétique Médicale, responsibleforavariablephenotypeinfemalesrangingfromlate- Hopital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France, onsetspasticparaplegiatoearly-onsetneurologicaldisease(Hijazi 6DepartmentofGeneticsandPersonalizedMedicine,DanishEpilepsy etal.,HumMut2020;41:150-68).Herewedescribeanovelfemale Centre, Dianalund, Denmark, 7Institute of Human Genetics, Uni- patient presenting with developmental delay, intellectual dis- versity of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 8Institute of Cardiovas- ability, behavioral anomalies and epilepsy. CGH-array analysis cularRegeneration,CenterforMolecularMedicine,GoetheUniversity, showed a de novo 350 Kb deletion in the Xq22.1 region, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 9Department of Neonatology and encompassing the genes TMSB15A, NFX4, ARMCX5, GPRAS
P1 , PediatricIntensiveCare,UniversityHospitalBonn,Bonn,Germany. GPRAS
P2 and BHLHB9.X-chromosome inactivation assayrevealed a random inactivation pattern. Various known pathogenic Introduction: The acronym VATER/VACTERL association refers to deletions overlap with our patient’s, but the majority are larger, the non-random co-occurrence of the following component sometimesextendingintoXq22.2-Xq22.3.Themostsimilarvariant EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 370 isa1.1Mbdeletioninafemalepatientwhohadclinicalfeatures Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Dona Estefânia, Centro comparabletoourcase(Grilloetal.,EurJMedGenet2010;53:113- Hospitalar e Universitário de Lisboa Central,Lisboa, Portugal. 6).The350Kbdeletioninourpatientcouldthereforerepresenta critical region within the Xq22.1 locus. Strikingly, a previously Introduction:Zhu-Tokita-Takenouchi-Kimsyndrome(ZTTK,OMIM published mouse model (Zhou et al., Hum Mol Genet #617140)isarecentlydescribedmultisystemicdisordercausedby 2014;23:3823-9) suggested that the developmental delay and de novo heterozygous pathogenic variants in SON gene. ZTTK epilepsy phenotype associated with Xq22.1 deletions could be syndrome is characterized by developmental delay, poor overall recapitulated in female mice bearing a minimal heterozygous growth, facial dysmorphisms and structural malformations (cleft deletion spanning Armcx5, Gprasp1, Gprasp2 and Bhlhb9. Our palate, brain,eye,heart, kidney, andskeletal anomalies). To date, report supports the notion of a Xq22.1 microdeletion syndrome only 35 patients were reported. Here, we present a new case of not comprising PL
P1  but still associated with severe intellectual ZTTKsyndromeaimingtocontributetoitsclinicalandmutational disability, and sheds some light on its genotype-phenotype spectrumcharacterization. correlations. Methods:Clinicaldatawascollectedfromthepatient’smedical S.G. Carafﬁ: None. G. Trimarchi: None. S. Giangiobbe: None. record and comparedwith literature. C. Cattani: None. B. Cavirani: None. M. Malacarne: None. F.C. Results: A six-year-old boy was referred for syndromic Radio: None. L.Garavelli: None. developmental delay evaluation. He was the ﬁrst child of a non- consanguineous couple. Previous medical history included con- 
P11 .133.C A ZFHX4 mutation associated with a recognizable genital heart defect, cleft palate, hypermetropia and recurrent neuropsychological andfacial phenotype infections. Physical examination showed short stature and facial dysmorphisms including mild frontal bossing, midface retraction, Paolo Fontana1, Monia Ginevrino2,3, Kristel Bejo2, Giuseppina low-set-ears, downslanting palpebral ﬁssures, broad and Cantalupo1, Maria Ciavarella1, Cinzia Lombardi1, Marianna Maioli1, depressed nasal bridge, full cheeks, short philtrum, small mouth Francesca Scarano1, AntonioNovelli2, Fortunato Lonardo1 and micrognatia. Abdominal, renal and central nervous system imaging excluded other structural anomalies. Microarray analysis 1AORNSanPio,Benevento,Italy,2BambinoGesùChildren’sHospital, detecteda59.17kbmicrodeletionofchromosomeregion21q22.1 Roma,Italy, 3Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma,Italy. encompassing SON gene (arr[hg19] 21q22.11 (34,892,568- 34,951,737)x1). Introduction:ZFHX4isagenecodifyingforatranscriptionfactor Discussion: The patient’s phenotype was strinkingly similar to involved in the development of various embryonic processes, ZTTK syndrome. All previous cases were due to loss-of-function includingbraindifferentiation.Themainfeaturesofpatientswith mutations in SON. To our knowledge, our case was the ﬁrst an 8q21.11 deletion encompassing this gene are intellectual associated with a 21q22.1 microdeletion involving a whole SON disability, hypotonia, short stature, and a peculiar facial pheno- gene deletion. Apparently, the co-deleted genes (GART, MIR6501 type. Corneal opacity has been frequently reported and some of andDONSON) didnot contribute totheclinical phenotype. thesubjectsalsoshowawiderangeofsevereeyeabnormalities. Conclusion: This report conﬁrms that ZTTK syndrome can be Case report: We describe a female patient with mild intellectual caused by 21q22.1 microdeletions, further broadening ZTTK disability and autism spectrum disorder. She had brachycephaly mutational spectrum. with ﬂat occiput, wide forehead, strabismus, monolateral ptosis, M.S. Melo: None. S.L. Ferreira: None. D. Antunes: None. R. epicanthicfolds,low-set,prominent,posteriorlyrotatedears,long Gonçalves: None. T.Kay:None. and smooth philtrum, thin lips, high-arched palate, microretrog- nathia,short4thand5thmetacarpalbones,lumbarhyperlordosis. 
P12 Cancer Genetics Clinical Exome Sequencing revealed the presence of the hetero- zygous de novo pathogenic variant c.3093+1G>T in the ZFHX4 
P12 .001.A The copy number loss heterozygosity in hyperdi- gene. This variant is located in a canonical donor splice site, ploidpediatric acutelymphoblastic leukemia suggestingapossiblealterationofthesplicingprocessandaloss ofprotein function. MonikaM.Lejman1,KatarzynaWojciechowska1,AgataPastorczak2, Conclusions: Severe eye abnormalities occur with a high Zuzanna Urbańska3, Paulina Skowera4, Borys Styka4, Anna Past- frequency in patients with large 8q21.11 deletions. They range wińska5,Joanna Zawitkowska1,Jerzy R.Kowalczyk1 from Peters anomaly to cataract, microphthalmia, sclerocornea, corneal opacity, pigmentary retina degeneration. None of these abnormalities have been reported in patients with ZFHX4 point 1Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland, 2Medical University of mutations, intragenic deletions, or small deletions encompassing Lodz, Łódź, Poland, 3Medical University of Łódź, Łódź, Poland, onlyZFHX4.WeproposethatZFHX4loss-of-functionisassociated 4Children’sUniversityHospital,Lublin,Poland,5MedicalUniversityof with an autosomal dominant condition, characterized by a Warsaw,Warszawa, Poland. neurobehaviouralphenotypeandarecognizablepatternoffacial features.Despiteapartialphenotypicoverlap,8q21.11microdele- Introduction: Genetic abnormalities such as hyperdiploidy and tion syndrome should be consideredasadistinct entity. hypodiploidy inﬂuence outcome during therapy of childhood P. Fontana: None. M. Ginevrino: None. K. Bejo: None. G. B-cellprecursoracutelymphoblasticleukemia.Puretrisomiesand Cantalupo: None. M. Ciavarella: None. C. Lombardi: None. M. tetrasomiesarethehallmark ofhyperdiploid (>47chromosomes) Maioli: None. F. Scarano: None. A. Novelli: None. F. Lonardo: ALL in children. Studies in ALL show that SNP microarray can None. reveal a copy-neutral loss of heterozygosity (CN-LOH) of disomic chromosomeinhyperdiploidkaryotype.Identiﬁcationofrecurrent CN-LOH raises the question of their clinical impact in pediatric 
P11 .134.D Zhu-Tokita-Takenouchi-Kim syndrome: the ﬁrst leukemia. caseduetoa21q22.1microdeletionencompassingSONgene MaterialsandMethods:BetweenOctober2018andDecember 2020400consecutivechildrenwithnewlydiagnosedBCP-ALLand Mafalda Santos Melo, Susana Lemos Ferreira, Diana Antunes, Rui treated according to AIEOP-BFM ALL 2017 Poland protocol were Gonçalves, Teresa Kay enrolled into this study. SNP microarray tests (CytoScan HD) and metaphase cytogeneticswere performedinpatients. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 371 Results:Ouranalysesidentiﬁedsofarelevensuchcases(8girls, Cancer Research Institute, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-Machi, 3 boys). Their chromosome copy number ranged from 49 to 59 Kanazawa920-1192,Japan,3MolecularTherapeuticTargetResearch andincludedtetrasomiesofchromosomes21(7x),18(4x),10(2x), Unit, Institute for Frontier Science Initiative, Kanazawa University, X (2x), 14 (1x). We observed CN-LOH of various chromosomes, Kakuma-Machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan,4Division ofTransdisci- including chromosomes 1, 3, 11, 13, 15, 16, 20 as a frequently plinaryScience,JapanAdvancedInstituteofScienceandTechnology recurrent.Allpatientscontinuetreatmentorremaininremission. (JAIST),NomiCity,Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan. Conclusion:Therearenoenoughcomprehensivestudiesinthe literature that reported outcome for patients with CN-LOH of Introduction: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene transloca- disomic chromosome in hyperdiploid karyotype. Our results tionwithinchromosome2resultsinEM
L4 -ALKoncofusion,drivers indicate that prognostic overview of patients with a CN-LOH for lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD). ALK inhibitors like crizotinib hyperdiploid karyotype seems relatively promising. Considering have shown tremendous antitumor activity for ALK-positive relatively short follow-up, further prospective observation of cancer. However, a complete and long-lasting response to the events in the study cohort is indispensable to assess prognostic ALKinhibitorisrareandpatientsbecomeresistanttothetherapy valueofa CN-LOH hyperdiploid karyotype. followinganinitialresponse.Substitutivetherapythatcaninhibit M.M.Lejman:None.K.Wojciechowska:None.A.Pastorczak: overexpression ofALKis desiredfor precision medicine. None.Z.Urbańska:None.P.Skowera:None.B.Styka:None.A. MaterialsandMethods:Here,weusedtheCRISPR-Cas13atool Pastwińska:None.J.Zawitkowska:None.J.R.Kowalczyk:None. for RNA downregulation. To evaluate the selectivity of CRISPR- Cas13a on guide RNA (gRNA) design, we ﬁrst knocked down the ﬁreﬂy luciferase mRNA. Next, we simply knocked down the 
P12 .002.BClonalarchitectureofpediatriccorebindingfactor- oncogenicdriverEM
L4 -ALKmRNAinthelungcancercell(H3122) acutemyeloid leukemia(CBF-AML) usingthetool.Thedownregulationwasthenendorsedbywestern blot, qPCR,and cellviabilityassays. Tatiana Nasedkina1, Lilit Ghukasyan1, Georgii Krasnov1, Lyudmila Results: Based on the Cas13a selectivity results, we observed Baidun2 restrictedendonucleaseactivityin3′crRNA-gRNAorientation.We found the highest activity between 24-30 bp long gRNAs with 1EngelhardtInstituteofMolecularBiologyoftheRussianAcademyof limited mismatch tolerance. In the case of EM
L4 -ALK oncofusion, Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian Children’s Clinical the ALK protein was prominently downregulated (>80%), which Hospital,Moscow, RussianFederation. wasalsoreﬂectedatthemRNAlevel.Thisdownregulationresulted insubstantialinhibition(4̴ 0%)ofthelungcancercellviability.We Intratumoralheterogeneityandclonalvariabilityisoneofthecentral further found that tyrosine phosphorylation was signiﬁcantly problemsinclinicaloncology,beingthereasonforthedevelopment reduced,whichisoneoftheimportantfeaturesforactivatingthe of resistance to therapy and relapses. The use of bioinformatic downstreamsignalinginLUAD.Collectively,thisstudysuggested processingalgorithmsallowsanalysisofsubclonaltumororganization that the CRISPR-Cas13a protein downregulated the ALK expres- basedonhigh-throughputsequencingdata.Intotal,16patientswith sioninthelung cancercell. t(8;21)and6patientswithinv(16)wereinvestigated(15boysand7 Conclusion: CRISPR-Cas13a mediated EM
L4 -ALK mRNA down- girls, mean age 8.5 years). The paired samples at diagnosis and regulationcouldbeapotentialtherapeuticstrategyforALK+lung remissionwereanalyzed,infourpatientsalsorelapsedsampleswere cancer. available.Targetsequencingof84genes,involvedinthepathogen- S. Saifullah: None. S. Matomo: None. T. Suzuki: None. T. esis of AML, or whole-exome sequencing was performed using Tsukahara: None. NextSeq500 Illumina platform. Comparative analysis of target panel and whole-exome sequencing in CBF-AML patients was carried out. Target sequencing showed the presence of several potential driver 
P12 .005.A MD
C1  restrains ATR-mediated resection of DNA mutationsinKIT, NRAS, KRAS, CBL, FLT3signaling pathway genes. In double-strand breaks inhuman cells 22% of patients, the presence of two or more signaling mutations with different variant allele frequencies was detected, which may StephenMeyn1,2,3, Paul S.Bradshaw2,3 reﬂect the complex clonal structure of tumor substrate. Additional mutations in ASX
L1 , ASX
L2 , RAD21, ETV6, WT1, SM
C3 , FBXW7, TET2 1Center for Human Genomics and Precision Medicine, University of were revealed. Analysis of whole-exome sequencing data from the Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA, 2Genetics and Genome Biology, The AMLpatientsallowedtheisolationofclustersofmutantallelesmost Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Department of likelycorrespondingtodifferentpopulationsofleukemiccellsinthe Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto,Toronto, ON, Canada. sample.ComparisonofthemutationproﬁleofprimaryAMLsample, samples in remission and relapse makes it possible to trace the Double-strand DNA breaks (DSBs) are a potentially lethal form of dynamics of the clonal composition of the tumor. The work was DNAdamagethatcancausegenomicinstabilityandcontributeto supportedbytheRussianScienceFoundation(grant#18−15-00398). carcinogenesis.HumancellsprimarilyrepairinducedDSBsviathe T.Nasedkina:None.L.Ghukasyan:None.G.Krasnov:None.L. error-prone classical-Non Homologous End Joining (c-NHEJ) Baidun: None. pathway, which occurs throughout the cell cycle. During S and G2, repair also occurs via the error-free Homologous Recombina- tion (HR) pathway. A critical early step in the DNA damage 
P12 .004.DRNAguidedCRISPR-Casproteindownregulatesthe response is resection of DSB ends, which has a major effect on oncogenic driver ALKexpression in humanlungcancer cell genomestability, asitcommitsthe celltoerror-free HR repair. HR-mediated DSB repair requires the ATM-dependent gen- Saifullah Saifullah1, Sakari Matomo1, Takeshi Suzuki2,3, Toshifumi eration of 3’ single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) via CtIP-mediated Tsukahara1,4 DNA end resection. However, we ﬁnd that DNA end resection can also be regulated by the DNA damage checkpoint protein 1Area of Bioscience and Biotechnology, School of Materials Science, MD
C1  independently of ATM. In human cells, MD
C1  loss Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (JAIST), Nomi promotes unrestrained resection of DNA ends, as indicated by City, Ishikawa 923-1292, Japan, 2Division of Functional Genomics, increasesinthenumberandintensityofRPA-coatedssDNAfoci EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 372 in a process that is dependent upon ATR and CtIP. Further, 
P12 .008.C BA
P1  germline variations in Finnish patients with optimal loading of Rad51 onto RPA coated ssDNA requires malignantmesothelioma MD
C1 . While ATM promotes HR repair by initiating CtIP dependentDNAendresection,MD
C1 canaffectpathwaychoice through restraining HR repair by preventing ATR- and CtIP- Pauliina Repo1,2, Aleksandra Staskiewicz1,2, Eva Sutinen3, Mikko dependent resection. Rönty4, TeroT. Kivelä2, Marjukka Myllärniemi3, JoniA. Turunen1,2 Ourwork identiﬁesarole for MD
C1 inthecontrol ofDNA end resection in human cells that is independent of ATM and sheds 1Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland, 2Ocular Oncology mechanistic insight into the processing of DNA damage that is Service, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Helsinki and requiredforfaithfulDNArepair,maintenanceofgenomestability Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of andprevention of tumorigenesis. Pulmonary Medicine, Heart and Lung Center, Helsinki University S.Meyn: None.P.S. Bradshaw:None. HospitalandIndividualizedDrugTherapyResearchProgram,Faculty ofMedicine,UniversityofHelsinki,Helsinki,Finland,4Departmentof 
P12 .006.B Phenotype of six families with AXIN2-oligodontia- Pathology, HUS Diagnostic Center, Helsinki University Hospital and colorectal cancer syndrome. Cleft palate as a new feature of Faculty ofMedicine, University of Helsinki,Helsinki, Finland. this syndrome? Pathogenic germline variations in tumour suppressor BRCA1- Laura Roht1,2, Hanne K. Hyldebrandt3, Astrid T. Stormorken3, Hilde associated protein 1 (BA
P1 ) gene cause a dominantly inherited Nordgarden4, Rolf H. Sijmons5, Dennis K. Bos5, Douglas Riegert- tumour predisposition syndrome (BA
P1 -TPDS). Tumours asso- Johnson6,SarahMantia-Macklin6,KaiMuru1,2,TiinaKahre1,2,Katrin ciated with BA
P1 -TPDS are uveal melanoma (UM), malignant Õunap1,2 mesothelioma (MM), cutaneous melanoma and renal cell carci- noma. Patients also exhibit cutaneous BA
P1 ‐inactivated naevi 1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu (BIN), the frequency of which is unknown. BINs may arise UniversityHospital,Tartu,Estonia,2DepartmentofClinicalGenetics, sporadically, but patients with pathogenic germline BA
P1  variant Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, might harbor multiple BINs even before other tumours. In this 3Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, study, we sequenced for germline BA
P1  variations 58 DNA Norway,4NationalResourceCentreforOralHealthinRareDisorders, samples archived in the Helsinki Biobank from Finnish patients Lovisenberg Diaconal Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 5Department of withMM.Theywerediagnosedin2010-2019.Sangersequencing Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Nether- identiﬁedonepatient(1.7%;95%CI,0.04to9.2)withapathogenic lands, 6Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, variation c.1780_1781insT, p.(G549Vfs*49) in exon 14, a putative FL,USA. founder variant that has been described in ﬁve Finnish families with UM. The patient was approximately twenty years younger Introduction: Oligodontia-colorectal cancer syndrome (OMIM than the mean of the study cohort when diagnosed with MM 608615) is an autosomal-dominant disease, which prevalence (mean 68, range 27 to 82), a nonsmoker with no exposure to accordingtoOrphanetis<1:1,000,000.Itiscausedbypathogenic asbestos, and without family history of BA
P1 -TPDS. The tumour germline variants in AXIN2 gene. Our cohort consists of 13 showed loss of nuclear BA
P1  staining in immunohistochemistry. individuals from six families carrying AXIN2 disease-causing Additionally,ﬁvenaeviremovedbeforetheMMwereanalyzedfor variants and presenting variable clinical expression of genetic alterations. Three combined BA
P1 ‐inactivation with BRAF oligodontia-colorectal cancer syndrome. V600E,identiﬁedaloneinthefourth(compound)naevus,whereas Aim:Togiveanoverviewofourcohort`sclinicalphenotypeand the ﬁfth (intradermal) naevus harbored NRAS Q61K. The overall AXIN2gene variants. frequency of pathogenic germline BA
P1  variations in Finnish Material and methods: Data was gathered through ERN- patientswithMMwassimilartothatinFinnishpatientswithUM GENTURIS collaboration and includes ﬁve Estonian, ﬁve Norwe- (9/433; 2.1%). gian,one Dutchand two North-American patients. Funding: the Helsinki University Hospital Research Fund; the Results: Of the 13 AXIN2 gene variant carriers, 8 were males CancerFoundation; theEye Foundation. and 5 were females aged 4-95 years. All were Caucasians, 11 P. Repo: None. A. Staskiewicz: None. E. Sutinen: None. M. from Europe, two from North-America. The most common Rönty: None. T.T. Kivelä: None. M. Myllärniemi: None. J.A. symptom was hypodontia/oligodontia and the number of Turunen: None. missing teeth ranged from 2-22. Eight of the individuals had some type of gastrointestinal polyps, one individual had adenocarcinoma of the coecum and abdominal superﬁcial 
P12 .011.C First case of comprehensive genetic diagnostics of melanoma,theotherhadolfactoryneuroblastomaandthethird Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome in aRussian patient individual had unknown skin cancer and prostate adenocarci- noma.Phenotypewasnormalinninecases.Inonecase,Silver- Dmitry S. Mikhaylenko1,2, Margarita G. Filippova3, Kirill I. Russell syndrome was additionally diagnosed and one family Anoshkin1, Nikolay A. Kozlov3, Vsevolod B. Matveev3, Alexander V. had three cases of cleft palate. Frameshift mutations in exon 8 Khachaturyan3, Alexandra V. Semyanikhina3, Alexander S. Tanas1, werebyfarthemostfrequentandinmostcasesweknowAXIN2 Marina V. Nemtsova1,2,Dmitry V.Zaletayev1 variant was inherited. Conclusions:Mostoftheindividualpresentedsomesymptoms 1ResearchCentreforMedical Genetics,Moscow, RussianFederation, of oligodontia-colorectal cancer syndrome. In one family, cleft 2I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University (Sechenov palate was associated with the AXIN2 pathogenic variant and University), Moscow, Russian Federation, 3N.N. Blokhin National thereforethischaracteristicshouldbeconsideredaspartofAXIN2 Medical Research Center of Oncology, Moscow, Russian Federa- phenotype.Funding: Estonian ResearchCouncil grants PRG471 tion. L. Roht: None. H.K. Hyldebrandt: None. A.T. Stormorken: None.H.Nordgarden:None.R.H.Sijmons:None.D.K.Bos:None. Here we report a case study of Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome D. Riegert-Johnson: None. S. Mantia-Macklin: None. K. Muru: (BHDS) in a 26-year-old female patient. The patient was None.T.Kahre: None. K. Õunap:None. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 373 admitted to a clinic for diagnosis and treatment with a increases the risk of BC/OC statistically signiﬁcantly (<0,0001). As neoplasm of the left kidney and had a history of renal cell no carriers were detected in the population-based samples, only cancer (RCC) of the right kidney and spontaneous pneu- lower limit of conﬁdence interval for OR was calculated and was mothorax. Multiple tumors of the left kidney and lung cysts foundtobe 14,4. were observed upon clinical and laboratory testing. Tumors of Conclusion: Detection of pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and the left kidney were resected and diagnosed by pathologist as BRCA2couldfacilitateearlydiagnosisandtimelypreventionofBC chromophobe renal cell carcinomas. PCR and Sanger sequen- andOC. cing of FLCN exons 4-14 from blood DNA revealed the A. Limonova: None. A. Meshkov: None. A. Ershova: None. A. heterozygous germline nonsense mutation c.1429C>T (p. Kiseleva: None. O. Skirko: None. M. Klimushina: None. E. R477*) and thus conﬁrmed the diagnosis of BHDS. Multiple Sotnikova: None. O. Kurilova: None. I. Eﬁmova: None. L. ﬁbrofolliculomas, which are the most common BHDS symp- Lyubchenko: None. M. Filippova: None. A. Poloznikov: None. toms, were not observed possibly because the patient was too V.Kutsenko: None. M.Pokrovskaya: None. O.Drapkina:None. young to develop them. Four variants of uncertain clinical signiﬁcanceweredetectedintumorDNAbyusingtheCCPand the IonChef/
S5  platform; known cancer driver mutations were 
P12 .013.AA15and28GenePanelforBRCA1,BRCA2andDDR not detected. Based on the ﬁndings, medical-genetic counsel- GenesforReporting Variants onFFPE Samples ling was carried out, and a follow-up management was outlined. As far as we know, this case study is the ﬁrst FionaHyland1,CharlesScafe1,YunZhu2,ChenchenYang2,Yu-Ting comprehensive clinical and genetic examination of a BHDS Tseng2,Steven Roman2 patient in Russia. The p.R477* mutation has been described in patients with ﬁbrofolliculomas and lung cysts, but not RCC, 1Thermo Fisher, South San Francisco, CA, USA, 2Thermo Fisher, San while RCC was the ﬁrst manifestation of BHDS in our case. The Mateo,CA, USA. case report may help geneticists and oncologists to better understand the clinical and genetic heterogeneity of BHDS in There is broad interest in detection of germline and somatic various populations. mutationsinBRCA1andBRCA2andotherDNAdamageresponse D.S.Mikhaylenko:None.M.G.Filippova:None.K.I.Anoshkin: (HR DDR) genes, including detect SNPs, Indels, CNVs, and exon None. N.A. Kozlov: None. V.B. Matveev: None. A.V. Khachatur- deletions on FFPE samples.We describe analytical veriﬁcation of yan: None. A.V. Semyanikhina: None. A.S. Tanas: None. M.V. 15-gene and 28-gene DDR next-generation sequencing assays, Nemtsova:None. D.V.Zaletayev: None. covering BRCA1 and BRCA2 and additional DDR genes. These panels can be customized, adding up to 250 optimized and performance veriﬁed genes. These panel detects germline and 
P12 .012.D Frequency of pathogenic variants in BRCA1 and somatic mutations on FFPE samples, with sensitive and speciﬁc BRCA2 genes in a Russian population-based sample and in detection of variants down to 5% LOD. Exon deletions and long patients withbreast orovarian cancer deletions are reported for BRCA1 and BRCA2. The panels perform well with low input (20ng) and degraded DNA.The Oncomine Alena Limonova1, Alexey Meshkov1, Alexandra Ershova1, Anna BRCA Expanded Panel has excellent performance. 92% of reads Kiseleva1, Olga Skirko1, Marina Klimushina1, Evgeniia Sotnikova1, are on target, and panel uniformity is 97%. Panel uniformity at Olga Kurilova1, Irina Eﬁmova1, Ludmila Lyubchenko2, Margarita hotspot positions (alleles of known relevance) ranges from 98- Filippova2, Andrey Poloznikov3, Vladimir Kutsenko1, Maria Pokrovs- 100%. Performance was measured with the Ion GeneStudio 
S5  kaya1,Oxana Drapkina1 system, with FFPE samples and cell line controls. An integrated bioinformatics pipeline with a visual user interface provides 1National Medical Research Centre for Therapy & Preventive Medicine, variant calling, functional annotation of variants, presence in Moscow, Russian Federation, 2N.N. Blokhin National Medical Research population,phenotypeandoncologydatabasesincludingClinVar, Center of Oncology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3National Medical COSMIC etc, and predicted protein effect. Filtering tools enable ResearchRadiologicalCenter,Moscow,RussianFederation. variant prioritization. We create a report describing drug labels andclinicaltrialsrelevantforthevariantsdetectedinthesample. Introduction: Progress in genetics and molecular research enabled This assay enables BRCA1/2 and HR DDR translational research discovery of mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2, leading to the intotheeffectsofrelevantmutations.ForResearchUseOnly.Not development of hereditary breast (BC) and ovarian (OC) cancer. foruseindiagnostic procedures Genetictestingcontributes toearly diagnosisand targeted preven- F. Hyland: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; tion of these cancers. Objective: To investigate the prevalence of Thermo Fisher. C. Scafe: A. Employment (full or part-time); pathogenicvariantsinBRCA1andBRCA2genesinpatientswithBC/ Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher. Y. Zhu: A. Employment (full or part- OCandinapopulation-basedsamplewithoutoncologicaldiseases. time); Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. C. Yang: A. Employ- MaterialsandMethods:156patients(meanage±SD:52±13 ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. Y. years old) with diagnosed BC/OC were included in the study Tseng: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Thermo consecutively.Inadditiontoit,672(meanage±SD:45±12years Fisher Scientiﬁc. S. Roman: A. Employment (full or part-time); old)and1191(meanage±SD:48±11yearsold)womenfromtwo Signiﬁcant; Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc. Russian population-based cohorts of the ESSE-RF study (ESSE- Vologda and ESSE-Ivanovo, respectively) were recruited in the analysis. Variants of BRCA1 (rs80357713, rs80357711, and 
P12 .014.B Harnessing national pan-laboratory data for accu- rs80357906) and BRCA2 (rs80359550) were detected using a ratequantitationofP
S4 incancersusceptibilitygenes:Cancer custom panel. Variant Interpretation GroupUK (CanVIG-UK) Results:Amongcancerpatientstherewere5carriers(3.21%)of mutationsinBRCA1(4-rs80357906,2.56%;1-rs80357711,0.64%) AliceGarrett1,CheyLoveday1,MirandaDurkie2,GeorgeJ.Burghel3, and 1 carrier (0.64%) of rs80359550 in BRCA2. In the population- JamesDrummond4,RachelRobinson5,IanBerry5,AndrewWallace3, based samples no mutations were identiﬁed. The presence of Laura King1, Subin Choi1, Eleni Soﬁanopoulou6, Fiona McRonald7, BRCA1 (rs80357906, rs80357711) or BRCA2 (rs80359550) variants Francesco Santaniello7, John Burn8, Jem Rashbass9, Steven Hardy7, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 374 DianaEccles10,11,MarkTischkowitz12,13,ClareTurnbull1,14,onbehalf 
P12 .015.C Clinical practice guidelines for BRCA1 and BRCA2 ofCanGene-CanVar consortium and CanVIG-UK genetic testing 1DivisionofGeneticsandEpidemiology,InstituteofCancerResearch, Marion Imbert-Bouteille1, Massimo Barberis2, Philip Beer3, Eitan London, United Kingdom, 2Yorkshire and North East Genomic Friedman4, Josep M. Piulats5, Ettore D. Capoluongo6, Jesus Garcia LaboratoryHub,ShefﬁeldChildren’sNHSFoundationTrust,Shefﬁeld, Foncillas7,IsabelleRay-Coquard8,FrédériquePenault-Llorca9,William United Kingdom, 3Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine and D.Foulkes10,ClareTurnbull11,HelenHanson11,StevenNarod12,Banu North West Genomic Laboratory Hub, Manchester University NHS K.Arun13,MattiS.Aapro14,Jean-LouisMandel15,NicolaNormanno16, Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4East Genomic Diether Lambrechts17, Ignace Vergote18, Bernard Baertschi19, Karen Laboratory Hub, Cambridge University Hospitals Genomic Labora- Baudry1, Yves-Jean Bignon9, Marc Bollet20, Carole Corsini1, Olivier tory, Cambridge University Hospitals, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Cussenot21,ThibaultDelaMotteRouge22,MarieDuboysdeLabarre1, 5YorkshireandNorthEastGenomicLaboratoryHub,LeedsTeaching Florence Duchamp1, Clarisse Duriez23, Karim Fizazi24, Virginie Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, United Kingdom, 6Department of Public Galibert1, Laurence Gladieff25, Joseph Gligorov21, Pascal Hammel26, HealthandPrimaryCare,ClinicalMedicine,UniversityofCambridge, William Jacot27, Tatiana Kogut-Kubiak1, Pierre-Jean Lamy28, Sophie Cambridge, United Kingdom, 7National Disease Registration, Public Nambot29, Yann Neuzillet30, Sylviane Olschwang31, Jean-Marc Rey1, Health England, London, United Kingdom, 8Institute of Genetic Chloé Rideau1, Jean-Philippe Spano32, Frédéric Thomas33, Marion Medicine,InternationalCentreforLife,NewcastleuponTyne,United Vandromme23,JulieVendrell1,DanielZarca34,KevinS.Hughes35,José Kingdom,9NationalCancerRegistrationandAnalysisService,Public E.Alés Martínez36, PascalPujol1 HealthEngland,London,UnitedKingdom,10CancerSciences,Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United 1CHU Montpellier, MONTPELLIER, France, 2European Institute of Kingdom, 11Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Faculty of Oncology, MILAN, Italy, 3University of Glasgow, GLASGOW, United Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United King- Kingdom, 4Chaim Sheba Medical Center, TEL-HASHOMER, Israel, dom, 12East Anglian Medical Genetics Unit, Cambridge University 5InstitutCatalàd’Oncologia(ICO),HOSPITALETDELLOBREGAT,Spain, Hospitals NHS Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 13Department of 6Federico II School of Medicine, NAPLES, Italy, 7Oncohealth Institute, MedicalGenetics, National Institutefor Health,Research Cambridge MADRID, Spain, 8Centre Léon Bérard, LYON, France, 9Centre Jean Biomedical Research Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, Perrin, CLERMONT-FERRAND, France, 10The Research Institute of the United Kingdom, 14Cancer Genetics Unit, Royal Marsden NHS McGill University, MONTREAL, QC, Canada, 11The Institute of Cancer Foundation Trust,London, United Kingdom. Research, LONDON, United Kingdom, 12Women’s College Research Institute, TORONTO, ON, Canada, 13University of Texas MD Anderson For genes associated with incomplete, late-onset penetrance for Cancer Center, HOUSTON, TX, USA,14Clinique de Genolier, GENOLIER, commonphenotypes,thelinesofevidenceavailableforinference Switzerland, 15The Institute of Genetics and Molecular and Cellular of pathogenicity are often limited. Individual labs in isolation Biology,STRASBOURG,France,16IstitutoNazionaleTumori"Fondazione typicallylacksufﬁcientdatatoundertakeinformativecase-control G. Pascale", NAPLES, Italy, 17VIB Center for Cancer Biology, LEUVEN, analyses.GiventhenationalinfrastructureoftheNHSandstrong Belgium,18CatholicUniversityofLeuven,LEUVEN,Belgium,19University professional cohesion afforded by ACGS/BSGM, the UK is well- of Geneve, GENEVE, Switzerland, 20Institut Rafaël, LEVALLOIS-PERRET, placed to address this issue through amalgamation of data, but France, 21Hôpital Tenon AP-HP, PARIS, France, 22CRLCC Eugène has been perennially limited by issues of governance and Marquis, RENNES, France, 23Association BRCA France, LILLE, France, infrastructure. 24Institut Gustave Roussy, PARIS, France, 25Institut Claudius Regaud, Precipitatedin2016bytheBRCAChallenge,all19EnglishNHS TOULOUSE, France, 26Hôpital Beaujon AP-HP, MONTPELLIER, France, molecular genetics laboratories now regularly submit pseudony- 27Institut du Cancer de Montpellier, MONTPELLIER, France, 28Institut mised individual-level variant data to the National Cancer Imagenome, MONTPELLIER, France, 29CHU Dijon, DIJON, France, Registration and Analysis Service of Public Health England (PHE). 30Hôpital Foch, SURESNES, France, 31Hôpital Européen Marseille, ViatheCRUK-supportedCanGene-CanVarinitiative,thesedataare MARSEILLE, France, 32Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière AP-HP, PARIS, France, harmonised, cleaned and ethnicity-matched in PHE. In total to 33CNRS Montpellier, MONTPELLIER, France,34Institut Françaisdu Sein, date we have had submissions for >100,000 BRCA tests and PARIS, France, 35Massachusetts General Hospital, BOSTON, MA, USA, >20,000 CRC/MMR gene tests. Variant counts are then released 36HospitalNuestraSenoradeSonsoles,AVILA,Spain. back to the clinical community via an online portal (http://www. canvaruk.org/). BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene pathogenic variants account for most We shall present UK NHS data on analysis of >1500 BRCA hereditary breast cancer and are increasingly used to determine variants to exemplify our proposed approach to graded quanti- eligibilityforPARPinhibitor(PARPi)therapyofBRCA-relatedcancer. tative application of ACMG evidence item P
S4 , namely use of BecauseissuesofBRCAtestinginclinicalpracticenowoverlapwith variant-levelcasecontroldata.Weshalldemonstratekeyelements both preventive and therapeutic management, updated and to our P
S4  approach, including (i) how to approximate an comprehensive practice guidelines for BRCA genotyping are appropriate control denominator when a variant is absent in needed. The integrative recommendations for BRCA testing gnomAD (ii) how to derive from an odds ratio of association a presentedhereaimto1)identifyindividualswhomaybeneﬁtfrom likelihood ratio for pathogenicity and (iii) adjustment for sample geneticcounselingandrisk-reducingstrategies;2)updategermline series enrichment incurred from recruitment based on family and tumor-testing indications for PARPi-approved therapies; 3) history. providetestingrecommendationsforpersonalizedmanagementof Grant reference:
C61296 /A27223 earlyandmetastaticbreastcancer;and4)addresstheissuesofrapid A. Garrett: None. C. Loveday: None. M. Durkie: None. G.J. process and tumor analysis. An international group of experts Burghel:None.J.Drummond:None.R.Robinson:None.I.Berry: includinggeneticists,medicalandsurgicaloncologists,pathologists, None. A. Wallace: None. L. King: None. S. Choi: None. E. ethicists and patient representatives was commissioned by the Soﬁanopoulou:None.F.McRonald:None.F.Santaniello:None. FrenchSocietyof Predictive andPersonalizedMedicine.Thegroup J. Burn: None. J. Rashbass: None. S. Hardy: None. D. Eccles: followed a methodology based on speciﬁc formal guidelines None.M. Tischkowitz: None. C.Turnbull: None. developmentincluding1)evaluatingthelikelihoodofBRCAmfrom EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 375 a combined systematic review of the literature, risk assessment Vandromme: None. J. Vendrell: None. D. Zarca: F. Consultant/ modelsandexpertquotationsand2)therapeuticvaluesofBRCAm AdvisoryBoard;Modest;ExactSciences,AstraZeneca.K.S.Hughes: status for PARPi therapy in BRCA-related cancer and for manage- B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant ment of early and advanced breast cancer. These international andpendinggrantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;CRA guidelines may help clinicians comprehensively update and Health LLC. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Hologic Inc, standardizeBRCAtestingpractices. Myriads Genetics. J.E. Alés Martínez: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; M. Imbert-Bouteille: None. M. Barberis: None. P. Beer: F. Modest; Roche, Pﬁzer, BMS, Tesaro. P. Pujol: B. Research Grant Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Genomic Strategy, OncoDNA (principalinvestigator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrants cancer theranostics, Karus therapeutics, Cambridge Cancer Geno- as well as grants already received); Modest; Novartis, Pﬁzer. F. mics. E. Friedman: None. J.M. Piulats: None. E.D. Capoluongo: Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Astra Zeneca, Pﬁzer, Exact None.J.GarciaFoncillas:None.I.Ray-Coquard:B.ResearchGrant Sciences. (principalinvestigator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrants as well as grants already received); Signiﬁcant; MSD. F. Consultant/ AdvisoryBoard;Modest;AstraZeneca,MSD,Tesaro,Roche,GenMab, 
P12 .016.D Uptake and efﬁcacy of bilateral risk reducing Pﬁzer, Clovis Oncology. F. Penault-Llorca: F. Consultant/Advisory surgeryin unaffected female BRCA1 andBRCA2 carriers Board; Modest; AstraZeneca, MSD, Tesaro, GSK, Illumina, Myriad Genetics,Roche.W.D.Foulkes:None.C.Turnbull:None.H.Hanson: RutaMarcinkute1,EmmaRoisinWoodward1,AshuGandhi2,Sacha None. S. Narod: None. B.K. Arun: B. Research Grant (principal Howell2, Emma J Crosbie3, Julie Wissely2, James Harvey2, Lindsay investigator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswellas Highton2, John Murphy2, Cathrine Holland4, Richard Edmondson4, grants already received); Modest; CIPRIT, NCI, Susan Komen, RichardClayton4,LesterBarr2,ElaineFHarkness5,AnthonyHowell6, PharnaMar, AbbVie, Astra Zeneca. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; FionaLalloo1,D Gareth Evans1 Modest;AbbVie.M.S.Aapro:F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest; Elsai,Helsinn,Merck,Mundipharma,Roche,Tesaro.J.Mandel:None. 1Clinical Genetics Service, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, N.Normanno:B.ResearchGrant(principalinvestigator,collaborator Manchester University Hospitals NHSFoundation Trust, Manchester, orconsultantandpendinggrantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived); United Kingdom, 2Prevent Breast Cancer Centre, Wythenshawe Modest; Roche, Astra Zeneca, Biocartis, Illumina. F. Consultant/ Hospital Manchester Universities Foundation Trust, Manchester, Advisory Board; Modest; MSD, Bayer, Biocartis, Incyte, Roche, BMS, United Kingdom, 3Division of Cancer Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Merck, Thermoﬁscher, Boehringer, Ingelheim, Astra Zeneca, Sanoﬁ, Medicine and Health, St Mary’s Hospital, University of Manchester, Eli-Lilly. D. Lambrechts: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; F. Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Department of Obstetrics and Hoffmann,Roche,Sanoﬁaventis,Bayer.I.Vergote:B.ResearchGrant Gynaecology, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester University NHS (principalinvestigator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrants Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, aswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;OncoinventAS,Genmab, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Division of Informatics, Imaging and Amgen, Roche, Strichting tegen Kanker. F. Consultant/Advisory DataSciences,SchoolofHealthSciences,FacultyofBiology,Medicine Board; Modest; Advaxis, Eisai, MSD belgium, Roche NV, GenMab, F. and Health, University of Manchester, Manchester Academic Health Hoffmann-La Roche, PharmaMar, Millenium Pharmaceuticals, Clovis Science Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6Manchester Breast Oncology, Astra Zeneca NV, Tesaro, Oncoinvent AS, Immunogen, Centre,The ChristieHospital, Manchester, United Kingdom. Sotio. B. Baertschi: None. K. Baudry: None. Y. Bignon: None. M. Bollet:F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest;Roche,Novartis,Sanoﬁ, Background: Women testing positive for BRCA1/2 pathogenic Pﬁzer,Amgen,Chugai,Archimedes.C.Corsini:None.O.Cussenot:B. variantshavehighlifetimerisksofbreastcancer(BC)andovarian ResearchGrant(principalinvestigator,collaboratororconsultantand cancer (OC). The effectiveness of risk reducing surgery (RRS) has pendinggrantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;Novartis, been demonstrated in numerous previous studies. We evaluated Pﬁzer.F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest;Janssen,Takeda.T.De long-term uptake, timing and effectiveness of risk reducing la Motte Rouge: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- mastectomy (RRM) and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO) borator or consultant and pending grants as wellas grants already inhealthyBRCA1/2 carriers. received); Modest; Novartis, Pﬁzer. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Methods:Womenwereprospectivelyfollowedupfrompositive Modest; Astra Zeneca, Tesaro-GSK, Clovis Oncology, Pﬁzer, Roche, genetic test (GT) result to censor date. χ² testing compared MSD.M.DuboysdeLabarre:None.F.Duchamp:None.C.Duriez: categorical variables; Cox regression model estimated HRs and None. K. Fizazi: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Janssen, 95% CI for BC/OC cases associated with RRS, and impact on all- Bayer,AstellasPharma,Sanoﬁ,OrionPharma,Curevac,AstraZeneca, cause mortality; Kaplan-Meier curves estimated cumulative RRS ESSA Pharma, Roche, Amgen. V. Galibert: None. L. Gladieff: F. uptake. The annual cancer incidence was estimated by women- Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Roche, Astra Zeneca, Tesaro. J. yearsatrisk. Gligorov: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Roche-Genentech, Results: In total, 887 women were included in this analysis. Novartis, Daichi, MSD, Eisai, Genomic Health, Ipsen, Macrogenics, Mean follow-up was 6.26 years (range=0.01-24.3; total=4685.4 Pﬁzer. P. Hammel: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Astra women-years). RRS was performed in 512 women, 73 before GT. Zeneca, BMS, Celgene, OSE Immunotherapeutics. W. Jacot: B. OverallRRMuptakewas57.9%andRRSOuptakewas78.6%. The Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant median time from GT to RRM was 18.4 months, and from GT to andpendinggrantsaswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Modest;Astra RRSO-10.0 months. Annual BC incidence in the study population Zeneca.F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest;AstraZeneca,Pﬁzer.T. was 1.28%. Relative BC risk reduction (RRMversus non-RRM) was Kogut-Kubiak: None. P. Lamy: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; 94%.Risk reductionof OC(RRSOversus non-RRSO)was100%. Modest; Astra Zeneca, Novartis, Janssen, Roche. S. Nambot: F. Conclusion: Overa 24-yearperiod, weobserved an increasing Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Astra Zeneca. Y. Neuzillet: F. numberofwomenoptingforRRS.Weshowedthatthetimingof Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; MSD, Astra Zeneca, Sanoﬁ, RRS remains suboptimal, especially in women undergoing RRSO. IPSEN, Bouchara-Recordiatet, BMS, Astellas. S. Olschwang: F. BothRRMandRRSOshowedasigniﬁcanteffectonrelevantcancer Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Astra Zeneca. J. Rey: None. C. riskreduction.However,therewasnostatisticallysigniﬁcantRRSO Rideau: None. J. Spano: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; protective effect on BC. Roche,MSD,Biogaran,AstraZeneca,LEOPharma,Mylan,Pﬁzer,BMS, R.Marcinkute:None.E.Woodward:None.A.Gandhi:None.S. Novartis, PFO, Myriads, Gilead and Lilly. F. Thomas: None. M. Howell: None. E. Crosbie: None. J. Wissely: None. J. Harvey: EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 376 None. L. Highton: None. J. Murphy: None. C. Holland: None. R. Olha Lobanova1, Z Rossokha2, V Cheshuk1, N Medvedieva2, R Edmondson:None.R.Clayton:None.L.Barr:None.E.Harkness: Vereshchako1, NGorovenko3 None.A. Howell: None. F.Lalloo: None. D.Evans: None. 
P12 .020.DNearlyallmultiple-casebreastcancerfamilieswith 1National Medical University Bogomolets, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2State HRDtumorsare detected by clinical gene panels InstitutionReference-centreforMolecularDiagnosticofPublicHealth Ministry of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, 3Shupyk National Medical ThibautS.Matis1,2,3,NadiaZayed2,3,BouchraLabraki4,Manondela Academy ofPostgraduate Education, Kyiv, Ukraine. Durantaye5,ThéophaneA.Matis6,NancyHamel3,AdrienneAtayan2, BarbaraRivera7,8,9,YuvalTabach10,PatriciaN.Tonin2,3,11,Alexandre Introduction: BRCA 1/2 genes identiﬁed as hereditary determi- Orthwein7,8, Anne-Marie Mes-Masson5,12, Zaki El Haffaf4, William D. nants of ahigh risk breast cancer (BC). The pathogenic variants Foulkes2,3,7,Paz Polak13 in BRCA genesis detected in familialBC, in contrast the benign and drug response variant with uncertain signiﬁcance in p53 1Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France, 2Department of Human gene(G119C).Theaimofourstudywastoevaluatethecombine Genetics,McGillUniversity,Montréal,QC,Canada,3CancerResearch effect of these gene variants on the clinical course of the Program, Centre for Translational Biology, The Research Institute of disease. theMcGillUniversityHealthCentre,Montréal,QC,Canada,4Divison Materials and Methods: The study group included 165 BC de Médecine Génétique, CRCHUM-CHUM, Montréal, QC, Canada, patientswithafollow-upperiodof28-36months.Variantsinthe 5CentrederechercheduCentrehospitalierdel’UniversitédeMontréal BRCA1gene(5382insC,rs80357906;4153delA,rs80357711;T300G, and Institut du cancer de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada, 6Ecole rs28897672) and in the p53 gene (G119C, rs1042522) were Supérieur de Génie Informatique, Paris, France, 7Gerald Bronfman detectedby PCRand PCR-RFLP. Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada, Results:BRCA1pathogenicvariantswerefoundin12.7%cases, 8Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Jewish General Hospital, p53 single variants - in 52.1 %. 5,5 % patients had combined Montréal, QC, Canada, 9IDIBELL Bellvitge Biomedical Research variantsinpathogenicBRCA1withvariantsof
P53 gene(5382insC/ Institute, Barcelona, Spain, 10Department of Developmental Biology G119C - 4,8%; 4153delA/G119C - 0,6%). The p53 single variants and Cancer Research, Institute for Medical Research-Israel-Canada, was deﬁned in 76.7% of familial BC. Triple-negative BC type Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel, 11Department of detected in 37% of all patients. Among triple-negative patients Medicine,McGillUniversity,Montréal, QC,Canada,12Departmentof withpathogenicBRCA1was81%,withthep53variants-36%,with Medicine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada, 13Depart- combined variants of two genes - 100% patients. Disease-free ment of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount survival and overall survival was decreased in patients with SinaiHospital, New York, NY,USA. combinedvariantscomparedwithotherpatients(44.4%vs87.3%; 66.7 % vs 96.4%, p<0.05, respectively). Brain metastases were Germline pathogenic variants (GPVs) in BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, and identiﬁed more often in patients with combined genes variant RAD51C/D account for about two-ﬁfths of multi-case breast cancer (60%vs28,6%, p<0.05, respectively). (BC) families.Because the knowngermline pathogenic variants are Conclusions: The unfavorable effect of combined BRCA1 and mostly related to homologous recombination repair (HR) pathway p53 gene variants with aggressive course and resistance to genes,ithasbeenhypothesizedthatvariantsinunknowngenesor treatmentin patientswith breast cancer wasdeﬁned. variants of uncertain signiﬁcance that lead to HR deﬁciency (HRD) O.Lobanova:None.Z.Rossokha:None.V.Cheshuk:None.N. cancontributetoalargefractionoftheunsolvedcases.Througha Medvedieva:None.R.Vereshchako:None.N.Gorovenko:None. pipeline optimized for archival formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded tumor tissues, we studied 39 whole-exome sequencings normal/ tumor pairs from French-Canadian patients with either early-onset 
P12 .022.BCase-controllikelihoodratiocalculationforclinical BCorastrongfamilyhistoryofBCnegativeforknownbreastcancer classiﬁcationofvariantsofuncertainsigniﬁcanceintheBRCA1 susceptibility genes (BCSGs). Consistent with previous studies, less andBRCA2genes than15%oftumorsdemonstratedHRD,andoneofwhichharbored a founder missense mutation in RAD51D, recently classiﬁed as Maria Zanti1, Fergus Couch2, Denise O’Mahony1,3, Breast Cancer pathogenic. No other samples revealed novel candidate HRD- Association Consortium, Joe Dennis4, Douglas Easton4, Amanda associated genes, selected on their co-evolution with HR genes. Spurdle5, David Goldgar6,Kyriaki Michailidou1,3 Thirteen patients harbored loss of heterozygosity in the matched tumorthatretainedvariantsinacandidategene,buttumorsdidnot 1Biostatistics Unit, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, have a mutational signature indicating HRD. We showed that our Nicosia,Cyprus,2MayoClinic,Rochester,MN,USA,3CyprusSchoolof pipelinecouldbeusedtoidentifyrareGPVthatleadtoHRD,butour Molecular Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Centre for Cancer Genetic results suggest that in French Canadians it is unlikely that a Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, signiﬁcantfractionofunexplainedmulti-casefamiliesisduetoHRD- University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5Division of associated variants. This pipeline will be useful for investigating Genetics and Population Health, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research understudiedpopulations.Inwell-studiedpopulations,theseresults Institute, Brisbane, Australia, 6Huntsman Cancer Institute, University suggestthatcurrentgenetestingpanelswillbeabletodetectmost of Utah School of Medicine, Department of Dermatology, Salt Lake pathogenicvariantsintheknowncancer-predisposingHRDgenes. City,UT, USA. T.S. Matis: None. N. Zayed: None. B. Labraki: None. M. de la Durantaye:None.T.A.Matis:None.N.Hamel:None.A.Atayan: Introduction: It is well established that the most prevalent None. B. Rivera: None. Y. Tabach: None. P.N. Tonin: None. A. inherited pathogenic variants (PVs) contributing to breast Orthwein:None.A.Mes-Masson:None.Z.ElHaffaf:None.W.D. cancer(BC)riskoccurintheBRCA1andBRCA2genes.Individuals Foulkes: None. P.Polak: None. carrying PVs can beneﬁt from risk management strategies including closer surveillance at an earlier age, prophylactic surgery and targeted therapies. However, BRCA1 and BRCA2 
P12 .021.A The clinical signiﬁcance of combined effect in genetic testing often (5-20%) identiﬁes a variant of uncertain BRCA1 and p53 genes variants on breast cancer treatment clinicalsigniﬁcance (VUS), complicatingclinicalmanagement of course patients and their families. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 377 Materials and Methods: After quality control, genotype data XRC
C1 -Arg/Gln genotypes had 3.1-fold increased risk of BC in generated as part of the Breast Cancer Association Consortium pre-menopausal patients compared to their post-menopausal (BCAC)OncoArrayprojectwasavailablefor184BRCA1/2variants. counterpart(p=0.001). Also, XPG-His/His genotypes had 1.2-fold Datafromupto75,657BCcasesand52,987healthycontrols(ages increasedriskofBCinyoungerBCpatients(<40years)comparedto between 18-80) were used to estimate likelihood ratios (LRs) of older patients(≥40years)(p=0.028). Moreover, XPG-Asp1104His pathogenicity. LRs were calculated by comparing the probability was associated with Luminal-A subtype and PR-positivity(p= ofobservingthedataassumingthevarianthassimilarpenetrance 0.042, p=0.021, respectively). And, MSH2-Gly322Asp was signiﬁ- as the “average” truncating pathogenic variant with the prob- cantly associated with HER2-positivity(p=0.028) in Tanzanian BC abilitythatthevariantunderstudyhasnoeffectonrisk.LRswere patients. categorised into American College of Medical Genetics and Conclusion: Our studies may well conﬁrm that XRC
C1 - Genomics and Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP) Arg399Gln and XPG-Asp1104His polymorphisms may inﬂuence codestrengthcategories followingpublished recommendations. thereproductiveriskfactorsandincreasedriskofBCinTanzania. Results: Our analysis provides supporting, moderate or strong I.C. Adolf: None. G. Akan: None. L.P. Rweyemamu: None. F. classiﬁcation evidence for 70.1% of the variants. Of these, LR Atalar:None. estimates in favour of pathogenicity were estimated for 17 variants, whereas LRs providing evidence of being benign were estimated for112 variants. 
P12 .024.D Pathogenic Variants in Hereditary Cancer Syn- Conclusions: These results may be used to inform BRCA1 and dromeGenesarePrevalentAmongBreastCancerPatientsNot BRCA2variantclassiﬁcation,withpotentialimplicationsforpatient MeetingVarious International Genetic Testing Guidelines management. Grant: Research Promotion Foundation; RESTART 2016- 2020; CULTURE/AWARD-YR/0418/0017 Sarah M. Nielsen1, Emily Decker1, Natalie Rickers1, Alekhya M. Zanti: None. F. Couch: None. D. O’Mahony: None. J. Narravula1,PatW.Whitworth2,PeterD.Beitsch3,EdwardD.Esplin4, Dennis: None. D. Easton: None. A. Spurdle: None. D. Goldgar: RobertL. Nussbaum1 None.K. Michailidou: None. 1Invitae Corp., San Francisco, CA, USA, 2Nashville Breast Center, Nashville, TN, USA, 3Dallas Surgical Group, Dallas, TX, USA, 4Invitae 
P12 .023.C Association of XRC
C1 -Arg399Gln and XPG- Corp., Chicago,IL,USA. Asp1104His polymorphisms with reproductive risk factors andincreased riskofbreast cancer inTanzanian patients Background: Clinical management options have expanded for patientsharboringpathogenicvariants(PVs)incancerpredisposi- Ismael C. Adolf1, Gokce Akan2, Linus P. Rweyemamu1, Fatmahan tion genes. Historically, testing costs and clinical implementation Atalar2 challengesledto restrictive testingguidelinesin many countries. Increasing evidence demonstrates that broader testing is a cost- 1University of Dar es Salaam Mbeya College of Health and Allied effective way to identify patients with PVs. We assessed the Sciences, Mbeya, Tanzania, United Republic of, 2Child Health efﬁcacy of multiple international testing guidelines in identifying Institute, Department of Rare Diseases, Istanbul University, Istanbul, breast cancer(BC) patients with clinicallyactionable PVs. Turkey, Istanbul, Turkey. Methods: We reanalyzed a prospective cohort of U.S.-based, primarily Northern European, BC patients, referred for germline Background: Variations in DNA repair genes can alter protein genetic testing (PMID: 30526229). We applied testing guidelines function, resulting in the accumulation of DNA damage and from Australia, U.K. and 2 Canadian provinces (Ontario, British mutations, and contribute to the development of cancer. Recent Columbia)todeterminetheirsensitivityforselectingpatientswith ﬁndings have shown the association between DNA repair gene PVsinhighrisk(>4xriskcomparedtogeneralpopulation)breast/ polymorphisms and pathogenesis of breast cancer(BC). In this ovariancancergenes.Thesepopulationswerechosenbecauseof study, we investigated the role of the following polymorphisms; similarhealthcare systems and ancestraldistribution. hOGG1-Ser326Cys(rs1052133), AP
E1 -Asp148Glu(rs1130409), Results:Table1displaysthedistributionofincriteria(IC)vs.out XRC
C1 -Arg399Gln(rs25487), XPG-Asp1104His(rs17655), XPD- ofcriteria(OOC)patientsbytestingcriteria.Over75%ofpatients Lys751Gln(rs13181), hMSH2-Gly322Asp(rs4987188), XRC
C3 - analyzed were OOC. Rates of PVs were similar between IC and Thr241Met(rs861539), XRC
C2 -Arg188His(rs3218536), RAD51- OOC patients. Existingcriteria missed upto 30% ofpatients with 4719A/T(rs2619679) and RAD51-4601A/G(rs5030789) in suscept- highriskPVs.Themajority(>80%)ofPVsinOOCpatientswerein ibilityinBCinTanzania.Theimpactofreproductiveriskfactorson geneswithpublished management guidelines. BC wasalso evaluated. Conclusions: In our cohort, select international testing criteria Methods & Results: A hospital based case-control study was identiﬁed <30% of patients with PVs. These data suggest carried out in Tanzanian population(263 BC patients and 250 expanding certain international guidelines would allow better controls matched for sex and age). QRT-PCR was used for identiﬁcation and improved management for BC patients across genotyping assay. Allelic, genotypic and haplotype association theglobe. analyses with disease risk and reproductive risk factor were FindingsinICvs.OOCpatientsUS,UnitedStates;B.C.,BritishColumbia;UK,UnitedKingdomNCCN, performed. The frequency of genotypic and allelic variants of XRC
C1 -Arg399Gln, XRC
C2 -Arg188His, XRC
C3 -Thr241Met, XPG- Overall Incriteria Outof criteria Asp1104His and MSH2-Gly322Asp were signiﬁcantly different Country/ Guideline Total IC(%of OOC(% TotalPV TotalPV Highrisk^ Highrisk^ between the groups(p<0.05,respectively). Moreover, XRC
C1 - providence nof total oftotal IC(%of OOC(%of PVs(%of PVs(%of cohort cohort) cohort) IC OOC totalPVs) totalPVs) Arg399Gln, XRC
C3 -Thr241Met and XPG-Asp1104His polymorph- cohort) cohort) isms were associated with the increased risk of BC in dominant, U.S. NCCN 953 473(49.6) 480(50.4) 43(9.1) 40(8.3) 22(26.5) 8(9.6) recessive and co-dominant genetic-inheritance models(p<0.05, Ontario MOHLTC 953 210(22.0) 743(78.0) 18(8.6) 65(8.7) 5(6.0) 25(30.1) respectively). Association analysis between reproductive risk B.C. BCHCP 953 203(21.3) 750(78.7) 24(11.8) 59(7.9) 9(10.8) 19(22.9) factors and DNA repair gene polymorphisms revealed that Australia eviQ 953 180(18.9) 773(81.1) 19(10.6) 64(8.3) 12(14.5) 18(21.7) U.K. NICE* 826** 127(14.7) 736(85.3) 11(8.7) 64(8.7) 6(7.2) 22(26.5) EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 378 S.M. Nielsen: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; pathomorphological characteristics. p<0.05 was considered Invitaecorp.E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions,patentor statistically signiﬁcant. otherintellectualproperty);Signiﬁcant;Invitaecorp.E.Decker:A. Results: No associations between clinicopathological variables Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae Corp. E. andSNPswereobserved.Inboth,univariateandmultivariateCox Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other survivalanalysis,TXNRD2rs1139793GGgenotypevs.GA+AAwas intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Invitae Corp. N. Rickers: A. a negative prognostic factor for DFS (multivariate HR 2.248, p= Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae Corp.. E. 0.025)and OS(multivariate HR 2.248, p=0.029). Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Conclusions:TXNRD2rs1139793polymorphismmaycontribute intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Invitae Corp. A. Narravula: totheidentiﬁcationofearly-stageBCpatientsatahigherriskfor None. P.W. Whitworth: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, disease recurrence and death. Further investigations with larger collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants sample sizes are needed to conﬁrm the results of the current already received); Modest; Invitae Corp., Intact Medical. D. study. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and E. Korobeinikova: None. R. Ugenskiene: None. R. Insodaite: expert witness); Modest; Medtronic. E. Ownership Interest (stock, None.E. Juozaityte: None. stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Reverse Medical, Rebound Medical, Lazarus, Cerebrotech. E. 
P12 .026.C Clinical utility of the 313-variant based polygenic Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other risk score and multigene panel testing for breast cancer risk intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Targeted Medical Education. F. prediction Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Medtronic, Lumicell, Impe- diMed. P.D. Beitsch: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Inge M. M. Lakeman1, Mar Rodriguez-Girondo1, Andrew Lee2, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants Antoinette Hollestelle3, Marjanka K. Schmidt4,1, Christi J. van already received); Modest; Invitae Corp. E. Ownership Interest Asperen1,Peter Devilee1, onbehalf of the HEBON study (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Targeted Medical Education. E.D. Esplin: A. Employ- 1LeidenUniversityMedicalCentre,Leiden,Netherlands,2Universityof ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae Corp. E. Ownership Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Erasmus MC Cancer Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual Institute, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Netherlands Cancer Institute, property); Signiﬁcant; Invitae Corp. R.L. Nussbaum: A. Employ- Amsterdam, Netherlands. ment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Invitae Corp.. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert wit- Introduction: We explored the BOADICEA model’s clinical utility, ness); Modest; Genome Medical, Maze Therapeutics, Pﬁzer. E. whichcurrentlyincorporatestheeffectsoftruncatingvariantsin5 Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other breast cancer genes, family history, and a polygenic risk score intellectual property); Modest; Genome Medical, Maze Therapeu- (PRS) based on 313 common variants, in non-BRCA1/2 Dutch tics,Personalis.E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions,patent breast cancerfamilies. or other intellectual property); Signiﬁcant; Invitae Corp.. F. Materials and Methods: We applied logistic regression to Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Genome Medical, Maze estimatethe association of PRS-313 with breast cancer risk using Therapeutics, Pﬁzer. 3,925 breast cancer cases from 3,528 non-BRCA1/2 breast cancer familiesand3,479populationcontrols.Lifetimerisksofcaseswere retrospectively calculated using BOADICEA, simulating an indivi- dualtobe at theageofone yearand unaffected. 
P12 .025.A Impact of functional polymorphisms in oxidative Results: We found a signiﬁcant association between PRS-313 stress-relatedgenes onearly-stage breast cancerprognosis andbreastcancerwithandwithoutadjustmentforfamilyhistory basedonpedigrees,perSDOR=1.54,95%CI[1.31-1.80]andOR= Erika Korobeinikova, Rasa Ugenskiene, Ruta Insodaite, Elona 1.96, 95%CI[1.84-2.09] respectively. Similar results were found for Juozaityte knownER-positiveand ER-negativetumours separately. Applying risk classiﬁcation thresholds from guidelines in the USA, United Lithuanian University ofHealth Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania. Kingdom and the Netherlands (NCCN, NICE, and IKNL), risk assessment by including the PRS-313 to BOADICEA would have Introduction: Oxidative stress-related proteins NF
E2 L2
, HMOX1 changed screening recommendations in CHEK2 and ATM patho- and TXNRD2 play a role in breast cancer (BC) pathogenesis. genicvariantcarrierstoasimilardegreeasnon-carriers,butnotin Functionalsinglenucleotidepolymorphisms(SNPs)intheircoding PALB2 pathogenic variantcarriers (Table). genes may alter protein levels and impact the course of BC. We Conclusions: Our results demonstrate that use of the PRS-313 aimed to evaluate possible associations of NF E2
L2  rs10183914, intheBOADICEA model ingenetically unexplained breast cancer rs35652124,HMOX1rs2071746,TXNRD2rs1139793SNPswiththe families and carriers of moderate breast cancer risk variants can early-stageBC clinicopathological characteristics and survival. potentially inﬂuence clinical management in substantial propor- Materialsandmethods:studyinvolved202EasternEuropean tionsof counselees. (Lithuanian)womenwithprimaryI-IIstageBC.DNAwasextracted from peripheral blood leukocytes. Alleles were genotyped using TaqMan genotyping assays. Association of clinicopathological characteristics (age at diagnosis: ≤50/>50 years; tumour size: ≤2cm/>2-5 cm; lymph node, oestrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and HER2 status: positive/ negative; tumour differentia- tion grade: G1+G2/G3) and SNPs was evaluated using χ2 test. Univariate differences between disease-free survival (DFS), metastasis-freesurvival(MFS)andoverallsurvival(OS)rateswere tested for signiﬁcance using the log-rank test; while multivariate analysis for survival was tested using Cox proportional hazards models. Multivariate analysis included above mentioned EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 379 1Department of Human Genetics, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, Punjab India, Amritsar, India, 2Department of Pathology, Sri Guru Ram Das Institute of Medical Sciences and Research, Amritsar, Punjab, India, Amritsar, India, 3Department of Radio- therapy, Sri Guru Ram Das Institute of Medical Sciences and Research, Amritsar, Punjab, India, Amritsar, India, 4Department of Surgery, Sri Guru Ram Das Institute of Medical Sciences and Research, Amritsar, Punjab,India, Amritsar, India. The objective of this study was to investigate the potential association of haplotypes of six VEGF polymorphisms with breast cancer risk in North-West Indians. Samples of 250 breast cancer patients and 250 age and gender matched controls were genotyped for VEGF -2578C/A, -2549I/D, -460T/C, +405C/G, -7C/T and +936C/T polymorphisms. Haplotypes were generated to I.M.M.Lakeman:None.M.Rodriguez-Girondo:None.A.Lee: determine the better contribution of VEGF polymorphisms to None. A. Hollestelle: None. M.K. Schmidt: None. C.J. van breast cancer risk. Haplotypes CDTCCC (OR=0.56, 95%CI, 0.38- Asperen: None.P. Devilee: None. 0.81; p=0.003) and CDTGCC (OR=0.63, 95%CI, 0.44-0.92; p= 0.018) of VEGF -2578C/A, -2549I/D, -460T/C, +405C/G, -7C/T and +936C/T polymorphisms were signiﬁcantly associated with 
P12 .027.CMendelian randomization andcolocalization study decreased risk of breast cancer. CDTCCC haplotype was also revealing splicing-type speciﬁc effects oncancers signiﬁcantly associated with reduced risk of breast cancer in pre and post menopausal as well as both obese and non obese HuilingZhao, Philip.C. Haycock, TomR.Gaunt, JieZheng patients.HaplotypeCDTGCCwasmarginallyassociated(p=0.07) with reduced risk of breast cancer in non-obese patients as MRCIntergrativeEpidemiologyUnit,BristolUniversity,Bristol,United compared with non-obese controls where as haplotype AICGTC Kingdom. was marginally associated (p=0.09) with reduced risk of breast cancer in obese patients when compared with non-obese Changesinalternativesplicingpatternscanleadtopartialortotal patients.TheCDTGCChaplotypewassigniﬁcantlyassociatedwith loss of protein functional domains, thereby affecting tumorigen- increased risk of breast cancer in premenopausal obese patients esis, progress and prognosis. However, the contribution of (OR=1.98, 95%CI, 1.10-3.56; p=0.02). Our data indicated that alternative splicingto cancerdevelopment isunclear. CDTCCC and CDTGCC haplotypes of VEGF -2578C/A, -2549I/D, We applied two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) and -460T/C, +405C/G, -7C/T and +936C/T polymorphisms were colocalizationto detect splicingevents with putativecausal roles signiﬁcantly associated with breast cancer risk in North-West on breast, lung, ovarian and prostate cancer, with 9,230 sQTLs Indians.Furtherstudiesonmultiethnicgroupswithlargersample representing 9,585 splicing events across 49 tissues fromhealthy sizearerequired to conﬁrmour results. GTEX samples as genetic instruments. The splicing-type speciﬁc K. Guleria: None. V. Sambyal: None. R. Kapahi: None. M. effectsofourtopMRﬁndingswerefurthervalidatedusingsQTLs Manjari: None. M. Sudan: None. M.S. Uppal: None. N.R. Singh: from CancersplicingQTL database, with samples from cancer None. patients. Among 618,932 splicing event-cancer MR analyses using GTEX data, 2,412 associations showed robust MR and colocalization 
P12 .032.DHighrateofpathogenicgermlinevariantsinyoung evidence(MR_P<5e-8,colocalizationprobability>0.8),whichwere patients withneuroendocrine tumors set as reliable ﬁndings. In a tissue speciﬁc manner, 746 MR associations(31%)wereobservedinthesametissuetypesofthe RachelP.Riechelmann,MauroD.Donadio,MiltonBarros,KarinaM. corresponding cancers. For example, a splicing event of MAN2
C1  Santiago, Nathalia A. Carvalho, Laura Lopez, Dirce M. Carraro, hasacausaleffectonbreastcancerriskonlyinbreasttissue.We GiovanaT. Torrezan validated the top splicing event-cancer associations across six splicing types in CancersplicingQTL and found that the top MR A.C.CamargoCancer Center,Sao Paulo, Brazil. associations showed different splicing-type enrichment patterns acrossdifferentcancers.Alternativedonorsitesaccountedfor6% Introduction: Advances in genomics have enabled the recogni- ofallpotentialeffectsonlungcancer,and82%fortoplungcancer tion of about a hundred cancer predisposing genes (CPG). The MRﬁndings.Similarly,ExonSkipshowedsplicing-typeenrichment contribution of most of these genes to the development of ontop prostate cancerMR associations. neuroendocrinetumors(NET)islargelyunknown.Here,weaimto Our study suggests that different splicing types may have deﬁnethefrequencyofpathogenic(P)andlikelypathogenic(LP) different enrichment patterns of causal effects on different germlinevariants inknownCPGs in youngadults with NET. cancers. This provides information for mechanism exploration Methods: We screened germline variants in 100 patients anddrug target prioritization. (without known clinical/molecular diagnosis of hereditary cancer H. Zhao: None. P. Haycock: None. T. Gaunt: None. J. Zheng: syndromes)withlungordigestiveNETdiagnosedunder45years. None. Next generation sequencing was performed using a custom 113 genepanelinanIlluminaNextSeq500.ForP/LPvariants,amplicon sequencing was performed in tumor DNA to identify loss of 
P12 .029.AAssociationofVEGFHaplotypeswithBreastcancer heterozygosis (LOH). riskinNorth-West Indians Results: Sixteen (16%) patients presented P/LP variants, including geneswith established or emerging association to TNE Kamlesh Guleria1, Vasudha Sambyal1, Ruhi Kapahi1, Mridu predisposition (SDHB, MUTYH, CHEK2) and genes with unknow Manjari2, MeenaSudan3, ManjitSinghUppal4, Neeti Rajan Singh4 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 380 relation to TNE risk (LZTR1, XPC, ERC
C2 , ERC
C3 , SLX4, others). None. M. Bitzer: None. Y. Moeller: None. O. Riess: None. C. MUTYH was the most frequently mutated gene (4 patients: Schroeder: None. pancreas,midgut,appendix,gastric).Themedianageandpositive familyhistoryofcancerwere34yearsand88%forpatientswithP/ LP variants and 35 years and 60% for patients without. LOH was 
P12 .034.B Subpopulation of cancer stem cells are endowed evaluated in 3 tumors so far: two presented absence of LOH for withdistinctive behavior variantsinXPCandERC
C2 andonepresentedLOHforavariantin SLX4. Letícia A. M. Ferreira, Carlos H. V. Nascimento-Filho, Vilson Seraﬁm- Conclusions:YoungadultswithNETpresentahighrateofP/LP Junior, Márcia M. U. Castanhole-Nunes, Glaucia M. M. Fernandes, variants in CPG, including several DNA repair genes. Tumor AnaL.S.Galbiatti-Dias,RosaS.Kawasaki-Oyama,MarlonF.Mattos, analysiscancontributetounderstandingtheroleofthesevariants Maria A. M. S. Bezerra, Érika C. Pavarino, José V. Maniglia, Eny M. inTNEdevelopment. FAPESP:20018/06269-5 Goloni-Bertollo R.P. Riechelmann: None. M.D. Donadio: None. M. Barros: None. K.M. Santiago: None. N.A. Carvalho: None. L. Lopez: FaculdadedeMedicinadeSãoJosédoRioPreto(FAMERP),SãoJosé None.D.M. Carraro: None.G.T. Torrezan: None. doRio Preto, Brazil. Introduction: Cancer stem cells (CSC) are capable of self- 
P12 .033.A Cancer Predisposition Syndromes as secondary renewing and recapitulate the tumor heterogeneity. Due to its ﬁndingsin patients undergoing somatictumor testing resistance to conventional chemotherapy, and association with relapses,thispopulationhasbeenwidelyinvestigated.Besides,its Alexandra Liebmann1,2, Sorin Armenau-Ebinger1,2, Cristiana Rog- association with epithelial to mesenchymal transition requires gia1,2, Stephan Ossowski1,2, Andrea Forschner3, Andreas Hartkopf4, better comprehension. Michael Bitzer5, Yvonne Moeller6, Olaf Riess1,2, Christopher Material and methods: Using the Fluorescent Activated Cell Schroeder1,2 Sorting by which we isolated from head and neck cancer subpopulations endowed with stemness properties: CD44+/ 1Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University CD117+/133+ (CDs+), and ALDH+ enriched cells, besides their Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 2Centre for Rare Diseases, negativecontrolgroup.CellssortedwerecultivatedunderDMEM University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 3Department of medium,supplementedwith10%FBS,2%AB/AM,1%glutamine, Dermatology, Center for Dermatooncology, University Hospital andmaintainedina5%CO2-humidiﬁedincubator.TotalRNAwas Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 4Department of Obstetrics and extracted using a Direct-zol RNA Miniprep Plus isolation kit, Gynecology, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, following the manufacturer’s protocol. Real-time PCR was 5Department of Internal Medicine 1, University Hospital Tübingen, performed to quantify genes and miRNAs expressions using PCR Tübingen, Germany, 6Center for Personalised Medicine, University MasterMix(LifeTechnologies),withspeciﬁcprobes,andTaqMan HospitalTübingen, Tübingen, Germany. miRNAAssay(ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc). Results: Our ﬁndings revealed that downregulation of ALDH Introduction: Genetic testing for Cancer Predisposition Syn- mRNAintheCDs+populationcomparedwiththeALDHenriched dromes (CPS) is currently offered to patients meeting speciﬁc population(*p<0.05).WealsoobservedafoldincreaseofmRNA clinicalcriteriasuchasageofcancerdiagnosisorfamilyhistory.At expressionforVEGFAandZEB1intheALDHenrichedpopulation ourCenterforPersonalisedMedicineparallelsequencingoftumor (*p<0.05 and ****p<0.0001). Moreover, the CDs+ population and normal tissue is performed in late-stage cancer patients to presentsmiRNA200-3poverexpressed,andZEB1inhibitedupon identifytherapeutictargets.Usingbloodasnormalcontrolallows transfection what suggests impairing its capacity on undergoing detecting pathogenic germline variants (PGVs) in CPS-related EMTphenotype. genesassecondary ﬁndings. Conclusion:Theseﬁndingspointtowardthecrucialroleofthe Material and Methods: Tumor-normal sequencing was per- epigenetic mechanisms, such as microRNAs, in regulating the formed in 578 gynecological, skin and gastrointestinal cancer tumor microenvironment complexity including the levels of patientswithoutpreviousgeneticdiagnosisbetween01/2019-01/ stemness and EMT phenotype. Altogether, our study brings new 2021.Next-Generation-Sequencingofacustomcancerpanelwith pieces for better understanding the regulation of epigenetic morethan 700 genesincluding 41 CPS-related genes(SureSelect mechanismsand tumor plasticity. XT; Agilent, Germany) was analyzed using an in-house bioinfor- L.A.M. Ferreira: None. C.H.V. Nascimento-Filho: None. V. matics pipeline(megSAP). Seraﬁm-Junior: None. M.M.U. Castanhole-Nunes: None. G.M.M. Results: In 578 patients 9.7% (n=56) PGVs in CPS-related Fernandes: None. A.L.S. Galbiatti-Dias: None. R.S. Kawasaki- geneswereidentiﬁed.PGVsweremainlydetectedinATM(n=13), Oyama: None. M.F. Mattos: None. M.A.M.S. Bezerra: None. É.C. MUTYH (n=10), CHEK2 (n=5), BRCA2 (n=5). Two patients Pavarino: None. J.V. Maniglia: B. Research Grant (principal harbored two different PGVs. Two other cases showed mosaic investigator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell statusinT
P53 andMSH6,respectively.Onecasewassuspiciousfor as grants already received); Modest; São Paulo Research Founda- clonal hematopoiesis in ATM. In 36 of the 56 PGVs cases the tion. E.M. Goloni-Bertollo: B. Research Grant (principal investi- patient’stumortypematchedtheassociatedtumorspectrum.For gator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as 10ofthe36PGVs a second hitintumor tissue wasidentiﬁed. grantsalreadyreceived);Modest;SãoPauloResearchFoundation. Conclusion: This study highlights the utility of parallel tumor- normal sequencing in identifying PGVs causal for CPS in cancer patients who are not necessarily eligible for genetic germline 
P12 .036.D Introducing Progenetix Beacon- a comprehensive testing.Inadditiontohavingimpactonclinicalmanagement,this cancercell line variantknowledge resource approach enables patients and their relatives to optimize individual prevention strategies. RahelPaloots, Michael Baudis A. Liebmann: None. S. Armenau-Ebinger: None. C. Roggia: None. S. Ossowski: None. A. Forschner: None. A. Hartkopf: University ofZürich, Zürich, Switzerland. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 381 Cancer cell lines are good models for studying the disease Anastasia Koval1, Daria Rodionova1, Alexey Kazakov2, Konstantin mechanisms and testing for possible drugs. For the cell lines to Laktionov2,Dmitry Shcherbo1 beaccuraterepresentationsofthedisease,theywouldneedtobe genetically highly similar to their primary neoplasias. Moreover, 1Institute of Translational Medicine, Pirogov Russian National another issue when working with cell lines is the possible Research Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2N.N. contamination or misidentiﬁcation of the cell lines. To address Blokhin Cancer Research Medical Center of Oncology, Moscow, bothoftheseconcerns, thegenetics ofbothcancer cell lines and RussianFederation. theiroriginswillneedtobeevaluated.Furthermore,cancersaswell ascancercelllinesexhibitcopynumbervariation(CNV)proﬁlesthat Introduction: Accumulating evidence suggests that aberrant show regions in the chromosomes that have been deleted or genome-wide cell-free DNA (cfDNA) fragmentation patterns reﬂect ampliﬁed. Similarity assessment of these CNV proﬁles along with thealteredepigeneticstateoftumorcellsincancerpatientsandcan examiningsingle nucleotide variantsaswell,enable the detection beappliedforcancerdiagnostics.GiventhatcfDNAfragmentationis of cell lines that are the most accurate representations of the non-random and fragment lengths tend to be overall shorter in disease.Therefore,wehavebeenbuildinganextensiveknowledge cancer,thecfDNAfragmentationstatemaydifferunevenacrossthe resource for cell line copy number and single nucleotide variants genome in healthy and cancer individuals. We suppose that a (SNVs).Thedatabase(Progenetix)containsinformationaboutboth measure of cfDNA fragmentation in differentially fragmented CNVs and SNVs as well as NCIt and ICDO codes for the disease regionscouldserveasacancerbiomarker. origin. Additionally, more metadata and other information about MaterialsandMethods:Wehavedevelopedanapproachbased cancercelllinesandvariantswillbeavailablepubliclyonProgenetix on a modiﬁcation of anchored multiplex PCR followed by NGS for website. The collection of these data enables and facilitates deepmultiplexfragmentlengthsproﬁlingthatsimultaneouslytargets researchwithcancercelllinesaswellastheauthenticationofthe 25 tumor-speciﬁc open-chromatin regions in cfDNA. We tested our cancercelllines. approach on 5 samples from patients with lung adenocarcinoma R.Paloots: None.M. Baudis: None. (stagesIIIandIV)and5samplesfromhealthydonors. Results:Wehaveidentiﬁed3regionswiththemostprominent differenceinfragmentationproﬁlesbetweenlungcancerpatients 
P12 .037.A The effect of germline POLG gene variants on and healthy donors that can further be evaluated as novel lung cervical cancer pathomorphological characteristics and dis- adenocarcinomamarkers in cfDNA. easeoutcome Conclusions: In this proof-of-concept study we demonstrate that cfDNA fragmetnomics may yield a novel class of cancer Ieva Golubickaite1, Rasa Ugenskiene1,2, Egle Ziliene3, Jurgita biomarkers not only at a whole-genome scale but also in a Beniusyte2, Arturas Inciura2,3, Elona Juozaityte2,3 targetedmanner.Theidentiﬁcationofcancer-speciﬁcdifferentially fragmented regions in larger screening studies may result in an 1Department of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Lithuanian additionaldimensionofbiomarkerscomplementingliquidbiopsy University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania, 2Institute of analyses. Oncology, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Funding:ThisstudywassupportedbyagrantfromtheRussian Lithuania, 3Department of Oncology and Hematology, Hospital of ScienceFoundation (project #20-75-10008) Lithuanian University ofHealth Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania. A. Koval: None. D. Rodionova: None. A. Kazakov: None. K. Laktionov: None. D.Shcherbo:None. Introduction: Cervical cancer ranks as the fourth most common cancer in women worldwide. Despite huge efforts and ongoing research in the ﬁeld, the effect of germline variants on tumor 
P12 .039.C Functional analysis of rare CHEK2 variants identi- phenotype and the course of the disease remain unclear. The ﬁed in breastcancer patients variationsinPOLGgene,codingforgammapolymerase,involved in mitochondria DNA replication and repair, might be important Olivia Fuentes Rios1,2,3, Marta Santamariña2,3,4, Ángel Vizoso5,6, for carcinogenesis. This study aimed to analyze germline single- BelindaRodríguez1,3,4,AnaCrujeiras1,3,AnaPaulaVegaGliemmo1,3,4 nucleotide variants in POLG gene and to assess their possible effect ontumor phenotype and disease outcome. 1Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago de Compostela, Materials and Methods: A group of 172 cervical cancer Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Universidad de Santiago de patients was analyzed. Tumor pathomorphological parameters Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Fundación Pública andpatientdata,relatedtodiseaseoutcome,werecollectedfrom Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, medical records. Four SNPs (rs3087374, rs2307441, rs2072267, 4Centro de Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Raras, Madrid, rs976072)inPOLGgenewereselectedforthestudy.Real-timePCR Spain, 5Universidad de A Coruña, A Coruña, Spain, 6Centro de withTaqMan probes wasused for theanalysis. Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas Avanzadas,A Coruña,Spain. Results: POLG variant rs3087374 was signiﬁcantly associated with tumor pathomorphological parameters. Patients with CA Introduction: CHEK2 (checkpoint kinase 2) germline mutations genotypeandthecarriersofAallelehadanincreasedprobability have been associated with a moderate breast cancer risk. ofadenocarcinomahistologicaltumortype,IIIAtumorstage,and However, for rare missense variants the clinical signiﬁcance is pT3tumors.Additionally,patientswithAAgenotypeinrs2072267 unknown.CHEK2 protein regulatesthecellcycleand isactivated hadlongermetastasis-freesurvivalthanthosewithGGgenotype. in response to DNA damage. Activated CHEK2 phosphorylates Conclusions: Our data suggest that variations in POLG gene proteins and inhibits CD
C25 C phosphatase, leading to cell cycle mightbe importantin cervicalcancer carcinogenesis. arrestandapoptosis.Theaimofthisstudywastoanalyse,through I.Golubickaite:None.R.Ugenskiene:None.E.Ziliene:None. a kinase activity assay, the functional impact of fourteen CHEK2 J.Beniusyte: None. A.Inciura: None. E.Juozaityte: None. variants identiﬁed in female breast cancer patients during the geneticdiagnosis. Materials and Methods: CHEK2 variants p.Trp114Cys, p. 
P12 .038.B Targeted analysis of cell-free DNA fragmentation Arg117Gly, p.Ser187Phe, p.Glu239Lys, p.Glu302Lys, p.Met304Val, proﬁlesin lungcancer p.Thr323Pro, p.Ser356Leu, p.Ile364Thr p.Met381Val, p.Ser412Arg, EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 382 p.Arg474His, p.Thr476Met and p.Asp488Glu were analysed. Also, Kristýna Závacká1,2, Petr Tauš2, Karol Pál2, Kamila Stránská1,2, CHEK2 wild-type and CHEK2: c.1100delC were used as controls. Šárka Pavlová1,2, Anna Panovská1, Šárka Pospíšilová1,2,3, Karla B
L21 E.coliweretransformedwiththewild-typeormutantpDest- Plevová1,2,3 566-CHEK2 vector. The proteins were expressed, puriﬁed, and quantiﬁed. The kinase activity levels were detected by Immuno- 1Department of Internal Medicine – Hematology and Oncology, blotusing an anti-phopho-Cdc25C (Ser216). UniversityHospitalBrno&MedicalFaculty,MasarykUniversity,Brno, Results: We found out that p.Met381Val, p.Ser412Arg and p. Czech Republic, 2Center of Molecular Medicine, Central European Arg474His presented a complete loss of function. Additionally, Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, variants p.Arg117Gly, p.Glu239Lys and p.Ile364Thr showed a 3InstituteofMedicalGeneticsandGenomics,UniversityHospitalBrno partial loss of function, whereas p.Trp114Cys, p.Ser187Phe, p. &Masaryk University, Brno,Czech Republic. Glu302Lys, p.Met304Val, p.Thr323Pro, p.Ser356Leu, p.Thr476Met and p.Asp488Glu showed no functional impact. The same result Introduction: In chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), tumor clones has been previously detected for variants p.Glu239Lys and p. withthemutantT
P53 genefrequentlyexpandindiseaserelapseof Arg117Glyinacell-basedassay(Wuetal.,2006).Inthecaseofp. patients treated with chemoimmunotherapy. Such an event often Thr476Met variant, contradictory results were previously found, leads to disease course deterioration and therapy resistance. fromcompleteloss tono functional impact. However,thereisasmallnumberofpatientsharboringstableminor Conclusions: The information of the functional impact of the T
P53 -mutatedcloneswhichdonotexpandevenafterseveraltherapy analysed fourteen CHEK2 variants will help to establish their lines. We aimed to identify molecular genetic factors affecting CLL clinicalsigniﬁcancein cancerpatients. clonal evolution in relation toT
P53  mutation expansions. Revealing O. Fuentes Rios: None. M. Santamariña: None. Á. Vizoso: theclonalarchitectureandamutationalproﬁleofleukemiccellsmay None. B. Rodríguez: None. A. Crujeiras: None. A.P. Vega contributetooptimaltherapytailoring. Gliemmo: None. Materials and Methods: Using whole exome sequencing, we investigated samples from 52 CLL patients with a known clinical course and different scenarios of T
P53  mutation expansions. Our 
P12 .040.DComplex karyotype in the course ofCLL cohort included patients treated with standard chemoimmu- notherapy, butalso with cellsignallinginhibitors. Dorota Koczkodaj1, Małgorzata Luterek1, Zuzanna Dołzycka1, Ewa Results:WeidentiﬁedmutationsingenesassociatedwithCLL, Wąsik-Szczepanek2, Agata Filip1 suchasSF3B1,ATM,RP
S15 ,MED12,NOTCH1,orNFKBIE,butalsoa large number of non-recurrent mutations, which expanded or 1Department of Cancer Genetics, Medical University, Lublin, Poland, diminished differently after speciﬁc types of therapy and in 2Department of Hematooncology and Bone Marrow Transplanta- relation to T
P53  mutation proﬁles. We calculated pathway tion, Medical University, Lublin, Poland. mutation scores and using advanced statistical methods, we deﬁnedgroupsofpatientswithsimilarpathwaymutationproﬁles Introduction: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a lymphopro- andexamined howthegroups differedina clinicalcourse. liferative disease characterized by a heterogeneous clinical course. Conclusion: Our results aid the understanding of molecular Clonal chromosome aberrations belong to the most important groundsoftheclonalevolutioninCLL,whichisnecessaryforthe prognosticandpredictivefactorsinCLL.Complexkaryotype(CK)is rational use of available treatment options and for designing of deﬁned by the presence of≥3 chromosomal aberrations incancer suitable diagnostic panels. Supported by MUNI/A/1595/2020, cells. The aim of the study was to observe chromosomal MUNI/IGA/1640/2020, AZV NU21-08-00237, and MH-CZ RVO abnormalities in CLL with particular attention to CK and their 65269705. clinicalsigniﬁcanceinrelationtoselectedprognosticfactors. K. Závacká: None. P. Tauš: None. K. Pál: None. K. Stránská: Methods:Thestudygroupcomprised101consecutive,untreated None. Š. Pavlová: None. A. Panovská: None. Š. Pospíšilová: CLL patients. Cytogenetic banding analysis (CBA) and FISH None.K. Plevová: None. (ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization) were performed. Expression of CD38andZA
P70 wasassessedbyﬂowcytometry,andthemutation statusofIGVHandNOTCH1wasdeterminedbydirectsequencing. 
P12 .042.BSearchformarkersandmechanismsofresistanceto Results: CK was detected in 23,8 % of patients by means of TKItherapy CBA. The most frequently detected recurrent changes were deletionsof13q(39,13%),6q(26,08%),17p(26,08%)andtrisomy Elmira P. Adilgereeva1, Alex G. Nikitin2, Diana G. Zheglo1, Oleg A. 12 (21,74%). Numerical changes and translocations were also Shukhov3,SvetlanaA.Smirnikhina1,AlexanderV.Lavrov1,Ekaterina observed. A statistically signiﬁcant relationship was found Y.Chelysheva3,Anna G. Turkina3, SergeyI.Kutsev1 between overall survival and the occurrence of 17p (del T
P53 ) (p<0.0056).CKwasfoundtobeariskfactorfortheoccurrenceof 1Federal State Budgetary Institution «Research Centre for Medical diseaseprogression.NeitherCD38andZA
P70 expressionnorIGVH Genetics», Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Pulmonology Research andNOTCH1 mutation status wererelated toCK. Institute, Federal Medical-Biological Agancy of Russia, Moscow, Conclusions: Chromosomal and genomic aberrations are Russian Federation, 3National Research Center for Hematology, important prognostic factors in CLL. Comparing to FISH, the CBA Moscow, RussianFederation. method captured a broader spectrum of alterations in a larger percentage of patients with CK. These results indicate that CK Chronicmyeloidleukemia(CML)ismyeloproliferativedisease,which should be taken into account when making a decision to initiate issuccessfully treated withtyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI),however, treatmentpromptly. 20-40% of patients remain resistant to existing therapy. To identify D.Koczkodaj:None.M.Luterek:None.Z.Dołzycka:None.E. the prognostic markers of the effectiveness of TKI therapy and Wąsik-Szczepanek: None.A. Filip: None. mechanisms for the development of resistance, we performed exome and transcriptome sequencing.Blood wassampledfrom 60 CML patients before starting the TKI therapy. Sequencing was 
P12 .041.A Exploring clonal evolution and genetic causes of performed on the Illumina NextSeq 550 Sequencing System. therapyfailure in chroniclymphocytic leukemia Bioinformatic analysis included SnpEff (analysis of all transcripts), EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 383 ANNOVAR (analysis of allele frequencies in gnomAD, 1000G, Hristo Y. Ivanov1, Aleksandar Linev1, Ivan Zheliazkov1, Veselina ES
P6500 , algorithms in silico prediction of pathogenicity of SIFT, Goranova-Marinova2, Zhanet Grudeva-Popova3, ViliStoyanova1 PolyPhen2, MutationTaster⋯), Alamut Batch (inﬂuence on splicing, dbsnp,ClinVar,COSMIC,andHGMD).HTSeq(tocountthenumberof 1Medical University Plovdiv, Department of Pediatrics and Medical reads transcripts), edgeR (count data were analyzed). Pheatmap (R Genetics,Plovdiv,Bulgaria,2MedicalUniversityPlovdiv,FirstDepart- package)wasusedfortheheatmapdiagram;onlylog2-foldchanges ment of Internal Medicine, Clinic of Hematology, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, withanadjustedp-valueof0.10wereconsideredsigniﬁcant.33%of 3Medical University Plovdiv, Department of Clinical Oncology, patientswhoareresistanttotherapyTKIhaveloss-of-functionvariant Plovdiv, Bulgaria. intheASX
L1 andDNMT3Agenes,with25%onlyintheASX
L1 gene, and 8% in ASX
L1  and DNMT3A. We have not yet managed to ﬁnd Introduction: Chronic myeloid leukemia is oncohematological pathogeneticpathwaysofresistance,todayanother36samplesare disease, characterized by a BCR-AB
L1  fusion protein. Through at the stage of bioinformatic analysis of the transcriptome. The treatment patients may acquire mutations in the kinase domain of identiﬁed variants in ASX
L1  and DNMT3A may be associated with AB
L1 . The T315I mutation is key mutation with relevant clinical resistancetoTKItherapyandserveasprognosticmarkersoftheTKI implications - can only be overcome by third generation tyrosine therapy effectivenessat the stage of CML diagnosis. Possibly,upon kinaseinhibitors.TheaimofourstudyistodetectT315Imutationin completion of the analysis of all transcriptomes, we will be able to patientswithCMLbyddPCRandevaluateifdetectionofsmallclones ﬁndthemechanismsofdevelopmentofresistance. couldsupportanearlyclinicaldecisiontochangeoftreatment. E.P. Adilgereeva: None. A.G. Nikitin: None. D.G. Zheglo: Materials and methods: The study included 17 patients with None.O.A.Shukhov:None.S.A.Smirnikhina:None.A.V.Lavrov: CML. gDNA was extracted from whole blood and the samples None. E.Y. Chelysheva: None. A.G. Turkina: None. S.I. Kutsev: weretestedfor T315Iby ddPCR. None. Results: T315I was detected in 2 patients, in one of them the variantallelefrequencywas29%intheotheritwasasmallclone mutation -0.1%. 
P12 .044.D Testing of molecular methods for highlighting Discussion: The use of ddPCR to screen for speciﬁc, highly rearrangements on BCR-ABLfusion gene relevant mutations as T315I that confer resistance to treatment holds great promise. Our study suggests that ddPCR can also be Andra Maria Duca1, Andrada Alexiu1, Silvia Aposteanu2, Mihaela an effective and sensitive method for the detection of the T315I Dragomir2, Danut Cimponeriu1,Ileana Stoica1 mutationinthesettingofCML.Theaimofmutationtestingisto identifythosewhoneedachangeintherapyratherthana“watch 1Department of Genetics, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, andwait”approach,sincedetectionofaTKI-resistantmutationis Romania, 2Department of Hematology - Molecular Biology, Clinical anindicationfortherapeuticswitch.Thecontinuationofthisstudy Institute,Bucharest, Romania. will be directed toward exploring the clinical advantage of the greater sensitivity offered by ddPCR, and the assessment how to Introduction: Testing of translocation between chromosome 9 best place ddPCR in the management of patients without an (AbelsonmurineVgeneleukemiaviraloncogenehomolog1-AB
L1 ) optimalresponse. and22(BreakpointClusterRegion-BCR)andmutationsintheABL H.Y. Ivanov: None. A. Linev: None. I. Zheliazkov: None. V. kinase domain are useful for diagnostic of chronic myeloid Goranova-Marinova: None. Z. Grudeva-Popova: None. V. leukemia(CML)andguidethetreatment.Wettestedtheabilityof Stoyanova:None. molecular methods to identify 
E255 K/V and T315I mutations in BCR-ABL gene. Materials and methods: Blood samples from twenty CML 
P12 .048.D Low mitochondrial DNA copy number correlates patients with Ph+ chromosome (55±17 years old) was used for with longer progression free survival in clear cell renal cell messenger RNA extraction. The cDNA was ampliﬁed by nested carcinomas PCR and the amplicons were digested with MnlI and DdeI endonucleases. Restriction fragments were resolved by polyacry- Sarah BELLAL, Cyrielle Rolley, Jeremy Richard, Léo Bove, Vincent lamidegelelectrophoresistohighlightthepresenceofthe
E255 K/ Lecorre, Marie - Christine Rousselet, Odile Blanchet, Pierre Bigot, Vandthe T315Imutations inBCR-ABL fusiongene. VincentProcaccio, CélineBris Results: This method revealed the 
E255 K/V and T315I muta- tions in the BCR-ABL gene in two samples. The male with T315I CHUAngers,Angers, France. mutationhas79yearsoldandhadbeenunderthetherapyfor11 years.Thepatientrespondedtotreatmentaftertheidentiﬁcation Clearcellrenalcellcarcinoma(CCRCC)isthemostcommonrenal of mutation. The 
E255 K/V mutation was detected in a male who cancerwhoseprognosisiscurrentlyassessedbyimperfectclinical died shortly after inclusion in this study. It was observed that scores. It is characterized by a metabolic reprogramming patients with CML who had acquired mutations did not respond suggesting a major role of mitochondria in tumor development. toimatinibtherapyandrequiredcustomization.Thefrequencyof Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), present in thousands of copies/cell, mutation is estimated to be in accordance with the values encodes essential polypeptides required for oxidative phosphor- reportedfor other populations. ylation. MtDNA copy number (mtDNAcn) variations and mtDNA Conclusions: This method based on reverse transcription and mutationshavebeenassociatedwithvariousclinicaloutcomesin nested PCR ampliﬁcation of the fusion gene BCR-ABL is easy to cancer.ThisretrospectivestudyevaluatestheinﬂuenceofmtDNA implement, is relatively rapid and inexpensive as compared with genetics on the prognosis in patients with CCRCC.Twenty-one othertechniques to identifythe mutations. patients following for CCRCC, including four metastatic, were A.M. Duca: None. A. Alexiu: None. S. Aposteanu: None. M. included after informed consent. Clinical and survival data were Dragomir:None. D.Cimponeriu: None. I.Stoica: None. collected for each patient. DNA extraction, mtDNA sequencing andmtDNAcnwereperformedontumorsandmatchedadjacent- normal tissues. Patient’s mtDNAcn variation between tumor and 
P12 .047.CDetectionofT315IinpatientswithChronicMyeloid adjacent-normal tissue was expressed as ratio, and cohort Leukemiaby ddPCR preliminary results subdividedintotwogroupsaccordingtothemedian.Progression EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 384 free survival (PFS) was signiﬁcantly longer in the low than in the several additional abnormalities of unknown clinical signiﬁcance highmtDNAcnratiogroup:1137daysvs252days(p<0,001*).On byOGM.Globally,morecomplexgenomicproﬁleswereidentiﬁed theotherhand,nocorrelationbetweenPFSandsomaticvariants, intheCK group. ageatdiagnosis,CCRCCgrading,orlymphovascularinvasionwas Conclusions: 1. OGM is a valuable tool to assess genomic found. NGS of the whole mtDNA did not reveal deletions or complexityinCLLthateffectivelydetectsthevastmajorityofthe common variants in tumor samples. Interestingly, few patients abnormalities usually deﬁned by a combination of standard accumulatedsomaticmtDNAvariantswithdifferentheteroplasmy methods in a single assay; 2. Several additional abnormalities of levelsbetweenthetumorandmetastasispotentiallyimportantfor unknown clinical signiﬁcance are identiﬁed by OGM; 3. Further tumor aggressiveness. Hence, mtDNAcn appears to be a promis- studiesarerequiredtodeﬁnecriteriaforOGMgenomiccomplex- ing independent prognostic factor in CCRCC.This work received itywithclinical signiﬁcanceinCLL. grants from the University and Hospital of Angers and Ligue Acknowledgements.17SGR437, GLD17/00282, FPU17/00361. contrelecancer. A. Puiggros: None. S. Ramos-Campoy: None. T. Mantere: S. Bellal: None. C. Rolley: None. J. Richard: None. L. Bove: None. M. Salido: None. C. Melero: None. M. Rodríguez-Rivera: None.V.Lecorre:None.M.Rousselet:None.O.Blanchet:None. None.S.Bougeon:None.R.Collado:None.M.delaRosa:None. P.Bigot: None. V.Procaccio: None. C.Bris: None. E. Gimeno: None. R. García-Serra: None. S. Alonso: None. M. Moro: None. M.D. García-Malo: None. J. Schoumans: None. A. Hoischen:None. B.Espinet: None. 
P12 .049.A Analysis of genomic complexity in patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) using optical genome mapping 
P12 .050.BHighly-sensitiveapproachforcharacterizingmicro- satelliteinstability innormaltissue andtumorsfrombiallelic AnnaPuiggros1,2,SilviaRamos-Campoy1,2,TuomoMantere3,Marta germlinemismatch repairmutation carriers Salido1,2, Carme Melero1,2, María Rodríguez-Rivera1,2, Sandrine Bougeon4,RosaCollado5,MireiadelaRosa1,2,EvaGimeno6,7,Rocío FátimaMarín*1,JúliaCanet*1,VanesaPérez-Alonso2,SandraTapial3, García-Serra5,8, Sara Alonso9, Marco Moro9, María Dolores García- Iciar Rey3, Nuria Carrizo-Mijarra4, Yolanda Rodriguez-Gil4, Gabriel Malo10, Jacqueline Schoumans4, Alexander Hoischen3,11, Blanca Capellá1,LuisIgnacioGonzález-Granado*5,MartaPineda*1,Daniel Espinet1,2 Rueda*3 1MolecularCytogeneticsLaboratory,PathologyDepartment,Hospital 1Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Institut delMar,Barcelona,Spain,2TranslationalResearchonHematological d’InvestigacióBiomèdicadeBellvitge(IDIBELL),ONCOBELLProgram, Neoplasms Group, Cancer Research Program, Institut Hospital del CIBERONC,L’HospitaletdeLLobregat,Spain,2PediatricsDepartment, Mar d’Investigacions Mèdiques (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain, 3Depart- DocedeOctubreUniversityHospital,i+12ResearchInstitute,Madrid, ment of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Spain, 3Hereditary Cancer Laboratory, Doce de Octubre University Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Oncogenomic laboratory, Hematology Hospital, i+12 Research Institute, Madrid, Spain, 4Department of service, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland, Pathology, Doce de Octubre University Hospital, i+12 Research 5Department of Hematology, Consorcio Hospital General Universi- Institute, Madrid, Spain, 5Primary Immunodeﬁciencies Unit, Pedia- tario,Valencia,Spain,6DepartmentofHematology,HospitaldelMar, trics,University Hospital12 Octubre, Madrid, Spain. Barcelona, Spain, 7Applied Clinical Research in Hematological Malignances, Cancer Research Program, Institut Hospital del Mar Constitutional MisMatch Repair Deﬁciency (CMMRD) is a rare d’Investigacions Mèdiques (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain, 8Research and devastating childhood-onset cancer predisposition syn- Foundation from Hospital General Universitario, Valencia, Spain, drome caused by biallelic mutations in MisMatch Repair (MMR) 9Department of Hematology, Hospital Universitario Central de genes. Microsatellite instability (MSI), a molecular hallmark of Asturias, Oviedo, Spain, 1010 Department of Hematology, Hospital MMR-deﬁciency,isnotalwaysdetectedintumorsfromCMMRD UniversitarioMoralesMeseguer,Murcia,Spain,11RadboudUniversity carriers by conventional MSI analysis methods. Recently, novel Medical Center Center for Infectious Diseases (RCI), Department of highly-sensitive NGS approaches have allowed the detection of InternalMedicineandRadboudInstituteforMolecularLifeSciences, low-level MSI in blood samples from CMMRD individuals (PMID Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,Netherlands. 31494577 and 30740824). Our aim was to better characterize MSI metrics in normal-tumor samples from CMMRD patients Background:Complexkaryotype(CK)predictspoorprognosisin using a highly sensitive approach. Blood, normal and tumor chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Although CK detection is tissue DNA samples from three CMMRD patients were analyzed routinely assessed by chromosome banding analysis (CBA) or using a recently developed high-sensitivity MSI approach. Two chromosomal microarrays (CMA), the obtained results are not metrics, MSI score (percentage of unstable markers) and mean equivalent. Optical genome mapping (OGM) is a novel technol- frequency of unstable markers (sum of frequencies of all allele ogy that overcomes most of the limitations of CBA/CMA, and lengths different from the wildtype), were calculated and would potentially replace them in the near future. We aimed to comparedwithbloodcontrolsamplesandsporadicMSItumors. analyzetheutilityofOGMinthecytogeneticassessmentofCLL All tumors (Wilms tumors, glioblastoma and lymphomas, n=8) patients. and non-neoplastic samples (n=19) from the three CMMRD Methods: Tumor DNA from 22 CLL patients were analyzed by patients showed a positive hs-MSI score (>4.576). CMMRD OGM (Bionano Genomics), 12 of them carried a CK and 10 were tumors showed signiﬁcantly higher mean instability frequency non-CK.OGMresultswerecomparedwithavailableCBA,FISHand than non-neoplastic tissues, with no overlapping (p=1.849e- CMA(ThermoFisher) data. 06).Ahighcorrelationbetweenunstablemarkerswasobserved Results:OGMdetectionrateofknownabnormalitieswas93.8% inbloodsamplesandlymphomas..Ofnote,MSIscoreandmean (15/16)and87.2%(109/125)innon-CKandCKgroup,respectively. frequencyofunstablemarkerswassigniﬁcantlylowerinCMMRD SizeandcoordinatesofcopynumberalterationsdetectedbyOGM tumorswhencomparedtosporadicMSItumors(p=0.002).The andCMAwerehighlyconcordant.OGMallowedtheinterpretation hs-MSItooldetectedMSIinnon-neoplastictissuesfromCMMRD of complex rearrangements or provided additional structural individuals regardless the tissue origin. Our approach may also information to CMA in 11/22 (50%) patients. All cases showed be useful in the characterization of CMMRD-associated tumors. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 385 Grant support: SAF2015-68016-R, AY12-2018 2019/0042, CB16/ Research in Network of Cancer (CIBERONC), Salamanca, Spain, 12/00234 6Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, F. Marín*: None. J. Canet*: None. V. Pérez-Alonso: None. S. Nashville,TN,USA,7Vanderbilt-Ingram CancerCenter,Nashville,TN, Tapial: None. I. Rey: None. N. Carrizo-Mijarra: None. Y. USA, 812 de Octubre Research Institute., MADRID, Spain, 9Depart- Rodriguez-Gil: None. G. Capellá: None. L. González-Granado*: ment of Gastroenterology and Oncology. Tokushima University None.M. Pineda*: None. D.Rueda*: None. Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences., Tokushima, Japan, 10DepartmentofMolecularDiagnosticsandExperimentalTherapeu- tics, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope. City of Hope 
P12 .051.C Multiplexed high-throughput MSREqPCR qualiﬁca- ComprehensiveCancerCenter,Monrovia, CA,USA,11ClinicalCancer tion of Colon Cancer DNA-methylation biomarkers in plasma Unit. Human Genetics Group, Human Cancer Genetics Program, cfDNA Spanish National CancerCentre (CNIO),Madrid, Spain. Andreas Weinhaeusel1, Walter Pulverer1, Silvia Schönthaler1, Introduction: Some multiple primary colorectal cancers (CRCs) Jasmin Huber1, Kristi Kruusmaa2, Bhangu Jagdeep Singh3, Klemens (synchronous or metachronous) may derive from a similar clonal Vierlinger1 origin. The most frequent etiology is a CRC predisposition, but other causes could lead to the question of whether multiple 1AIT, Vienna, Austria, 2Universal Diagnostics S.L., Sevilla, Spain, primary CRCs arise from one primary tumor and a metastatic 3Medical University of Vienna,Vienna, Austria. lesionin thecolorectum. Material and Methods: Using a cohort of 48 cases diagnosed Background: There is great need to improve colorectal cancer withMetachronousCRCs(excludinghereditarycases),wecharacter- (CRC) early diagnosis, treatment stratiﬁcation and therapy ized microsatellite instability (MSI) and performed Next Generation monitoring. Methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme coupled Sequencing, with a 50-gene panel, to deﬁne the concordant cases qPCR (MSREqPCR) has been setup to test the diagnostic (sameMSIproﬁleandidenticalpathogenicmutationsbetweenboth performance in plasma cell-free DNA (cfDNA) of candidate paired-tumors).Wealsocarriedoutgenome-wideDNAmethylation markers deduced fromCRC tissue. analysis. To conﬁrm concordance of CRC paired samples, we Methods: We setup MSREqPCR assays for DNA methylation achieved unsupervised multidimensional scaling (MDS) of the analysis using cfDNA isolated from plasma. 48 candidate methylationproﬁles,withbothconcordantanddiscordantcases. methylation markers were evaluated in 88 cfDNAs (44 CRC, 44 Results: A total of 4% of cases (2 of 48) had concordant controls).Theworkﬂowwasthenusedtoperform500plexanalysis microsatellite stability and pathogenic mutations in both tumors on770plasmacfDNAsamples,selectingmarkerstodeﬁnerobust (one with identical T
P53  mutation in both; the second with T
P53  classiﬁers. andBRAFmutations).BothcasesofconcordantCRCshadtheﬁrst Results: A panel of 48 candidate DNA-methylation-markers tumorintherightcolonandthemetachronousmalignancyinthe selectedfromtissueDNAtestingbytargetedmicroarray-analysis, rectum. One case was initially diagnosed with stage IV CRC; the was used to for bisulﬁte-qMSP conﬁrmation giving 96-100% second developedmetastatic disease 2years post-metachronous correct classiﬁcation. Testing the 48 markers in plasma cfDNA by CRC. MDS analysis revealed that concordant cases were grouped MSREqPCR (44 CRC, 44 controls) provided in ROC analysis an togetherviasimilar methylation proﬁles. AUC>0.85 for WT1, PENK, SPARC, GDNF, TMEFF2, and DCC. Conclusions: The potential that a proportion of multiple Applyingthe48-plex-paneltoliquidbiopsiesfromprogressedCRC primary CRSs may be composed of a primary CRC and a a 3-gene-signature (BOLL, DCC, SFR
P2 ) was deﬁned supporting metastatic lesion with concordant molecular proﬁles opens a patient stratiﬁcation and therapy monitoring. Applying our clinically relevant avenue in diagnostic and therapeutic manage- workﬂowfortesting180markerson1000cfDNAsamplesenabled ment ofthis CRC subtype. deﬁnition of a robust and highly reliable diagnostic methylation J.Perea:None.L.Corchete:None.A.N.Holowatyj:None.J.L. 12-plexclassiﬁer ofAUC 0.88. Garcia:None.S.Tapial:None.Y.Okada:None.A.Goel:None.D. Conclusions:MSREqPCRallowsthetargetedinvestigationof96 García-Olmo: None. M. Urioste: None. R. González-Sarmiento: DNA methylation sites using the cfDNA content of only 2 ml of None. plasma. Performance of methylation markers in tissue and in liquid biopsy as well as in different clinical settings differ largely. MSREqPCR is best suited for efﬁcient selection of markers and 
P12 .053.A Omic data integration in the search of novel directly applicable forPCRbased non-invasive testing. candidate genesofsusceptibility to colorectal cancer A. Weinhaeusel: None. W. Pulverer: None. S. Schönthaler: None. J. Huber: None. K. Kruusmaa: None. B. Singh: None. K. Anael Lopez-Novo1, Juan Fernandez-Tajes1, Jorge Amigo1, Andres Vierlinger: None. Dacal2, David Remedios3, Joaquin Cubiella3, Victoria Alvarez- Sanchez4, Maria Jesus Ladra-Gonzalez5, Fernando Fernandez- Lopez5,AnaAlvarez-Castro5,JoseManuelCameselle-Teijeiro6,Miriam 
P12 .052.D Concordant molecular proﬁles between metachro- Cuatrecasas7, Francesc Balaguer8, Sergi Castellvi-Bel8, Ceres nouscolorectal cancers: acolonic or rectal metastasis? Fernandez-Rozadilla1, ClaraRuiz-Ponte1,9 Jose Perea1,2, Luis Corchete3,4,5, Andreana N. Holowatyj6,7, Juan L. 1Fundacion Publica Galega de Medicina Xenomica, Instituto de Garcia3,4, Sandra Tapial8, Yasuyuki Okada9, Ajay Goel10, Damian Investigacion Sanitaria de Santiago (IDIS), Grupo de Medicina García-Olmo1,2, Miguel Urioste11, Rogelio González-Sarmiento3 Xenomica-Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Servicio de Digestivo, Hospital Universitario 1Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, Lucus Augusti, Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria de Santiago de 2Fundación Jiménez Díaz University Hospital Health Research Compostela (IDIS), Lugo, Spain, 3Servicio de Digestivo, Complexo Institute, Madrid, Spain, 3Institute of Biomedical Research of Hospitalario Universitario de Ourense, Centro de Investigacion Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain, 4Hematology Department, Biomedica en Red de Enfermedades Hepaticas y Digestivas University Hospital of Salamanca. Cancer Research Center (CiC- (CIBERehd), Ourense, Spain, 4Servicio de Digestivo, Complexo IBMCC, CSIC/USAL), Salamanca, Spain, 5Center for Biomedical Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain, 5Servicio de EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 386 Digestivo, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago de Surgery, Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Compostela,SantiagodeCompostela, Spain,6ServiciodeAnatomia Sahlgrenska University Hospital/Östra, Gothenburg, Sweden. Patologica, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago de Compostela,SantiagodeCompostela, Spain,7ServiciodeAnatomia Introduction: The number of pathogenic variants in colorectal Patologica,InstitutD’InvestigacionsBiomediquesAugustPiiSunyer, cancer (CRC) predisposing genes is continuously increasing. Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en Red de Enfermedades Interpretation of variants involves classiﬁcations and association Hepaticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd) and Tumor Bank-Biobank, toCRCphenotypes.Wearegraduallyimprovingthegenotypeto Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 8Gastroenterology Department, phenotype correlation between the genes and the CRC syn- Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), dromes with the aim to improve recommendations for surveil- Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades lance.However,wedonotknowmuchaboutthecontributionof Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), Hospital Clínic, Universitat de pathogenic variants in CRC genes to other hereditary cancer Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 9Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en syndromes. We present results from analysing variants in 328 Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Santiago de Compostela, genes including CRC predisposing genes in patients referred for Spain. suspicion of other rare hereditary cancers (not CRC or breast/ ovariancancer). Introduction: In recent years the main strategy to explain the Materials and methods: The study included 68 patients with missing heritability in colorectal cancer (CRC) relied on whole- suspectedhereditarycancer(renalcancer,neuroendocrinecancer, exomesequencing(WES)analysis.However,thisstrategywasnot melanomaandneuroﬁbromatosis)referredtotheCancerGenetics as successful as expected, possibly due to the genetic hetero- CounsellingClinicatSahlgrenskaUniversityHospital,Gothenburg, geneity underlying CRC. Our aim is to molecularly characterize Sweden.Variantscreeningwasperformedusingawhole-genome early-onsetMMR-proﬁcientCRCatsomaticleveltofurtheridentify sequencing (WGS) approach. Variants were evaluated regarding novelcandidate susceptibility genesby integratinggermline and pathogenicity using bioinformatic ﬁltration and manual variant tumoromic data. classiﬁcation. Materials and Methods: WES, RNA-seq and methylation array Results: Pathogenic variants and variants of uncertain clinical were performed on paired normal-tumor tissue from a phenoty- signiﬁcance were identiﬁed in a number of the CRC associated pically homogeneous cohort of 20 early-onset (<50y) MMR- genesinthepatients. proﬁcient CRC patients. Germline and somatic variant calling Conclusions: Extended panels might be of value to catch (HaplotypeCaller and Mutect2, respectively), signature proﬁle variantsinpatientswithsuspicionofhereditarycanceringeneral. (SigProﬁler), consensus molecular subtyping (CMSCaller), differ- Surveillance guidelines in CRC might in some cases need to be ential expression analysis (DESeq2) and methylation proﬁle were adjusted to also include screening for tumours related to other carriedout. rare cancer syndromes. The study was supported by grants from Results: Colorectal tumors were molecularly subtyping as: the Swedish state under the agreement between the Swedish CM
S1 (10%),CM
S2 (35%),CM
S3 (25%),CM
S4 (10%)andunknown government and the county councils, the ALF-agreement (ALF- (20%). Filtering germline exome data according to the over- 725011)and theSwedishCancer Society (Grantno. 190351). represented pathways, found in each subgroup, and also tumor F. Eiengård: None. A. Rohlin: None. T. Olausson: None. U. signatures did not identify recurrent rare variation within the Lundstam: None. M.Nordling: None. different groups. Currently, we are conducting a joint analysis usingdatafromWES,RNA-seqandmethylationarray,toachievea more accurate molecular classiﬁcation and a more reliable 
P12 .055.C Validation of liquid biopsy hotspot assays for germlineﬁltering strategy. assessing recurrence and progression in colorectal cancer Conclusions: These data show the molecular heterogeneity patients underling CRC in a phenotypically homogeneous cohort. The integration of somatic and germline omics will allow a more ArianeHallermayr1,2,3,VerenaSteinke-Lange1,4,AnnaBenet-Pagès1, comprehensive prioritization of germline variants, increasing the Markus Rentsch5,6, Holger Vogelsang7, Maike De Wit8,9, Christopher probabilitiestoidentifynewCRCpredispositiongenes.Asaresult, Haberl10, Elke Holinski-Feder1,4, JuliaM. A. Pickl1,4 a more personalized genetic diagnostic could be achieved.Grant support: ISCIII and FEDER funds PI17/00509; Predoctoral Fellow- 1MGZ - Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany, ship(Xunta de Galicia) 2Pettenkofer School of Public Health, Munich, Germany, 3Institute A. Lopez-Novo: None. J. Fernandez-Tajes: None. J. Amigo: for Medical Information Processing, Biometry, and Epidemiology None. A.Dacal: None. D.Remedios: None. J. Cubiella: None. V. –IBE, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany, 4Medizinische Klinik und Alvarez-Sanchez: None. M.J. Ladra-Gonzalez: None. F. Fernan- Poliklinik IV,Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität München, dez-Lopez: None. A. Alvarez-Castro: None. J.M. Cameselle- Munich, Germany, 5Department of General, Visceral and Thorax Teijeiro: None. M. Cuatrecasas: None. F. Balaguer: None. S. Surgery, Klinikum Ingolstadt, Ingolstadt, Germany, 6Department of Castellvi-Bel: None. C. Fernandez-Rozadilla: None. C. Ruiz- General, Visceral, Vascular and Transplant Surgery, University Ponte:None. HospitalMunich,Ludwig-Maximilians UniversityofMunich,Campus Großhadern, Munich, Germany, 7Department of General, Visceral, Thoracic and Endocrine Surgery, Klinikum Garmisch-Partenkirchen, 
P12 .054.B Contribution of Pathogenic Variants in Genes TeachingHospital,LudwigMaximilianUniversityMunich,Garmisch- Predisposing to Colorectal Cancer by Pan-Cancer Panel Partenkirchen,Germany,8DepartmentofHematologyandOncology, Testing Vivantes Klinikum Neukoelln, Berlin, Germany, 9Department of Oncology, Vivantes Auguste-Viktoria-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany, Frida Eiengård1,2, Anna Rohlin1,2, Torbjörn Olausson1,2, Ulf Lund- 10Department of Oncology and Hematology, Barmherzige Brüder, stam3, Margareta Nordling1,2 Klinikum St.Elisabeth, Straubing, Germany. 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Biomedicine, Introduction: The BloodPac Consortium recently released guide- Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, linesforanalyticalvalidationofNGS-basedliquidbiopsyassaysfor Sweden, 2Department of Clinical Genetics and Genomics, Sahl- diagnostic testing. We extend these protocols to more sensitive grenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Department of EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 387 dropletdigitalPCR(ddPCR)assays,andprovideclinicalvalidation useofthecurrentguidance.Inthiscontext,BSGguidelinesappear fordetermination of disease recurrence andprogression. toeffectivelystratify risk forfamilialCRC. MaterialandMethods:Mutantvariantallelefrequencies(VAFs) K. Christou:None. J.N. Berg: None. J.Dunlop: None. inplasmaweremeasuredbyBRAFp.V600EandKRASp.G12/p.G13 ddPCR assays in 22 colorectal cancer (CRC) patients, from whom clinicaldatawereavailable. 
P12 .057.A Application of targeted next-generation sequen- Results:AnalyticalvalidationofBRAFp.V600EandKRASp.G12/ cing in primary and metastatic colorectal cancer using hot- p.G13 assays revealed a cutoff for residual disease detection of spot panel for detection of potentially therapeutically 0.02%and0.11%VAFandaccuratequantiﬁcationfor≥0.52%and relevant rarevariants ≥0.41% VAF in plasma, respectively. Clinical validity of ddPCR assaysforresidualdiseasedetectionwasconﬁrmedin19samples Zora Lasabová1, Peter Mikolajcik2, Dusan Loderer3, Marian of R0 resected CRC patients, as ctDNA detection was in line with Grendar3, Eva Gabonova2, Ivana Kasubova4, Tatiana Burjanivova1, clinical evidence: In 5/19 patients, residual disease was detected. Michal Kalman5,Lukas Plank6, Ludovit Laca2 In 4 of these 5 patients, metastases were conﬁrmed. In 14/19 patients no residual disease was detected. Only 1 of these 14 1Comenius University in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in patients developed metastases. Further, association of ctDNA Martin, Dept. of Molecular Biology and Genomics, Martin, Slovakia, detection rates with tumor stages was shown, as 0/4 stage-I, 4/8 2Comenius University in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in stage-II,3/4stage-IIIand6/6stage-IVpatientswerefoundctDNA- Martin, Clinic of Surgery and Transplant Center, Martin, Slovakia, positive. Only newly diagnosed patients were tested to prevent 3Comenius University in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in ctDNA perturbation due to surgery or treatment interventions. Martin, Biomedical Center Martin, Martin, Slovakia, 4Comenius Clinical validity of ddPCR assays for treatment monitoring was University in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, shown, as ctDNA quantities were associated with response or Biomedical Center Martin, Martin, Slovakia, 5Comenius University in resistance tochemotherapy in7/7 patients. Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, Dept. of Conclusions: We proof analytical and clinical validity of our Pathological Anatomy, Martin, Slovakia, 6Comenius University in liquid biopsy assays to determine recurrence and progression in Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine in Martin, Dept. of CRC. Pathological Anatomy, Martin, Slovakia. A. Hallermayr: None. V. Steinke-Lange: None. A. Benet- Pagès:None.M.Rentsch:None.H.Vogelsang:None.M.DeWit: Introduction: In the practice, for the treatment of metastatic None. C. Haberl: None. E. Holinski-Feder: None. J.M.A. Pickl: colorectalcancer(mCRC)patientsusuallyﬁrstgenerationmethods None. can be applied to detect therapeutically relevant variants. The implementationofNGSallowstotestthatpatient´sbiopsyalsofor variants for which drugs are yet under development, or for rare 
P12 .056.D Assessing the effectiveness of current UK guide- variants still allowing the patients to beneﬁt from personalized lineson familial colorectal cancer (CRC)risk therapy. Methods: We used the Ampliseq Cancer HotSpot multigene Kyriaki Christou1, Jonathan N. Berg2, Jacqueline Dunlop2 panel with 2800 hot spots in 50 genes, and analyzed 87 tissue samplesfrom55patientswithprimaryCRC(pCRC)and31mCRC. 1University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom, 2Department of Results:Intotal,weidentiﬁed164somaticvariants,whichwere ClinicalGenetics, Ninewells hospital, Dundee, United Kingdom. classiﬁed as pathogenic. We identiﬁed mutations in T
P53  (47%), and the RAS family (46%) genes, of which KRAS and NRAS Introduction: Family history (FH) of CRC is a frequent reason for represented39%and7%,respectively,followedbyAPC(37%),and referral to Clinical Genetics in the UK. The British Society of PIK3CA in 12% of samples. In 30 samples, two driver mutations Gastroenterologists (BSG) guideline stratiﬁes patients to risk werepresentinonesample,andwedidnotﬁndanyofmutations categories (low/population, low-moderate, high-moderate and presentinourpanelin9patients.Inonepatient,weidentiﬁeda high) according to FH and known penetrant mutations. We potentially therapeutically signiﬁcant combination of the KRAS investigated how effectively BSG guidelines categorise people at G12AandBRAFD594E.Anotherpatienthadapotentiallysensitive increasedrisk ofCRC. mutation to anti-EGFR therapy KRAS A59T along with the PIK3CA Methods:FHdatawasobtainedforallunaffectedpeoplewitha mutation 
E545 K. In two liver metastases from one patient, we family history of CRC, referred to Tayside clinical genetics from identiﬁed two different mutations KRAS G12C and NRAS Q61K 2000-2009.RiskcategoryaccordingtoBSGguidancewasassigned togetherwiththe PIK3CAmutation 
E545 K inboth metastases. denovo.Individualswhowentontodevelopadenomatouspolyps Conclusion: Our results may have potential signiﬁcance for orCRC wereidentiﬁed by record linkage. moleculartumorboardsinpersonalizedtumortherapydecisions. Results: 1120 patients were identiﬁed and after exclusion Supported by the APVV-16-0066 and ITMS 313011V446 projects, criteria, there were 728 non-polyposis patients (288 low-risk, 316 fundedby theEU resources. moderate-riskand121high-risk,including31mutationcarriers).8 Z.Lasabová:None.P.Mikolajcik:None.D.Loderer:None.M. invasiveCRCdeveloped,2inlow,3inmoderateand3inhigh-risk Grendar: None. E. Gabonova: None. I. Kasubova: None. T. groups.TherewasasigniﬁcantincreasedriskofCRCdevelopment Burjanivova: None. M. Kalman: None. L. Plank: None. L. Laca: inmutationcarriers.Therewasnosigniﬁcantdifferenceintherate None. of CRC development between the risk-groups. There was a signiﬁcantly higher risk of polyp detection in all categories comparedto thelow-risk group. 
P12 .058.B The interplay between regulatory variants, trans- Conclusions: The mutation group have a signiﬁcantly higher posable elements and gene expression in the context of riskofCRCdevelopment,butregularscreeningappearstoreduce colorectal cancer this risk. Colonoscopic surveillance appears effective in reducing the cancer incidence in moderate and high-risk groups, pre- Nikolaos M. R. Lykoskouﬁs1, Halit Ongen1, Evarist Planet2, Didier sumably through polyp removal, thereby supporting continued Trono2, EmmanouilT. Dermitzakis1 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 388 1Department of Genetic Medecine and Development, University of group.WeobservedthatcombinedtreatmentactivatesPTENand Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2School of Life Sciences, Ecole 
P53 ,decreases PI3Kexpression inMDA-MB-231 cells. Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzer- Conclusions:Ourstudyindicatesfortheﬁrsttimethatinhibition land. ofPI3K/AKTsignalingwithcombinedtreatmentoftheselectiveAKT inhibitor MK-2206 and JAK1/2 inhibitor Ruxolitinib and reduces There is increasing evidence of transposable element (TEs) colony formation with combined treatment in MDA-MB-231 cells. activation during tumorigenesis. However, it still remains This study was ﬁnancially supported by Bilecik Seyh Edebali unknown whether TE expression is under genetic control and UniversityResearchProjects(ProjectNo.2018-02.BSEÜ.01-01). whatisthecausalrelationshipbetweeneQTLs,TEsandgenes.To E.GuvenirCelik: None. O.Eroglu: None. addressthat,weperformedcis-eQTLanalysisusinggenotypesand mRNA-seqdatafor 275 normal and 276 tumor samples from the SYSCOLcolorectalcancer(CRC)cohort.At5%FDR,wediscovered 
P12 .060.D A comprehensive genomic proﬁling (CGP) 10’111and5’152TE-eQTLsaswellas6’856and1’539gene-eQTLs approach for somatic and germline mutation detection in normal and tumor samples, respectively. We observed more purposein FFPE cancer samples independent eQTLs per gene than per TEs in either state and a smallerdistanceofeQTLstotheTSSofTEscomparedtogenes(P Francesco Orsini1, Anna Dellai1, Matteo Giacomin2, Lara Walczer <0.001innormalandtumor).OftheidentiﬁedTE-eQTLs,376are Baldinazzo1,FabianaCrò1,CristinaLapucci1,Marcello Gambacorta1 tumor-speciﬁc and display differences in methylation patterns (Wilcoxon P=0.017) and enrichment for binding of transcription 1Synlab Italia, Castenedolo, Italy, 2University of Perugia, Perugia, factors (LoVo cell line ChIP-seq data) compared to the 524 Italy. discovered shared TE-eQTLs. To assess the causal relationship between eQTLs, TEs and genes, we used Bayesian networks on Introduction: CGP is one of the most recent approach in tumor 12’379 normal and 9’714 tumor eQTL-TE-gene triplets identiﬁed mutation analysis. Many laboratories are focused in mutational by association testing. We observed an increase of TEs being screeningbyclassicalmoleculartechniques;CGPdetectsgenomic causalforgeneexpressionchangesintumorcomparedtonormal aberrationsandisincreasinglybeingutilizedtomatchpatientsto (FisherP=6.34e-11)andidentiﬁed79tripletswhereTEsbecome targeted therapies against oncogenic drivers. CGP also detects causalforchangesingeneexpressionfor51cancerdrivergenes germlinevariantsandmightbeusefulforpatient’smanagement. (5 CRC-speciﬁc) in tumor making these TEs potential drivers of Materials and Methods: we applied a CGP approach for cancerdrivergenes.ThisstudyhighlightsasubstantialroleforTEs mutational screening, TumorMutation Burdencalculation, Micro- as drivers of gene expression and sets a framework to better satellite Instability and to identify RNA rearrangments, RNA understand TE effectsincancer. rearrangements detection. DNA and RNA from 42 FFPE tumor N.M.R. Lykoskouﬁs: None. H. Ongen: None. E. Planet: None. samples(melanoma,colorectalcancer,breastcancerandprostatic D. Trono: None. E.T. Dermitzakis: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; cancer) were processed using TSO500 and sequencing was Modest; Hybridtstat LTD. performed on NextSeq 550Dx. We applied two bioinformatic pipelines for variants ﬁltering. Germline variants were conﬁrmed analyzingnontumor tissue whenavailable. 
P12 .059.CThecombinationofruxolitinibandMK2206inhibits Results: Somatic variants were classiﬁed in 4 TIERS following cell growth via activating 
P53  and PTEN expression and AMP/ASCO/CAPguidelines.14TIER-IAvariantswereconﬁrmedby decreasing PI3K expression in triple negative breast cancer goldstandardmethod.TMBandMSIweredeterminedandMSI-H cellline status was conﬁrmed by an IVD kit. Germline variants were classiﬁed according to ACMG guidelines. We detected 
C5  EsinGuvenir Celik1, OnurEROGLU1,2 mutations in colorectal cancer (3 samples carried APC and T
P53  mutations), 2 
C5  and a 
C4  mutation in melanoma. Breast and 1DepartmentofMolecularBiologyandGenetics,BilecikSeyhEdebali prostatecancersamplesshowedrespectively12and9
C3 variants, University, Bilecik, Turkey, 2Biotechnology Research and Application while no 
C5  mutations were found. Deeper analysis is ongoing Center,Bilecik SeyhEdebali University, Bilecik, Turkey. andmore datawill beavailable soon. Conclusions: TSO500 conﬁrmed its efﬁcacy for the identiﬁca- Introduction: Triple-negative breast cancer(TNBC) is the most tionofsomatic,germlinevariants,TMBandMSIdeterminationin aggressive and carries the poorest prognosis, largest recurrence tumorigenic samples and can be relevant for an improved and lowest survival rate. A tumor-speciﬁc receptor or pathway- patient’s managementand stratiﬁcation fortarget therapies. relatedtargetforTNBCshasnotyetbeendeveloped.Ruxolitinibisan F. Orsini: None. A. Dellai: None. M. Giacomin: None. L. orally available receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor that targets JAK1 Walczer Baldinazzo: None. F. Crò: None. C. Lapucci: None. M. andJAK2.Theaimofthisstudy;ﬁrstlytodecreasethesideeffectsof Gambacorta:None. ruxolitinib by combined treatment with selective Akt inhibitor MK- 2206andsecondlytoinvestigatetheeffectofcombinedtreatment onPI3K/AKTsignalingpathwayinMDA-MB-231. 
P12 .061.A Development of a miRNA-based classiﬁer for MaterialsandMethods:Cellswerecultured.Drugdoseswere molecular colorectal cancersubtypes determined by MTT assay. A colony formation assay was performed to determine the metastatic effect of drugs on cells. Ronja S. Adam1,2, Dennis Poel3, Leandro Ferreira Moreno1,2, Joey Protein was isolated from treated-untreated cells. Expression Spronck1, Tim R. de Back1,2, Florian Markowetz4, Xin Wang5,6, Henk levels of 
P53 , PTEN, PI3K and AKT genes were determined by M.W. Verheul3, Tineke E.Buffart7,Louis Vermeulen1,2 westernblotting.Westernblotresultswereanalyzedtogetband intensitiesby ImageJprogram. 1Center for Experimental and Molecular Medicine (CEMM) and Results: The cell viability is 50.1% for 22.5μM Ruxolitinib, Cancer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdaum UMC, Amsterdam, Nether- 55.91% for 7.5μM MK-2206, 54.99% for 18μM Ruxolitinib+5μM lands, 2Oncode Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of MK-2206. The combination of Ruxolitinib and MK-2206 signiﬁ- Medical Oncology, Radboud University medical center, Nijmegen, cantly reduced colony formation compared with the control Netherlands,4CancerResearchUKCambridgeInstitute,Universityof EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 389 Cambridge,Cambridge,UnitedKingdom,5DepartmentofBiomedical actionablevariantscannotbefoundforallTRS-suspectedindividuals. Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, While for SNV-calling speciﬁcity/sensitivity is almost 100%, CNV 6Shenzhen Research Institute, City University of Hong Kong, detectioninexome-dataremainschallenging.Wehypothesizedthat Shenzhen, China, 7Netherlands Cancer Institute, Department of pathogenicCNVsinCPGmaysolvesomeoftheyetunexplained,but Gastrointestinal Oncology, Amsterdam, Netherlands. clinically suspected gastrointestinal TRS-cases. The ERN-GENTURIS/ SOLVE-RDproject,re-analyzedexomesfrom293unsolvedTRS-cases: Colorectal cancer (CRC) has been classiﬁed into Consensus adenomatouspolyposis(AP;n=105),hyperplasticpolyposis(HP;n Molecular Subtypes (CMSs) with implications for our under- =98), hereditary gastric cancer (HGC; n=83) and hereditary standing of tumour heterogeneity and the prognosis of patients. colorectalcancer(hCRC;n=7).CNVswerecalledwithfourdifferent This classiﬁcation is based on the expression of protein coding variantcallers(ClinCNV,ExomeDepth,Conifer,VarGenius).341CNVs genes, messenger RNAs (mRNAs). MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have also ﬁltered from 229 CPGs were prioritized for their involvement in GI been shown to play a role in tumour heterogeneity and CMS- tumours, quality and calling by >1 caller. High-quality and/or speciﬁc biology. In contrast to mRNAs, they have a smaller size ‘multiple-called’ CNVs were evaluated using IGV and focused and increased stability, making miRNA expression quantiﬁcation paired-end mapping/split-read analysis.Eight CNVs(6-del; 2-dup), 3 more easily accessible. Therefore, we built a miRNA-based CMS- ‘multiple-called’,werefoundin11/293TRS-cases,sometimesincases classiﬁer by translating the existing mRNA-based CMS-classiﬁer withanatypicalphenotype.CNVsfoundinCDH1(n=1),PALB2(n= usingmachinelearning.TheperformanceofthismiRNA-assigned 1), APC (n=2), MSH6 (n=1) are under validation with qPCR and CMS-classiﬁer (CMS-miRaCl) was validated in two independent MLPA. The CDH1 deletion found in 4 HGC-relatives, supported by data sets. To gain insight into the biological relevance, we split-reads/paired-end mapping, was considered an actionable evaluated its most important features. We found that miRNAs diagnosis(4.8%amongHGCcases).AdeletionaffectedPALB2in1/ previously reported to be relevant in microsatellite instable CRCs 83 (1.2%) HGC cases. Two deletions affected APC in 2/105 (2%) AP orinWnt-signallingwereimportantfeaturesforCMS-miRaCl.With cases. Altogether, this approach delivered a potential diagnosis in further validations proving its robustness, this miRNA-based 3.8%unsolvedGITRS-cases,thatmaybecomeactionable afterlab/ alternativemightallowtoimplementCMS-classiﬁcationinclinical clinicalvalidation. workﬂowsmore easily. J.Garcia-Pelaez*:None.S.Laurie*:None.G.Demidov*:None. R.S.Adam:None.D.Poel:None.L.FerreiraMoreno:None.J. I. Paramonov: None. A. Sommer: None. I. te Paske: None. D. Spronck:None.T.R.deBack:None.F.Markowetz:E.Ownership Huntsman: None. E. Holinski-Feder: None. M. Tischkowitz: Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual None.S.Aretz:None.N.Hoogerbrugge:None.R.deVoer:None. property); Modest; Tailor Bio. X. Wang: None. H.M.W. Verheul: C.Oliveira: None. None.T.E. Buffart:None. L.Vermeulen: None. 
P12 .063.C Harnessing segment breakpoint statistics to inter- 
P12 .062.B Germline copy number variants: an underreported pret copynumber variation in cancer genetic diagnosis in gastrointestinal tumour risk syndrome suspected individuals QingyaoHuang,Michael Baudis J.Garcia-Pelaez*1,2,3,S.Laurie*4,G.Demidov*5,I.Paramonov6,A.K. University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. Sommer7,I.B.A.W.tePaske8,D.Huntsman9,ERN-GENTURISgroup, SOLVE-RD consortium, E. Holinski-Feder10, M. Tischkowitz11, S. Genomic variations are direct cause of tumor formation and Aretz7,12, N. Hoogerbrugge8, R. M. de Voer8, C. Oliveira1,2,3, * accompliceinitscontinuousevolution.Whilepointmutationscan contributed equally be pinpointed to a targeted genetic element, copy number variations(CNVs)involvecopynumbergainorlossofalargeDNA 1InstitutodeInvestigaçãoeInovaçãoemSaúde(i3S),Universidadedo segmentwhichoftencovershundredsofgeneticelementsinone Porto,Porto,Portugal,2InstituteofMolecularPathologyandImmunol- event. Although futile variations commonly exist in cancer and ogy of the University of Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal, 3Faculty of serve as an incubator for its subtype evolution, we observe Medicine,UniversityofPorto(FMUP),Porto,Portugal,4CentreNacional consistency in CNV landscape within the same cancer types and d’Anàlisi Genòmica-Centre de Regulació Genòmica (CNAG-CRG), Parc corresponding increase in heterogeneity along with increased Cientíﬁc de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 5Institute of Medical Genetics distinction in physiology and morphology. This implies that and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, particular CNV may promote cancer type-speciﬁc progression. A 6Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics and Rare Disease, focal CNV (of length shorter than 3Mb) has indicated stronger Hospital Universitari Vall D’hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 7Institute of biological relevance. In addition, we observe highly frequent Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, Universityof Bonn, Bonn, Germany, overlapofbreakpointsinsamplesofthesamecancertype.Taken 8Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, together,wedesignedastatisticthatharnessinformationofCNV Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, segment breakpoint, to delineate the importance of genetic 9Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of elementscoveredbyCNVsegments.UsingtheTCGAovarian,lung British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 10MGZ - Medizinisch andbreastadenocarcinomadata,wehaveidentiﬁedtheircancer Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany, 11Academic Laboratory of type-speciﬁc oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes on the top MedicalGeneticsandNationalInstituteforHealthResearchCambridge of the ranking. The comparison with GISTI
C2 .0 using the same Biomedical Research Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, datashowedsimilar regionalpeaks,but our methodcan provide United Kingdom, 12National Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, signiﬁcance measure on the ﬁner gene level. With the conﬁrma- UniversityHospitalBonn,Bonn,Germany. toryresultsontheknowntumorpromotinggenes,thisworkhasa potential to identify novel functional pathways that are exerted Germline pathogenic variants, including rare copy number variants through CNV. We expect to expand this method to the non- (CNVs)incancerpredisposinggenes(CPG),causegenetictumourrisk coding area to provide a better overview of the CNV functional syndromes (TRS). TRS-causative variants can be clinically actionable landscape. and lead to intensive surveillance and/or risk reducing surgery that Q.Huang:None. M. Baudis: None. improve morbidity and mortality. Regrettably, causative and EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 390 
P12 .064.D Expression Proﬁling of Jak-STAT Pathway Under DNA fragments (short/medium/long). Blood samples were col- Cutaneous T-Cell Lymphoma Early Stages UVB and PUVA lected before treatment start (BL) and after 3 months (
E1 ). Treatment Matched pairs variations were tested through Wilcoxon test, the prognosticimpactofctDNA%andDNAyieldwastestedthrough Irina V. Kozlova, Dmitry A. Verbenko, Anastasiya A. Vorontsova, Coxregression. ArfenyaE. Karamova, Marian B. Zhilova, Alexey A.Kubanov Results:ThemaintreatmentwasET+CDK4/6inhibitors(92%). Pts with a ctDNA% > 75th percentile were burdened by a State Research Center for Dermatovenerology and Cosmetology of signiﬁcantly worse outcome (Median PFS: 7.8 months, P= RussianMinistry ofHealth, Moscow, Russian Federation. 0.0290). When compared with 
E1 , a signiﬁcant decrease in ACTB_short (71% P=0.0162), ACTB_medium (66% P=0.0011) Introduction: Mycosis fungoides (MF) is the most common and ACTB_long (78% P=0.0001) was observed.The prognostic subtype of cutaneous T-cell lymphomas. Activation of the signal impactofadrophigherthan10%wastheninvestigatedforthe transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) protein family different fragments of ACTB in terms of PFS. While a signiﬁcant have been found to involved in the pathogenesis of leukemias, impact was observed for ACTB_short (HR: 5.98, 95%CI 1.61 - Hodgkinlymphomas and CTCL. 22.24, P=0.008), no signiﬁcance was observed for ACTB_me- Materials and Methods: The expression levels of JAK-STAT diumandACTB_long.TheprognosticimpactofACTB_shortwas pathway genes in affected vs nonaffected skin were studied, as also retained after multivariable analysis (HR: 4.88, 95%CI 1.07 wellgeneexpressionproﬁlingataffectedskinduringUVB-311and -22.17, P=0.040). PUVA therapy of MF. FOX
P3 , GATA3, IRF4 and NFKB1 gene Conclusions: The study proofed the concept of a feasible transcript levels were also evaluated. The study included 20 MF mutation-agnosticworkﬂowforamoregranulardiseasemonitor- patients diagnosed using clinical examination and histopatholo- ingand prognostication inMBC. gical and immunohistochemical skin biopsies tests. RNA expres- A. Franzoni: None. L. Bortot: None. C. Corvaja: None. L. sionwasevaluatedinskinbiopsiesbyqPCRusingtaqmanprobes Allegri: None. R. Mazzeo: None. L. Palmero: None. D. Basile: withStepOne5 equipment. None. E. Bertoli: None. S. Buriolla: None. M. Alberti: None. G. Results: The JAK3, STAT1 and FOX
P3  expression levels in Targato: None. E. De Crignis: None. L. Da Ros: None. S. Russo: affected vs visually normal skin were elevated in 75% patients, None.P.DiNardo:None.M.Bonotto:None.B.Belletti:None.G. whereasloweredexpressionofGATA3shownfor90%ofpatients. Baldassarre: None. L. Gerratana: None. F. Puglisi: None. G. Theexpressionfoldchangeheatmaprevealedthreeclusterswith Damante: None. distinctexpressionpatternsinpatients.PUVAtreatmentelevated transcription level of GATA3, STAT5B, and JAK1 on 62-75% of patients;JAK3,STAT1,STAT4andFOX
P3 expressionisdecreasedin 
P12 .067.C DGCR8-
E518 K conﬁrms a susceptibility allele for 75-85% of patients. Almost the same shaping shown after UVB multinodular goiter in conjunction with peripheral treatment, butSTAT4 elevated in57%of patients. schwannomatosis Conclusions: JAK-STAT genes reveals different pattern of expression in affected vs non-affected skin of MF patients. The Clara Nogué1, Èlia Grau2,3, Joan Brunet2,4,5, Anne-Sophie Chong6, level of genes expression is changed during UV therapy towards HyeRimHan1, Eduard Dorca7, BarbaraRivera1,6,8 the visually normal skin values; however the expression of JAK1 and JAK3 genes is arose for one third of patients, indicating 1Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL), L’Hospitalet de possible disease stageadvance. Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan I.V. Kozlova: None. D.A. Verbenko: None. A.A. Vorontsova: InstituteofOncology,IDIBELL-IGTP-IDIBGI,L’HospitaletdeLlobregat, None.A.E.Karamova:None.M.B.Zhilova:None.A.A.Kubanov: Badalona, Girona, Spain, 3Program in Molecular Mechanisms and None. ExperimentalTherapyinOncology(Oncobell),IDIBELL,Hospitaletde Llobregat, Spain, 4Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), -, Spain, 5Medical Sciences Department, School 
P12 .065.A Exploring a mutation agnostic ctDNA-based work- of Medicine, University of Girona, Girona, Spain, 6Gerald Bronfman ﬂow for early response monitoring in HR positive, HER2 Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, negative Metastatic Breast Cancer 7Bellvitge’s Hospital, Department of Pathological Anatomy, L’Hospi- taletdeLlobregat,Barcelona,Spain,8LadyDavisInstitute,TheJewish Alessandra Franzoni1, Lucia Bortot2, Carla Corvaja2, Lorenzo GeneralHospital, Montreal, QC,Canada. Allegri3, Roberta Mazzeo2, Lorenza Palmero2, Debora Basile2, Elisa Bertoli2, Silvia Buriolla2, Martina Alberti2, Giada Targato2, Elisa De Introduction: Familial forms of multinodular goiter (MNG) are Crignis2, Lucia Da Ros4, Stefania Russo5, Paola Di Nardo4, Marta rare.Nowadaystheonlybona-ﬁdesusceptibilitygeneforfMNGis Bonotto5, Barbara Belletti4, Gustavo Baldassarre4, Lorenzo Gerra- DICER1. Last year, we identiﬁed a single germline pathogenic tana2,4,Fabio Puglisi2,4,Giuseppe Damante1,2 variantinthenuclearmicroprocessorDGCR8(c.1552G>A;p.
E518 K) that was responsible for a family featuring fMNG in conjunction 1Institute of Human Genetics-ASU FC, Udine, Italy, 2University of withperipheralschwannomatosis(Riveraetal,.2020).Later,a35- Udine,Udine,Italy,3InstituteofHumanGenetics,Udine,Italy,4IRCCS year-old man with a history of multiple schwannomas (n=7) CRONationalCancerInstitute,Aviano,Italy,5ASUFC,Udine,Italy. since the age of 12, thyroid nodules, papillary thyroid cancer (dx.23y),andrenalcyst(dx.33y)wasbeingfollowedattheinstitute Background:Endocrinetherapy(ET)isthemainstaytreatmentfor català d’oncologia. No family history of thyroid nodules or HR positive, HER2 negative Metastatic Breast Cancer (Luminal schwannomatosis wasreported. MBC)butearlydiseasedynamicsisstillanunmetneed.Theaimof Methods: Blood from the affected proband and his non- the study was to proof the concept of a mutation-agnostic early affected sister and parents was collected jointly with patient’s disease monitoring based on circulating tumor DNA(ctDNA). tissue of 5 schwannomas and 3 thyroid samples. Sanger-seq was Methods:ThestudyenrolledandcharacterizedthroughctDNA performedinbloodandtumorsamples.Wholeexomesequencing dropletdigitalPCR(ddPCR)49womenwithLuminalMBC.ctDNA% (WES) was performed in the germline DNA from the family was deﬁned as the proportion of the different lengths of ACTB members andin theDNAfrom thetumors. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 391 Results: WES of the proband’s blood DNA identiﬁed the 1AIT Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH, Vienna, Austria, c.1552G>A;p.
E518 K variant, whereas no other likely pathogenic 2Medical University of Vienna,Vienna, Austria. variant was identiﬁed in any other cancer susceptibility genes. Sanger-seqshowedlossofheterozygosityatthevariantlevelinall Introduction: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (neoCTx) followed by analyzed tumors. Segregation analysis in the germline DNA of hepatic resection is the treatment of choice of patients with parentsandsisterrevealednoothercarriersandpointedtoade colorectal cancer liver metastasis (CLM). Only about 70% of novocharacterofthevariant.WESanalysisofﬁveschwannomasis patientsrespondtoneoCTx.RecentevidencesuggeststhatcfDNA currently ongoing. methylation is a highly sensitive biomarker and may more Conclusions: The identiﬁcation of this new case further accurately reﬂect tumour burden and treatment response than conﬁrms the role of DGCR8 as a novel tumor susceptibility gene conventionalmarkers forCRC. adding papillary thyroid carcinoma to the syndrome associated Methods: Thirty-four patients with CLM who received neoCTx phenotypes. prior to intended hepatic resection were included in this study. C. Nogué: None. È. Grau: None. J. Brunet: None. A. Chong: Peripheralblood plasma wascollected at baseline and before each None.H.Han: None. E.Dorca: None. B.Rivera: None. cycle of neoCTx. cfDNA was digested with 4 different methylation sensitiverestrictionenzymesandanalysedforaberrantmethylation of 48 CRC-associated genes. Methylation marker levels were 
P12 .068.DHighlysensitivedetectionmethodofDICER1tumor correlated with baseline tumour volume and treatment response hotspotmutations by drop-offdroplet digital PCR andcomparedwiththestandardtumourmarkersCEAandCA19-9. Results:ThemethylationmarkersSEPT9,DCC,BOLLandSFR
P2  Roseline Vibert1,2, Marion Gauthier-Villars1,2, Christelle Carrière1,2, were present in all patients at baseline and displayed a stronger CatherineDuboisd’Enghien1,2,AnneVincent-Salomon2,3,Dominique correlation with tumour volume than CEA and CA 19-9. Serial Stoppa-Lyonnet1,4, Ivan Bièche1,4, Emmanuelle Jeannot1,2,3, Lisa measurement of these methylation markers allowed for discrimi- Golmard1,2 nationbetweenoperatedandnon-operatedpatientsafter1cycle of neoCTx. The early dynamic changes of SEPT9 and DCC also 1Service de Génétique, Institut Curie, Paris, France, 2Université PSL, seemedtocorrelatewithpathohistologicalresponse.Methylation Paris, France, 3Service d’Anatomo-Pathologie, Institut Curie, Paris, values of eleven out of the 48 tested CRC-associated markers France,4Université de Paris, Paris, France. showeda strongcorrelation (>0.80) with SEPT9. Conclusion: Our data suggest that serial measurements of CRC- Introduction: DICER1 syndrome is an autosomal dominant associatedmethylationmarkersisavaluabletoolforearlyresponse inheritedsyndromepredisposingtovariousbenignandmalignant assessment.Wealsoidentiﬁedasetofelevenmarkers,whohavethe tumors,mainlyoccurringinchildrenandyoungadults,requiringa potentialtostrengthenthevalueoftheCRC-markerSEPT9. broad surveillance starting at birth with repeated irradiating W. Pulverer: None. J.S. Bhangu: None. S. Schönthaler: None. imaging exams and sedations for young patients. It is caused by R. Öhler: None. T. Bachleitner-Hofmann: None. A. Weinhäusel: germlinepathogenicvariantsintheDICER1gene.Morethan90% None. oftumorsbearaDICER1missensehotspotmutation,asasecond hit,involvingoneofsixcodonsclusteredinexons24and25.We designed and validated in vitro a drop-off ddPCR system to scan 
P12 .072.D Identiﬁcation of the R882H mutation in DNMT3A allDICER1hotspot codons. by arestrictiontest in patients withhematologic neoplasms Materials and Methods: Three drop-off ddPCR assays were designed (one for exon 24, two for exon 25), with two TaqMan Elizaveta Kulaeva1, Pavel Lipilkin2, Tatyana Lipilkina3, Elena probesperassay,onecomplementarytothewildtypesequence Mashkina1 of the region containing hotspot mutations, another used as a reference. Eight tumor-derived DNAs and ﬁve synthetic oligonu- 1Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, cleotidesbearingDICER1 hotspot mutationswere tested. 2RostovStateMedicalUniversity,Rostov-on-Don,RussianFederation, Results:The13testedmutationsweredetected,withalimitof 3Don State Technical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federa- detection ranging from 0.07% to 0.31% for codons p.
E1705 , p. tion. D1709 and p.D1713 in exon 24, and from 0.06% to 0.15% for codonsp.G1809, p.D1810and p.
E1813  inexon25. DNMT3A is one of the most frequently mutated genes in adult Conclusions:Thehighsensitivityofthismethodiscompatible hematological neoplasms, including myelodysplastic syndrome withitsuseforplasmacirculatingtumorDNA(ctDNA)analysisfor (MDS), acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and chronic myeloid earlytumordetectioninDICER1syndromepatients.Itmayreduce leukemia(CML).ThemostfrequentsomaticmutationinDNMT3A the need for radiation exposure and sedation in surveillance is R882H (c.2645G>A); this amino acid substitution reduces the protocols.Itmayalsoimprovepatientprognosis.Clinicaltrialsare enzymatic activity of the protein and destabilizes its functional neededtoevaluate ctDNAanalysis inDICER1 syndrome patients. tetrameric form in vitro and in vivo. Our work is focused on Grants: Liguecontrelecancer creatingamethodtoidentifytheR882Hsomaticmutationinthe R.Vibert:None.M.Gauthier-Villars:None.C.Carrière:None. DNMT3A gene for use in the diagnosis of MDS. We developed a C. Dubois d’Enghien: None. A. Vincent-Salomon: None. D. speciﬁc restriction test using Fsp4HI restrictase and original Stoppa-Lyonnet: None. I. Bièche: None. E. Jeannot: None. L. primers and tested it on a sample of 81 patients with various Golmard:None. hematologicalneoplasms:MDS(n=,AML(n=andCML(n=)to determinethefrequencyofthemutationintheMDSspeciﬁcally. The sources indicated a frequency of 12,2% for R882H in MDS, 
P12 .070.B DNA methylation status of circulating tumor DNA frequency in all our sample was 2,47±1,72%, but patients with enables therapy response monitoring and assessment of thismutation haddiagnosed CML,not MDS. Wealso identiﬁed a tumor burden mutation in the second restriction site Fsp4HI, which was in the investigated DNA fragment at positions 113118-113122 Walter Pulverer1, Jagdeep Singh Bhangu2, Silvia Schönthaler1, (NG_029465.2) in three patients with AML, MDS, and CML Rudolf Öhler2, Thomas Bachleitner-Hofmann2, Andreas Weinhäusel1 accordingly. Therefore, we found that the R882H mutation is not EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 392 characteristic of MDS but is more likely characteristic of CML, forEGFR/ALKstatusandPD-
L1 expressionwillhelpforguidanceof which is important for clarifying the role of this mutation in the treatment strategy. Simultaneous testing of EGFR/ALK driver pathogenesis of myeloid neoplasms. We also found a new mutations and PD-
L1  expression, in order to gain valuable time mutation that requires further study of its effect on enzyme for the treatment decision of advanced adenocarcinoma (ADC). functionand thepathogenesis ofMDS, AML andCML. Our study has included 26 unrelated Caucasians patients (20-84 E. Kulaeva: None. P. Lipilkin: None. T. Lipilkina: None. E. years-old) with NSCLC (23 ADC and 3 squamous cell carcinoma). Mashkina:None. Genomic DNA was isolated from primary or secondary FFPE tumorssamples,with20-80%tumorcellscontent.EGFRstatuswas analyzed by Real-Time PCR using a commercial kit, while ALK 
P12 .073.A Transcriptional proﬁle of NOMO1 deleted cells, a status and PD-
L1  expression by IHC (clone D5F3, respectively SP common alteration inearly-onset colorectal cancer 263). All investigated samples were ALK negative. By tumor proportionlevel(TPS),PD-
L1 expressionwasclassiﬁedasnegative Abel Jesús Martel-Martel1,2, Paula García-Vallés1,2, Jésica Pérez- (TPS<1%, n=10), weak (TPS 1-49%, n=11) and strong (TPS García1,2,3, Luis Ángel Corchete1, Nerea Gestoso-Uzal1,2, Diego ≥50%,n=5).Fivepatientspresenteddrivermutationsinexon19 Iglesias-Corral1,2, Juan Luis García1,3, Ana Belén Herrero1,2,3, José or 21 (3 ex19del and 2 Leu858Arg). It has to be mentioned that Perea4, Rogelio González-Sarmiento1,2,3 along with EGFR-Ex19del a patient has also a high PD-
L1  overexpression (>80%). This is a 65-year-old female, which 1Biomedical Research Institute of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, underwent last year a right upper lobectomy being diagnosed Spain,2MolecularMedicineUnit,DepartmentofMedicine,University with micropapillary and acinary adenocarcinoma. Though the ofSalamanca,Salamanca,Spain,3InstituteofMolecularandCellular studied lot comprises only 26 patients, it can be seen that Biology of Cancer (IBMCC), University of Salamanca-CSIC, Sala- simultaneous testing of these biomarkers has beneﬁcial effects manca, Spain, 4Health Research Institute, Fundación Jiménez Díaz both on the patient’s turnaround time and on amount of University Hospital, Madrid,Spain. biological material used. However, the most important beneﬁt is the rapidity of treatment strategy guidance, a very important Introduction:Early-onsetcolorectalcancer(EOCRC)incidencehas beenincreasinginthelastfewyears.About10%ofallcolorectal aspect foradvanced/inoperable ADC patients. P. Apostol: None. A.Pinzariu: None. cancer (CRC) tumors are diagnosed in this cohort of patients (under 45 years). In a recent study performed by our group, we have detected a homozygous deletion of the NOMO1 gene in 
P12 .075.C High sensitivity detection of endometrial cancer- morethan70%ofEOCRCpatients,suggestingthatNOMO1could associated genetic variants in minimally-invasive gynecologi- be a molecular marker associated with EOCRC. Our aim was to calsamples identify, using whole genome microarray, differential gene expressionbetweenNOMO1KnockoutandNOMO1wildtypecell Fátima Marín*1, Beatriz Pelegrina*2, Sònia Paytubi*2, Ferran linesthat could explainits role incolorectal carcinogenesis. Briansó3,4, Paula Peremiquel2, Jon Frias2, Yolanda Benavente2, José Material and methods: CRISPR/Cas9 technology was used to Manuel Martínez5, Marc Barahona5, Sergi Fernández5, Alba Zanca6, generate NOMO1-KO HT29 (CRC), HCT116 (CRC) and HS-5 NuriaBaixeras6,AugustVidal6,AxelRodríguez6,JúliaCanet1,Álvaro (mesenchymal) cell lines. Total RNA from two NOMO1-KO and Carmona2, Javier de Francisco7, Victor Caño7, Francesc Xavier NOMO1-WT clones was labeled and hybridized according to Bosch2, Silvia de Sanjosé8, Jordi Ponce5, Gabriel Capellá1, Xavier Affymetrix protocols. Samples were hybridized to Clarium-S Matias-Guiu6,JoanBrunet1,9,LaiaAlemany2,MartaPineda*1,Laura human array and scanned using GeneChip System of Affymetrix. Costas*2 WebGestalt toolwasused for microarray dataanalysis. Results:Atotalof2overexpressedgenes(FC>1,5;HS
P90 B1and 1HereditaryCancerProgram,CatalanInstituteofOncology,Institut PCNT)and8infra-expressedgenes(FC<-1,5;NOMO1,PLP
P3 ,RFT1, d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), ONCOBELL Pro- STEA
P1 B, FBXO32, SL
C6 A8, ZNF503 and AT
P8 B1) showed up in gram, CIBERONC, L’Hospitalet de LLobregat, Spain, 2Cancer commonbetweenthethreecelllines.Notably,PLP
P3 isassociated EpidemiologyResearchProgramme,CatalanInstituteofOncology, withtheactivationoftheWnt/β-cateninpathway,whichplaysan Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), CIBERESP, importantrole inthedevelopment ofCRC. L’Hospitalet de LLobregat, Spain, 3Department of Genetics, Conclusions: The inactivation of NOMO1 leads to the Microbiology and Statistics, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, differential expression of some genes that could explain its Spain, 4Roche Diagnostics, Sant Cugat del Vallès, Spain, 5Depart- implicationinthedevelopmentofCRC.ValidationofthesemRNA ment of Gynecology, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, Institut expression changes and new functional experiments are being d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L’Hospitalet de performed.Study funded by PI20/01569. LLobregat, Spain, 6Pathology, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, A. Martel-Martel: None. P. García-Vallés: None. J. Pérez- Institutd’InvestigacióBiomèdicadeBellvitge(IDIBELL),L’Hospitalet García: None. L.Á. Corchete: None. N. Gestoso-Uzal: None. D. de LLobregat, Spain, 7Department of Anesthesiology. Hospital Iglesias-Corral: None. J.L. García: None. A.B. Herrero: None. J. Universitari de Bellvitge, Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Perea: None. R.González-Sarmiento: None. Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L’Hospitalet de LLobregat, Spain, 8National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA, 9Hereditary Cancer Program, CatalanInstituteofOncology,Institutd’InvestigacióBiomèdicade 
P12 .074.B Simultaneous detection of EGFR mutation and PD- Girona (IDIBGI), Girona, Spain. 
L1 overexpressioninacaseofadvancedlungadenocarcinoma Diagnosis of endometrial cancer (EC) is based on the histo- POMPILIAAPOSTOL,Alex SebastianPinzariu pathological assessment of endometrial biopsies among symp- tomaticwomen.Geneticanalysesofminimallyinvasivesamples SCCLINICA SANTESRL, BUCHAREST,Romania. using highly sensitive techniques offer a promising perspective forscreeningandearlydetectionofEC.Ouraimwastoidentify Worldwide, lung cancer represents the leading cause of cancer- somatic mutations associated to EC that could be detected in relatedmortality,inspiteofpersonalizedtherapysuccess.Testing cervical Pap Brush and cervico-vaginal self-samples. Sixty-one EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 393 DNA samples from nine EC cases and four from controls were pathogenic variant was identiﬁed in 7/11 patients (63.6%), in all extractedfromendometrialbiopsies,clinician-collectedcervical cases inAPC.In 2/7 (28.57%) mosaicism was restricted to colonic samples, cervico-vaginal self-samples, and blood; plus surgical tissues, while in 5/7 (71.43%) it was extended to the blood. specimens for cases. A custom panel targeting exons of 49 Mosaicism affected the germline in one patient, being his genes, which incorporates duplex unique molecular identiﬁers, daughtera heterozygous carrier ofthesame variant. was used to sequence samples at a high depth. The deduplica- Conclusions: The implementation of somatic testing in FAP tionprocesswasperformedusingacombinationofPicard,fgbio patients identiﬁes APC mutations previously missed, improving and bwa tools. VarDictJava and Mutect2, in tumor-only mode, thediagnosticyield inour cohort of patients, attributable were used for variant calling. Variants detected by both callers totheidentiﬁcationoflow-frequencygermlinevariantsaswell and with variant allele frequency (VAF)>0.5% were considered asmosaicvariantsconﬁnedtothecolon.Grantsupport:CarlosIII andﬁlteredbyqualityandfunctionalimpact.AminimumVAFof Institute funded by FEDER–a way to build Europe– [PI19/00553; 5% was set in aspirates to ﬁlter out low frequency variants of PI16/00563 and CIBERONC]; Government of Catalonia normaltissue.GeneticvariantsatVAF>5%intumors(67variants [2017SGR1282 and 2017SGR496]. across the 9 tumors) were detected in paired endometrial P. Rofes: None. J. del Valle: None. S. González: None. L. aspirates, clinician-collected cervical samples, and vaginal self- Feliubadaló: None. M. Pineda: None. E. Tornero: None. M. sampleswithasensitivityof96%(60/67),76%(53/67),69%(49/ Menéndez:None.X.Muñoz:None.E.Montes:None.R.Cuesta: 67), respectively. No somatic variants were identiﬁed in None.M.Navarro:None.A.Solanes:None.N.Dueñas:None.S. gynecologicalsamplesfromcontrolsorbloodfromanywomen. Iglesias: None. M. Salinas: None. J. Balmaña: None. J. Brunet: This approach is useful to detect tumor somatic mutations in None.G. Capellá:None. C.Lázaro: None. gynecological minimally-invasive samples at high sensitivity. A larger sample size is required to validate these results. Funding: PI
E16 /00049,PI19/01835,Roche,CM19/00216,FI20/ 
P12 .077.A Development of APC-speciﬁc ACMG/AMP variant 00031,CB16/12/00234,CB06/02/0073. classiﬁcation guidelines F. Marín*: None. B. Pelegrina*: None. S. Paytubi*: None. F. Briansó: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; Roche. P. Isabel Spier1,2, Xiaoyu Sherry Yin3,4, John-Paul Plazzer3, Andreas Peremiquel: None. J. Frias: None. Y. Benavente: None. J. Laner5, Ian M. Frayling6, Deborah Ritter7,8, Sharon Plon7,8, Marc Martínez: None. M. Barahona: None. S. Fernández: None. A. Greenblatt9, Johan T. den Dunnen10, Finlay A. Macrae3,11, Stefan Zanca: None. N. Baixeras: None. A. Vidal: None. A. Rodríguez: Aretz1,2,onbehalfoftheInSiGHT-ClinGenHereditaryColonCancer/ None.J.Canet:None.Á.Carmona:None.J.deFrancisco:None. Polyposis Variant CurationExpert Panel V. Caño: None. F. Bosch: None. S. de Sanjosé: None. J. Ponce: None. G. Capellá: None. X. Matias-Guiu: None. J. Brunet: None. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, L. Alemany: None. M. Pineda*: None. L. Costas*: C. Other Bonn, Germany, 2National Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other UniversityHospitalBonn,Bonn,Germany,3DepartmentofColorectal in-kindsupport); Modest; Roche, IDT. MedicineandGenetics,RoyalMelbourneHospital,Parkville,Australia, 4Melbourne Medical School, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, 5Department of Genomics, Medical Genetics Center 
P12 .076.D Somatic testing in unsolved familial adenomatous Munich, Munich, Germany, 6Institute of Medical Genetics, University polyposiscasesincreasesdiagnosticyieldanddisclosesahigh Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 7Baylor College of prevalence ofAPC mosaicism Medicine, Houston,TX,USA,8TexasChildren’sCancerCenter,Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, 9Vermont Cancer Center, Paula Rofes1,2, Jesús del Valle1,2, Sara González1,2, Lídia Feliuba- University of Vermont College of Medicine, Burlington, VT, USA, daló1,2, Marta Pineda1,2, Eva Tornero1,2, Mireia Menéndez1,2, Xavier 10Department of Human Genetics and Clinical Genetics, Leiden Muñoz1,2, Eva Montes1, Raquel Cuesta1, Matilde Navarro1, Ares University,Leiden,Netherlands,11DepartmentofMedicine,University Solanes1, Núria Dueñas1, Sílvia Iglesias1, Mónica Salinas1, Judith ofMelbourne, Parkville, Australia. Balmaña3, JoanBrunet1,2, Gabriel Capellá1,2, ConxiLázaro1,2 Introduction: The proper characterisation of the clinical signiﬁ- 1HereditaryCancer,CatalanInstituteofOncology,ONCOBELLprogram, cance of germline variants is of high relevance to reduce the IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación amount of variants with uncertain clinical signiﬁcance (VUS). BiomédicaenReddeCáncer(CIBERONC),Madrid,Spain,3HighRiskand Pathogenic APC variants are causative for Familial adenomatous Cancer Prevention Unit, Medical Oncology Department, University polyposis, a colorectal cancer predisposition syndrome. This Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona and Vall projectaimstoimprovevariantclassiﬁcationbythedevelopment d’HebronInstituteofOncology(VHIO),Barcelona,Spain. ofAPC-speciﬁcclassiﬁcationcriteriawithintheapprovalprocessof a Hereditary Colon Cancer / Polyposis Variant Curation Expert Introduction: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a highly Panel (VCEP) from the International Society for Gastrointestinal penetrantdominantconditionaccountingfor1%ofCRCcases.Itis Hereditary Tumours(InSiGHT) and ClinGen. characterized by the development of hundreds to thousands of Methods:APC-speciﬁcadaptationsoftheinterpretationguide- colorectal adenomas. Up to 90% of FAP cases are caused by linespublishedbytheAmericanCollegeofMedicalGeneticsand inactivating mutations in APC, and mosaicism has been previously the Association of Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP) were reportedin20%ofsporadiccases.Aim:Toexploretheprevalenceof suggested based on expert opinions, database analyses, and mosaicism in 11 unexplained cases of FAP and to evaluate the literature searchconducted by theVCEP. impactofsomatictestingonthediagnosticyield. Results: Four of the 28 original criteria were left unchanged, Methods: Paired samples of colorectal polyps, tumors and/or whilst six were not used for different reasons. For the remaining mucosa were analyzed using a custom NGS hereditary-cancer 18criteria,gene-ordisease-basedspeciﬁcationsand/orevidence panel.Wheneverpossible, theextensionofmosaicism withinthe strengthmodiﬁcationsweremade.Themainchangesconcernthe differentembryonic layers wasexamined. “pathogenic very strong” (PV
S1 ) criterion (speciﬁcations at the 5’ Results: 14 polyposis-associated genes were analyzed in 26 and 3’ end of the gene), and modiﬁcations of the minor allele colorectal samples by high-coverage sequencing. A mosaic frequencythresholds(criteriaBA1,B
S1 andPM2).Thevalidationof EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 394 theAPC-speciﬁcmodiﬁcationsbysystematicevaluationofknown such as ClinVar. Prioritised VUS will be classiﬁed by the VCEP variantsiscurrently underway. regularly, whose consensus will represent the most authoritative Conclusions: It is expected that using the APC-speciﬁc guide- classiﬁcation of pathogenicity. The InSiGHT-ClinGen effort might lines will improve variant interpretation and facilitates resolution serveasamodel forother variant interpretation initiatives. of variants with conﬂicted assertions in ClinVar. Based on the S.Aretz:None.I.Spier:None.X.S.Yin:None.J.Plazzer:None. adaptedallelefrequencythresholds,itislikelythatinparticulara E.Holinski-Feder:None.J.T.denDunnen:None.D.Ritter:None. considerableportionofVUScanbereclassiﬁedas(likely)benign. S. Plon: None. M. Greenblatt: None. I. Frayling: None. F.A. I.Spier:None.X.S.Yin:None.J.Plazzer:None.A.Laner:None. Macrae:None. I.M. Frayling: None. D. Ritter: None. S. Plon: None. M. Green- blatt:None.J.T.denDunnen:None.F.A.Macrae:None.S.Aretz: None. 
P12 .079.C Frequency of pathogenic variants in Fanconi anemiagenesinhereditarybreastandovariancancerfamilies 
P12 .078.BVariantclassiﬁcationandexpertcuration:APCasa Vida Stegel1, Gašper Klančar1, Nina Anžič1, Petra Škerl1, Vita pilotproject andmodel ofthe collaborative InSiGHT-ClinGen Šetrajčič Dragoš1, Alenka Bombač1, Anja Zagožen Klasinc1, Vesna Hereditary Colon Cancer / Polyposis (ICCP) Variant Curation Vogrič1,MatejaKrajc2,AnaBlatnik2,KsenjaStrojnik2,MartaBanjac2, ExpertPanel (VCEP) SrdjanNovaković1 Stefan Aretz1,2, Isabel Spier1,2, Xiaoyu Sherry Yin3, John-Paul 1Department of Molecular Diagnostics, Institute of Oncology Plazzer3, Elke Holinski-Feder4,5, Johan T. den Dunnen6, Deborah Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Cancer Genetics Clinic, Institute of Ritter7,8, Sharon Plon7,8, Marc Greenblatt9, Ian Frayling10, Finlay A. OncologyLjubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Macrae3,11, on behalf of the InSiGHT - ClinGen Hereditary Colon Cancer/ Polyposis Variant Curation Expert Panel Introduction: It is estimated that 5-10% of breast and ovarian cancers (BC/OC) have hereditary origin. Higher BC/OC risk is 1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, mostlyattributedtopathogenicvariants(PV)inBRCA1/2genes,as Bonn, Germany, 2National Center for Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, wellastoPVinotherhightomoderateBC/OCriskgenesaslisted UniversityHospitalBonn,Bonn,Germany,3DepartmentofColorectal by NCCN guidelines for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer MedicineandGenetics,RoyalMelbourneHospital,Parkville,Australia, syndrome HBOC (NCCN-HBOC genes). Several of NCCN-HBOC 4MGZ - Medical Genetics Center, Munich, Germany, 5Arbeitsgruppe genesbelongtoFanconianemia(FA)pathway. Therearereports erbliche gastrointestinale Tumore, Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik on PVs in other FA genes (nonNCCN-HBOC FA genes) found in IV–CampusInnenstadt,KlinikumderUniversitätMünchen,Munich, cancer patients, but their association with cancer risk is not yet Germany, 6Department of Human Genetics and Clinical Genetics, fullyestablished.Theaimofthisstudywastoanalyzeacohortof Leiden University, Leiden, Netherlands, 7Baylor College of Medicine, HBOC families to determine the frequencies of PVs in nonNCCN- Houston,TX,USA,8TexasChildren’sCancerCenter,BaylorCollegeof HBOC FA genes in NCCN-HBOC PV positive and NCCN-HBOC PV Medicine, Houston, TX, USA, 9Vermont Cancer Center, University of negativeHBOC cases. Vermont College of Medicine, Burlington, VT, USA, 10Institute of Methods: Since 2015 at our institute, the individuals fulﬁlling Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United the HBOC testing criteria were counseled and screened for Kingdom, 11Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, germline PVs in NCCN-HBOC genes by Illumina’s NGS multigene Parkville, Australia. panel. Retrospective reanalysis of nonNCCN-HBOC FA genes (FANCA, FANCB, FANCC, FANCD2, FANCE, FANCF, FANCG, FANCI, Characterising the clinical signiﬁcance of germline variants FANCL, FANCM, SLX4, ERC
C4 ) was performed on 2023 individuals becomes imminent for the translation of genetic testing into from different HBOC families. Statistical analysis was performed medicalpractice.Therealisationofthisgoalisacomplexprocess usingFisher’sexact test. that includes curation of locus-speciﬁc databases (LSDB), the Results:InNCCN-HBOCgenes466PVsandinnonNCCN-HBOC implementationofVariantCurationExpertPanels(VCEP),andthe FAgenes37PVswereidentiﬁed.OfallnonNCCN-HBOCFAgenes development of standardized rules for variant classiﬁcation such FANCM,FANCD2 and FANCAweremost frequently mutated. as gene-speciﬁc modiﬁcations of the ACMG/AMP guidelines. We Conclusions:ThepercentageofsubjectswithPVsinnonNCCN- describe this process for the curation and classiﬁcation of APC HBOC FA genes is statistically signiﬁcantly higher among the variants which is part of a long-term endeavour of the NCCN-HBOC PV negative individuals compared to the NCCN- International Society for Gastrointestinal Hereditary Tumours HBOCPVpositive individuals(2.16 vs0.65%, p=0,0294). (InSiGHT) in collaboration with the Clinical Genome Resource V. Stegel: None. G. Klančar: None. N. Anžič: None. P. Škerl: (ClinGen).Toimprovedatacentralisationandstandardisation,we None.V.ŠetrajčičDragoš:None.A.Bombač:None.A.Zagožen identiﬁed APC-related LSDBs with thousands of rare or private Klasinc:None.V.Vogrič:None.M.Krajc:None.A.Blatnik:None. variants and initiated the removal or merging of outdated or K.Strojnik: None. M. Banjac:None. S.Novaković: None. orphan ones.A novel version ofthe referenceInSiGHT APCLSDB was established. Subsequently, variants were reclassiﬁed and annotation inconsistencies within and between the APC and 
P12 .080.D Familial Colorectal Cancer Type X syndrome: new ClinVar databases were scrutinised and partly solved. As a insights collaborative effort, an InSiGHT-ClinGen Hereditary Colon Can- cer/PolyposisVCEPisconstitutedintheClinGenHereditaryCancer FelipeA.O.Garcia1,EdileneS.deAndrade1,HenriqueC.R.Galvão2, ClinicalDomain.Thisincludesthedevelopmentandvalidationof Cristina S. Sabato3, Natalia Campacci1, Matias E. Melendez4, Rui M. APC-speciﬁcadaptationsofthegenericACMG/AMPinterpretation Reis1, EdenirI.Palmero4,1 guidelines(separateabstract),whichwillimproveinparticularthe classiﬁcation of the high amount of sequence variants with 1Molecular Oncology Research Center, Barretos Cancer Hospital, unknownclinicalsigniﬁcance(VUS)inpublicuncuratedresources Barretos, Brazil, 2Oncogenetics Department, Barretos Cancer EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 395 Hospital, Barretos, Brazil, 3Center of Molecular Diagnosis, Barretos majority of the brain tumors (200/290, 69%) concentrate on p. CancerHospital,Barretos,Brazil,4PeleLittlePrinceResearchInstitute, N546Kandp.K656Emutations.Whileappearingpredominantlyas Curitiba, Brazil. singlemutants,FGFR1doublemutantsappearsigniﬁcantlyhigher in combination with p.K656E (31/39, 79%, p=0.0001). Molecular Abstract: Familial colorectal cancer type X (FCCTX) is a hetero- biology experiments indicate that while both the single and geneouscolorectalcancerpredispositionsyndromethatdiffersfrom double FGFR1 mutants activate the MAPK/ERK pathway, double Lynchsyndromeinthatitdoesnotpresentmicrosatelliteinstability mutantsmodulatethesignalinglevels.Furthermore,BioIDresults andexhibitsthefourmaingenesofmismatchrepair,MLH1,MSH2, demonstrate that the germline p.R661P mutant retains similar MSH6,andPM
S2 function.Besides,itsgeneticetiologyremainstobe interactors as that of wild-type FGFR1, while the double mutants elucidated. We performed whole-exome sequencing of constitutive share many with p.N546K, recapitulating the interactome of this materialfrom38cancer-affectedpatientsfrom33familiesatriskfor activating mutant. FCCTX(followingAmsterdamIclinicalcriteria).Thevariantclassiﬁca- Conclusions: Genotype-phenotype correlation demonstrates tion followed the American College of Medical Genetics and theprevalenceofp.N546Kandp.K656Emutationsinbraintumors, Genomics (ACMG) guidelines. A total of seven pathogenic/likely inparticularwithp.K656Eincisfordoublemutants.Interrogation pathogenic variants in six unrelated families (18.2% of the families) oftheproximityinteractomeofFGFR1mutantsrevealedpotential were identiﬁed. Most of the genes were involved in DNA damage treatment targets against low-grade gliomas with impaired FGFR repair.OneofthemistheknownCRCpredisposinggeneCHEK2.In signaling components. addition,pathogenic/likelypathogenicvariantswerefoundingenes Grants:AlexLemonadeStandFoundation,MiaNeriFoundation, previouslyassociatedwithFCCTX/hereditaryCRCasOGG1andFAN1. LaCaixa Foundation. Furthermore, potentially pathogenic variants were identiﬁed in the H. Han: None. C. Jin-Wong: None. T. Gayden: None. G. TREX1, ASX
L1 , PRKN and SLX4 genes. Although the association of Hesketh: None. M. Slattery: None. N. Jabado: None. W.D. thesevariantsneedstobefurtherstudied,wewereabletopresent Foulkes: None. A.Gingras: None.B. Rivera:None. newpotentialgenesthatmightbeinvolvedinthecarcinogenesisof FCCTX, thus providing important clues that can contribute to the understandingofhereditarycolorectalcancergeneticbasis. 
P12 .082.BAnalyzingclinicalbehavioroftwogermlinevariant Funding This project was funded through grants from the in FH gene in a young female patient with renal cancer National Oncology Care Support Program (PRONON hereditary syndrome (HLRCC) (25000.056766/2015-64)) from the Ministry of Health and from donationsfromCotemiggroup.EIP,MEM,andRMRarerecipients JesicaM.Ramirez,ElizabethFaderKaiser,HernánRodríguezZanini, ofNationalCouncilforScientiﬁcandTechnologicalDevelopment MiriamRogel (CNPq) productivity fellowships. F.A.O. Garcia: None. E.S. de Andrade: None. H.C.R. Galvão: MendozaCentral Hospital, Mendoza,Argentina. None. C.S. Sabato: None. N. Campacci: None. M.E. Melendez: None.R.M. Reis:None. E.I.Palmero: None. Hereditaryleiomyomatosisandrenalcellcarcinoma(HLRCC)isan autosomal dominant hereditary cancer syndrome. It is character- ized by the development of uterine and cutaneous leiomyomas, 
P12 .081.A Interactome of FGFR1 mutations found in low- renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and rarely uterine leiomyosarcomas. gradegliomas (LGGs) The RCC occurrence is low and it affects young adults whom generally present metastases at diagnosis. This tumor is usually HyeRim Han1, Cassandra Jin-Wong2, Tenzin Gayden3, Geoffrey unilateral, aggressive and the main histological subtype being Hesketh2, Michael Slattery4, Nada Jabado3, William D. Foulkes5,6, type 2 papillary RCC. HLRCC is due to mutations of the fumarate Anne-Claude Gingras2, Barbara Rivera1,6 hydratase(FH,fumarase)genethatencodesforFHenzymewhich acts as a tumor suppressor. At date about 100 mutations have 1BellvitgeInstituteforBiomedicalResearch(IDIBELL),L’Hospitaletde beenreportedinafewfamilies.Theaimofthisworkistoreport Llobregat, Spain, 2Department of Molecular Genetics, Gingras Lab, the presence of two variants, in a germline testing, in a 34 years University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Department of femalepatientwhoconsultedwithdiagnosisofRCCinadvanced Pediatrics, The Research Institute of the McGill University Health stage and cutaneous leiomyomas. Her mother and sister Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 4Department of Microbiology and presented cutaneous leiomyomas conﬁrmed by biopsy. The FH Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 5Cancer gene was analyzed by exome sequencing (NGS) using Illumina Research Program, Research Institute, McGill University Health platform. Genetic testing reported two variants in exon 8 of FH Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada, 6Gerald Bronfman Department of gene. First variant, c.1157A>C, p.Gl386Pro was classiﬁed as Oncology,McGill University, Montreal, QC,Canada. probably pathogenic according functional assays. This mutation is very rare in the general population and was predicted by in Introduction: Aberrant FGFR signaling is involved in the silicosoftwaretobedeleterious.Thesecondvariant,c.1157A>G,p. development of many different types of pathologies, including Gl386Arg was classiﬁed as probably pathogenic according to those of the brain. In particular, oncogenic hotspot FGFR1 LOV.3 and CLINVAR. Considering to low prevalence, no clear mutationsp.N546Kandp.K656Ehavebeendemonstratedtoplay correlation between mutations (genotype) and phenotype has acriticalroleintheetiologyoflow-gradegliomas(WHOGradeI/II). been found. This report could contribute to increase de knowl- Material and methods: We performed a comprehensive edge. Cosegregation studies will be considering to certiﬁcate genotype-phenotype correlation of 739 cases of different FGFR1- variableexpressivity and penetrance inrelatives. mutatedpathologiespublishedinpublicdatabasesandliterature. J.M. Ramirez: None. E. Fader Kaiser: None. H. Rodríguez Furthermore, we investigated the MAPK/ERK pathway activation Zanini: None. M.Rogel: None. of FGFR1 single and double mutants found in low-grade brain tumors, and identiﬁed potential interactors through co- immunoprecipitation assays and Bio-ID. 
P12 .083.C The transcription factors TFEB and TF
E3  promote Results: Targeted analysis of CNS-related pathologies in the tumor growthin Birt-Hogg-Dube’ syndrome comprehensive genotype-phenotype correlation revealed that a EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 396 CHIARA DI MALTA1,2, Angela Zampelli1, Letizia Granieri3, Luisa nodes.Altogetheronly3fusiongeneswerefoundin18control Lanfrancone3,Andrea Ballabio1,2,4 samples, while in 19 tumor samples 32 fusion events were detected. Among identiﬁed fusion genes we found known 1Telethon Institute ofGenetics andMedicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli (NA), follicular lymphomas fusions such as BC
L2 /IGH and BC
L6 /IGH Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Medical and Transla- with high level of evidence. There are also fusions typical for tionalScience,FedericoIIUniversity,Naples,Italy,3EuropeanInstitute other cancer types, e.g. KDM5A/NINJ2 (breast adenocarcinoma). of Oncology (IEO), Milan, Italy, 4Department of Molecular and Most of the fusions are not covered in databases (ChimerKB, HumanGenetics, Baylor College ofMedicine., Houston,TX,USA. FusionGDB), but participating genes are well known in carcinogenesis.Foundfusion geneswillbe validated by Sanger The Birt-Hogg-Dube’ (BHD) syndrome is an autosomal dominant sequencing. inherited disorder due to loss of function germline mutations in The work was carried out with the support of the Russian the folliculin (FLCN) gene. Symptoms include benign cutaneous Foundation forBasic Research, project No.17-54-33051. ﬁbrofolliculoma, pulmonary and kidney cysts and spontaneous M.Pospelova:None.K.Danilov:None.E.Bozhokina:None.Y. pneumothoraces. The most severe manifestation of the disease Krivolapov:None. A. Gorbunova: None. I.Evsyukov: None. are kidney tumors, which develop in about one out of three affectedindividualsduetoasomaticsecond-hitmutationleading to the inactivation of the remaining FLCN allele. However how 
P12 .087.C Identiﬁcation of new genes involved in germline FLCN suppresses tumor establishment has remained elusive for predisposition to early-onset gastriccancer decades. The MiT/TFE family members TFEB and TF
E3  are constitutively nuclear in cells depleted of FLCN and we recently Cristina Herrera-Pariente1, Roser Capó-García1, Marcos Díaz- demonstratedthatgeneticdepletionofTFEBcompletelyrescued Gay1,2, Sabela Carballal1, Jenifer Muñoz1, Joan Llach1, Ariadna renalcystformation,restorednormalkidneyfunctionandlifespan Sánchez1, Laia Bonjoch1, Coral Arnau-Collell1, Yasmin Soares de of kidney-speciﬁc FLCN KO mice, thus pointing at TFEB as a key Lima1, Mariano Golubicki3,4, Gerhard Jung1, Juan José Lozano5, driver of renal pathology in BHD. However, the contribution of Antoni Castells1, Francesc Balaguer1, Luis Bujanda6, Sergi Castellví- TFEB, or the one of its paralogue TF
E3 , to the development of Bel1, LeticiaMoreira1 kidney cancer associated with this disorder has never been addressed. We now show that depletion of TFEB, or the one of 1Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades TF
E3 , remarkably reduced the growth of a BHD-patient-derived Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), Gastroenterology Department, tumorcelllineinvivo.Moreover,geneexpressionstudiesallowed Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), us to identify key TFEB/TF
E3  downstream pathways which could University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Department of Cellular be responsible for tumorigenesis in BHD. Our ﬁndings demon- andMolecularMedicine,UniversityofCalifornia,SanDiego,CA,USA, stratetherelevanceofconstitutiveactivationofTFEBandTF
E3 in 3OncologySection,HospitalofGastroenterology“Dr.C.B.Udaondo”, thegrowthofkidneytumorsassociatedwithBHDsyndromeand Buenos Aires, Argentina, 4Molecular Biology Laboratory, Hospital of encourage future studies exploiting TFEB/TF
E3  inhibitors as a Gastroenterology “Dr. C. B. Udaondo”, Buenos Aires, Argentina, therapy forthese tumors. 5BioinformaticsPlatform, CentrodeInvestigación Biomédica enRed C. Di malta: None. A. Zampelli: None. L. Granieri: None. L. de Enfermedades Hepáticas yDigestivas (CIBEREHD), University of Lanfrancone: None. A.Ballabio: None. Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 6Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), Gastro- enterology Department, Biodonostia Health Research Institute, 
P12 .084.D Searching for novel fusion genes by RNA-Seq in Basque CountryUniversity (UPV/EHU), SanSebastián, Spain. follicular lymphoma Introduction: The genetic cause for several families with gastric MariaPospelova1,KonstantinDanilov1,EkaterinaBozhokina2,3,Yuriy cancer (GC) aggregation is unclear, with marked relevance in Krivolapov2, Anna Gorbunova2, Igor Evsyukov1 early-onset patients. We aimed to identify new candidate genes involvedinGC germline predisposition. 1ITMO University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Mechnikov Material and Methods: Whole-exome sequencing (WES) of North-West State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian germline samples was performed in 20 early-onset GC patients Federation, 3Institute of Cytology RAS, Saint Petersburg, Russian without previous germline mutation identiﬁed. WES was also Federation. performed in nine tumor samples to analyze the somatic proﬁle. Sequencing germline data were ﬁltered to select variants with Follicular lymphoma is the second most common non-Hodgkin’s plausible pathogenicity, rare frequency and previously involved in lymphoma. In most cases, tumor cells contain a t(14;18) cancer. Then, a manual ﬁltering was performed to prioritize genes translocation that activates BC
L2 , a key gene for apoptosis. accordingtocurrentknowledgeandfunction.Thesegeneticvariants However, there are a number of minor genetic alterations. wereprevalidatedwithIntegrativeGenomicsViewer(IGV).Aselection Identifying such events in a particular patient can affect the stepwascarriedoutandSangersequencingwasperformed. diagnosis, prognosis and treatment of cancer. Therefore, the Results: 274 genetic variants located on 205 genes were search for new fusion genes is very important for a personalized prioritized.AfterIGVandselectionstep,58geneticvariantsin52 approach inmedicine. different candidate genes were validated by Sanger sequencing Currently,thesearchfornewfusiongenescanbeperformedin (Table1). RNA-Seqdatausingspecialprograms,suchasSTAR-Fusion.Found Conclusion: Among them, APC, FAT4, CTNND1 and TLR2 seem bythisapproachandsubsequentlyvalidatedhybridgenescanbe tobethemostpromisinggenesbecauseoftheirroleinhereditary used for diagnostic purposes using FISH, Southern blotting and cancer syndromes, tumor suppression, cell adhesion and Helico- RT-PCR. bacterpylorirecognition,respectively.Theseresultswillbehelpful In this study whole transcriptome RNA-sequencing proﬁling toincreasetheknowledgeofpredispositiontoearly-onsetgastric was performed on biopsy specimens obtained from patients cancer. Grant Support: CIBEREHD Beca de investigador novel with untreated follicular lymphoma and non-tumor lymph 2017-2019,FondodeInvestigaciónSanitaria/FEDER(17/00878,20/ EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 397 00113),CERCAProgramandAgènciadeGestiód’AjutsUniversitaris (p=0.03).Althoughclinicalassociationsaresomewhatpremature, ideRecerca (GRPR
E2017 SGR21, GRC 2017SGR653). since the group of patients is not very large yet. This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (project No.18-29-09020). Table1.Finalcandidategenestogastriccancerpredisposition. A. Kalinkin: None. E. Kuznetsova: None. E. Alekseeva: None. Function Genes T. Deryagina: None. I. Bure: None. D. Mikhaylenko: None. A. Tanas:None. V. Strelnikov: None.M. Nemtsova: None. Germlinecancer APC,ATM,SDHC,CO
L7 A1,GP
C3 ,RNF43,EXT2, predisposition POLD1,EXT1,POT1,PTCH1,POLH,GATA2,BA
P1 , ERC
C2 andFANCA 
P12 .089.A Functional characterisation ofPLK2polymorphism Celladhesion FAT1,FAT2,FAT4andCTNND1 PiaPužarDominkuš,Petra Hudler Tumorsuppression PHF2,LAR
P7 ,LR
P1 B,WWOX,ADAMT
S9 ,LAT
S1 , genes BC
L6 B,ITIH5,NEO1,MAD1
L1 ,GPX7,IQGA
P2 ,DACT2, UniversityofLjubljana,FacultyofMedicine,InstituteofBiochemistry SIRT3,RC
C1 andEPHB2 andMolecular Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Helicobacterpylori I
L12 A,TLR1,TLR2,TLR5,TLR10,A4GNTandMU
C1  recognition Introduction: The majority of gastric cancer (GC) tumours is DNArepair UNG,KAT5,RAD23A,HB
P1 andLIG3 characterized by chromosomal instability and extreme molecular Otherrelated ARID4A,ARID1B,AT
P4 AandROBO1 heterogeneity, which can be driven by low-penetrating changes, functions includingsinglenucleotidevariants(SNVs)incellcyclegenes.The aimofourstudywastofunctionallyinvestigateSNVsincandidate genesCD
C20 ,PLK2,PLK3andATM. Methods: 542 GCpatients and healthy controls wereincluded C. Herrera-Pariente: None. R. Capó-García: None. M. Díaz- in the genotyping study. Survival analysis was performed using Gay:None.S.Carballal:None.J.Muñoz:None.J.Llach:None.A. the Kaplan-Meier method. The binding of candidate miRNAs on Sánchez: None. L. Bonjoch: None. C. Arnau-Collell: None. Y. polymorphic allelewas evaluated withLuciferase reporterassay. Soares de Lima: None. M. Golubicki: None. G. Jung: None. J. Results: Analyses of genetic models revealed signiﬁcant Lozano:None.A.Castells:None.F.Balaguer:None.L.Bujanda: associations with GC risk: male patients with PLK2-rs963615 CT None.S. Castellví-Bel: None. L.Moreira:None. genotypehadlowerrisk,whereasfemalepatientshadhigherrisk (OR=0.59,95%CI=0.37-0.93,P=0.023;OR=2.03,95%CI=1.09- 3.80, P=0.026, respectively). PLK3-rs12404160 AA genotype was 
P12 .088.D Somatic mutations of epigenetic regulation genes associatedwithhigherriskinmalepopulation(OR=3.55,95%CI ingastric cancer =1.26-10.04,P=0.015).PatientswiththeCD
C20 -rs710251CChad shorter overall survival (53.7 months) in comparison to patients Alexey Kalinkin1, Ekaterina Kuznetsova2, Ekaterina Alekseeva1, with AC or AA genotypes (131.7 and 133.5 months). For patients Tatyana Deryagina1, Irina Bure2, Dmitry Mikhaylenko2, Alexander withthePLK2-rs15009GGgenotypethe10-yearsurvivalratewas Tanas1, Vladimir Strelnikov1, Marina Nemtsova2 63.5%incomparisontopatientswithCGorCCgenotypes(15.7% and20%).Relative luciferaseactivity ofthepmirGLO-PLK2-3’UTR- 1ResearchCentreforMedical Genetics,Moscow, RussianFederation, Var (G allele) was decreased for 35% when cells were co- 2I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, transfected with miR-23b-5p mimic in comparison to the RussianFederation. pmirGLO-PLK2-3’UTR-Wt(C allele). Background: Epigenetic processes play a signiﬁcant role in Conclusion: The CD
C20 -rs710251 and PLK2-rs15009 could carcinogenesis, cancer recurrence and metastasis, and may serve potentially be useful for survival prediction. MiR-23b-5p directly as useful clinical biomarkers. Analysis of epigenetic regulator targetsPLK2-rs15009Gallele.SupportedbyYRand
P1 -390grants genes mutation landscape in gastric cancer (GC) samples may fromtheSlovenian ResearchAgency (ARRS). revealnovel clinicalbiomarkers and therapeutic targets. P. PužarDominkuš: None.P. Hudler: None. Methods: Weinvestigated somaticmutations of25epigenetic regulation genes, using the NGS panel in 95 GC samples. All identiﬁed somatic variants wereveriﬁed in tumor and non-tumor 
P12 .090.BSolvingthegeneticaetiologyofhereditarygastro- tissue by Sanger sequencing. Prediction ofsomatic variants intestinal cancer - a collaborative multicentre endeavour pathogenicity and impact on structure were carried out using within the projectSolve-RD PolyPhen2, SIFT, PROVEAN, MutPred2, I-Mutant 3 and HOP
E3 D tools. Westudied the survival of patients using the Kaplan-Meier Anna K. Sommer1, Iris B. A. W. te Paske2, José García-Peláez3,4,5, method. Andreas Laner6, Elke Holinski-Feder6,7, Verena Steinke-Lange6,7, Results: For further analysis, we selected frameshift, nonsense Sophia Peters1, Laura Valle8, Isabel Spier1,9, Solve-RD consortium, or missensevariants with MAF<0.0005 and not annotated in the Carla Oliveira3,4,5, Richarda M. de Voer2, Nicoline Hoogerbrugge*2, ClinVarordbSNPdatabases.Basedonthesecriteria,weidentiﬁed StefanAretz*1,9, *contributed equally 60 somatic mutations in 45/95(48%) GC samples. 23/60 (38%) of theidentiﬁedvariantsarenew,notdescribedinthedatabases.28/ 1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, 60mutationsweidentiﬁedaspathogenic,9/28(32%)wereveriﬁed Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud in non-neoplastic tissue, and were not described germline university medical center, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life variants. We showed that survival was signiﬁcantly reduced in Sciences, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Instituto de Investigação e patients with T3-4 tumor size to have mutations, compared with Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, the T3-4 group without mutations (p=0.043) and patients with 4InstituteofMolecularPathologyandImmunologyoftheUniversity distant metastases (M1) to have mutations, compared with M1 ofPorto(IPATIMUP),Porto,Portugal,5FacultyofMedicine,University group without mutations (p<0.0001). It was also revealed that of Porto (FMUP), Porto, Portugal, 6MGZ - Medizinisch Genetisches mutations in ARID1A prevail in patients with distant metastases EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 398 Zentrum, Munich, Germany Arbeitsgruppe erbliche gastrointestinale Materials and Methods: A total of 50 Romanian men Tumore, Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik, Munich, Germany, diagnosed with prostate cancer that underwent radical prosta- 7Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität München, Munich, tectomy were included in the study. DNA was extracted from Germany, 8Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncol- peripheral blood from all 50 patients. We divided the prostate ogy, IDIBELL and CIBERONC, Barcelona, Spain, 9National Center for cancer patients in two groups according to biochemical recur- Hereditary Tumor Syndromes, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, rence (biochemical recurrent disease and no biochemical recur- Germany. rence). Genotyping of the rs4054823 C/T polymorphism, located on the chromosome 17p12, was performed by allelic discrimina- Background:Patientsandfamilieswithsuspected,butgenetically tion withTaqman 5’-nuclease assays. unexplained (unsolved) genetic tumour risk syndromes lack Results: Statistical analysis revealed a signiﬁcant correlation of appropriate treatment and prevention, leading to preventable TT genotype with an increased risk for biochemical recurrence. morbidityandmortality.Totacklethisproblem,patientsfromthe Kaplan-Meier survival curves of recurrence-free survival after EuropeanReferenceNetworkonGeneticTumourRiskSyndromes radical prostatectomy showed a signiﬁcant difference between (ERN GENTURIS) are analysed in the European Commission´s theTTgenotypecompared to CC/CTgenotypes (P=0.0362). research project “Solving the unsolved rare diseases” (Solve-RD). Conclusions: Our ﬁndings propose the TT genotype as a The aim is to uncover known and novel cancer predisposing potential susceptibility factor for biochemical recurrence of genes by reanalysing available whole-exome sequencing (WES) prostate cancer after radical prostatectomy. Therefore, detection data of large cohorts in a combined manner, and applying a of hereditary genetic variations associated with prostate cancer multidimensionalomics approach. progressionandoutcomehasasigniﬁcantimpactontheaccurate Approach: Nearly 500 genetically unsolved cases with sus- classiﬁcation of the disease, providing insight into possible pected hereditary gastrointestinal tumour syndromes (polyposis, preventive andtherapeutic targets. early-onset/familial colorectal cancer and gastric cancer) from A.Pavel:None.D.Stambouli:None.A.Preda:None.I.Gener: multiple European centres were included. Currently, clinical and None.G. Anton: None. germlineWESdatafrom294casesareanalysed.Furthermore,an extensive molecular proﬁling of gastrointestinal tumours is planned and deep learning techniques will be applied. The 
P12 .092.D High frequency of clinically actionable pathogenic ambitious, multidisciplinary project is accompanied by a number variants detected with an On-Demand 35-gene panel in ofmethodical,technical,andlogisticchallenges,whichrequirethe Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome in Castilla y developmentandimplementation ofnewanalysistools, standar- León(Spain) disation of bioinformatics pipelines, and strategies to exchange dataand knowledge. MarInfante1,EnriqueLastra2,LuisE.Abella3,NoemyMartínez1,Lara Results and Outlook: The re-analysis of 229 known cancer Hernández1,Mercedes Durán1 predisposition genes allowed solving 2-3% of GENTURIS cases. Further variants in 7% of the cases are under revision. The 1Cancer Genetics Group. Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular integration of expert knowledge and new technologies will help (UVa-CSIC), VALLADOLID, Spain, 2Unit of Genetic Counseling in toidentifythegeneticbasisofasubstantialnumberofadditional Cancer. Complejo Hospitalario de Burgos, Burgos, Spain, 3Unit of cases within the ongoing project. The ERN GENTURIS approach Genetic Counseling in Cancer. Hospital Universitario Rio Hortega, might serve as a model for other genomic initiatives. Solve-RD VALLADOLID, Spain. receivedfunding fromEUHorizon 2020(No.779257). A.K.Sommer:None.I.B.A.W.tePaske:None.J.García-Peláez: Introduction:BRCA1andBRCA2arethehigh-riskgenesthatare None. A. Laner: None. E. Holinski-Feder: None. V. Steinke- traditionally screened for germline mutations in the context of Lange: None. S. Peters: None. L. Valle: None. I. Spier: None. C. Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome (HBOC). With Oliveira:None.R.M.deVoer:None.N.Hoogerbrugge*:None.S. Next Generation Sequencing, detection of mutations in other Aretz*:None. predisposing genes using multigene panels is rapid and cost- effective. Thus, we have designed an On-Demand gene panel, including 35 genesassociated with HBOC to improve our clinical 
P12 .091.C Genetic susceptibility to prostate cancer biochem- diagnosticroutine,especiallyinthosefamiliesthatgathersseveral icalrecurrence after radical prostatectomy cancer types, which do not ﬁt into a speciﬁc inherited cancer syndrome. Anca Pavel1,2, Danai Stambouli1, Adrian Preda3, Ismail Gener3, Patients and Methods: 48 HBOC cancer Patients were Gabriela Anton2 screened for mutations using the On-Demand Research Assay. Library and template preparations were performed using the 1Cytogenomic Medical Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania, 2Stefan S. automated Ion Chef System, then sequenced in Ion 
S5  with Ion Nicolau Institute of Virology, The Romanian Academy, Bucharest, 520Chip according tothemanufacturer’sinstructions. Romania, 3Center of Internal Medicine-Nephrology, Fundeni Clinical Results: After variant ﬁltering, 37 variants were described: 12 Institute,Bucharest, Romania. Pathogenic or Likely Pathogenic variants were identiﬁed in 6 differentgenes(5inATM,2inBRCA2,2inT
P53 andoneforBRCA1, Introduction:Radicalprostatectomyisaneffectivetreatmentfor FANCM and PALB2, each). All but one, are actionable genes localized prostate carcinoma. Although the majority experience according with Clinical guidelines. 25 Unclassiﬁed Variants were longtermdiseasecontrol,asigniﬁcantpercentageofpatientswill identiﬁed.TwovariantsinATM and FANCMare novel. develop biochemical recurrence after surgery. The aim of this Conclusions:Our35-genesPanelallowedustodetectclinically study was to determine if biochemical recurrent disease can be actionable variants in a third of the families studied. They would related to a particular risk genotype. Therefore, a single genetic have gone overlooked if we only have screened BRCAs genes. variant was selected in order to determine if genotyping could Moreover,theworkﬂowusedincreasedthenumberofUV,butin provideinformation regarding theoutcomeof prostatecancer. anaffordable way tofurther research. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 399 Funding: Regional Government of Castilla-and-Leon to the 1Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of University of Valladolid (Spain). Regional Health Management of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Biomedical Research Institute of Castilla-and-Leon: GR
S1547 /A/17and GR
S175 /A/18 Salamanca (IBSAL), University Hospital of Salamanca-USAL-CSIC, M. Infante: None. E. Lastra: None. L.E. Abella: None. N. Salamanca, Spain, 3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Martínez:None. L.Hernández: None.M. Durán: None. Cancer (IBMCC), University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain, 4Medical Oncology Service, University Hospital of Salamanca-IBSAL, Salamanca,Spain. 
P12 .093.A Molecular characterization of two new cell lines derivedfrom headandneck squamous cell carcinomas Background: Genome-wide somatic DNA copy number aberration (CNA) proﬁling is a widely established approach to characterize Nerea Gestoso-Uzal1,2,3, Juan Luis García2,3, Javier Fernández- chromosomalaberrationsincancergenomes.Evidenceisemerging Mateos1,2, Sonia Carretero-Domínguez1,2,3, María Ovejero-Sán- thatstructuralchromosomalaberrationsrepresentabiologicallyand chez1,2,3, Pedro Blanco Pérez2,4, Luis Angel Corchete2,3, Ana Belén clinicallyrelevantclassofalterationsinmanycancertypesincluding Herrero1,2,3, Juan Jesús Cruz-Hernández1,2,5, Rogelio González- solid tumours. The aim of this work was to identify the CNA- Sarmiento1,2,3 associatedbreakpointsinalargeseriesofheadandnecksquamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) and correlate them with clinical data. 1Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Patientsandmethods:Tumoursamplesfrom177patientsincluded Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Biomedical Research Institute of intheclinicaltrialTTCC-2007-01wereused.Tumourswereanalysed Salamanca (IBSAL), University Hospital of Salamanca-USAL-CSIC, by OncoScan® assay and the computational method “GeneBreak” Salamanca, Spain, 3Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology of that identiﬁes chromosomal breakpoint locations using DNA copy Cancer (IBMCC), University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain, number proﬁles. Statistical analysis was performed to associate the 4Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University Hospital of Sala- genes showing recurrent breakpoints with clinical and molecular manca-IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain, 5Medical Oncology Service, Uni- data,consideringstatisticallysigniﬁcantp<0,05. versityHospital of Salamanca-IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain. Results:Wedetected10688breakpointsassociatedwithgenes. We selected 14 genes that were recurrently affected by breaks Background: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) (FDR<0.1) and showed break points in at least 25% of cases. includes epithelial malignancies of the oral cavity, pharynx and Breakpoint in SHANK2 gene was associated with T
P53  mutations. larynx.MostoftheHNSCCcelllinesreporteddonotcomefromthe Tumours located in hypopharynx and larynx were linked with primary tumour site and its molecular characterization is not break in CSMD1 gene. Histologically non-keratinizing tumours available.Theaimofthisworkwastocharacterizenewcelllinesthat wereassociatedwithbreaksinRG
S7 andEMCNgenes.Numberof canbeusedasmodelstostudyHNSCCfromdifferentlocations. focalchangeswasassociatedwithSHANK2break.Overallsurvival Patients and methods: Two cell lines were newly established (OS)was inversely correlated with thebreak inLR
P1 Bgene. fromoropharyngeal(32816)andlaryngeal(32860)squamouscell Conclusion: We conclude that CNA-associated chromosomal carcinomas.Theircharacterizationwasdonebykaryotyping,FISH breaks within genes represent a highly prevalent and clinically analysis, array-based comparative genomic hybridization and relevant subsetof somaticvariants (SVs) inHNSCC. microarray expressionproﬁling. Thisproject was fundedby FIS-FEDER: PI18/01476. Results:KaryotypingofthecellslinesbyGbandingrevealeda N. Gestoso-Uzal: None. J.L. García: None. J. Fernández- moderate hyperploidy for both cell lines. Also, we identiﬁed an Mateos: None. L.A. Corchete: None. S. Carretero-Domínguez: unbalanced translocation between chromosomes 3 and 12 in None. P. García-Vallés: None. A. Martel-Martel: None. E. Del 32816, conﬁrmed by FISH. Loss of heterozygosity and copy Barco:None.A.B.Herrero:None.R.González-Sarmiento:None. number variations were detected. Both cell lines share certain J.J.Cruz-Hernández: None. alterations associated with HNSCC, but we also found small regions speciﬁcally altered for each line. The study of the transcriptome showed 1313 genes with differential expression 
P12 .095.CCombinatorialeffectofsorafenib,valproicacidand between32816and32860.Accordingtop-valueweselectedthe metforminin ahepatic cancercells model most signiﬁcantly dysregulated genes as candidates for study: NEDD4L,KLK6,GALNT14 and SPARC. Edgar X. Franco-Juárez1, Alain Jesús Aguirre-Vázquez1, Vianey Conclusions: We established two new cell lines derived from Gonzalez-Villasana2, Mario Bermúdez-de León1 differentHNSCClocationsthataregoodmodelstostudythistype ofcancer.Thecharacterizationofthelinesshowedsomecommon 1Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Monterrey, Mexico, 2Universi- alterationsalreadydescribedinHNSCC,aswellasdifferencesthat dadAutonoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Mexico. canbe dueto thelocationof theprimary tumours. Thisproject was fundedby FIS-FEDER: PI18/01476. Introduction: Hepatocellular carcinoma is the main type of N. Gestoso-Uzal: None. J.L. García: None. J. Fernández- hepaticcancer,whichhasthesixthandfourthplaceinincidence Mateos: None. S. Carretero-Domínguez: None. M. Ovejero- andmortalityworldwide,respectively.Chemotherapeuticscheme Sánchez:None.P.BlancoPérez:None.L.A.Corchete:None.A.B. of treatment extends the overall survival in three months. Herrero: None. J.J. Cruz-Hernández: None. R. González- Moreover, latest research with drugs used in diseases other than Sarmiento:None. cancer,likethehistonedeacetylasesinhibitorsorrapalogues,have been described with in vitro anticancer properties. These drugs have shown synergistic effects towards apoptosis induction and 
P12 .094.B Characterization of recurrent breakpoints in head inhibition of angiogenesis, migration and proliferation in combi- andneck cancer nation with the approved chemotherapeutic drug, sorafenib. In this study we evaluated the viability, migration and angiogenic Nerea Gestoso-Uzal1,2,3, Juan Luis García2,3, Javier Fernández- potential using different combinations of sorafenib, valproic acid Mateos1,2, Luis Angel Corchete2,3, Sonia Carretero-Domínguez1,2,3, (VPA)and metforminain hepatic cancermodel. PaulaGarcía-Vallés1,2,3,AbelMartel-Martel1,2,EdelDelBarco2,4,Ana Materials and Methods: HepG2 cells were treated with Belen Herrero1,2,3, Rogelio González-Sarmiento1,2,3, Juan Jesús Cruz- different concentrations and combinations of sorafenib, VPA and Hernández1,2,4 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 400 metformin for 48 h to evaluate viability with alamar blue assay, Conclusions: In our clinical setting, the diagnostic yield of migrationwithawoundhealingassays,andangiogenicpotential HBOCbymultigenepaneltestingwas12%.Thismultigenetesting byRT-qPCRassayswithTaqmanprobesspanningonVEGF-Aand strategy allows the identiﬁcation of individuals carrying multiple GAPDHgenes. pathogenic variants and the diagnosis of multiple hereditary Results: Treatment with sorafenib, VPA or metformin shown cancersyndromes, resulting in adirect beneﬁt forthefamilies. viabilityreductioninadose-dependentfashionandthecombina- M. Potrony: None. B. Morales-Romero: None. L. Moreno: tionof2μMsorafenib,4mMVPAand10mMmetforminshowed None.B.Pastor:None.J.L.Villanueva-Cañas:None.C.Badenas: strongest synergistic effect in the viability reduction. This None. I. Aragón Manrique: None. P. Carrasco Salas: None. P. concentration also reduced migration but not VEGF-A gene Aguilera:None.L.Ferrer-Mileo:None.L.Gaba:None.B.Adamo: expressioncompared tocontrol. None.J.Oriola:None.A.Sánchez:None.J.A.Puig-Butillé:None. Conclusion:Combinationofsorafenib,VPAandmetforminhas synergistic effects towards reduction of viability and migration potential, in contrast with angiogenic potential, where levels of 
P12 .097.A Unravelling genetic predisposition to familial VEGF-Atranscript remain with no changes. breastandovariancancer:identiﬁcationofnewsusceptibility E.X. Franco-Juárez: None. A.J. Aguirre-Vázquez: None. V. genesby case-control study Gonzalez-Villasana: None.M. Bermúdez-de León:None. Alejandro Moles-Fernández1, Ester Aguado-Flor1, Cristina Zamar- reño1, María Antolín2, Sandra Bonache1, Adrià López-Fernández1, 
P12 .096.D Multigene panel testing for hereditary breast and LídiaFeliubadaló3,4,JoséFernández-Navarro1,ConxiLázaro3,4,Judith ovarian cancer syndrome: experience from a tertiary referral Balmaña1, OrlandDíez1,2, SaraGutiérrez-Enríquez1 hospital 1Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain, 2Vall Miriam Potrony1,2, Blai Morales-Romero1, Lorena Moreno3, Belen d’Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain, 3Catalan Institute of Pastor4, Jose L. Villanueva-Cañas5, Celia Badenas1,2, Isabel Aragón Oncology(ICO),Institutd’InvestigacióBiomédicadeBellvitge(IDIBELL), Manrique6, Pilar Carrasco Salas7, Paula Aguilera8,2, Laura Ferrer- Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 4Centro de Investigación Mileo4, Lydia Gaba4, Barbara Adamo4, Josep Oriola1, Aurora BiomédicaenReddeCáncer(CIBERONC),Madrid,Spain. Sánchez1,Joan A.Puig-Butillé5,2 Multiplehigh-andmoderate-riskgenesforbreastandovariancancer 1BiochemicalandMolecularGeneticsDepartment,HospitalClínicde havebeenidentiﬁed.However,ahighpercentageofaffectedpatients Barcelona, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación andfamiliesstillremaingeneticallyundiagnosed.Althoughdifferent BiomédicaenRedenEnfermedadesRaras,InstitutodeSaludCarlos candidate genes have been identiﬁed, the evidence for association III, Barcelona, Spain, 3Gastroenterology Department, Hospital Clínic withthediseaseisstillinsufﬁcientandthemissingheritabilityremains de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 4Medical Oncology Department, unexplained.Our goalwastoidentifyandvalidate candidate genes Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 5Molecular Biology forhereditarybreastandovariancancer(HBOC)usingacase-control CORE, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 6Genetic studyapproach.Theexomesof25patientsfrom13high-riskHBOC Counseling Unit, Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Juan familiesaswellas63candidategenesof192HBOCpatientswithout Ramón Jiménez, Huelva, Spain, 7Genetic Unit, Clinical Analysis pathogenicvariantsidentiﬁedweresequenced.Aftervariantannota- Department,HospitalJuanRamónJiménez,Huelva,Spain,8Derma- tion,weselectedgenesinwhichdeleteriousvariantswereidentiﬁed tologyDepartment,HospitalClínicdeBarcelona,IDIBAPS,Barcelona, according to their function and the segregation of the variant in Spain. affectedrelatives.RRB
P8 ,TPMT,MACROD1,DM
C1 ,RALGDS,andTD
P2  wereidentiﬁedascandidategenesforanalysisinacase-controlstudy. Introduction:Theimplementationofnext-generationsequencing ED
C4  and RECQ
L5  genes were included from collaborators’ publica- in the clinical setting has increased the diagnostic yield of tions. DNA samples were collected from 500 healthy women and Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Syndrome (HBOC). We 1500patientswithHBOCwithoutdetectedpathogenicvariantsinrisk aimedto assess thespectrum ofgermline pathogenic variants in genes.Todate,aftermassivelyampliconsequencing,annotationand cancer susceptibility genes among Spanish patients selected for interpretation,ahigherfrequencyofdeleteriousvariantsisobserved personal and/or family history of breast, ovarian, prostate, in RECQ
L5  in 250 patients compared to 50 controls and gnomAd melanoma,and otherBRCA-associated cancers. database.TheseﬁrstresultssuggestRECQ
L5 asapotentialriskgene Materials and Methods: The study cohort comprised 1381 associatedwithHBOC,andtheneedtoincreasecase-controlscohorts Spanish patients referred to Hospital Clinic of Barcelona for toverifythisassociation.Funding:CarlosIIIInstitutefundedbyFEDER- genetic testing. The HBOC genes BRCA1, BRCA2, PALB2, ATM, a way to build Europe- [PI16/01218-PI19/01303;PI19/00553;PI16/ CHEK2, BRI
P1 , RAD51C, RAD51D, T
P53 , and PTEN, and the Lynch 00563 and CIBERONC]; AECC; ERAPERMED2019-215 support and Syndrome genes MLH1, MSH2, and MSH6 were analyzed by GovernmentofCatalonia[2017SGR1282and2017SGR496]. commercial Hereditary Cancer Panels (Illumina) and an in-house A. Moles-Fernández: None. E. Aguado-Flor: None. C. Zamar- bioinformatics pipeline. reño: None. M. Antolín: None. S. Bonache: None. A. López- Results: We detected that 9% and 3% of patients carried Fernández: None. L. Feliubadaló: None. J. Fernández-Navarro: pathogenic variants in high-risk and moderate-risk genes, None. C. Lázaro: None. J. Balmaña: None. O. Díez: None. S. respectively. Three patients carried pathogenic variants in Lynch Gutiérrez-Enríquez: None. Syndromegenesandfourpatientscarriedpathogenicvariantsin two genes. Pathogenic variants prevalence was 12% in breast/ ovarian cancer patients, 15% in prostate cancer, 10% in 
P12 .098.B Massively parallel functional analysis of missense melanoma, and 6.6% in healthy individuals with a family history variants in the breast/ovarian cancer gene RAD51C of BRCA-associated cancers. Individuals with two different HBOC tumors (OR=6.29, p<0.001) or family history of ovarian cancer Gemma Montalban, Larissa Milano, Amélie Rodrigue, Yan Cou- (OR=2.08, p=0.009) were more likely to carry deleterious lombe,SylvieDesjardins,MartineDumont,CharlesJoly-Beauparlant, variantsinhigh-risk genes. PennySoucy, Jean-Yves Masson,Jacques Simard EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 401 CHUde Québec -Université Laval, Québec, QC,Canada. positivityrateof11.6%thatwefoundinourcohortareinlinewith observations fromtheliterature. Introduction: A notable proportion of hereditary breast/ovarian K. Segers: None. M. Kulisic: None. B. Flies: None. C. Müller: cancer cases are due to inherited pathogenic mutations in DNA None.P.Theis:None.K.Dahan:None.B.Klink:None.D.Stieber: repair genes. The application of multi-gene panels for genetic None. testinghas ledto an increased detection ofvariants of unknown clinical signiﬁcance (VUS). Our work aims to implement a massively parallel functional approach to study the molecular 
P12 .100.DVariantandgeneprioritizationstrategytoidentify impactofallpossiblemissensesubstitutionsintheRAD51Cgene. new hereditary colorectal cancergenes by NGS Materials and Methods: A RAD51C mutagenesis library was designedandclonedintoaninducible,recombinase-sitecontain- Mariona Terradas, Isabel Quintana, Noemí González-Abuín, Pilar ing vector. In parallel, HeLa “landing pad” cells were generated, Mur,Matilde Navarro, JoanBrunet, Gabriel Capellá, LauraValle ensuringtherecombinationofonevariantpercell.Asubsetofthe librarywasintegratedandcellsweretreatedwithPARPinhibitors. HereditaryCancerProgram,CatalanInstituteofOncology;Oncobell Genomic DNA from pre-treated and post-treated samples was Program,IDIBELL, Hospitalet deLlobregat, Spain. collectedand sequenced ina MiSeqinstrument. Results: To date, ~160 RAD51C missense variants have been Introduction:Inthepasttwodecades,multiplestudieshavebeen screened. All variants were detected in the pre-treated pool at a undertakentoelucidatethegeneticcauseofthepredispositionto similar abundance, conﬁrming their optimal integration and expres- mismatch repair (MMR)-proﬁcient nonpolyposis colorectal cancer sion.Variantreadcountswerereducedforthepositivecontrolsafter (CRC);ﬁrstbygenome-widelinkageanalysisand,nowadays,using treatment, conﬁrming the synthetic lethal effect of olaparib when next-generation sequencing techniques. Nevertheless, a relevant RAD51C is not functional. Experimental replicates and calculation of proportion of familial CRC cases remain unexplained. Here we loss-of-functionscoresusingotherDNAdamagingagentsisongoing. propose a fast and focused variant selection strategy to facilitate Conclusions: We have developed a large-scale functional theidentiﬁcationofMMR-proﬁcientnonpolyposisCRCpredispos- approach to measure the impact of all missense variants in the inggenes. RAD51CgeneusingPARPinhibitorssensitivityasareadout.Future Material and methods: Peripheral blood DNA from 25 work will focus on validating our data with published works, individuals belonging to 16 families affected with MMR- clinical databases and complementary assays. The ﬁnal goal is to proﬁcient nonpolyposis CRC was used to perform WES. After improve the interpretation of RAD51C VUS and accelerate their variantcallingwithGATK,rare(populationMAF<0.1%),predicted clinicaltranslation. pathogenic variants in genes involved in pathways or processes G. Montalban: None. L. Milano: None. A. Rodrigue: None. Y. relevant in colorectal carcinogenesis and hereditary cancer, Coulombe: None. S. Desjardins: None. M. Dumont: None. C. including DNA Repair, Wnt and TGF-beta pathways (n=2957 Joly-Beauparlant: None. P. Soucy: None. J. Masson: None. J. genes), were selected. Gene prioritization was then performed Simard:None. consideringdatafromCanVar(datafrom̴1000familial/early-onset CRCpatients),IntOGen(informationoncancerdrivergenes),GTEx 
P12 .099.C Hereditary Cancer Predisposition Testing in (geneexpression), OMIMand Pubmed. Luxembourg Results: Based on the ﬁltering and variant prioritization strategies mentioned above, 24 candidate CRC-predisposing Karin Segers1,2, Marizela Kulisic1, Ben Flies1, Christian Müller1, genes were selected. Validation in further >1000 unrelated Philippe Theis1, Karin Dahan1,Barbara Klink1,Daniel Stieber1 familial/early-onset and sporadic CRC patients is currently being performedand ﬁnalresults will be presentedat themeeting. 1National Center of Genetics (NCG), Laboratoire National de Santé Conclusions:Thevariantprioritizationstrategyfollowedfacilitated (LNS), Dudelange, Luxembourg, 2Human Genetics Department CHU the identiﬁcation of variants in relevant genes, being particularly SartTilman, Liège, Belgium. usefulincaseswhereonly one (ortwo)affected member(s)is(are) sequenced; thus showing a higher performance than processes At our center, we provide oncogenetic consultations and appliedinthepasttosimilarstudies. moleculargenetictestingforhereditarytumordiseasesforwhole Grants: SAF2016-80888-R; CB16/12/00234; Sara Borrell; PERIS Luxembourg. Here we report on the outcome of one year SLT002/16/0037; SLT002/16/00164; Fundación Olga Torres; hereditary cancer predisposition testing using the Hereditary INVE
S19022 TERR; MSCA. Cancer Solution developed by Soﬁa Genetics, an NGS-based M. Terradas: None. I. Quintana: None. N. González-Abuín: capture panel optimized for the detection of SNVs, InDels, and None. P. Mur: None. M. Navarro: None. J. Brunet: None. G. CNVs in 26 genes. In 2020, we analyzed blood samples of Capellá:None. L.Valle: None. altogether 276 patients. We identiﬁed pathogenic germline variants in 32 of 276 samples (positivity rate of 11.6%). Of those, 74.5% were identiﬁed in patients with a referral for suspicion of 
P12 .101.A Hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell carci- Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer syndrome (HBOC). Fifty noma:identiﬁcation and characterization of a new Spanish percent of pathogenic variants affected the BRCA1 and BRCA2 foundermutation inthe FH gene genes.Themajorityofnon-BRCAvariantswerefoundinATMand in MMR genes. The following cancer types had the highest EstelaDámaso1,AnaBeatrizSánchezHeras1,YoelEsteve1,VirginiaDíez positivity rates: triple negative breast cancer (23.3%), ovarian Obrero2,María-IsabelCastillejo1,AdelaCastillejo1,Jose-LuisSoto1 cancer (26.5%), and prostate cancer (40%). As expected, patients with triple negative breast cancer and ovarian cancer had 1Hospital General Universitario Elche, Elche, Spain, 2Institut d`Inves- pathogenic variants in BRCA1, BRCA2, ATM and RAD51. Interest- tigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, ingly,weidentiﬁedapathogenicgermlinevariantinfourofeleven Barcelona, Spain. patients with a personal history of prostate cancer. The affected genes--PALB2,ATM,MSH2andPM
S2 --arenotknowntobehigh Hereditary-leiomyomatosis-renal-cell-carcinoma (HLRCC) syn- prostatecancerriskgenes.Distributionofaffectedgenesandthe dromeis arare autosomal dominant disease causedby germline EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 402 mutationsinthefumaratehydratase(FH)gene.Ahighlyrecurrent Conclusions: The strategy of reﬂex gene-panel tumor testing HLRCC-associatedmissensevariant[FH:c.1118A>G;p.(Asn373Ser)] enablestheidentiﬁcationofclinicallyactionablegermlinevariants wasobservedinapparentlyunrelatedfamiliesfromthesoutheast in a signiﬁcantly higher proportion of ovarian cancer patients, of Spain. Our goal was to establish the founder effect of this which may be a valuable information in patients with advanced alterationand characterized its associated clinical phenotype. disease that have run out of approved therapeutic options. Materials-Methods: Haplotype construction was performed Furthermore, this approach increases the chance to make using 37 ﬂanking FH polymorphic markers covering ≈14 Mb. available genetic counseling, presymptomatic genetic testing, Twenty unrelated carriers were selected for genotyping. Clinical andgynecologicalcancerprophylaxistofemalerelativeswhoturn data from a recently published large Spanish cohort of HLRCC out tobe healthycarriers ofdeleterious germlinevariants. (PMID_33167498)wasusedtoassesstheclinicalphenotypeofthis A.Barbosa:None.P.Pinto:None.A.Peixoto:None.J.Guerra: founder mutation and to look for genotype-phenotype associa- None. C. Pinto: None. C. Santos: None. M. Pinheiro: None. C. tions, including 104 individuals with this mutation and 93 Escudeiro: None. C. Bartosch: None. J. Silva: None. M. R. individualscarrying otherFHpathogenic variants. Teixeira:None. Results: Haplotype analysis conﬁrmed that families shared a common haplotype (25/37 markers) between 0.61-0.82 Mb (≈1.40- 1.89cM).TheseresultsstronglysuggestthatrecurrentFH:c.1118A>G 
P12 .103.CGeneticcausesofsarcomasdevelopment inyoung variant observed in apparently unrelated individuals was indeed patients inherited from a founder ancestor. Patients carrying the founder mutation were diagnosed of cutaneous leiomyomas (CLM) 65%, NathaliadeAngelisdeCarvalho,KarinaMirandaSantiago,Joyce uterine leiomyomas (ULM) 98%, renal cysts (RCy) 42% and renal MariaLisboaMaia,MariaNirvanadaCruzFormiga,DiogoCordeiro cancer(RC)10%.Inaddition,wefoundhigherfrequenciesofCLMs, de Queiroz Soares, Daniele Paixão Pereira, Felipe D’Almeida Costa, ULMsandRCys,thanthosewithloss-of-functionvariants(p<0.005). DirceMaria Carraro, Giovana Tardin Torrezan Conclusions: Identiﬁcation and characterization of founder mutationsprovideaccurateandspeciﬁcinformationregardingtheir ACCamargoCancer Center,Sao Paulo,Brazil. penetrance and expressivity. Individuals carrying FH: c.1118A>G variant had lower frequency of RC than previously published in Introduction:Althoughgeneticscreeningofcancerpredisposing HLRCC, and higher frequencies of CLMs, ULMs and RCys when genes (CPGs) is currently well established for the most common comparedtoHLRCC-individualswithloss-of-functionvariants. hereditary tumors, there are a number of rare tumors, including Funding:UGP-19-428 (SEOM). sarcomas, which may be associated with hereditary cancer E.Dámaso:None.A.SánchezHeras:None.Y.Esteve:None.V. syndromes but whose pathogenic variants frequencies in these Díez Obrero: None. M. Castillejo: None. A. Castillejo: None. J. genesarestillunknown.Aims:Deﬁnethefrequencyofpathogenic Soto: None. rare germline variants in known CPGs in young patients (<40 years) with sarcomas; evaluate the molecular characteristics of 
P12 .102.B Gene panel tumor testing in ovarian cancer thesetumors and searchfornew associated genes. patients signiﬁcantly increases the yield of clinically action- Methods: We evaluated 156 young patients diagnosed with able germline variants beyond BRCA1/BRCA2 sarcomaforthepresenceofgermlinevariantsusingacustom113 gene panel and Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS). Analyzes of Ana Barbosa1, Pedro Pinto1, Ana Peixoto1, Joana Guerra1, Carla proteinexpressionandevaluationoflossofheterozygosity(LOH) Pinto1,CatarinaSantos1,ManuelaPinheiro1,CarlaEscudeiro1,Carla in tumor tissue are being performed in cases with pathogenic Bartosch1,João Silva1, ManuelR.Teixeira1,2 variants. Results: Pathogenic/likely pathogenic (P/LP) variants were 1PortugueseOncologyInstituteofPorto(IPO-Porto),Porto,Portugal, detected in 31/156 patients (19.8%). These P/LP variants were 2Institute of Biomedical Sciences Abel Salazar (ICBAS), University of found in genes previously associated with the risk of developing Porto,Portugal,Porto, Portugal. sarcomas (CHEK2, EXT1, EXT2, RB1 and T
P53 ), but also in genes wherethatriskisstillunknown(ERC
C2 /3,TS
C2 ,RAD50,FANCMand Introduction: Since the approval of PARP inhibitors for the others) or is emerging (PALB2, BRCA2). LOH was evaluated in 8 treatment of high-grade serous ovarian cancer that BRCA1 and tumors so far: two presented LOH for variants in EXT1 and MITF BRCA2 genetic testing have therapeutic implications (germline and6showednoevidenceofLOHforvariantsinERC
C4 ,RB1,NF1, and somatic variants) in addition to cancer risk assessment and PALB2, CHEK2andMUTYH. should be offered to these patients at diagnosis irrespective of Conclusion:OurresultshighlightahighrateofP/LPvariantsin family history. However, variants in other genes besides BRCA1 CPGs in young Brazilian patients with sarcomas (19.8%) and we and BRCA2 are associated with ovarian cancer predisposition, expecttocollaboratewiththedeﬁnitionofeffectiveandadequate which would be missed by a genetic testing aimed only at screeningstrategies forthese patients. indicationforPARPinhibitortreatment.Inthisstudy,weaimedto FAPESP:2018/06269-5 evaluate the yield of clinically actionable germline variants using N.A. de Carvalho: None. K.M. Santiago: None. J.M.L. Maia: next-generation sequencing customized panel. None.M.N.C.Formiga:None.D.C.Q.Soares:None.D.P.Pereira: Material and methods: Next generation sequencing was None. F.D. Costa: None. D.M. Carraro: None. G.T. Torrezan: performed in formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded tumor samples None. obtainedfrom96patientsdiagnosedwithovariancancerusinga customized panel containing ten genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, BRI
P1 , MLH1,MSH2,MSH6,PM
S2 , RAD51C,RAD51D and T
P53 ). 
P12 .104.D Global-screening array for the assessment of Results: In addition to 13.7% of deleterious germline BRCA1/ homologous recombination deﬁciency (HRD) in epithelial BRCA2 carriers, we identiﬁed 7.4% additional patients with ovariancancer pathogenic germline variants in other genes predisposing for ovariancancer, namelyRAD51C,RAD51D andMSH6,representing Simon Schnaiter1, Esther Schamschula1, Heidelinde Fiegl2, Daniel 35%ofallpathogenic germline variants. Reimer2,Alain Zeimet2, Johannes Zschocke1, Katharina Wimmer1 EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 403 1InstitutfürHumangenetik,Med.Univ.Innsbruck,Innsbruck,Austria, according to Blascko’s lines, who developed a left paratesticular 2DepartmentfürGynäkologieundGeburtshilfe,Med.Univ.Innsbruck, embryonicrhabdomyosarcomaat18monthsofage.WeusedNGS Innsbruck, Austria. custom panel approach to scan the lesions-associated genomic eventsusingblood,buccalbrush,ﬁbroblastandrhabdomyosarcoma Introduction: Homologous recombination deﬁciency (HRD), tissue samples. Parallel sequencing analysis identiﬁed a somatic caused in 40-50% of cases by BRCA1/2 pathogenic variants pathogenic gain-of-function variant (c.37G>C, p.Gly13Arg) in the (PVs), is a predictive biomarker for the response of different HRASgeneinbothepidermalnevusandtumortissues.Variantreads tumorstoPARP-inhibitortherapyand,inepithelialovariancancer accountedfor33%and92%oftotalreadsinthenevusandtumor, (EOC),alsoconsideredpredictiveforsensitivityofplatinum-based respectively,supportingtheoccurrenceofasecondeventinvolving therapies. Currently, HRD-positivity is mainly assessed by a the gene speciﬁcally arisingin the latter. The variant was absent in commercial diagnostic tests with limited transparency of the theDNAextractedfromtheproband’speripheralbloodandbuccal underlying algorithms. brush, indicating its postzygotic origin. DNA methylation proﬁling Methods: To determine HRD positivity we examined genome- microarrayanalysiswasperformedontheproband’stumorsample, wide copy number variation and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) by providing a proﬁle that was consistent with the signature genotyping62ovariancancers,22ofwhichcontainedaBRCA1/2 characterizing embryonic rhabdomyosarcomas. The analysis also PV,usingtheGlobalScreeningArray(GSA-24v3.0+Multi-Disease documentedacopynumbergainofChromosome11,pointingouta Content; Illumina). Data analysis was performed with Illumina structuralgenomicrearrangementresultingintheduplicationofthe GenomeStudio1.6.3(GenotypingAnalysisModule)andNxClinical mutatedHRASalleleasasecondhitinthetumor.Somaticactivating (Biodiscovery, SNP-FASST2-Segmentation Algorithmus) software. mutationsoftheHRASgeneareassociatedwithvariousneoplasms. For quantiﬁcation of HRD a LOH-score based on Swisher et al Ourﬁndingsareinlinewithpreviouslycollecteddatadocumenting (2017;PMID:27908594)andanAneuploidyNormalizedTelomeric the occurrence of gene dosage events involving activating HRAS Imbalance-Score (ANTI-Score, unpublished) weredeﬁned. allelesincancersoccurringinpatientswithCostellosyndrome.This Results/Conclusion: The group of BRCA1/2-PV samples had diagnosiswillpermitadoptionofscreeningmeasuresinthepatient signiﬁcantlyhighermedianscoresthanBRCA1/2-wildtypesamples todetectmalignanttransformationatearlystages. (LOH-score:28vs.3.6;ANTI-score:11vs.1.5).LOH-scoreandANTI- R.Zuntini:None.L.Pedace:None.E.Miele:None.S.G.Carafﬁ: scores were concordant (R2= 0.89). Based on the lowest scores None.S.Gardini:None.E.Ficarelli:None.R.Pampena:None.S. determinedintheBRCA1/2-PVsamples,wedeﬁnedthethreshold Pizzi:None.F.Radio:None.A.Barone:None.S.Piana:None.P. for HRD-positivity as LOH-score ≥14 and/or ANTI-score ≥6. 8/40 Bertolini: None. D. Corradi: None. M. Marinelli: None. A. BRCA1/2-wildtype samples had scores above the thresholds and Motolese: None. M. Tartaglia:None. L.Garavelli: None. 32 below. To determine whether the formers are true HRD positives we are currently testing these samples for other (epi-) genetic aberrations explaining their potential HRD-positivity. 
P12 .106.C Germline Wnt pathway alterations predispose to Rapid and reliable HRD analysis is possible with a standard colorectal hyperplastic polyposis genotyping arrayon DNA fromnative tumor tissue. Wecurrently evaluateDNA extracted fromFFPE-tissue. Isabel Quintana1, Mariona Terradas1, Pilar Mur1,2, Gemma Aiza1, S.Schnaiter: None. E.Schamschula: None. H.Fiegl: None. D. Matilde Navarro1,2, Virginia Piñol3, Joan Brunet1,2,4, Gabriel Reimer:None.A.Zeimet:None.J.Zschocke:None.K.Wimmer: Capellá1,2, LauraValle1,2 None. 1HereditaryCancerProgram,CatalanInstituteofOncology;Oncobell Program, IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Centro de 
P12 .105.A Sequential somatic HRAS mutation and gene Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), Madrid, duplication in a patient with epidermal nevus and rhabdo- Spain, 3Gastroenterology Unit, Hospital Universitario de Girona Dr myosarcoma: further evidence of a two-hit pathogenetic Josep Trueta, Girona, Spain, 4Catalan Institute of Oncology, IDIBGi, mechanism contributing to oncogenic transformation Girona,Spain. Roberta Zuntini1, Lucia Pedace2, Evelina Miele2, Stefano Giuseppe Extensive efforts have been made to elucidate the inherited Carafﬁ1, Stefano Gardini3, Elena Ficarelli3, Riccardo Pampena3, factors that predispose to serrated/hyperplastic polyposis (SP), a Simone Pizzi4, Francesca Clementina Radio4, Angelica Barone5, heterogeneousdiseaseassociatedwithasigniﬁcantpersonaland Simonetta Piana6, Patrizia Bertolini5, Domenico Corradi7, Maria familial CRC risk. Germline RNF43 pathogenic variants have been Marinelli1,Alberico Motolese3, MarcoTartaglia4,8, Livia Garavelli1,8 causally linked to the disease, explaining <2% of SP cases. We aimed to identify additional inherited risk factors by performing 1MedicalGeneticsUnit,AUSLIRCCSArcispedaleSantaMariaNuova, exome sequencing in 44 non-related SP cases followed by a ReggioEmilia,Italy,2DepartmentofPediatricHematology/Oncology pathway-centeredanalysis.Weselectedrare,predicteddamaging andCellularandGeneTherapy,OspedalePediatricoBambinoGesù, variants affecting genes involved in pathways or processes IRCCS,Roma,Italy,3DermatologyUnit,AziendaUSL,IRCCS,Arcispe- relevant in colorectal carcinogenesis and hereditary cancer, dale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 4Genetics and Rare including DNA repair, TGF-β and Wnt pathways. Mutational Diseases Research Division, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, burdenanalysiscomparingthefrequencyofpredictedpathogenic IRCCS,Roma,Italy,5PediatricHematologyOncologyUnit,University variants in cases vs. controls (gnomAD, non-Finnish Europeans) Hospital of Parma, Parma, Italy, 6Pathology Unit, Deptartment of identiﬁed signiﬁcant differences in Wnt pathway components: Oncology and Advanced Technologies, Arcispedale S Maria Nuova- allele frequency in cases was 50% (44/88), compared to 36% IRCCS, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 7Unit of Pathology, Department of (42,649/118,190) in controls (p=0.007). Differences were not Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Parma, Italy, 8, These observed when analyzing DNA repair and TGF-β pathway authors jointlycoordinated thiswork, Italy. components. Focused on the genes involved in Wnt signaling, we identiﬁed 44 rare, predicted damaging variants in 34 Wnt- Wereporta7year-oldchildwithdiffuseepidermalneviontheface related genes. Of the 34 genes, 11 harbored signiﬁcantly more and head, right upper limb, thorax, left lower limb, arranged predicted damaging variants in SP cases than in controls: EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 404 CCD
C88 C, DKK1, DKK4, HECW1, ITPR3, PSMB3, PSM
C3 , PSM
E4 , Yucel Erbilgin1, Ozden Hatirnaz Ng2, Sinem Firtina3, Fulya RNF43,TL
E4 andWNT9B.Analysisofthe11candidateSPgenesis Kucukcankurt1,ZeynepKarakaş4,TirajeCelkan5,SemaAylanGelen6, currently being performed in further 1̴ 00 SP patients, 1̴ 00 KhusanKhodzhaev1, Müge Sayitoglu1 adenomatous polyposis patients and ̴1000 familial/early-onset CRC patients, with the aim of validating our ﬁndings in an 1Aziz Sancar Institute of Experimental Medicine, Istanbul University, independent SP series and conﬁrming that the enrichment of Istanbul,Turkey,2AcibademMehmetAliAydinlarUniversity,Istanbul, Wnt-related variants is exclusive of SP or, at most, of polyposis Turkey, 3Istinye University, Faculty of Art and Science, Istanbul, phenotypes. Turkey, 4Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, I.Quintana:None.M.Terradas:None.P.Mur:None.G.Aiza: Turkey,5IstanbulUniversity-CerrahpasaFacultyofMedicine,Istanbul, None. M. Navarro: None. V. Piñol: None. J. Brunet: None. G. Turkey, 6Faculty of Medicine, Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey. Capellá:None. L.Valle: None. Introduction: The lymphoid enhancer factor 1 (LEF1) is a DNA- binding transcription factor that functions in the Wnt signaling 
P12 .109.AmicroRNAproﬁle inBulgarian laryngeal squamous pathway.IncreasedLEF1activityisassociatedwithprogressionof cellcarcinoma severaltypesofcancerincludingleukemia.Here,weinvestigated LEF1 isoforms expression and genomic variations in acute GerganaStancheva1,SilvaKyurkchiyan1,VeronikaPetkova1,Julian lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Rangachev2, Vanyo Mitev1, Diana Popova2, Radka Kaneva1, Todor Methods: LEF1 isoforms expression was evaluated by quanti- Popov2 tativereal-timePCRin87newlydiagnosedchildhoodALLpatients and controls. Moreover, Western blot analysis was performed for 1MolecularMedicineCenter,DepartmentofChemistryandBiochem- detectionofLEF1expressionandthehotspotregionofLEF1was istry,MU-Soﬁa,Soﬁa,Bulgaria,2DepartmentofEar-NoseandThroat, screenedby deep sequencing. MU-Soﬁa; Clinic of Ear- Nose and Throat, UMHAT "Tsarica Yoanna- Results: The LEF1 mRNA expression of B-cell ALL patients was ISUL",Soﬁa,Bulgaria. higher than the controls (LEF1-totalp=0.011, LEF1-long p= 0.026). Moreover, B-ALL samples showing higher total LEF1 Introduction: Laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) is an expression had signiﬁcantly shorter relapse-free survival (p= aggressive malignancy with poor prognosis, which despite 0.008) and overall survival (p=0.011). Although, full length LEF1 modern treatment protocols, novel molecular markers are expressionwassimilartothecontrolsinT-ALL,50%(n=15)ofthe required to improve survival. The aim of our study was to reveal ALL patients had increased full-length LEF1 protein expression. the speciﬁc miRNAs signature in advanced LSCC as well as to Imbalancebetweenshortandfull-lengthLEF1isoformsmaylead investigate some of discovered hypoxic miRNAs in a validation to cell survival in ALL. Beside the LEF1 activation, LEF1 gene groupofsamples.Materialandmethod:Expressionof2549miRNA variations wererarely observed inour cohort. in fresh-frozen tumour materials and adjacent normal tissue was Conclusion: The results indicate that the Wnt pathway may performed in 12 patients, diagnosed with advanced LSCC during have a pathogenic function in a group of ALL patients and high primary laryngectomy, by SurePrint G3 Human MiRNA r21 LEF1-total expression might be a marker for shorter relapse free Microarray Kit, 8×60K(Agilent Technologies). The normalization survivaltime inB-cell ALL. of the data was performed by GeneSpringGX software. The Y. Erbilgin: None. O. Hatirnaz Ng: None. S. Firtina: None. F. expressionofmiR-21-3pandmiR-210-3pwasevaluatedinagroup Kucukcankurt: None. Z. Karakaş: None. T. Celkan: None. S. of 38 fresh frozen laryngeal tumor samples and adjacent normal AylanGelen: None. K. Khodzhaev: None. M.Sayitoglu: None. tissue by qRT-PCR analysis. Statistical analysis was performed usingSPSS 17.0. Resultsanddiscussion:Expressionlevelsof2549miRNAwere 
P12 .111.C Implementation of an integral strategy for perso- assessed,242ofthoseweresigniﬁcantlydysregulated(cut-off>2.0 nalized medicine based on Duplex Sequencing and cell-free (FC);BH-FDR<0.05).Aftertheanalysis,asubsetof14miRNAswas DNA selected -8 upregulated (miR-18a-5p, miR-181a-5p, miR-181b-5p, miR-21-3p, miR-24-3p, miR-93-5p, miR-210-3p, miR-1246) and 6 PauRodriguez-Sodupe1,KarolinaHenrykaCzarnecka1,LuisAlberto downregulated(miR-140a-3p,miR-145-5p,miR-148a-5p,miR-204- Pérez-Jurado2,Lluis Armengol Dulcet1, JairoRodriguez Lumbiarres1 5p, miR-497, miR-874-3p). miR-21-3p and miR-210-3p revealed to beanimportantandrelatedtopathwaysoftumourangiogenesis 1qGenomics, Esplugues del Llobregat, Spain, 2Universitat Pompeu and hypoxia so they were investigated in a validation group of Fabra,Barcelona, Spain. patients. It was conﬁrmed increased expression levels of miR-21- 3p and miR-210-3p, respectively 78.94% and 39.47%. The ROC Ultrasensitive and speciﬁc methods for rare allele detection are curve analysis showed that miR-21-3p can distinguish laryngeal essential in order to fully exploit the potential of identifying a tumor from normal tissue (AUC=0.816; 95% CI:0.720-0.917;p= single genetic variant that might be poorly represented in a 1.76.10-6) with sensitivity of 84.2% and speciﬁcity of 73.7% biological mixture (liquid biopsy, for instance). In this context, whereas miR-210-3p did not. Acknowledgements: Grants:13/12/ severalmethods havebeen described that useunique molecular 20.12.2017/NSF;D01-285/17.12.2019/MES/Bulgaria. identiﬁers(UMIs)toanalyticallyremoveNGSerrors.Amongthem, G.Stancheva:None.S.Kyurkchiyan:None.V.Petkova:None. DuplexSequencing(DS)hasbeenshowntobehighly-effectiveby J. Rangachev: None. V. Mitev: None. D. Popova: None. R. leveraging the sequence complementarity of the two DNA Kaneva:None. T.Popov: None. strands. Nevertheless, the described DS adaptors’ production methodologyleadstoalowligationefﬁciency,whichhinderstheir capabilitytoworkwithlimitedamountsofinputDNAsuchascell- 
P12 .110.BPrognosticevidenceofLEF1isoformsinchildhood free DNA (cfDNA) samples. Moreover, DS needs a much higher acutelymphoblastic leukemia sequencing depth and is a costly approach together with large panels. EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2022)30:88–608Abstractsfromthe54thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics(ESHG)Conference 405 Here,wehavedevisedanefﬁcientandcost-effectiveapproach Conclusion: Combination of curcumin and silymarin at low to produce DS adapters with a double-stranded 12 bp UMI that concentrationsreducedtheproliferationofhumanliverandcolon canbeusedwithcfDNAinputsaslowas2ng.This,togetherwith cancer cells compared to normal, their apoptotic effect was thecapacitytoefﬁcientlyproducemixturesofenrichmentprobes conﬁrmedby In-silico analysis. thatareabletodeliververyhighon-targetmetrics,arekeytoany A.M.Osman:None.S.A.Loutfy:None.H.S.Hosny:None.L.S. personalized medicine strategy. Within the pediatric oncology Fouda: None. M.E. AbdelRaouf: None. A.M. Ageez: None. S. context, promising preliminary results demonstrate that we can Kchouk:None. L.Hegazy:None. detectcirculatingtumorDNA(ctDNA)atfrequenciesdowntoone inone thousand withextremeaccuracy. In summary, we are laying the foundations for a robust 
P12 .113.A Extended gene panel testing in lobular breast personalized medicine solution that will allow an extremely cancer accurate detection of ultra rare mutations by using small custom panels that may be strictly personalized in different clinical Elke M. van Veen1,2, D Gareth Evans1,2,3,4, Elaine F. Harkness3,5, settings. Helen J. Byers1,2, Jamie M. Ellingford1,2, Emma R. Woodward1,2, P. Rodriguez-Sodupe: A. Employment (full or part-time); NaomiL.Bowers2,AndrewJ.Wallace2,SachaJ.Howell3,4,6,Anthony Signiﬁcant; qGenomics. K. Czarnecka: A. Employment (full or Howell3,4, FionaLalloo2, William G. Newman1,2, MiriamJ. Smith1,2 part-time); Signiﬁcant; qGenomics. L. Pérez-Jurado: A. Employ- ment(fullorpart-time);Modest;qGenomics.L.ArmengolDulcet: 1Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of Biological A. Employment (full or part-time); Signiﬁcant; qGenomics. J. Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Rodriguez Lumbiarres: A. Employment (full or part-time); Manchester,ManchesterAcademicHealthScienceCentre,Manchester, Signiﬁcant; qGenomics. UnitedKingdom, 2ManchesterCentre forGenomicMedicine, Manche- ster University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Prevent Breast Cancer Centre, Wythenshawe Hospital 
P12 .112.B combinatorial interactions of curcumin and sily- Manchester Universities Foundation Trust, Manchester, United King- marin against proliferation of human liver and colon cancer dom, 4Manchester Breast Centre, The Christie NHS Foundation Trust, cells (in-silico andin-vitro study) Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Division of Informatics, Imaging and Data Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of AhmedMamdouhOsman1,SamahAlyLoutfy1,2,HabebaS.Hosny3, Manchester,ManchesterAcademicHealthScienceCentre,Manchester, LinaSMFouda3,MahmoudERAbdelRaouf3,AmrM.Ageez4,Sophia United Kingdom, 6Division of Cancer Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Kchouk5, LameesHegazy5 MedicineandHealth,UniversityofManchester,ManchesterAcademic HealthScienceCentre,Manchester,UnitedKingdom. 1National Cancer Institute, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt, 2Nano- technologyResearchCenter(NTRC),BritishUniversityinEgypt(BUE), Purpose: Lobular breast cancer (LBC) accounts for ~15% of breast Cairo, Egypt, 3Faculty of Biotechnology, Modern Science and Arts cancer. Here, we studied the frequency of pathogenic germline (MSA) University, 6th of October city., Cairo, Egypt, 4Faculty of variants (PGVs) in an extended panel of genes in women affected Biotechnology, Modern Science and Arts (MSA) University, 6th of withLBC. October city, Cairo, Egypt, 5Center for Clinical Pharmacology, Methods:302womenwithLBCand1567withoutbreastcancer Washington University School of Medicine and St. Louis College of were tested for BRCA1/2 PGVs. A subset of 134 LBC affected Pharmacy,St. Louis, MO, MO, USA. women who tested negative for BRCA1/2 PGVs underwent extended screening, including: ATM, CDH1, CHEK2, NBN, PALB2, Background/Aim: Newer approaches are required to control PTEN,RAD50, RAD51D and T
P53 . human cancers, natural materials derived from plants offer Results: 35 PGVs were identiﬁed in the group with LBC, of tremendousadvantages.Curcuminpuriﬁedformofturmericherb which22wereinBRCA1/2.TenactionablePGVswereidentiﬁedin and silymarin which derived from Silybum marianum demon- additionalgenes(4xATM,1xCDH1,1xCHEK2,2xPALB2and2xT
P53 ). strated anticancer activities. The synergistic effect of both Overall, PGVs in four genes conferred a signiﬁcant increased risk phytochemicals has been reported against proliferation of some for LBC. Odds ratios (ORs) were: BRCA1: OR=13.17 (95%CI: 2.83- human cancers, therefore, we aimed at evaluating the cytotoxic 66.38; P=0.0017), BRCA2: OR=10.33 (95%CI: 4.58-23.95; P< effectofbothmaterialsseparatelyandwhenmixedtoobtainthe 0.0001),T
P53 :OR=75.74(95%CI:8.72-1098;P=0.0020)andATM: maximumsynergistic effect. OR=8.01 (95%CI: 2.52-29.92; P=0.0053). We did not detect an Methods: I
C50 s for curcumin, silymarin were determined on increasedrisk ofLBC for PALB2, CDH1or CHEK2. human liver cancer (huh7) and on human colon cancer cells Conclusion: The overall PGV detection rate was 11.59%, with (HCT116) compared to normal cells (Vero), and when mixed similarratesofBRCA1/2(7.28%)PGVsasforotheractionablePGVs togetherusingMTT.Natureoftherelationshipwasdeterminedby (7.46%),indicatingabeneﬁtforextendedpanelgenetictestingin CompuSyn software. Sensitization of cells was performed to LBC. We also report a previously unrecognised association of determine which one exerted its cytotoxic effect. Molecular pathogenic variantsinATM with LBC. docking for materials in BC
L2  and EGFR was performed using Funding: The genotyping work was supported by the the Glide package within Schrodinger’s Maestro interface to Biomedical Research Centre (IS-BRC-1215-20007) and Prevent elucidatetheir anticancer activities. Breast Cancer(GA19-002). Results:I
