54
Abstracts
PL01. Garrod´s inborn errors of metabolism: Lessons from a 
defective heme pathway
P. Martásek ;  
Department of Pediatrics and Center of Applied Genomics, First School of 
Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
Heme, iron-containing tetrapyrrole, is indispensable for life. It is utilized 
by a whole host of proteins involved in numerous cellular processes such as oxygen transport (hemoglobin), respiration (cytochrome oxidase), vascular homeostasis (nitric oxide synthases), detoxiﬁcation (cytochromes P450), and cell death (cytochrome 
c). Heme is produced 
in the mitochondrion by a complex cellular machinery comprising eight enzymes that are evolutionarily conserved from bacteria to humans. Mutations in genes encoding the heme biosynthetic pathway enzymes lead to diseases broadly classifed as porphyrias. In the past two decades these genes have been cloned and the disease-causing mutations have been identiﬁed. We have established a web site (www.porphyhria_europe.com) that details the efforts to diagnose and treat porphyrias. In this presentation I will focus on the antepenultimate step of this pathway in which deﬁciency of coproporphyrinogen oxidase (CPO) activity results in hereditary coproporphyria (HCP) - an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by accute attacks (severe abdominal pain, neuropsychiatric symptoms, and / or skin lesions). First, we cloned the cDNA and characterized the gene (3q11.2) encoding CPO. Next, we puriﬁed, crystallized, and determined the novel structure of CPO to gain insights into the structural basis of HCP. Thus, mutations primarily destablize molecular interactions that are critical for activity. Since prokaryotes employ two different gene products to mediate CPO activity, we hypothesized that an ortholog of the second bacterial gene may be found in humans. A bioinformatics approach validated this prediction and led to the discovery of a gene called RSAD1 (radical S-adenosyl methionine domain 1). Interestingly, RSAD1’s mitochondrial function is not redundant with CPO. We have since discovered that it is involved in cardiovascular development. Therefore, a detailed study of heme biosythetic pathway enzymes have not only resulting in molecular insights into porphyrias, but have provided leads regarding 
mitochondrial homeostasis mechanisms.
PL02. Garrod´s inborn errors of metabolism: Lessons from 
homocystinuria
V. Kozich ;  
Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles University, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.
Four decades ago homocystinuria due to cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) has been described as a typical inborn error of metabolism partially resembling the Marfan syndrome. As extremely high concentrations of plasma homocysteine result in vascular pathology, mild hyperhomocysteinemia has been subsequently considered a risk factor for arteriosclerosis and other complex diseases. In the past ten years our Prague team had an opportunity to explore selected facets of CBS deﬁciency, some of which are discussed below.The CBS gene-located at chromosome 21- spans 28 kbp and contains numerous non-pathogenic variants with population speciﬁc frequencies. Analyzes of more than 550 patient-derived CBS alleles worldwide revealed over 130 different pathogenic mutations, which are deposited at http://www.uchsc.edu/cbs. As pathogenic mechanisms in CBS deﬁciency are only partially understood a substantial part of our work was aimed at exploring molecular consequences of selected mutants: i/we observed that some - but not all- RNA molecules carrying premature termination codons are unstable owing to the rapid degradation by nonsense-mediated decay; ii/our current work is focused on studying misfolding of mutants as a common mechanism in homocystinuria. Homocystinuria is traditionally perceived as a rare disease with worldwide incidence of 1:355,000. However, recent studies based on detecting heterozygotes for selected mutations in anonymous newborn samples suggest that CBS deﬁciency may be considerably more common throughout Europe with expected birth prevalence of homozygotes ranging between 1:6,400 in Norway and 
1:15,000 in the Czech Republic.Intense research of CBS deﬁciency- a supposedly rare inborn error of sulfur metabolism- enriched the knowledge of human biology in at least two areas: i/it identiﬁed homocysteine as a possible risk factor for common complex diseases such as arteriosclerosis; ii/ epidemiological studies suggests that the common practice may in fact identify only a fraction of individuals affected by this diseases, which calls for re-
evaluation of newborn screening programs.
PL03. TEL/AML1 fusion gene in childhood acute lymphoblastic 
leukaemia
J. Trka ;  
CLIP – Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, Department of Paediatric 
Haematology and Oncology, 2nd Medical School, Charles University, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) is the most common malignancy 
in childhood. The cryptic translocation t(12;21), discovered only in 1994 and resulting in TEL/AML1 chimaeric gene, is the single most frequent non-random chromosomal aberration in childhood ALL (~25%). It was shown to be speciﬁcally related to the leukaemias with the onset in the pre-school age. Twin and backtracking studies showed that TEL/AML1-positive leukaemias originate in utero and the TEL/AML1 fusion was later identiﬁed as a ﬁrst leukaemogenic event. The analysis of the non-translocated TEL allele deletions proposed this aberration as an ultimate leukaemia-triggering hit. Both partner genes of the fusion are important for the development and maintenance of normal haematopoiesis. The TEL part of the fusion protein contains domains interacting with mSin3A, N-CoR and HDAC-3 corepressors. Consequently, TEL/AML1 is supposed to negatively regulate the expression of genes that, under normal conditions, are transactivated by AML1, thus affecting the differentiation during haematopoiesis by chromatin remodelling via association with histone deacetylases (HDAC). Indeed, TEL/AML1-positive cells show dose-dependent arrest in proliferation and also the maturation drift after treatment with 
HDAC inhibitors, thus supporting this hypothesis.The prognosis of children with TEL/AML1-positive ALL tends to be better-than-average, however, relapses occur also in this subgroup in approximately 15% of children. Since the response to the initial treatment is the main predictor of outcome in childhood ALL, quantitative detection of TEL/AML1 transcript in early phases of treatment can serve as suitable tool for the risk stratiﬁcation of patients. Detectable minimal residual disease predicts relapse in children with TEL/AML1-positive ALL both on front-line treatment and after stem cell transplantation. These ﬁndings have important clinical implications for the determination of prognosis and potentially also for the treatment of 25% of children with ALL. They also represent the progress in the ﬁeld 
of paediatric acute leukaemias during the past decade.
PL04. New Mouse Model of Human Aneuploidy syndrome
J. Forejt1, R. Blatný1, M. Ort2, T. Vacik1, J. Bures2;  
1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 
Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Physiology, Academy of Sciences of the 
Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.
Aneuploidy syndromes, such as Down syndrome, represent complex developmental disorders with the known cause, but with largely unknown mechanisms that link the triplicated chromosome with abnormal developmental/physiological traits. The hypothesis of dosage-sensitive genes explains the abnormal phenotype as a speciﬁc consequence of elevated expression of a subset of triplicated genes, while the ampliﬁed developmental instability hypothesis posits a rather non-speciﬁc effect of a large number of overexpressed genes. One way to distinguish between these two hypotheses is to compare, at the phenotype and gene expression levels, unrelated partial trisomies that differ in size as well as in the number of triplicated genes. The existing mouse models are not sufﬁcient in this respect because they triplicate overlapping subsets of orthologs to human chromosome 21. In this study we investigated an independent mouse model of segmental trisomy, Ts43H, which triplicates 30 Mb of proximal chromosome 17, encompassing >300 known genes of ENSEMB 29 database. This trisomy shows a limited overlap with Ts65Dn segmental trisomy (40-70 genes) and no overlap with other mouse models. The Ts43H mice exhibited spatial learning deﬁcits in Morris Water Maze similar to those observed in Ts65Dn. qRT PCR of the brain expression of 20 genes inside the trisomic interval and of 12 genes lying outside on Chr17 Plenary Lectures55
revealed 1.2-fold average increase of mRNA levels of triplicated genes 
and 0.9-fold average downregulation of genes beyond the border of trisomy. We propose that systemic comparison of gene expression levels with global phenotype (phenome) data between unrelated segmental trisomies, such as Ts65Dn and Ts43H, will help to disclose the affected functional networks leading from the triplicated sequences 
to the complex developmental anomalies.Vacík, T., Ort, M., Gregorová, S., Strnad, P., Blatný, R. Conte, N., Bradley, A., Bureš, J., Forejt. J.: Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A
.102:4500-
4505  2005.
PL05. Pharmacogenetics of drug metabolising enzymes. 
Implications for a safer and more efﬁcient drug therapy
M. Ingelman-Sundberg ;  
Division of Molecular Toxicology, IMM, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Swe -
den.
Drug treatment is in many cases ineffective. Non responders and 
patients suffering fram adverse drug reactions is estimated to cost the US society 100 billion USD and over 100,000 deaths per year. Many drug transporters are polymorphic. In addition, the majority of phase I and phase II dependent drug metabolism is carried out by polymorphic enzymes which can cause abolished, quantitatively or qualitatively altered or enhanced drug metabolism. Stable duplication, multiduplication or ampliﬁcation of active genes, most likely in response to dietary components that have resulted in a selection of alleles with multiple non-inducible genes, has been described. Several examples exist where subjects carrying certain alleles suffer from a lack of drug efﬁcacy due to ultrarapid metabolism caused by multiple genes or by induction of gene expression, or, alternatively, adverse effects from the drug treatment due to the presence of defective alleles. The evolutionary aspect of the genetic polymorphism in these genes includes genetic drift but also selection because of environmental stress.The information about the role of polymorphic drug transporters and drug receptors for efﬁciency of drug therapy is scarcer, although promising examples are seen in drug treatment of e.g. asthma. In addition, certain polymorphic genes can be used as markers for optimisation of the drug therapy. It is likely that predictive genotyping in the future will be of beneﬁt in 20-30 % of drug treatment and thereby allows for prevention of causalities as a cause of ADRs and thus improves the health for a signiﬁcant fraction of the patients. Recently several important clinical examples have been given. In the lecture an overview of the current status in the ﬁeld will be given.
PL06. The future of pharmacogenetics
A. Roses ;  
Genetics Research, GlaxoSmithkline, Research Triangle Park, NC, United 
States.
No abstract received.
PL07. Advances in human genetics: what beneﬁts for the 
patients?
A. Munnich ;  
Hopital des Enfants Malades Necker, Paris, France.
The recent advances of human genetics have raised considerable hopes for a better future of patients with genetic diseases. Yet, apart from early diagnosis and prevention, have disease gene identiﬁcation improved their condition and changed their life ? In fact, while gene therapy has riveted most of attention/investments with hitherto limited impact on their condition, it appears that understanding the disease mechanisms has occasionally fostered spectacular improvement in their lifespan and quality of life. This includes 1) the dietary management of recently identiﬁed metabolic diseases (CDGIb), 2) their occasional responsivensess to vitamins, cofactors (quinones, carnitine) and lacking compounds (creatine-responsive mental retardation), 3) organ transplantation (kidney, liver, heart, bone marrow) and neuro-electrostimulation (torsion dystonia, DYT1), 4) protein engineering (hemophilia, diabetes, growth hormone deﬁciency, congenital adenal hyperplasia), 5) enzyme replacement therapy (Gaucher, Fabry, Pompe, Hurler disease), and, 6) conventional pharmacology. Indeed, elucidating the molecular bases of diseases has led to successful re-expression of fetal hemoglobin by hydroxyurea for thalassemias and sickle cell anemia and improvement of periodic familial fever by colchicine, to the continuation of translation by gentamycin in cystic ﬁbrosis and hopefully to correction of abnormal splicing by antisense RNA in Duchenne muscular dystrophy (at least in vitro). Similarly, it is now possible 1) to clear a toxic compound (benzoate in urea cycle diseases, cysteamin in cystinosis), 2) to lock an impaired pathway (NTBC in tyrosinemia type 1), 3) to activate a pathway (ﬁbrates in carnitine palmityl transferase 2 deﬁciency), 4) to inhibit a function (bisphophonates in osteogenesis imperfecta), 5) to replace a function (melatonin in Smith Magenis syndrome), or to protect a targeted function (idebenone in free-radical induced oxphos injury in Friedreich ataxia. Based on this variety of procedures, it is clear that understanding the exact disease mechanism can help devising original therapeutic approaches to ﬁght genetic diseases. One should not ignore any of these approaches and one should not put "all his eggs in one basket". Finally, while genotyping is not presently required for diagnosing a genetic disease, identifying the disease causing mutation (splicing, nonsense..) might soon become mandatory to devise "à la 
carte" therapeutic strategies.
PL08. Asthma
J. Kere ;  
Dep.of Biosciences at Novum & Clinical Research Center, Karolinska Institutet, 
Huddinge, Sweden.
No abstract received.
PL09. Genes and mechanisms in type 1 diabetes
J. Todd ;  
Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inﬂam -
mation Laboratory, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
At least 90% of cases of type 1 diabetes who are absolutely insulin-dependent since diagnosis suffer from an autoimmune destruction of the insulin-producing beta cells of the pancreas. There are four conﬁrmed susceptibility genes in type 1 diabetes, the HLA class II complex, insulin (
INS), CTLA4 and PTPN22, with evidence for a ﬁfth, 
mapping to the CD25 region (Vella, A et al Am J Hum Genet, 76, Epub, 
2005). The known functions of these four genes, and their unequivocal association with the disease, indicates that a major pathway in beta-cell destruction is the breakdown in immune tolerance to preproinsulin. Further gene discovery will identify what other pathways are involved 
(Wang, W et al Nat Rev Genet, 6, 109-118, 2995). For example, 
we have evidence that the HLA class I gene, 
HLA-B, in associated 
independently of the class II genes, which would substantiate the assumed direct involvement of CD8 cytotoxic T cells in disease and could perhaps implicate natural killer cell activity. Knowledge of gene association has also begun to help in the ﬁrst steps towards sub-classiﬁcation of type 1 diabetes: we have found that 11% of paediatric cases of type 1 diabetes have autoantibodies to the autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD)-associated antigen, thyroid peroxidase, and that the T cell immunoregulatory CTLA-4 gene acts almost exclusively in this smaller subgroup of patients. These results indicate that AITD-complicated type 1 diabetes is different in an aetiological way to the isolated form of the disease, in which the effects of the soluble form of CTLA-4 (Ueda, H et al 
Nature 423, 506-511, 2003) are greatly reduced, 
perhaps by the action in these cases of other, as yet undiscovered genes, that bypass or mask the negative T cell signalling component of the AITD-complicated sub-class of the disease.
PL10. Genetics of Crohn disease, an archetypal inﬂammatory 
barrier disease
S. Schreiber ;  
Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology, University Hospital Schleswig Holstein, 
Kiel, Germany.
Chronic inﬂammatory disorders such as Crohn disease, atopic eczema, 
asthma, and psoriasis are triggered by hitherto unknown environmental factors, acting on the background of some polygenic susceptibility. The share the common theme of inﬂammation of barrier organs. This includes similarities in clinical manifestations, a chronic relapsing character of disease and a striking overlap in disease pathophysiology. Recent technological advances have allowed to unravel the genetic etiology of these and other complex diseases. Using Crohn disease as an example, it will be shown how the discovery of susceptibility Plenary Lectures56
genes furthers our understanding of the disease mechanisms involved 
and, ultimately, will give rise to new therapeutic developments. The long-term goal of such endeavors is to develop targeted prophylactic strategies that most likely will concern the molecular interaction on the mucosal surface between the genome and the microbial metagenome 
of a patient.
PL11. Identifying the genes encoding longevity
R. G. J. Westendorp1, P. E. Slagboom2;  
1Department of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Leiden University Medical Hospital, 
Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Department of Molecular epidemiology, Leiden Uni -
versity Medical Hospital, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Each species has its own characteristic life span but within a species individual life spans vary widely. This variation is in part the result of an individual ability to avoid or cope with internal and external damage. For example, single point mutations in the insulin-signaling pathway of C. elegans  can lower the rate of aging and lengthen life 
span up to nearly ﬁve times as long as the wild type worms. These experimental data suggest that a major part of the age-related changes are under coordinated genetic control. Twin studies have shown that approximately 25% in the variation of human lifespan is explained by 
genetic factors.The search into the genetic loci that explain the inter-individual differences in human longevity has peculiar characteristics. By virtue of the extremeness of the phenotype, linkage studies in extended families are cumbersome as members are often too young to determine their phenotypic status, whereas others whose status is beyond doubt have already deceased. An ordinary association study also generates problems as the long-lived cases originate from a birth cohort that has never been deﬁned and of which the controls have already deceased. When a younger control group is used for comparison a particular form of bias is introduced as these have been selected for fertility over two generations. Evolutionary theory predicts that a genetic predisposition for fertility has a cost at survival. Haplotypes that associate with fertility 
and a shorter life are thus, by design, increased in the control group.Two alternative approaches are presented: (1) investigating linkage in an affected sib-pair design, and (2) assessment of association in a classic prospective follow-up design. Recent studies have demonstrated a clustering of extreme longevity within families and localized a locus on chromosome 4. These data will be discussed in the light of the outcomes of the Leiden Longevity Study that also uses linkage in an affected sib pair design. Finally, data will be presented on genetic variation in the evolutionary conserved insulin-signaling pathway from the prospective Leiden 85-plus study.
PL12. IGF signalling and aging
M. Holzenberger ;  
Inserm U515, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France.
No abstract received.
PL13. Genetics of early and accelerated ageing syndromes
N. Levy ;  
Inserm U491, Faculté de Médecine, Marseille, France.
Segmental aging disorders have been caracterized at the clinical level for many years. Most of them were shown to be due to alterations of DNA repair/replication/recombination/transcription mechanisms. Among these latter, autosomal recessive Werner syndrome, caused by mutations in RecQl2 encoding a DNA helicase, has been widely explored and is the better characterized at the clinical molecular and cellular level. More recently, a distinct set of premature and accelerated segmental aging syndromes has been uncovered, due to Lamins A/C defects. Lamins A/C are ubiquitous nuclear proteins belonging to the intermediate ﬁlament family; mutations in 
LMNA,  
encoding them, are responsible of different allelic disorders, known as "laminopathies", varying in severity from mild to lifespan-reducing/neonatal lethal syndromes. Lamin-related segmental progeroid syndromes include, increasing in severity: lipodystrophy-atypical Werner syndromes (LIRLLC, WS), Mandibuloacral Dysplasia (MAD), Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria syndrome (HGPS) and Restrictive Dermopathy (RD). These syndromes are characterized by alterations of Lamins A/C expression levels, function and distribution which can either be primary, due to 
LMNA pathogenic sequence variations, or, in MAD and RD, secondary, due to defects in ZMPSTE24, encoding a 
metalloproteinase involved in processing of Lamin A precursors. While 
LMNA mutations responsible of most laminopathies, as well as of the less severe segmental progeroid syndromes LIRLLC, atypical WS, MAD, affect both Lamins A and C, 
LMNA mutations responsible of the 
more severe HGPS and RD, speciﬁcally affect Lamin A. HGPS and RD have recently been shown to be due to intranuclear accumulation of unprocessed, truncated or wild type, prelamin A, respectively due to intrinsic lack of key post-translational processing sites or lack of ZMPSTE24. These accumulated precursors seem to have dominant negative effects on residual wild type proteins' function. Furthermore, it has been recently showed in vitro and in vivo, that a reduction of the 
amounts of prelamin A produced by the cells can spectacularly reverse the cellular pathological phenotype. These observations constitute indeed an exciting hope towards targeted molecular therapeutic 
strategies in patients.
S01. Systems biology in cardiovascular disease
F. Cambien ;  
INSERM U525, University Paris VI 'Pierre et Marie Curie', Paris, France.
No abstract received.
S02. Bioinformatics of signalling pathways
R. Eils ;  
Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center 
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
No abstract received.
S03. Integral Membrane Proteins and Visual Defects
J. B. C. Findlay ;  
The LIGHT Laboratories, School of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University 
of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom.
The visual system in humans is prone to arguably the widest range of 
human genetic defects leading to different levels of visual impairment. Examples include various forms of colour blindness and retinitis pigmentosa. Several proteins are subject to mutational change. This presentation will focus on two most heavily implicated in the machinery of light capture-rhodopsin and peripherin, both integral membrane 
proteins in the discs of the rod cell.There are four visual opsins in the human genome, each of which combines with 11-cis retinal to generate the pigments responsible for colour vision and vision under conditions of dim light. Colour blindness results from the absence of colour pigment genes whilst mutations in rhodopsin give rise to a number of different conditions some of which result in blindness. The 3-D structure of rhodopsin is known: thus this presentation will provide structural explanations as to how mutational changes could impair the function of the protein and consequently give rise to the clinical effect.The role of peripherin is less clear but mutations in this protein give rise to the degeneration of the retina. Topographical mapping using glycosylation has established that the protein probably consists of 4 transmembrane regions and a large loop which is located in the intradiscal (intralumenal) space of the retina discs. Most of the clinically meaningful mutations in peripherin are located in this loop region. A probable role for the protein in causing the invagination and ﬂattening of the plasma membrane to give the characteristic discs of photoreceptor cells has been demonstrated. Natural mutations in the protein are unable to produce this effect, due to improper folding, processing or protein assembly.Finally, the mechanism by which retinol is taken up by the visual system and how retinol binding protein dysfunction seriously perturb 
vision will be outlined.
S04. Lessons from rare disorders: The Bardet-Biedl syndrome
P. L. Beales ;  
Institute of Child Health & Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, 
United Kingdom.
The Bardet-Biedl syndrome is an uncommon disorder, traditionally viewed as having a recessive pattern of inheritance. First described some 140 years ago, signiﬁcant advances in our understanding Concurrent Symposia57
of its pathogenesis have recently come to light. In the early 1990s, 
heterogeneity became apparent, both hindering and informing progress in the ﬁeld. Although, all eight mapped loci have been identiﬁed, they do not yet account for all cases (in fact around 55% of families do not have identiﬁed mutations). Segregation analyses of some BBS families have also identiﬁed a departure from Mendelian inheritance requiring us to view this and perhaps other disorders in a new manner. Most recently however, our studies have indicated that BBS is fundamentally a disorder of primary cilia function which might account for the retinal degeneration and renal tubular abnormalities characteristic of the syndrome. I will summarise the wealth of evidence that has brought us to these conclusions and highlight some of the recent discoveries 
within this rare disorder which continue to enlighten us.
S05. Nephronophthisis
C. Antignac ;  
Inserm U574 and Department of Genetics, Paris 5 University, Necker Hospital, 
Paris, France.
Nephronophthisis (NPHP) is an autosomal recessive, genetically heterogeneous, chronic nephropathy characterized by renal interstitial ﬁbrosis and medullary cyst formation. It represents the most common genetic cause of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in children and adolescent. Three distinct forms of the disease (juvenile, adolescent and infantile) have been described depending on the age of onset of ESRD. Extra-renal anomalies have been described in association with juvenile NPHP, namely retinal dystrophy [Senior-Løken syndrome (SLSN)] in 10-20% of the patients, ocular motor apraxia (Cogan 
syndrome), bone and liver anomalies.Five genes have been identiﬁed so far, 
NPHP1 and NPHP4 in juvenile 
nephronophthisis, NPHP3 in the adolescent form, IQCB1/NPHP5 in 
SLSN and INVS encodin inversin in the infantile form. All except the 
inversin gene are novel genes. They encode nephrocystins, widely expressed cytosolic proteins containing multiple protein-interacting domains. They are all, at least partially, localized to the primary cilia in renal tubular cells, as virtually all products of human renal cystic genes. However, at least for inversin and nephrocystin-4, they also show various other sub-cellular localizations, which altogether suggests that nephrocystins are implicated in various cell processes, such as cytoskeleton organization, cell cycle regulation, adhesion processes and cilia function. Furthermore, nephrocystin-5 is expressed in the connecting cilia of photoreceptors and interacts with RPGR (retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator), thereby suggesting a common 
mechanism for retinal and kidney defects.
S06. Molecular basis of congenital nephrotic syndrome
M. Zenker ;  
Institute of Human Genetics, University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Ger -
many.
Congenital nephrotic syndrome (CNS) is a heterogeneous disorder caused by loss of glomerular permselectivity. It presents with proteinuria and edema at or even before birth. The common target of different pathogenetic mechanisms leading to CNS are the podocytes. These cells cover the outer surface of the glomerular capillaries and, by their interdigitating foot processes, form highly specialized intercellular contacts, the ﬁltration slits representing the intrinsic protein barrier. CNS is mostly genetic. In the more common, 
isolated CNS, autosomal-
recessively inherited mutations in the genes encoding nephrin (NPHS1; OMIM 602716) and podocin (NPHS2; OMIM 604766), proteins expressed speciﬁcally at the slit diaphragm, can be frequently found. Certain mutations in the transcription factor 
WT1 (OMIM 607102), which 
is speciﬁcally expressed in podocytes, are associated with early-onset nephrosis and due to diffuse mesangial sclerosis (DMS) and Denys-Drash syndrome in males (OMIM 194080). Still, the mechanisms of 
aberrant WT1 signalling that lead to defective podocyte differentiation 
are incompletely understood. The genetic basis of other syndromic  
forms of CNS is even less known. We recently reported that loss-of-function mutations of 
LAMB2 lead to Pierson syndrome (OMIM 609049) 
characterized by CNS with DMS and distinct ocular anomalies. Laminin β2, a component of the glomerular basement membrane and certain other basal laminae, is believed to convey critical extracellular matrix signals for the differentiation and attachment of podocytes. Thereby, molecules at the cell-matrix interface and intracellular transducers of matrix-derived signals came in the focus as potential candidates for other syndromic forms of CNS of which disorders associated with cerebral maldevelopment (e.g. Galloway-Mowat syndrome; OMIM 251300) represent an important subgroup. Additionally, animal models have implicated several genes (
neph1 , itga3 , actn4 , cd2ap; arhgdia ) in 
the pathogenesis of nephrotic disorders. Future progress in that ﬁeld will probably lead to a substitution of the conventional morphological classiﬁcation of CNS by a new, etiology-based nosology.
S07. Mitochondrial dysfunction in neurodegeneration
A. Suomalainen-Wartiovaara , A. Hakonen, P. Luoma, S. Heiskanen, K. Pel -
tola, H. Tyynismaa;  
Programme of Neurosciences and Department of Neurology, Biomedicum Hel -
sinki, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Mechanisms involved in mitochondrial DNA maintenance have recently turned out to be important causes of neurodegeneration. The proteins involved are nuclear-encoded, targeted to the mitochondria, and they participate in mtDNA replication and possibly repair. Their defects are often associated with secondary mutagenesis of mitochondrial DNA, or mtDNA depletion. Polymerase gamma, POLG, is the replicative DNA polymerase of the mitochondria. The mutations of its catalytic alpha subunit are the most common cause of familial progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO). However, recent data suggest that the clinical phenotypes resulting from POLG defects are exceptionally variant. We recently reported that dominantly transmitted parkinsonism can be caused by POLG mutations. The age-of-onset of the symptoms varied between families from early to late onset. A severe infantile multisystemic disorder, Alpers disease, was also found to be caused by recessive POLG mutations. Furthermore, we identiﬁed POLG spacer domain mutations underlying a spino-cerebellar ataxia phenotype, which has turned out to be the most common adult ataxia-type in Finland, and possibly also in the Western and Northern Europe. Recessive mutations of the helicase-partner of POLG in the mtDNA replication, called Twinkle, also may result in a spinocerebellar ataxia disease, manifesting already in the early childhood. In the SCA group, these mitochondrial SCAs mostly resemble Freidreich's ataxia. The data of ours and collagues indicate that mitochondrial DNA maintenance mechanisms are of crucial importance for the well-being of neurons, and their defects can result in late-onset neurodegeneration, as well as in acute infantile encephalopathies. Our recently developed transgenic 
mouse model may give clues to the pathogenetic mechanisms.
S08. The assembly of OXPHOS complexes in health and disease
L. Nijtmans ;  
Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Univer -
sity Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Mitochondria are considered to be ‘the powerhouse’ of the cell. In this organelle, the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system confers the energy released by the breakdown of organic nutrients to produce ATP, the free energy currency of the cell
. The mammalian OXPHOS 
system comprises ﬁve large membrane complexes, which are believed to be organised in higher order assemblies, supercomplexes. The complexes are built from numerous polypeptide subunits and prosthetic groups and their biosynthesis is a complicated process that requires both nuclear and mitochondrial gene products. Many genetic defects can occur that cause improper function of the OXPHOS system and a decrease in ATP production, but also can lead to an increase of toxic 
reactive oxygen species.Although many mutations have been found to be associated with a large spectrum of clinical phenotypes, they cover only a fraction of the proteins involved in the biogenesis of mitochondria. Still a number of known and unknown OXPHOS defects remain to be explained at the genetic-molecular level. It is very likely that many new mutations in 
mitochondrial proteins will be detected in the future.Our studies into the biogenesis of the OXPHOS system have revealed that defects can occur at various stages. In addition the use of functional complementation studies allowed the identiﬁcation of a mutation in a component of the mitochondrial translation machinery causing progressive hepatoencephalopathy. This ﬁnding reveals a 
new class of proteins as a potential cause of mitochondrial disorders.Concurrent Symposia58
S09. Immunohistochemical tests for mitochondrial dysfunction
R. Capaldi ;  
Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, United States.
No abstract received.
S10. Genetic and Epigenetic Changes in Early Carcinogenesis
T. D. Tlsty ;  
Department of Pathology, UCSF Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States.
Studies of human epithelial cells and ﬁbroblasts from healthy individuals 
are providing novel insights into how early epigenetic and genetic events affect genomic integrity and fuel carcinogenesis. Key epigenetic changes, such as the hypermethylation of the p16 promoter sequences, create a previously unappreciated pre-clonal phase of tumorigenesis in which a subpopulation of epithelial cells are positioned for progression to malignancy (Nature 409:636, 2001). These key changes precede the clonal outgrowth of pre-malignant lesions and occur frequently in healthy, disease-free individuals (Caner Cell 5:263, 2004). Prior work from our laboratory has shown that surrounding stroma can dramatically inﬂuence tumorigenesis. Proper stromal-epithelial interactions can actually suppress the expression of preneoplastic phenotypes in epithelial cells and conversely, altered stromal-epithelial interactions can promote the probability that preneoplastic lesions progress to malignancy (Cancer Research 
61:5002, 1999). Understanding more 
about these early events should provide novel molecular candidates for prevention and therapy of cancer.
S11. Cell Cycle Control: How to Preserve Genome Integrity 
during Cell Division ?
E. A. Nigg ;  
Max-Planck-Institute for Biochemistry, Dept. of Cell Biology, Martinsried, Ger -
many.
The error-free segregation of duplicated chromosomes during cell division is vital to the development and growth of all organisms. Chromosomal instability and imbalances (aneuploidy) are typical of many solid human tumors and often correlated with malignancy. Many chromosome aberrations are likely to result from the deregulation of mitotic progression, a defective spindle checkpoint and/or centrosome abnormalities. Our research aims at elucidating the role of protein kinases (and phosphatases) in the control of cell division (Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2001, 2:21-32), the detailed function of the spindle assembly checkpoint (EMBO J. 2002, 21:1723-1732; Science 2002, 297:2267-7220), and the regulation of the centrosome cycle (Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2001, 2:21-32). This talk will focus on the human centrosome, the major microtubule-organizing center. In every cell cycle, the centrosome needs to be duplicated once, and only once - much like the genome. We have been able to show that several protein kinases control distinct steps in the centrosome cycle (Dev Cell. 2003, 5:113-25). Furthermore, in collaboration with Matthias Mann’s laboratory (Univ. of Southern Denmark, Odense), we have recently used a mass-spectrometry based proteomics approach to establish an inventory of centrosome components (Nature 2003, 426:570-574). Finally, we have begun to investigate the mechanisms that might cause centrosome ampliﬁcation in human tumor cells. Our results identify both errors during mitosis and/or cytokinesis (EMBO J. 2002, 21:483-492) and bonaﬁde overduplication of centrosomes 
(Mol Biol Cell (2005), 16:1095-1107) as prominent routes to numerical 
centrosome aberrations.
S12. Functional genomics of the Wnt signaling pathway in 
tumorigenesis
J. Behrens ;  
Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Zentrum, University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
Colorectal tumors develop as a consequence of genetic alterations in various tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes. The tumor suppressor APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) is mutated at an early stage of colorectal tumorigenesis and has been proposed to act as a gatekeeper in this process. Mutations of APC lead to aberrant activation of the Wnt signaling pathway by stabilization of the cytoplasmic component β-catenin and formation β-catenin/TCF transcription factor complexes. Thus, constitutive activation of of β-catenin/TCF target genes including c-myc is a key event in the development of colorectal carcinomas and also various other tumors, such as hepatocellular carcinomas. Wnt signaling is controlled by the negative regulator conductin (also termed axin2 or axil) or the related protein axin, which induce degradation of β-catenin by functional interaction with APC and the serine/threonine kinase GSK3β. We show that conductin but not axin is a target of the Wnt signaling pathway and is upregulated in human colorectal and liver tumors as well as in the APC-deﬁcient intestinal tumors of Min mice. Upregulation of conductin may constitute a negative feedback loop that controls Wnt signaling activity. Furthermore we present evidence that conductin is involved in mitotic checkpoint control and generation of chromosomal instability linking aberrant Wnt signaling to alterations 
of genomic integrity of cancer cells.
S13. VEGF in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
P. Carmeliet ;  
Centre for Transgene Technology and Gene Therapy, KU Leuven, Campus 
Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium.
No abstract received.
S14. Leukoencephalopathies: from MRI pattern to basic defect
M. van der Knaap ;  
Department of Child Neurology, Free University Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
No abstract received.
S15. BDNF Signaling in Anorexia and Bulimia
X. Estivill1, M. Ribases1, J. M. Mercader1, H. Howard1, B. Puchau1, F. Fernan -
dez-Aranda2, M. Gratacos3;  
1Genes & Disease Program, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), CeGen 
Spanish Genotyping Network, Barcelona, Spain, 2Psychiatric Service, Ciutat 
Sanitaria Bellvitge, L’Hospitalet, Spain, 3WGenes & Disease Program, Center 
for Genomic Regulation (CRG), CeGen Spanish Genotyping Network, Barce -
lona, Spain.
Eating disorders (ED), such as anorexia nervosa (AN) and bulimia nervosa (BN), predominantly affect women and adolescents, and have a high prevalence and mortality rate in European populations. Although environmental factors play an essential role in the aetiology of ED, there are strong evidences of a genetic participation in the predisposition and development of AN and BN. Experiments on murine models and pharmacological studies in rats indicate the potential role of BDNF in the regulation of food intake and body weight as an anorexigenic factor. We have performed several case-control studies ﬁnding a consistent association between the -270C/T BDNF SNP and bulimia nervosa (BN), and the Val66Met variant to both AN and BN in six European populations. Furthermore, haplotype relative risk analysis and the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) in ED trios for BDNF alleles have been conﬁrmed in a large collection of trios from different European countries. We have analyzed 24 SNPs with a minor allele frequency higher than 0.10, covering the entire BDNF gene using the SNPlex technology in a total sample of 174 ED patients and 174 sex-matched unrelated controls, permitting a dense and targeted genetic characterization of the variability of BDNF in ED. We have also screened the entire NTRK2 gene in patients with ED and show evidence of association of a speciﬁc NTRK2 haplotype with binge-eating/purging AN, and a reduced frequency of another haplotype in BN patients. Finally, we have assessed BDNF plasma levels in 50 discordant sib pairs with ED and found that BDNF levels were signiﬁcantly higher (P = 0.004) in ED patients than in their unaffected sibs. These data strongly indicate that this neurotrophic factor has an important role in the genetic susceptibility to ED and strongly argue for a role of BDNF 
signaling in eating behavior and body weight regulation.
S16. Digital karyotyping
M. R. Speicher ;  
Institut für Humangenetik, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.
No abstract received.Concurrent Symposia59
S17. Canceromics: Molecular, cellular and clinical biochip 
technologies for cancer genetics
O. Kallioniemi ;  
Medical Biotechnology Unit, VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, and 
University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
Our aim has been to develop and apply new biochip technologies and 
approaches for high-throughput drug target and biomarker discovery, validation and therapy selection in oncology. This has involved development of microarray strategies in the molecular, cellular and 
clinical ”dimensions”.Molecular biochips:  We are applying microarray-based Comparative 
Genomic Hybridization (CGH) and Non-sense Mediated RNA Decay (NMD) to identify genes that undergo mutational activation or inactivation in cancer. CGH and NMD microarray data may highlight critical primary causative genetic events in the multi-step progression of cancer. As demonstrated by several recently approved targeted drugs for cancer, such mutated genes represent attractive targets for the development of effective cancer-speciﬁc therapeutics.Cell-based biochips:  We are developing cell-based functional 
microarrays for the high-throughput analysis of gene and protein functions in living cells. A number of different cell biochip platforms can be applied, including the reverse transfection approach (or "cell carpet" approach), where cDNAs, siRNAs or other biomolecules are printed on microscope slides and cells plated to grow on top of the array. Functional cell-based microarray studies make it possible to identify and validate drug targets in a highly parallel, miniaturized fashion, eventually in a genomic scale. Cell biochips can also be used for cell-based drug screening as well as for the analysis of causative gene-drug interactions. Thesetechnologies may in the near future facilitate the design of individualized therapies and more effective therapy combinations.Clinical biochips:  Sample-based microarray strategies, such as tumor 
tissue microarrays (TMA), facilitate the analysis of individual DNA, RNA and protein targets in thousands of arrayed patient samples, typically from formalin-ﬁxed tumors. TMA analysis with target speciﬁc antibodies can rapidly establish deﬁnitive clinical diagnostic proﬁles for molecular targets, and quantify drug target distributions at the population level (target epidemiology). Further development of methods to print tissue lysates from frozen samples in an array format will help to automate and expand antibody-based screening of molecular targets in large 
cohorts of tissue specimens.In summary, biochip technologies can be applied in molecular, cellular and clinical studies, thereby expanding the concept of "microarray analysis" beyond traditional gene expression studies. Integration of the various microarray platforms will facilitate a deeper, integrated, ”systems biological” and mechanistic understanding of cancer cell biology, which eventually will be required for the development of next-generation targeted therapeutics for cancer.
S18. Single-molecule detection in situ using padlock and 
proximity probes
U. D. Landegren , M. Nilsson, J. Banér, F. Dahl, O. Ericsson, S. Fredriksson, M. 
Gullberg, S. Gustafsdottir, J. Göransson, J. Jarvius, M. Jarvius, H. Johansson, 
M. Kamali, C. Larsson, J. Melin, E. Schallmeiner, L. Spångberg, J. Stenberg, O. 
Söderberg;  
Rudbeck Laboratory, University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden.
Total genome sequence information provides a theoretical overview 
of all nucleic acids and protein molecules in cells and tissues. We now need efﬁcient strategies to probe this multitude of molecules for information about their distribution, concentrations, interactions, and 
about their roles in biological processes.We have established a set of molecular tools that represent detected DNA, RNA, or protein molecules as short, circular strings of DNA for highly speciﬁc analysis of large sets of molecules in solution, or for 
in 
situ analyses of even single or interacting sets of molecules.
Padlock probes  are linear oligonucleotide probes that are converted to 
DNA circles in the presence of speciﬁc target nucleic acid sequences. Large sets of such circles can be ampliﬁed and identiﬁed, for example by hybridization to universal tag microarrays. The method presently permits genotyping of tens of thousands of DNA sequences in 
parallel.
In proximity ligation , antibodies are equipped with DNA strands that can be joined by ligation when pairs of reagents bind the same target protein molecule. The process effectively reverse translates target proteins to linear or circular signature DNA molecules that can then be ampliﬁed and identiﬁed in extremely sensitive and precise homogenous or solid-phase protein assays. The procedure is being 
adapted for parallel analyses of large sets of proteins.Both reacted padlock and proximity probes can be ampliﬁed by copying the circular molecules in so-called rolling-circle replication  reactions. 
We have shown that the method allows analysis of the intracellular distribution of individual mitochondrial genomes, differing in single-nucleotide positions. In a variant of this procedure, proximity ligation-based detection of single or interacting pairs of Myc and Max proteins can be locally ampliﬁed by rolling-circle replication, for single molecule 
detection in situ in cells and tissues.
S19. cis regulatory variation in the human genome
B. E. Stranger1, M. Forrest1, S. Tavare2, A. G. Clark3, S. Deutsch4, B. Kahl5, S. 
E. Antonarakis4, P. Deloukas1, E. T. Dermitzakis1;  
1The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Department 
of Oncology, Cambridge Univesrity, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Depart -
ment of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaka, NY, United 
States, 4Department of Genetic Medicine, University of Geneva Medical School, 
Geneva, Switzerland, 5Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, United States.
The goal of this work is to identify and characterize functionally variable regulatory regions that are likely to contribute to complex phenotypes and disorders in human populations, through effects on regulation of gene expression. We surveyed gene expression levels for ~ 700 genes in a sample of immortalized lymphoblastoid cell lines from 60 unrelated humans of the CEPH pedigrees, and used the publicly-available HapMap SNP genotypes of the same individuals to perform association analyses, in an attempt to localize the genetic determinants of these quantitative traits. Approximately 300 of the 700 genes gave a detectable expression signal relative to background, and for most of those loci, we observed signiﬁcant gene expression variation among individuals. We identiﬁed loci that exhibited highly signiﬁcant associations between gene expression and SNP variants located 
cis- to the coding locus. We are ﬁnding many regulatory haplotypes several Mb away from the target gene suggesting that the regulatory landscape may be different from what has been hypothesized. For other genes, a 
cis- signal was detected, but its effect was spread 
over many SNPs and thus did not meet our signiﬁcance threshold. By working with the complete genomic set of HapMap SNP genotypes, we were also able to identify signiﬁcant 
trans-acting SNPs inﬂuencing 
expression variation.
S20. Activation of Non-coding RNAs by Epigenetic Therapy
P. A. Jones, Y. Saito, G. Liang, G. Egger, J. C. Chuang;  
University of Southern California, Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, 
United States.
The abnormal methylation of CpG islands located near the transcriptional start sites of human genes plays a major role in carcinogenesis. Methylation of cytosine residues in these regions is associated with alterations in chromatin structure which reinforce gene silencing. Abnormally silenced genes serve as targets for epigenetic therapy in which the goal is to reverse DNA methylation and chromatin changes and reactivate silenced genes. Until now, the focus has mainly been on protein coding genes but we have now found that epigenetic therapy can activate microRNAs (miRNAs) which in turn can downregulate speciﬁc gene products by translational repression. Simultaneous treatment of human cancer cells with 5-aza-2’-deoxycytidine and phenylbutyric acid (epigenetic therapy) resulted in the activation of miR-127. Activation of miR-127 transcription was accompanied by changes in the DNA methylation and increased levels of histone H3 acetylation and lysine 4 methylation around the transcriptional start site. Interestingly, we also detected decreased levels in BCL6 protein, a potential target of miR-127. Thus, epigenetic therapy can activate expression of some microRNAs resulting in downregulation of target 
products important in human carcinogenesis.Concurrent Symposia60
S21. Ultraconserved elements in the human genome
D. Haussler1, G. Bejerano2, S. Salama2, B. King2, J. Kent2, N. Ahituv3, E. M. 
Rubin3;  
1Howard Hughes Medical Institute, UC, Santa Cruz, CA, United States, 2Center 
for Biomolecular Science and Engineering, UC, Santa Cruz, CA, United States, 
3Dept. of Energy Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, CA, United States.
The availability of multiple mammalian genomes has allowed us 
to partially infer the evolutionary history of most of the bases in the human genome since the time of the mammalian radiation. Analysis has revealed about 500 DNA segments that show remarkably strong negative selection: stretches of at least 200bp that are totally unchanged in human mouse and rat, and averaging 96% identity with species as distant as chicken (diverged about 310 MYA). A signiﬁcant number of these ultraconserved elements overlap the mRNAs of genes, especially genes involved in RNA processing. The remainder, which constitute the majority of the ultraconserved elements, neither code for protein nor appear in the UTRs of known genes. These latter elements do not appear to have any orthologs in invertebrate species. They often appear in clusters within ~1 Mb regions surrounding transcription factors involved in embryonic development. Experimental analysis of some of these elements has provided evidence that many are distal enhancers, located many hundreds of Kb from the transcription factor that they regulate. The most extremely conserved elements in the human genome (>1000bp, >99% identical in chicken) lie in the introns of POLA, the gene for DNA polymerase alpha on chromosome X. Recent evidence suggests that these ultraconserved elements do not regulate POLA, but rather are distal enhancers for a gene located a few hundred Kb downstream from them. This is the aristaless related homeobox (ARX) gene, involved in forebrain development, and associated with X-linked myoclonic epilepsy with spasticity and intellectual disability, X-linked West syndrome, Partington syndrome, nonsyndromic mental retardation, and X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia. We will discuss the evolutionary origins and properties of these and the 
other intriguing ultraconserved elements.
S22. Overview of preimplantation diagnosis
L. Gianaroli ;  
S.I.S.Me.R. Reproductive Medicine Unit, Bologna, Italy.
Following its ﬁrst clinical application in the year 1990, PGD (Preimplantation genetic diagnosis
) was integrated into in vitro 
fertilization programs for the analysis of genetic disorders before the corresponding embryo is transferred to the patient. This approach represents an important alternative for couples at high reproductive risk which otherwise, in case of an affected fetus, have to decided whether to interrupt a pregnancy after conventional prenatal diagnosis. Throughout the years, the indications were expanded and now PGD is proposed in the following situations: 1) to carriers of monogenic diseases; 2) to carriers of balanced translocations; 3) to couples at risk of generating high proportions of aneuploid embryos for which they are exposed to failed or abnormal implantation; 4) to couples having an affected child requiring bone marrow transplantation from an HLA-identical sibling; and 5) to carriers of predisposition to late onset 
disorders.According to the reports of the International Working Group on PGD and the ESHRE PGD Consortium, the demand for PGD has constantly increased and the number of cycles performed worldwide until now exceeds 6000. The reported pregnancy rate ranges from 25 and 30% per cycle with an incidence of obstetric and neonatal complications similar to that reported after ART. The incidence of malformations at 
birth is also in the same range as that characterized in ICSI children.The attitude towards PGD is extremely different in the different countries, due to cultural and religious aspects. This variability is present also in Europe, with some countries like Austria, Germany, Italy and Switzerland prohibiting by law the use of the technique. As a results, a form of reproductive tourism began, and couples questing for PGD are now looking for it in the European countries in whom PGD 
is currently applied.S23. Circulating fetal cells and cell free fetal DNA: what is the 
current status?
S. Hahn ;  
University Women’s Hospital, Basle, Switzerland.
Fetal cells from maternal blood were ﬁrst enriched in 1979 by Herzenberg and co-workers using the then newly developed approach of ﬂow cytometry. In the intervening years developments in molecular biology (FISH and PCR) permitted the reliable analysis of such cells. In addition the development of more efﬁcacious or simpler enrichment methods (MACS) lead to the remise that diagnostic applications would soon become a reality. These hopes have largely been dashed by the large scale NIH funded NIFTY study, in which close to 3000 clinical cases, enriched by either MACS or FACS and examined by XY-FISH, 
indicated that these approaches were not all suited for clinical use.Recent data has also suggested that the fetal erythroblast, may not be the most suitable target cell, as its nucleus displays an apoptotic character which renders it impervious to FISH analysis. For this reason current endeavours, are focussing on optimised enrichment procedures, automated detection, and the analysis of other cells types, such as trophoblasts. These analyses are largely being conducted in a multi-centre manner in the recently funded EU Network of Excellence 
“SAFE”.The presence of cell free circulatory nucleic acids was ﬁrst reported almost 60 years ago by Mandel and Métais, however, it is only in recent years that this phenomenon has gained the interest of the wider scientiﬁc community, especially in oncology and prenatal medicine. Prompted by observations made in cancer patients, that tumour-derived DNA was detectable in plasma samples, Lo and colleagues in 1997 detected cell free fetal DNA in the plasma of pregnant women, thereby opening a new avenue for the non-invasive assessment of fetal genetic traits. In those instances where the fetal loci being interrogated are completely absent from the maternal genome, such as the fetal RhD gene in Rhd pregnant women, this approach has been found to be so reliable that it is already being used clinically in 
several European centres.The detection of other fetal genetic loci which differ slightly from maternal ones has proven to be more problematic, as the vast majority (>95%) of circulating cell free DNA in maternal plasma is of maternal origin. Therefore, the detection of fetal loci involving point mutations, which are of greatest interest for single gene disorders, has been 
restricted to single case reports.In this regard we have recently made the observation that circulatory fetal DNA sequences are generally smaller than comparable maternal ones, and that by selecting sequences with a small size a selective enrichment of fetal DNA sequences can be attained. By using this approach we have shown that otherwise masked fetal loci, such as STRs or point mutations, can be reliably detected. By optimising this approach, it is hoped, that future developments will permit the detection of both the paternal and maternal fetal loci, thereby permitting a clear 
non-invasive prenatal diagnosis.
Once again, these facets are being explored in the NoE “SAFE”.
S24. Practice of preimplantation genetic diagnosis
I. Liebaers ;  
Centrum Medische Genetica AZ-VUB, Brussels, Belgium.
No abstract received.
S25. LD in genetic isolated populations
C. M. van Duijn ;  
Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Eras -
mus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
No abstract received.
S26. Selecting the right SNPs for genetic mapping studies in 
European populations
T. Meitinger ;  
GSF National Research Center, Munich, Germany.
The success of genetic mapping strategies for both rare and common disorders is critically dependent on the choice of study populations. As an increasing number of national genetic databases are being set up, sampling strategies have come under scrutiny. For the identiﬁcation of genes mutated in Mendelian disorders, samples from isolated Concurrent Symposia61
founder populations especially from the periphery of the European 
subcontinent have proved extremely valuable mainly because of the uneven distribution of disease causing variants between and within populations and because of the wealth of genealogical data often available in isolates. Both simulation and experimental studies also suggest that the genetic variety provided by diverse populations will in the same way optimize the use of linkage disequilibrium mapping of 
common disease genes.Because of the low effects observed in complex disorders, large sample sizes are required which can often not be collected in more isolate populations. This brings about an urgent need for the determination of genetically deﬁned subpopulations within continental populations. An appropriate number of tagging SNPs has to be determined for each of those subpopulations to ensure sufﬁcient capture of information especially in whole genome mapping approaches. Recent studies testing population based samples from across Europe suggest that the CEPH trios used by the HapMap Consortium as a reference for tagSNP selection will only provide partial information for an as-yet-unknown proportion of genes, and especially for peripheral European 
populations.
S27. Inﬂuence of LD on high-density SNP genome linkage scans
B. Müller-Myhsok ;  
Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany.
No abstract received.
SP1. The success of the oppositions against the BRCA1 patents: 
how did it occur and what will be the impact on genetic testing?
G. Matthijs1, D. Halley2, G. Lenoir3, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet4;  
1Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Dept of 
Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3Institut Gustave-
Roussy, Villejuif, France, 4Institut Curie, Paris, France.
In 2001, the European Patent Organisation (EPO) has granted 3 patents on the BRCA1 gene. The patentees included Myriad Genetics, the United States of America and University of Utah. Their option to strictly exert their monopoly right by requesting that all diagnostic testing be done at Myriad Genetics Laboratories in Utah, has evoked strong reactions. Several European genetic societies and research institutes, and other parties including the Dutch and Belgian governments, have ﬁled oppositions against these patents. These procedures have 
recently been concluded.In May 2004, the ﬁrst patent, which claimed ‘a method for diagnosing a predisposition for breast and ovarian cancer’ by comparing the patient’s BRCA1 sequence with a reference sequence, has been revoked. In January 2005, the 2 other patents were maintained after the ﬁnal hearings, but in amended - say slimmed - form: they no longer include a method for diagnosis, but only relate to a probe for the BRCA1 gene and a probe for the common Ashkenazi 185delAG mutation, respectively.In practice, these patents will no longer interfere with diagnostic testing for familial breast and ovary cancer in Europe. The successful attack on the patents was based on errors contained in the original sequence, as it was disclosed in the patent application in 1994. On the discussion about ‘inventive step’ for diagnostic methods or speciﬁc mutations, the EPO has largely decided in favour of the patentees. The authors witnessed the hearings in Munich and would like to give the genetic community a ﬁrsthand account of the case.
LB1. The Human Telomeric maintenance Proteins trf2 and trf1 
are involved in a EARLY DNA damage response
P. Bradshaw1,2, D.J. Stavropoulos1,2 D. Gilley3, M.S. Meyn1,2,4; 
1Genetics, Hospital For Sick Children, Toronto, Canada, 2Molecular & Medical 
Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada, 3Medical & Molecular Genet -
ics, University of Indiana, Indianapolis, United States; 4Paediatrics, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Human cells protect their genomes by using DNA damage surveillance 
networks that can activate DNA repair, cell cycle checkpoints and apoptosis in response to <4 double-strand breaks (DSBs)/genome.  These same networks tolerate telomeres, in part because the TRF2 protein prevents recognition of telomeric ends as DSBs. Unexpectedly, we ﬁnd TRF2 and another telomere maintenance protein, TRF1, 
involved in the DSB response. TRF1 and TRF2 form transient foci that colocalize with laser microbeam-induced DSBs in human ﬁbroblast nuclei. TRF1 and TRF2 are detectable at DSBs <3 seconds post-irradiation, earlier than ATM, a kinase that controls the major DSB surveillance network. Like many DNA damage response proteins, TRF2 is phosphoyrlated after DSB induction.  Phospho-TRF2 associates with induced DSBs but not undamaged telomeres. The TRF2 response to DSBs is dependent on its basic domain and occurs in the absence of functional DNA-PKcs, the MRE11/Rad50/NBS1 complex or the Ku70, WRN and BLM repair proteins. Multiple lines of evidence suggest that TRF2 and ATM functionally interact at DSB sites: the two proteins colocalize at DSBs, 
�-ray induced phosphorylation of TRF2 is ATM-dependent, and over-expression of TRF2 impairs DSB-induced ATM autophosphoyration as well as ATM-dependent phosphorylation of H2AX and p53. These results provide evidence that TRF2 and TRF1 interact with DSB-containing chromatin, TRF2 competes with or attenuate ATM responses to DSBs and DSB-induced modiﬁcations may shift TRF2 from telomere maintenance to DSB repair. Our ﬁndings also indicate that human cells practice a strategic economy in using the same proteins in telomere maintenance and DSB repair.
LB2. Mutations in ESCO2, establishment of cohesion 1 homolog 
2 (S. cereviseae), cause Roberts syndrome
H. Vega1,2, Q. Waisﬁsz3, M. Gordillo2,4, N. Sakai2, I. Yanagihara5, M. Yamada5, 
D. van Gosliga3, H. Kayserili6, K. Ozono2, E. Wang Jabs4, K. Inui2, H. Joenje3; 
1Instituto de Genética, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Ciudad Universitaria, 
Bogotá, Colombia, 2Department of Developmental Medicine (Pediatrics) D-5, 
Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan, 3Depart -
ment of Clinical Genetics and Human Genetics,VU University Medical Center , 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medi -
cine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States, 5Department of 
Developmental Infectious Diseases, Research Institute, Osaka Medical Center 
for Maternal and Child Health, Izumi, Osaka, Japan, 6Division of Medical Gene -
tics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey
Roberts syndrome (RBS; MIM 268300) is an extremely rare autosomal recessive disorder. Clinical characteristics include pre- and postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, bilateral cleft lip and palate, mental retardation and tetraphocomelia. Cells from Roberts syndrome patients show a characteristic premature centromere separation, also known as heterochromatin repulsion/pufﬁng, or the RS effect. To identify the disease locus we performed genome wide homozygosity mapping using a cluster of four RBS families from Colombia that shared a common ancestor in the XVIIIth century and an additional ﬁfth Colombian family. Signiﬁcant linkage was established for chromosome 8p12-21.2 between markers D8S258 and D8S505. Multipoint linkage analysis of 11 affected individuals gave a maximum LOD score of 13.4 at marker D8S1839. A new transcript LOC157570, recently renamed as ESCO2, appeared to encode a protein that belongs to a conserved family of proteins which play a role in the establishment of cohesion between sister chromatids. We performed sequence analysis of ESCO2 and identiﬁed homozygous mutations in all patients that were studied. In 19 patients from 16 families of different ethnic backgrounds eight different mutations were identiﬁed (one nonsense, one missense and six frameshift mutations). Northern analysis identiﬁed a predominant mRNA of approximately 3.3 kb in all human fetal tissues tested and in a subset of tested adult tissues (thymus, placenta and small intestine). We suggest that the RBS-related developmental abnormalities result from the impaired cell proliferation observed in RBS cells and that this growth impairment results from the cohesion defect and subsequent 
mitotic arrest.
LB3. Prospects of a Protein Therapy by means of PTDs-MeCP2 
fusion protein for Rett syndrome
F. Laccone, P. Kempaiah;
Institute of Human Genetics University of Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany
Mutations in the MECP2 gene are the principle cause of the Rett 
syndrome and several lines of evidence show that the disease is caused by a loss of function of the MeCP2. It is therefore plausible that Special Lecture - Late Breaking Research Session62
the “introduction” of a wild type MeCP2 into the brain should be able at 
least to mild the course of the disease. Recently it has been reported that the protein transduction domain (TAT) when fused to a variety of proteins is able to deliver them into cells and even into the brain of living animals. We have produced large amount of recombinant MeCP2 isoform A protein tagged at the N-terminus with the TAT peptide. The data collected until now demonstrate that the TAT-MeCP2 protein is able to transduce after 8 to 10 hours in vitro several cell lines including primary ﬁbroblasts of patients with Rett syndrome with an efﬁciency of 100%. The treatment of a clonal ﬁbroblast cell line expressing the T158M mutation with the TAT-MeCP2 recombinant protein reverts the hyperacetylation of both H3 and H4K16 to a level comparable to the one of the cell line expressing the wild type MeCP2. The TAT-MeCP2 when injected intraperitoneally is able to trespass the Blood-Brain-Barrier and localizes in the nuclei of wild type mice. Experiments in knockout mice show that the TAT-MeCP2 protein inﬂuences the 
acetylation state of both H3 and H4K16.Our results show that it is possible to introduce a consistent amount of biologically active recombinant proteins into the brain of knock out animals proving that the transduction technology may be applied to 
genetic diseases.
AcknowledgementsWe thank the “Elternhilfe für Kinder mit Rett Syndrome e.V.” for the support of this project. We thank Pandian Arunachalam, M. Prinz, S. Wolf and W. Engel for their help.
C01. The splitting of human chromosome bands into sub-bands
U. Claussen, H. Lehrer, R. Hliscs, A. Kuechler, A. Weise, T. Liehr;  
Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany.
The splitting of chromosome bands into their sub-bands has its implications for the precise mapping of DNA probes at the sub-band level and for the understanding of the chromosome architecture. Surprisingly, there have been nearly no scientiﬁc investigations dealing with that process. Here we investigated the hierarchically organised splitting of bands in detail using the multicolour banding (MCB) probe set of different human chromosomes (#5, 6, 18,19, X) hybridised to normal human metaphase and prometaphase chromosomes at the different band level. The analysis were performed by comparing the disappearance and appearance of pseudo-colour bands of the four different band levels according to ISCN95. The regions to split ﬁrst are telomere- and centromere-near. In contrast to the GTG-band ideograms published in ISCN 95 at the 850-, 550-, and 400-band level pseudo-colours assigned to GTG-light bands are resistant to band splitting. GTG-dark bands split into their dark and light sub-bands because inside dark bands light sub-bands appear which are rather resistant to further elongation. This conﬁrms the results obtained by stretching of GTG-banded chromosomes (Cytogenet Cell Genet 79:162-166, 1997). In this respect the nomenclature of the ideograms of GTG-banding patterns for normal human chromosomes should be reassessed. Furthermore, the results indicate to fundamental doubts on the well established concept of chromosome condensation during mitosis which should be replaced by the recently proposed concept of chromosome region-speciﬁc protein swelling.Supported in part by the Deutsche Krebshilfe/Mildred Scheel Stiftung für Krebsforschung (70-3125-Li1) and the IZKF together with the TMWFK (TP 3.7 and B307-04004).
C02. Peculiarities of 5-methylcytosine-rich DNA distribution on 
adult and fetal human metaphase chromosomes
O. A. Eﬁmova1, A. A. Pendina2, A. N. Kaminskaya1, T. V. Kuznetzova2, V. S. 
Baranov2;  
1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott's 
Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion.
DNA methylation is an epigenetic modiﬁcation of human genome and is known to have an essential role in regulation of gene silencing and 
stabilization of chromosome structure.We have investigated 5-methylcytosine-rich DNA localization on human metaphase chromosomes and have carried out a comparative analysis of 5-methylcytosine distribution on fetal and adult chromosomes from PHA-stimulated lymphocytes. 72 metaphases from adult and 56 from fetal lymphocytes were analyzed. Immunoﬂuorescent detection with monoclonal antibodies was performed for 5-methylcytosine-rich DNA regions reveling. Fluorescent signals appeared to be preferentially localized in the certain regions. Speciﬁc landmarks were identiﬁed for each chromosome pair, the new type of banding which we called M-banding was described. Intensity of signals varied. Pericentromeric heterochromatin of chromosomes 1 and 16, short arms of acrocentric chromosomes, majority of T and some R-bands demonstrated the most intensive ﬂuorescence. Average to weak ﬂuorescence was detected in majority of R-, in some T-bands and in pericentromeric heterochromatin of chromosomes 3 and 9. Very weak ﬂuorescence was observed in all G-bands. Thus, the majority of GC-rich bands were shown to be highly methylated. However, certain GC-rich bands of 6,9,10,13,15 chromosomes (6q15,6q21,6q23,9p13,9q22,9q32,10q24,13q22,15q15,15q24) demonstrated hypomethylated status, suggesting their special 
functional activity in lymphocytes.Certain bands of fetal and adult chromosomes, with similar M-banding patterns, differed in their ﬂuorescence intensity (chromosomes 1-3,5-18,20-22). Differences in staining of pericentromeric heterochromatin of chromosomes 1,9,16, heteromorphic staining of homologous 
chromosomes were registered.Further analysis of structural and functional peculiarities contributing to M-banding characteristics in other adult and embryonic human tissues 
is needed.
C03. Systematic re-examination of carriers of balanced 
reciprocal translocations identiﬁes multiple candidate regions 
for late-onset and common disorders
I. Bache1, K. Brondum-Nielsen2, G. Bruun-Petersen3, M. Bugge1, M. Hjorth1, S. 
Holstebroe1, P. K. A. Jensen4, C. Lundsteen5, E. Niebuhr6, K. Rasmussen7, L. 
Schmidt8, N. Tommerup1;  
1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, University of 
Copenhagen, Denmark, 2John F. Kennedy Institute, Glostrup, Denmark, 3Dept 
of Clinical Genetics, Vejle Sygehus, Denmark, 4Dept of Clinical Genetics, Aar -
hus Kommunehospital, Denmark, 5Dept of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, 
Denmark, 6Dept of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Copen -
hagen, Denmark, 7Dept of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Den -
mark, 8Institute of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
Balanced reciprocal translocations associated with genetic disorders 
have facilitated the identiﬁcation of genes especially for monogenic disorders with an early-onset. To assess whether chromosomal breakpoints may be associated with common and later onset disorders, we performed a systematic questionnaire-based re-examination of 
known reciprocal translocation carriers in Denmark.In total, questionnaires were mailed to 875 carriers of which 733 accepted to participate (compliance = 84%). The reported traits/diseases were conﬁrmed by medical ﬁles and personal contact with the family.We observed 27 unrelated carriers with a disease where a breakpoint involved a cytogenetic band known to harbour a corresponding locus. This included very common disorders (e.g. allergy, asthma, myopia, obesity, hypertension, coronary heart disease, Type 2 diabetes), autoimmune disorders (Type 1 diabetes, inﬂammatory bowel disease, hyperthyroidism), neurological/neuropsychiatric disorders (e.g. bipolar disorder, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease) and cancer. We found a signiﬁcant linkage (LOD = 2.1) of dyslexia and a co-segregating translocation with a breakpoint in a conﬁrmed locus for dyslexia, and we identiﬁed 10 other families, where the translocation co-segregated with a speciﬁc phenotype. Furthermore, we identiﬁed carriers with the same disease (e.g. cervix dysplasia, hypertension), where independent 
breakpoints involved the same chromosomal band.Our study indicates that a systematic re-examination of translocation carriers promises to be a powerful way to identify loci and genes for a variety of human traits and disorders. To expand this approach to larger populations, we have initiated an international consortium to systematize the questionnaire-based re-examination and data-handling. For further information, see http://www.mcndb.org.Concurrent Sessions63
C04. Molecular karyotyping detects structural low grade 
mosaics in ~4 % of patients with idiopathic mental retardation 
and multiple congenital aberrations
N. M. C. Maas1, B. Menten2, C. Melotte1, B. Thienpont1, K. Buysse2, G. Froyen1, 
P. Marynen1, A. De Paepe2, J. Fryns1, G. Mortier2, K. Devriendt1, F. Speleman2, 
J. R. Vermeesch1;  
1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Center for Medical Genetics, 
Gent, Belgium.
Chromosomal abnormalities are a major cause of mental retardation 
and multiple congenital anomalies. Screening for these chromosomal imbalances has mainly been performed in the past by standard or high resolution karyotyping. Unfortunately, the resolution of these analyses is limited to about ~5 to 10 Mb. Recently, so-called array or matrix CGH was developed to provide a better resolution for detection of subtle structural rearrangements. The resolution of array CGH depends on the size and density of the genomic fragments. Since arrayCGH provides a molecular approach for genome wide detection of unbalanced 
karyotypic defects, we propose the term molecular karyotyping .
In this study, molecular karyotyping was performed using arrays of 1 Mb resolution. Eighty patients with mental retardation, multiple congenital anomalies and normal standard karyotypes were analysed. In 18 patients (~22%) a chromosomal imbalance was detected and conﬁrmed by FISH analysis. Interestingly, in three cases we found evidence for mosaicism for the detected structural chromosomal abnormality. Mosaicisms ranged between 20 and 60%.Our results indicate that in over 20% of patients with unexplained mental retardation and congenital anomalies cryptic chromosomal imbalances can be detected when using arrayCGH at 1 Mb resolution. We show that not only the resolution, but also the sensitivity to detect mosaics 
for small structural defects is higher than traditional karyotyping.*These authors share equal contribution to the work presented in this 
abstract.
C05. CASP8 constitutional haploinsufﬁciency in a girl with 
del(2)(q32.3-q33.1) associated with congenital abdominal 
neuroblastoma, psychomotor retardation and dysmorphisms
G. Gregato1, E. Rossi1, S. Gimelli1, T. Pramparo1, R. Giorda2, R. Tenconi3, O. 
Zuffardi1;  
1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Pavia, Italy, 2IRCSS la nostra famiglia, 
Bosisio Parini, Italy, 3Genetica Medica, Padova, Italy.
Neuroblastoma is a neuroblastic tumor of neuroectodermal cells derived from the neural crest. We studied a patient that underwent to medical evaluation at 2 and 4 years of age due to psychomotor and growth retardation, hypotonia, joint laxity and some dysmorphic features. She was operated soon after birth for a monolateral abdominal stage 1 neuroblastoma identiﬁed prenatally. No chemotherapy but only surveillance was recommended. Cytogenetic and FISH analysis revealed a complex translocation involving chromosomes 6, 10 and 15 with four breakpoints. The same translocation was found in her normal mother. The FISH breakpoints were narrowed by PCR ampliﬁcation of STS markers in somatic hybrids. No cryptic deletions were present at the translocation breakpoints neither in the proposita nor in her mother. Later array-CGH experiments demonstrated a 2q32.3q33.1 deletion. FISH reﬁned the deletion breakpoints within BAC RP11-267L23 and the two BACs RP11-53H10 (deleted) and RP11-35B12 (not deleted). The same region deleted in the patient (about 8 Mb) was inverted in one of the maternal chromosomes 2. Microsatellites analysis conﬁrmed 
the maternal origin of the deletion.The deleted 2q32.3q33.1 region contains genes known to be involved in neuroblastoma: CASP8 (and also CASP10), and caspase-8-related FLICE-inhibitory protein (FLIP). Usually CASP8 gene is deleted or silenced by methylation in neuroblastoma cell lines while methylation of its promoter region is the predominant mechanism in tumor samples. Constitutional hemizygous deletions involving these apoptotic genes have never been reported. DNA copy number changes and methylation 
studies in the tumor sample of the proposita are in progress.C06. Interphase FISH mapping of translocation breakpoints 
using parafﬁn-embedded tissue: Identiﬁcation of a candidate 
gene for phocomelia
L. Harewood ;  
MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Disease-associated balanced chromosomal rearrangements (DBCRs) 
have proved to be extremely useful in mapping disease loci and the positional cloning of disease-causing genes. In these cases the phenotype is likely to arise from direct interruption of one or more genes or regulatory elements. Generally, breakpoint mapping is done using ﬂuorescent in-situ hybridisation (FISH) on metaphase preparations but these are not always available. We have extended our previously reported technique for mapping DBCR breakpoints using interphase FISH to enable the use of archive parafﬁn embedded tissue sections. We have shown that this is an effective strategy using two cases with de novo, apparently balanced translocations: namely: t(1;2)(q41;p25.3) with bilateral renal dysplasia and t(2;12)(p25.1;q23.3) with upper limb peromelia and lower limb phocomelia. The latter case has proven particularly interesting as the gene CMKLR1 was found at the translocation breakpoint on chromosome 12. This gene is known to be expressed in the developing limb and is likely to be part of the retinoic acid signalling pathway. Our own studies using immunocytochemistry suggest that the limb expression may be myoblast speciﬁc. The phenotype of the proband is consistent with recent data suggesting that myoblasts may be requires for normal limb outgrowth We are currently screening a case with a similar phenotype but no visible chromosomal abnormalities for mutations in CMKLR1 and a mouse model is being created. This gene is an excellent candidate for the limb phenotype and its discovery emphasises the usefulness of this method 
in studying cases with no available metaphase chromosomes.
C07. Rad50 deﬁciency causes a variant form of Nijmegen 
Breakage Syndrome
R. Bendix-Waltes1, R. Kalb2, M. Stumm3, A. Sobeck2, P. Heidari1, B. Brinkhoff1, 
B. Wieland1, R. Varon-Mateeva4, D. Schindler2, T. Dörk1;  
1Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2University of Würzburg, Würzburg, 
Germany, 3University of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, 4University Clinics 
Charite, Berlin, Germany.
The Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 complex is assumed to act as a sensor of DNA double-strand breaks. Mutations of Mre11 and Nbs1 are associated with the radiation sensitivity syndromes ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder (ATLD) and Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), respectively. Here we report that Rad50 deﬁciency also occurs as an inherited condition in man due to hypomorphic 
RAD50 germline mutations. An 18-year-old 
German who has a variant form of the NBS without immunodeﬁciency, is a compound heterozygote for a nonsense and a stop codon mutation in the 
RAD50  gene. Rad50 protein expression is reduced to 
less than one tenth in her ﬁbroblasts and lymphoblastoid cells. This Rad50 deﬁciency is associated with a high frequency of spontaneous chromatid exchanges. Rad50 deﬁcient ﬁbroblasts fail to form Mre11 and Nbs1 foci in response to irradiation. Phosphorylation of p53 at serine 15 and the transcriptional induction of p21/WAF1 mRNA are reduced and Ser343 phosphorylation of Nbs1 is undetectable in the patient´s lymphoblastoid cell line following irradiation. These defects could be complemented by transient transfection of wildtype Rad50 cDNA into the lymphoblastoid cells. Our ﬁndings expand the clinical spectrum of DNA double strand break repair disorders and provide evidence that Rad50 is required for the recruitment of Mre11 to sites of DNA damage and modulates some functions of the ATM kinase.
C08. Expression analysis of murine hemochromatosis genes in 
anemia and iron overload
A. Roetto1, F. Daraio1, A. Bondi1, P. Valentino1, S. Carturan1, E. Gottardi1, C. 
Camaschella2;  
1Università di Torino, Orbassano Torino, Italy, 2Università Vita-Salute, Milano, 
Italy.
Hereditary Haemochromatosis (HH) is an autosomal recessive disorder common among Caucasians, characterized by iron homeostasis disruption leading to parenchymal iron overload. Five different disease form have been characterized and the involved genes (HFE, HJV, HEPC, TFR2 and SLC40A1) have been individuated. All these genes are highly expressed in the liver and the correspondent iron proteins Concurrent Sessions64
(HFE, hemojuvelin, hepcidin, Tfr2 and ferroportin1) seem to be 
correlated. Nevertheless, the molecular details of their interrelationship are still unclear. To clarify in vivo iron proteins function we utilized 
murine models of two different strains in different iron conditions. Here we report the liver expression of hepcidin, ferroportin and of the other HH genes after phlebotomy-induced anaemia and following parenteral and oral iron loading. Furthermore, TFR2 and ferroportin proteins expression variations have been investigated in liver and duodenum. Results demonstrate in liver a statistically signiﬁcant reduction of hepcidin and ferroportin expression after phlebotomy, an increase of Hepc and a decrease of Tfr2 expression after iron loading. Hepatic ferroportin protein is decreased during anemia, while, 6 hour after phlebotomy, when hepatic hepcidin expression is increased, SLC40A1 duodenal expression increases but ferroportin resulted to be diminished. This data would conﬁrm that ferroportin protein is regulated by hepcidin post-tradutionally.In parenteral iron overload condition, TFR2 expression and protein production decrease, while HFE expression remains constant. On the contrary, in dietary iron overload TFR2 remains constant while HFE expression increases. This data supports the hypothesis that Hfe and Tfr2 are part of different pathways both causing ﬁnal hepcidin 
activation.
C09. Gain-of-function amino acid substitutions drive positive 
selection of FGFR2  mutations in human spermatogonia and 
explain the high prevalence of de novo  Apert syndrome 
mutations.
A. Goriely1, G. A. T. McVean2, A. M. M. van Pelt3, A. W. O’Rourke4, S. A. Wall5, 
D. G. de Rooij3, A. O. M. Wilkie1,6;  
1Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United 
Kingdom, 2Dpt of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 
3Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 4The Churchill Hospital, Oxford, 
United Kingdom, 5Department of Plastic Surgery, Radcliffe Inﬁrmary, Oxford, 
United Kingdom, 6Nufﬁeld Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Univer -
sity of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Despite the importance of mutation in genetics, there are virtually no experimental data on the occurrence of speciﬁc nucleotide substitutions in human gametes. We have studied the occurrence of spontaneous mutations at position 755 of Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor 2 
(FGFR2) because 755C>G transversions cause Apert syndrome; this 
mutation, encoding the gain-of-function substitution Ser252Trp (birth prevalence: 1:100,000), occurs with a birth rate elevated 500-800 fold above background and originates exclusively from the unaffected father. We previously demonstrated high levels of both 755C>G and 755C>T 
FGFR2 mutations in human sperm, and proposed that these 
particular mutations are enriched because the encoded proteins confer a selective advantage to spermatogonial cells (Goriely et al., Science
 
301, 643; 2003).
We have now obtained further evidence consistent with this proposal. First, we show that mutation levels at the adjacent 
FGFR2 nucleotides 
752-754 are low, excluding any general increase in local mutation rate. Second, we present three instances of double nucleotide changes involving 755C, expected to be extremely rare as chance events. Two are shown, either by assessment of the pedigree or by direct analysis of sperm, to have arisen in sequential steps; the third (encoding Ser252Tyr) was predicted from structural considerations. Finally we demonstrate that both major alternative spliceforms of FGFR2 (
Fgfr2b  
and Fgfr2c ) are expressed in rat spermatogonial stem cell lines.
Taken together, these observations show that speciﬁc pathogenic 
FGFR2 mutations attain high levels in sperm because they encode proteins with gain-of-function properties, favoring clonal expansion of 
mutant spermatogonial cells in the human testis.
C10. A 12 gene DNA resequencing chip for molecular diagnosis 
of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
S. Fokstuen1, R. Lyle1, A. Munoz1, C. Gehrig1, U. Sigwart2, R. Lerch2, M. 
Beghetti3, F. Mach2, J. Sztajzel2, S. E. Antonarakis1, J. L. Blouin1;  
1Medical Genetics, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Car-
diology, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Pediatric Cardi -
ology, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an autosomal dominant disease with a prevalence of approximately 1/500 adults. To date, mutations in 14 genes responsible for familial HCM have been identiﬁed. The majority of these mutations are single nucleotide substitutions and have been identiﬁed throughout coding exons, intron-exon junctions and in promoter regions. Genetic testing for HCM is of considerable beneﬁt in diagnosis, prognosis or predictive testing. However, the genetic and allelic heterogeneity of HCM means that mutation detection by classical methods is time-consuming, expensive and difﬁcult to realise in a routine diagnostic molecular laboratory. We have developed a 30 kb CustomSeq Resequencing Array (Affymetrix) enabling rapid molecular diagnosis of HCM. This array comprises all coding exons (161), splice-site junctions and known promoter regions of 12 genes mutated in HCM. We designed PCR probes for a total of 44 amplicons (size ranging from 330-10’800 bp) which are pooled and hybridised to the array. Using this array, more than 90% of all mutations reported to 
date can be detected by a single hybridisation experiment.We report here the results of a ﬁrst series of unrelated patients with HCM that we have analysed by our CustomSeq array and discuss our 
experience with this new highthroughput molecular diagnostic tool.
C11. An FGF23 missense mutation causes familial tumoral 
calcinosis with hyperphosphatemia
A. Benet-Pages1, P. Orlik2, T. M. Strom1,3, B. Lorenz-Depiereux1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, GSF National Research Center for Environment 
and Health, Munich, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics, Innsbruck Medical 
University, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der 
Isar, Technical University, Munich, Germany.
Familial tumoral calcinosis (FTC) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by ectopic calciﬁcations and elevated serum phosphate levels. Recently, biallelic deleterious mutations in the 
GALNT3 gene 
have been described to cause FTC. We investigated a 12-year-old boy from Austria with FTC who was negative for 
GALNT3 mutations. He 
clinically presented with painful swellings at the left elbow and left tibia. Radiographs showed a calciﬁed tumoral mass at the left elbow and signs of diaphysitis at the left tibia. The FTC phenotype is regarded as the metabolic mirror image of hypophosphatemic conditions, where causal mutations are known in the genes 
FGF23 or PHEX. Hence, we 
considered these  genes candidates for underlying FTC. Sequencing 
revealed a homozygous missense mutation in the FGF23 gene 
(p.S71G) at an amino acid position which is highly conserved. Wild-type FGF23 is secreted as intact protein and processed N-terminal and C-terminal fragments. Expression of the mutated protein in HEK293 cells showed that only the C-terminal fragment is secreted whereas the intact protein is retained in the Golgi complex. Also, determination of circulating FGF23 in the affected individual with an FGF23 ELISA showed a marked increase in the C-terminal fragment. These results suggest that the FGF23 function is decreased by absent or extremely reduced secretion of intact FGF23. We conclude that FGF23 mutations in hypophosphatemic rickets and FTC have opposite effects on 
phosphate homeostasis.
C12. Homozygosity for a Dominant-Negative Type I Collagen 
Mutation Attenuates the Type IV OI Phenotype of the 
Heterozygous Brtl Mouse: Insight into Disease Mechanism
A. Forlino1, C. Bergwitz1, T. E. Uveges1, K. M. Kozloff2, N. V. Kuznetsova3, G. 
Gronowicz4, S. A. Goldstein2, S. Leikin3, J. C. Marini1;  
1BEMB; NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Ortho Res Labs; U Mich, 
Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 3Sect of Phys Biochem; NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, 
MD, United States, 4U Conn Health Center, Farmington, CT, United States.
The Brtl mouse is a dominant-negative model for type IV osteogenesis 
imperfecta, caused by a glycine substitution (G349C) knocked into one col1a1 allele. Brtl/+ pups have 30% perinatal lethality. Surviving Brtl 
mice are small with weaker and more brittle bones.In murine models for other dominant genetic disorders, homozygous animals have a more severe or lethal phenotype than heterozygous.. We present the novel genetic situation in which homozygosity for a dominant mutation (Brtl/Brtl) attenuates the phenotype of the heterozygous mice. Brtl/Brtl have normal perinatal survival, an intermediate weight versus Wt and Brtl/+, and lack the rib fractures, ﬂared thorax, osteoporotic calvarium and vertebrae seen in Brtl/+.Brtl/Brtl femurs have normal BMD, but intermediate CSA, TbTh and BV/TV. They withstand normal loading to fracture and are less brittle than Brtl/+. Cell numbers, MAR and BFR/BS were unchanged in all Concurrent Sessions65
genotypes at 2 mos.
Matrix insufﬁciency and collagen chain composition may contribute to the different homozygous and heterozygous phenotype. In Brtl/+, type I collagen containing one mutant chain is selectively retained by the cells and is deﬁcient in lung and skin tissue. Approximately 1/3 of collagen with one mutant chain and 2/3 of collagen with two mutant α1 chains are secreted from the Brtl/+ ﬁbroblasts, resulting in about 40% matrix insufﬁciency of type I collagen in Brtl/+ versus only 15% in Brtl/Brtl. Additionally, collagen with one mutant chain present in Brtl/+ has a reactive SH group which might contribute to illegitimate collagen cross-links, while collagen of Brtl/Brtl contains only disulﬁde-linked α1 
dimers.
C13. Germ-line and somatic PTPN11 mutations in human 
disease
V. Cordeddu1, S. Martinelli1, C. Carta1, V. Petrangeli1, F. Pantaleoni1, V. Fo -
dale1, G. Zampino2, I. van der Burgt3, S. Jeffery4, P. D. Emanuel5, C. Schoch6, 
M. L. Loh7, N. Gatterman8, G. Basso9, A. Biondi10, M. Sorcini1, B. D. Gelb11, M. 
Tartaglia1;  
1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, 
Rome, Italy, 3University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 4St. 
George's Hospital Medical School, London, United Kingdom, 5University of 
Alabama, Birmingham, AL, United States, 6Ludwig-Maximilians-University of 
München, München, Germany, 7University of California, San Francisco, CA, 
United States, 8Heinrich-Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 9Università di 
Padova, Padua, Italy, 10Università di Milano Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 11Mount Sinai 
School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States.
We recently demonstrated that germ-line mutations in PTPN11 cause 
Noonan syndrome (NS), and that somatic mutations in the same gene recur in a heterogeneous group of hematologic malignancies. PTPN11
 
encodes the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, a transducer that relays signals from activated receptors to RAS and other intracellular signaling molecules. Both germ-line and somatic PTPN11 mutations 
promote SHP-2 gain-of-function by destabilizing the catalytically 
inactive conformation of the protein.Here, we describe the diversity of PTPN11 mutations in human disease, 
and trace the parental origin of de novo  PTPN11  lesions in NS.
DNAs from individuals with NS (N=107), juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (N=64), myelodysplastic syndromes (N=234), chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (N=84) and acute myeloid leukemia (N=393) were screened by DHPLC analysis. Mutations were identiﬁed in 49 subjects with NS and 45 individuals with a hematologic disorder. Most of mutations altered residues located in or around the interacting surfaces of the N-SH2 and PTP domains that stabilize SHP-2 in its catalytically inactive conformation. However, no overlap in the precise residue substitutions was observed. Such dramatic genotype-phenotype relationship deﬁnes a novel class of mutations of PTPN11
 
with role in cancer. These data also support that distinct gain-of-function thresholds for SHP-2 activity are required to induce cell-, tissue- or developmental-speciﬁc phenotypes, each depending on the 
transduction network involved.Finally, by analyzing intronic portions ﬂanking the exonic PTPN11 
lesions in 49 sporadic NS cases, we traced the parental origin of mutations in 14 families, and demonstrated that they were transmitted 
by the father in all cases.
C14. The Loeys-Dietz syndrome: a new aortic aneurysm 
syndrome caused by mutations in TGFBR1 and TGFBR2
B. L. Loeys1, J. De Backer2, P. J. Coucke2, J. Chen1, H. C. Dietz1, A. M. De 
Paepe2;  
1McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United 
States, 2Center for Medical Genetics, Gent, Belgium.
A novel aortic aneurysm syndrome characterized by the triad of widely spaced eyes (hypertelorism), biﬁd uvula and/or cleft palate, and generalized arterial tortuosity with ascending aortic aneurysm/dissection was previously described (Loeys-Dietz syndrome; ASHG 2004). This syndrome shows autosomal dominant inheritance and variable clinical expression. Here were present other ﬁndings in multiple systems that include: craniosynostosis, Arnold-Chiari malformation with hydrocephalus, mental retardation, congenital heart disease, and aneurysms with dissection throughout the arterial tree. While some individuals show some overlap with Marfan syndrome (MFS) (variable evidence for bone overgrowth and aortic root dilatation and/or dissection), none satisﬁed diagnostic criteria for MFS. Importantly, aneurysms appeared to be particularly aggressive, with rupture at a 
very early age or at a size below that seen in MFS.We identiﬁed heterozygous mutations in either type I or type II transforming growth factor β receptor (TβRI or TβRII) in 4 and 6 families, respectively. Despite evidence that receptors derived from selected mutant alleles cannot support TGFβ signal propagation, heterozygous patient-derived cells do not show altered kinetics of the acute phase response to administered ligand. Furthermore, tissues derived from affected individuals show increased expression of both collagen and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), as well as nuclear enrichment of phosphorylated Smad2, indicative of increased TGFβ signaling. These data deﬁnitively implicate perturbation of TGFβ signaling in many common human phenotypes including craniosynostosis, cleft palate, arterial aneurysms, congenital heart disease, and mental retardation, and suggest that comprehensive mechanistic insight will 
require consideration of both primary and compensatory events.
C15. LMX1B  genotype-renal phenotype studies in 32 families 
with nail patella syndrome
E. M. H. F. Bongers1, F. T. Huysmans2, R. J. C. Admiraal3, J. R. M. Cruysberg4, 
G. Borm5, A. van Remortele1, H. van Bokhoven1, L. H. Hoefsloot1, E. Levtch -
enko6, N. V. A. M. Knoers1;  
1Dept Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijme -
gen, The Netherlands, 2Dept Internal Medicine, Radboud University Nijmegen 
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Dept Otorhinolaryngology, Rad -
boud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4Dept 
Ophthalmology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands, 5Dept Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Radboud University Nijme -
gen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 6Dept Pediatric Nephrology, 
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Nail-patella syndrome (NPS) is characterized by developmental defects of dorsal limb structures, nephropathy, and glaucoma and caused by heterozygous mutations in the LIM homeodomain transcription 
factor LMX1B. In order to identify possible genotype-phenotype 
correlations, we performed LMX1B mutation analysis and in-depth 
investigations of limb, renal, ocular, and audiological ﬁndings in 106 subjects from 32 NPS families. Remarkable phenotypic heterogeneity at the individual, intrafamilial, and interfamilial level was observed for different NPS manifestations. We detected low tension glaucoma (LTG) and hearing impairment as new symptoms associated with NPS. Quantitative urinanalysis revealed proteinuria in 21.3% of individuals. Microalbuminuria was observed in 21.7% of subjects without overt proteinuria. Interestingly, nephropathy appeared signiﬁcantly more frequent in females. A signiﬁcant association was identiﬁed between the presence of renal involvement in an NPS patient and a positive family history of nephropathy. Sequencing of 
LMX1B revealed 
18 different mutations, including 9 novel variants, in 28 families. Individuals with an 
LMX1B mutation located in the homeodomain 
showed signiﬁcantly more frequent and higher values of proteinuria compared to individuals carrying mutations in the LIM-A and LIM-B domains. No clear genotype-phenotype association was apparent for extrarenal manifestations. This is the ﬁrst study indicating that family history of nephropathy and mutation location might be important in precipitating the individual risk for developing NPS renal disease. We suggest that the NPS phenotype is broader than previously described and that LTG and hearing impairment are part of the syndrome. Further studies on modifying factors are needed to understand the mechanisms underlying phenotypic heterogeneity.
C16. A new XLMR syndrome characterized by mental retardation, 
primary ciliary dyskinesia and macrocephaly, caused by a novel 
mutation in OFD1.
B. Budny1,2, W. Chen1, M. Wisniewska2, A. Tzschach1, H. Omran3, M. Fliegauf3, 
M. Badura2, L. R. Jensen1, M. Raynaud4, A. Latos-Bielenska2, S. Lenzner1, H. 
H. Ropers1;  
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2University of 
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Albert Ludwigs University, Freiburg, Ger -
many, 4Service de Genetique et INSERM U316, Tours, France.
We report on a new syndrome characterized by mental retardation, 
primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) and macrocephaly in a large three-Concurrent Sessions66
generation family with an X-linked recessive inheritance. The 11-
year-old index case had delayed motor development, severe mental retardation (IQ=20), and macrocephaly. Recurrent respiratory problems led to the diagnosis of PCD at the age of 8 years. Eight other affected males died because of bronchopulmonary infections before the age of 5 years. Five obligate female carriers were clinically inconspicuous. We performed pairwise and multipoint linkage analysis using SNP markers, and found tight linkage to a 25 cM interval in Xp22.32-Xp21.3 (LOD score 2.99 at DXS8019). Based on the speciﬁc phenotype of PCD, the candidate interval was screened for cilium-associated genes. Therefore, we performed an in silico  comparative 
genomic approach, comparing 164 genes from the candidate interval with those from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii  as a ciliated and those 
from Arabidopsis thaliana  as a non-ciliated organism. For 4 of these 
genes, orthologs were only detected in C.reinhardtii.  Subsequent 
screening of these genes revealed a causative mutation in the OFD1  
gene, known to be mutated in X-linked dominant Oral-Facial-Digital syndrome type 1 (MIM#311200). An insertion of four nucleotides (AAGA) in exon 16, present in affected males and all obligate carrier females, causes a frameshift leading to a premature stop codon. Thus, despite its different mode of inheritance, the disorder in this family is allelic to OFD1, and our ﬁndings suggest that the 
OFD1 gene plays an 
important role in the biogenesis and/or functioning of cilia.
C17. CHARGE syndrome: the phenotypic spectrum of mutations 
in the CHD7  gene
M. Jongmans1, L. Vissers1, L. Hoefsloot1, R. Admiraal2, J. M. van Hagen3, J. A. 
Veltman1, B. B. A. de Vries1, A. G. van Kessel1, H. G. Brunner1, C. van Raven -
swaaij-Arts1;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Cen -
tre, The Netherlands, 2Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University 
Nijmegen Medical Centre, The Netherlands, 3Department of Human Genetics, 
VU University Medical Centre Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
The main features of CHARGE syndrome are coloboma, heart malformations, choanal atresia, retarded growth and development, genital hypoplasia, ear anomalies and/or deafness. Other common aspects of this syndrome are cleft lip/palate, balance disturbances, facial palsy and renal malformations. The clinical variability is high and 
a clinical diagnosis is not always straightforward.Recently, the 
CHD7  gene, a new member of the chromodomain gene 
family, was identiﬁed as an important gene involved in CHARGE 
syndrome1. Since this discovery we studied more than 60 patients with 
CHARGE syndrome and identiﬁed CHD7 mutations in over 60% of 
cases.The clinical details of our 
CHD7  positive patients conﬁrm the phenotypic 
variability of CHARGE syndrome. This spectrum includes patients who do not meet the diagnostic criteria for CHARGE syndrome as proposed by Blake et al.
2, as will be illustrated by some atypical cases. 
For example a mutation was found in a boy with an above average IQ. Also in a patient without coloboma, choanal atresia or heart defect a mutation was identiﬁed. Furthermore we were able to demonstrate 
intrafamilial variability in sibs carrying the same CHD7  mutation.
An overview of the mutations identiﬁed thus far will be given and the 
clinical spectrum of CHD7  positive patients will be discussed.
1) Vissers LE. Nat Genet. 2004 Sep;36(9):955-7.2) Blake KD. Clin Pediatr. 1998 Mar;37(3):159-73.
C18. Identiﬁcation of a novel locus for Hirschsprung disease 
associated with microcephaly, mental retardation and 
polymicrogyria
A. S. Brooks1, A. M. Bertoli-Avella1, G. M. Burzynski2, J. Osinga2, J. A. Hurst3, 
G. M. S. Mancini1, E. de Graaff1, B. A. Oostra1, R. M. W. Hofstra2;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 
2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals, 
Oxford, United Kingdom.
At least two syndromes present with a similar association of 
Hirschsprung disease, microcephaly and mental retardation, namely Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS) and Goldberg-Shprintzen syndrome (GOSHS). Although some of the key features in GOSHS are more or less similar to the ones in MWS, patients can be distinguished on the basis of their facial dysmorphism. Furthermore, MWS is associated with de novo mutations in 
ZFHX1B located at 2q22, whereas for GOSHS, 
which is autosomal recessive inherited, no causative gene has been identiﬁed yet. To unravel the genetic basis of GOSHS we studied a large inbred Moroccan family segregating GOSHS and polymicrogyria as part of the syndrome. We identiﬁed, by homozygosity mapping, a critical region of 3.8 Mb on 10q21.3-q22.1. We sequenced all the genes in the region and identiﬁed a homozygous stop codon in a gene we named GOSHS. In a second Pakistani family we identiﬁed another homozygous stop codon. As mutations in this gene are associated with Hirschsprung disease and polymicrogyria, the encoded protein likely 
plays a role in neural crest and cerebral development.
C19. Different mechanism of second hit in neuroﬁbromas 
depending on the germline NF1 mutation
T. De Raedt1, O. Maertens2, H. Brems1, I. Heyns1, J. R. Vermeesch1, R. Sciot3, 
L. Messiaen2, E. Legius1;  
1Department of Human Genetics, KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Center for 
Medical Genetics, UGent, Gent, Belgium, 3Department of Pathology, KULeu -
ven, Leuven, Belgium.
Neuroﬁbromatosis type I is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in the NF1 tumor suppressor gene. The hallmarks of NF1 are neuroﬁbromas, café-au-lait spots, Lisch noduli and learning difﬁculties. The NF1 population can, on the basis of their germline mutation, be subdivided into two main patient groups i.e. those with a mutation conﬁned to 
NF1 and those with a microdeletion of the entire 
NF1 region (1,4Mb) including neighboring genes. Patients with an NF1 microdeletion have on average a larger tumor load and have an increased risk for malignancy.We investigated if the difference in tumor phenotype originates from a difference in somatic inactivation of 
NF1. We analysed 35 
neuroﬁbromas of NF1 microdeletion patients and 28 neuroﬁbromas of NF1 non-microdeletion patients for LOH. LOH was found in 7/28 neuroﬁbromas of the non-microdeletion patients and in none of the 35 microdeletion patients (P=0.002, Fisher exact). Using semi-quantitated PCR and array-CGH we further investigated the mechanism of LOH. Of the 7 neuroﬁbromas with LOH, 3 exhibited LOH due to a deletion on 
chromosome 17, and 4 due to mitotic recombination.The reason for the absence of LOH in neuroﬁbromas of NF1 microdeletion patients remains speculative. LOH in microdeletion cases results in a homozygous deletion of 17 genes and this might not be viable for the Schwann cell or alternatively this might lead to a malignant tumor. This study points to an important difference in the pathogenesis of neuroﬁbroma formation in both NF1 patient groups.
C20. Inducible oncogenic ERBB2 signaling identiﬁes premature 
senescence as a primary tumor-protective response in 
mammary carcinogenesis
C. Spangenberg1, T. M. Trost1, E. U. Lausch1, S. A. Fees1, D. Reutzel1, A. 
May1, S. Schmitt2, I. B. Schiffer3, J. G. Hengstler4, D. Prawitt1, B. U. Zabel1;  
1Universitätskinderklinik, Mainz, Germany, 2FACS Core Facility, Mainz, Ger -
many, 3Universitätsfrauenklinik, Mainz, Germany, 4Rudolf-Böhm Institut für 
Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Leipzig, Germany.
ERBB2 plays a central role in the development of breast cancer and other epithelial malignancies. Enhanced ERBB2 expression leading to aberrant signaling in the course of tumorigenesis can frequently be attributed to genomic ampliﬁcation of the ERBB2-locus on chromosome 17q21. In order to inducibly express oncogenic ERBB2 (NeuT) in MCF-7 breast carcinoma cells we applied a tetracycline (Tet)-controlled expression system. Interestingly, tet-mediated upregulation of NeuT does not result in a mitogenic response but instead leads to prominent biochemical and phenotypical alterations compatible with premature senescence (e.g. cell cycle arrest and expression of senescence associated beta-galactosidase). Molecular dissection of the underlying mechanisms provides direct evidence that upregulation of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor P21 via the P38 MAPK pathway is necessary to elicit the senescence response upon oncogenic ERBB2 
signaling.Premature senescence represents a tumor-protective program that has previously been shown to be induced by overexpression of other oncogenes (e.g. activated forms of RAS or RAF). Our results suggest a multistep model of ERBB2-positive mammary carcinomas that anticipates further speciﬁc hits in addition to upregulation of ERBB2. Concurrent Sessions67
Such lesions may functionally inactivate premature senescence as 
the inherent anticarcinogenic program, targeting constituents of the premature senescence program (like P21), regulatory molecules, or downstream effectors.
C21. Pharmacogenetics studies in patients with advanced lung 
cancer: prognostic value of the thymidylate synthase 2R/3R 
polymorphism and predictivity of NER factor XPD K751Q 
and XRCC1 R399Q polymorphisms following platinum-based 
chemotherapy
D. F. Giachino1, P. Ghio2, S. Regazzoni1, G. Mandrile1, S. Novello2, G. Sel -
vaggi2, M. De Marchi1, G. V. Scagliotti2;  
1Medical Genetics, ASO San Luigi, University of Torino, Orbassano, Italy, 2Tho-
racic Oncology Unit, ASO San Luigi, University of Torino, Orbassano, Italy.
Lung cancer is one of the most frequent killers in most populations, and treatment is mainly based on platinum derivatives. Survival is limited and highly variable, probably depending both on tumor features and sensitivity to treatment. Pharmacogenetic studies can contribute to better understand both kind of variables. As candidate genes we choose TS, whose expression controls cell proliferation and the 3R allele is associated with higher expression, XPD, whose K751Q SNP affects repair activity, and the XRCC1 R399Q SNP. We enrolled 322 consecutive patients, 80% males, 86% smokers, 82% NSCLC. Among them, 244 received platinum derivatives, mainly in combination with gemcitabine. The control group was represented by 253 healthy medical students. Uni- and multivariate statistical analysis was performed with the SPlus package. On December 2004, the median follow up period was 320 days. Survival was estimated on a subgroup of 128 patients 
with enrollment <6 months from diagnosis and >9 months follow-up.Patients' genotype frequencies were not signiﬁcantly different from controls'. Median survival was signiﬁcantly increased in TS 2R homozygotes (17.3m) vs. 9.6m in 2R/3R and 8.7m in 3R/3R, independently of the treatment. The effect of platinum treatment was statistically signiﬁcant in KK homozygotes, who showed a signiﬁcantly longer survival (13.3m in Pt-treated vs 7.7m in nonPt-treated), while it was ineffective in QQ homozygotes. Relapses were 22.8% in KK and 43.5% in QQ. The XRCC1 SNP was not signiﬁcantly associated with 
any of the clinical parameters.Pharmacogenetics may predict non-responsiveness and address 
patients to alternative non-platinum based treatments.
C22. All-trans retinoic acid treatment of Wilms tumor cells 
reverses expression of genes associated with high risk and 
relapse in vivo
B. Zirn1, B. Samans2, M. Krause2, M. Eilers2, M. Gessler1;  
1Physiological Chemistry I, University of Wuerzburg, Germany, 2Institute of 
Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), University of Marburg, Germany.
Wilms tumor is one of the most frequent neoplasias in children. Our previous microarray screening in a large series of Wilms tumors revealed several candidate genes that are deregulated in advanced tumors and are part of the retinoic acid signalling pathway. To investigate whether retinoic acid could be employed as a novel therapeutic agent in these tumors, we treated cultured Wilms tumor cells with different concentrations of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and assessed gene expression changes by real time RT-PCR as well as microarray analysis. Several genes like RARRES3, CTGF, CKS2, CCNA2, IGFBP3, CCL2 or ITM2B that were previously found to be deregulated in advanced tumors exhibited opposite expression changes after ATRA treatment. In addition to enhanced retinoid signalling, the TGFß pathway was strongly activated by ATRA treatment of Wilms tumor cells. Both the retinoic acid and the TGFß pathway mediate inhibition of cell growth. These ﬁndings represent the ﬁrst molecular evidence of a potential beneﬁt from ATRA treatment in Wilms tumors.
C23. Follow-up Extension Study of a Double-Blind Phase 3 
Clinical Study of Recombinant Human Arylsulfatase B (rhASB) 
in Patients with Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (MPS VI).
M. Beck1, P. Harmatz2, R. Giugliani3, I. Schwartz3, N. Guffon4, C. Sá Miranda5, 
E. Teles6, J. Wraith7, M. Scarpa8, K. Berger9, S. Swiedler10;  
1Children's Hosp, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 2Children's Hosp & Re -
serach Center, Oakland, CA, United States, 3Hosp de Clinicas de Porto Alegre 
- UFRGS, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 4Hosp Edouard Herriot, Lyon, France, 5Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portugal, 6Hosp de Sao Joao, Porto, 
Portugal, 7Willink Biochemical Genetics Unit, Royal Manchester Children’s Hos -
pital, Manchester,Novato, United Kingdom, 8Department of Pediatrics, Univer -
sity of Padova, Padova, Italy, 9NYU Departments of Medicine, Physiology and 
Neuroscience, NYU School of Medicine, USA, New York, CA, United States, 
10BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Novato, CA, United States.
MPS VI (Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome) is a lysosomal storage disease 
caused by insufﬁcient activity of the enzyme N-acetylgalactosamine 
4-sulfatase (arylsulfatase B or ASB). The clinical course is chronic, progressive, and life threatening. Results are reported here for a multicenter, multinational, open-label extension of the Phase 3 study of enzyme-replacement therapy (ERT) using weekly treatment of 1 mg/kg recombinant human arylsulfatase B (rhASB). Nineteen patients in each of the rhASB and placebo groups completing the 24-week placebo-controlled study were enrolled. The primary objective was to evaluate rhASB’s ability to enhance endurance based on an increase in the number of meters (m) walked in a 12-MinuteWalk at Week 48 compared to baseline (Week 0) and with entry into the extension study (Week 24). As a reference, the rhASB group improved by a mean distance of 109 m relative to 26 m for the placebo during the double-blind phase (p=0.025). From Week 24 to Week 48, the original placebo group received rhASB and showed a mean increase of 65 m relative to Week 24 values (p=0.007), and an increase of 90 m relative to baseline for the entire 48 weeks (p<0.001). From Week 24 to Week 48, the original rhASB group improved their mean walk distance an additional 36 m (p = 0.15) for a total of 145 m relative to baseline (p=0.001). Similar changes were observed for each group in a 3-Minute Stair Climb, a secondary endpoint variable, providing additional evidence of improved endurance. Additional efﬁcacy and safety data 
will be presented.
C24. Development of antisense-induced exon skipping for 
clinical applications in Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy.
J. C. T. van Deutekom1, A. Aartsma-Rus1, A. A. M. Janson1, C. L. de Winter1, R. 
C. J. Schotel1, J. T. den Dunnen1, G. Platenburg2, G. B. van Ommen1;  
1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 
2Prosensa B.V., Leiden, The Netherlands.
Manipulation of pre-mRNA splicing using antisense oligoribonucleotides 
(AONs) has shown great therapeutic promise for Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). By inducing the skipping of one or more exons, an out-of-frame transcript associated with DMD can be converted into an in-frame transcript as found in patients with the less severe Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD). This may alleviate or even stop the progression of muscle wasting in DMD. We have characterized a series of AONs with which the skipping of 30 out of 79 DMD exons can be induced. Ten were successfully applied to cultured muscle cells from a series of DMD patients carrying a variety of mutations. The synthesis of BMD-like dystrophins was detected in up to 90% of treated muscle cells. Furthermore, by applying combinations of AONs, we demonstrated the simultaneous skipping of two, and even multiple, consecutive exons. This multiexon skipping increases the therapeutic applicability to over 85% of DMD patients, and renders it signiﬁcantly less mutation-speciﬁc. In the 
mdx mouse model, intramuscular 
injections of an exon 23 skipping AON restored dystrophin in up to 20% of ﬁbers. We also set up human sequence-speciﬁc exon skipping in transgenic mice carrying a copy of the full-length human DMD gene. Intramuscular delivery of human-sequence speciﬁc AONs showed dose-and time-dependent skipping of the human (but not the murine) exons in hDMD mice. We are currently planning a clinical proof of concept study to determine the tolerability and efﬁciency of an exon 51-speciﬁc AON following local intramuscular injections in patients.
C25. Signiﬁcant decrease of BMI in individuals carrying the 103I 
MC4R allele - Association analysis in 7937 participants of two 
population-based surveys
C. Vollmert1, I. M. Heid1, A. Hinney2, A. Döring1, F. Geller3, H. Löwel1, H. Wich -
mann1, F. Kronenberg4, J. Hebebrand2, T. Illig1, &. the KORA group5;  
1GSF National Research Center for Environment and Health, Neuherberg, Ger -
many, 2Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University of Duisburg-
Essen, Germany, 3Institute of Medical Biometry and Epidemiology, Philipps-Uni -
versity of Marburg, Germany, 4Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of 
Medical Genetics, Mol. and Clin. Pharmacology, Innsbruck Med. Univ., Austria, Concurrent Sessions68
5The KORA group consists of H.-E. Wichmann (speaker), H. Löwel, C. Meis -
inger, T. Illig, R. Holle, J. John, and their coworkers, who are responsible for the 
design and conduct of the KORA studies. The MONICA Augsburg study was initiated and conducted by U, Keil and coworkers., Germany.
The melanocortin-4-receptor gene ( MC4R) is part of the 
melanocortinergic pathway that controls energy homeostasis. The 
MC4R_V103I (rs2229616) polymorphism was recently shown to be 
associated with body weight regulation: A meta-analysis of 14 case-control studies reported a mild negative association with obesity (OR=0.69, p=0.03). However, evidence in a large population-based study in a homogeneous population and a signiﬁcant estimate of the 
change in quantitative measures of obesity was still lacking.We performed an association analysis of the genotyping data of two population-based surveys of Caucasians with the same high quality 
study protocol including a total of 7937 participants.Linear regression analysis showed a signiﬁcant decrease of 0.52 BMI units (95%CI=[-0.02, -1.03], p=0.043) for carriers of the heterozygote rs2229616G/A genotype, a genotype observed in 3.7% of the participants. Logistic regression illustrated a signiﬁcantly negative association of the 
MC4R variant with “above average weight” (BMI 
≥median BMI) yielding an odds ratio of 0.75 (95%CI=[0.59, 0.95], p=0.017). Comparing obese (BMI ≥30 kg/m², WHO 1997) to non-obese (BMI <30 kg/m²) we obtained similar results. The ﬁndings were detected for each gender and each survey separately and did not depend on the modelling of age-, sex- and survey effects.Our study conﬁrms previous ﬁndings of a meta-analysis that the relatively infrequent G/A genotype of the V103I_
MC4R polymorphism 
is negatively associated with obesity in population-based original data of 7937 participants. Our study extends previous ﬁndings by showing for the ﬁrst time a signiﬁcant decrease of BMI in individuals carrying 
the infrequent allele of this MC4R  variant.
C26. Linkage of chromosome 7p and association of the GPRA 
gene region in Italian asthmatic families
G. Malerba1, E. Trabetti1, L. Xumerle1, R. Galavotti1, J. Kere2, P. F. Pignatti1;  
1Section of Biology and Genetics, Dept of Mother and Child, and Biology-Ge -
netics, Verona, Italy, 2Dept of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland.
In 2001, a genome scan for asthma and IgE described linkage of a 20cM region on chromosome 7p14-p15 in Finnish and French- Canadian families, and in 2004 the GPRA gene region has been associated with 
elevated IgE in the same populations.We performed the screening of chromosome 7 to investigate whether it may contain a susceptibility gene for asthma phenotypes in the Italian population. The screening of 117 families with 19 microsatellite markers showed potential linkage at different positions ranging from 22 cM to 54 cM in the marker map, for asthma (p<0.005 at 44 cM), 
elevated IgE (p<0.002 at 22 cM), and atopy (p<0.005 at 54 cM).The PDT (pedigree disequilibrium test) was performed on 211 families using 7 SNPs in the GPRA gene region. Elevated IgE levels were associated with 2 SNPs (Hopo 546333 p=0.0046; Hopo 49 p=0.006) and with 7-SNP haplotypes in the global test (p=0.019).These results are in agreement with the recent report in Finnish and French-Canadian families and suggest that a common susceptibility factor for atopic manifestations in asthma is likely to map in the GPRA 
gene region.
C27. Effect of Dnmt1  mutations on transmission ratio distortion.
A. K. Naumova1, S. Croteau1, M. Freitas Andrade1, C. M. T. Greenwood2;  
1McGill University Health Centre Research Institute, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 
2Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Transmission-ratio distortion (TRD) (transmission of parental alleles that deviate from expected 1:1 ratio) has been observed in different species and at different genetic loci. We hypothesized that TRD resulted from failure to erase epigenetic marks during gametogenesis, and therefore TRD is one of the manifestations of epigenetic inheritance . This hypothesis was strongly supported by our ﬁnding of grandparental-origin dependent TRD for loci closely linked to imprinted regions in humans and mice. We found evidence for genetic heterogeneity with regard to TRD in human families. In the mouse, we determined that the preferential transmission of grandmaternal alleles (58%) in the imprinted region of chromosome 12 was due to postimplantation loss of female embryos that inherited the alleles of their grandfather. To further investigate the mechanism underlying TRD and the role of methylation we repeated the backcrosses with mice that carry mutations in the DNA methyltransferase gene 1 (
Dnmt1), which 
encodes the enzyme involved in maintenance DNA methylation and is essential for normal embryo development. Two mutations were tested: 
the Dnmt1c and Dnmt1n that target the catalytic and N-terminal regions 
of DNMT1, respectively. As predicted by our model, Dnmt1 mutations 
caused loss of TRD (P=0.0007), i.e. normal Mendelian transmission of alleles. Furthermore, the transmission ratios did not depend upon the genotype of the offspring, but depended upon the genotype of the mother, suggesting a maternal factor effect. These results conﬁrm the role of methylation and 
Dnmt1 in the genesis of TRD and explain the 
genetic heterogeneity observed in human studies.
C28. Identiﬁcation of a ﬁfth locus involved in Autosomal 
Dominant Hypercholesterolemia
M. Trillard1, D. Allard1, M. Abifadel1,2, M. Devillers1, D. Erlich1, C. Junien1,3, M. 
Varret1, C. Boileau1,3, J. P. Rabès1,3, A. D. H. French Research Network4;  
1INSERM UR383, Paris, France, 2Faculté de Pharmacie, Université Saint Jo -
seph, Beirut, Lebanon, 3Laboratoire de Biochimie, Hormonologie et Génétique 
moléculaire, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, AP-HP, Boulogne, France, 4GIS-Institut 
des maladies rares, Paris, France.
Autosomal Dominant Hypercholesterolemia (ADH), a major risk factor for atherosclerosis, is associated with mutations in two genes : 
LDLR  (encoding low-density lipoprotein receptor) or APOB (encoding 
apolipoprotein B). Our team has pioneered the claim that the disease is far more heterogeneous. We have shown that defects in at least 2 other genes (
HCHOLA3  and HCHOLA4 ) are implicated in the disease 
and recently identiﬁed HCHOLA3  as PCSK9 (proprotein convertase 
subtilisin/kexin type 9). Through the ADH French Research Network, we collected genetic material from a large french pedigree. Molecular diagnostic laboratory excluded linkage to the major genes 
LDLR  
and APOB and sequencing analysis did not reveal any mutation in 
the PCSK9 gene. Furthermore, the study of 6 microsatellite markers 
spanning the HCHOLA4  interval clearly excluded linkage to this 
locus. To evaluate the power of the family for linkage, 500 simulations were carried out using the SLINK software in which genotypes were simulated using parameters compatible with ADH. The average lod score was 2.08 and the maximum lod score was 3.96 indicating that the statistically signiﬁcant threshold of 3 can be reached in this single family. Genomewide scan will be performed in collaboration with the National Genotyping Center. After the ﬁne mapping of the locus, candidate gene approach through sequencing and Southern blot will be developed to identify the corresponding gene. Identiﬁcation of this gene, called 
HCHOLA5 , could reveal a new regulatory pathway or 
mechanism and lead to the development of new potent drugs.
C29. Two new putative loci for ADNFLE identiﬁed in an Italian 
family suggest a digenic inheritance for the disease
R. Combi1, L. Dalprà2, L. Ferini-Strambi3, M. L. Tenchini1;  
1University of Milano, Milano, Italy, 2University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 
3Scientiﬁc Institute H San Raffaele, Milano, Italy.
Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is an idiopathic partial epilepsy characterised by cluster of short repeated seizures occurring mostly during non-REM sleep. This epileptic phenotype has been up to now considered a simple Mendelian trait caused by mutations in neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) subunit genes. However, for the 88% of the identiﬁed cases such mutations were not identiﬁed. We recently demonstrated that in a three generation Italian family the disease was unlinked to all known ADFNLE loci as well as to all known brain-expressed nAChR subunits. We therefore performed a genome-wide linkage analysis on this family, by analysing approximately 400 STR markers equally distributed on the whole genome and calculating LOD and NPL scores. Two new putative ADNFLE loci (NPL score > 3) on chromosomes 3p22-p24 and 8q11.2-q21.1 were identiﬁed. These ﬁndings, together with several previously ADNFLE characteristics (i.e. the impossibility to draw a phenotype-genotype correlation, the variability of symptoms observed even among individuals of the same family and with the same genetic defect, the rarity of the identiﬁed mutations, the difﬁculty in linking the phenotype to the mutated receptor properties and the presence of Concurrent Sessions69
locus heterogeneity) which cannot be explained by a simple Mendelian 
inheritance of the disease suggest that this epilepsy could be, at least in the above family, a complex disorder. In particular, the reported data 
are conceivable with a digenic transmission of the disease.
C30. Co-localization on human chromosome 1 of susceptibility 
loci for Atopic Dermatitis (ATOD2) and Psoriasis (PSORS4)
C. Sinibaldi1, E. Giardina1, M. Paradisi2, A. Provini2, F. Nasorri3, S. Chimenti4, 
G. Marulli4, S. Nisticò4, P. Rossi5, V. Moschese5, L. Chini5, G. Girolomoni6, G. 
Novelli1,7;  
11Department of Biopathology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2Department 
of Pediatric Dermatology,IDI - IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 3Laboratory of Immunology 
and Department of Immunodermatology, IDI- IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 4Department 
of Dermatology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 5Division of Immunology 
and Infectious Disease, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital 'Bambino 
Gesu' and Department of Pediatrics, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 6Dept. 
of Biomedical and Surgical Sciences, Section of Dermatology, University of Verona, Italy, 
7Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Arkansas 
for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States.
Atopic dermatitis (ATOD) [OMIM%603165] is a chronic inﬂammatory 
skin disease typiﬁed by itchy inﬂamed skin characterized by an onset mainly in early childhood. ATOD is a complex disease triggered by both genetic and environmental risk factors and twin studies indicate that the genetic contribution is substantial. Many genome wide linkage studies mapped a number of susceptibility regions on chromosomes 1q21 (ATOD2), 3q21 (ATOD1), 5q31-q33 (ATOD6), 13q12-q14 (ATOD5), 17q25 (ATOD4), 20p (ATOD3). Four of these loci (1q21, 3q21, 17q25 and 20p) are closely coincident with psoriasis [OMIM*177900] susceptibility loci, although ATOD is quite distinct from psoriasis and 
rarely the two diseases occur together in the same patient.We performed a ﬁne-mapping approach to reﬁne the localization of ATOD2 and PSORS4 in a large series of 115 Italian nuclear families with ATOD and 128 trios with psoriasis using a set of 16 microsatellites mapping within 1q21 segment spanning 3.5 Mb. Genotype and haplotype analysis revealed that ATOD and psoriasis overlap in an interval of 65 Kb. This region contain at least 4 genes including SPRR2C, SPRR2G, LOR, PGLYRP3 and some ESTs. These results conﬁrm preliminary reports on the existence of an ATOD susceptibility locus on human chromosome 1 and provide the exact localization in a smallest region of overlap (SRO) with PSORS4. This data support the “common soil” hypothesis (identical predisposing genes are involved in different complex diseases like diabetes, asthma, osteoporosis and inﬂammatory bowel disease).
AKNOWLEDGEMENTS
COFIN and Ministry of Health
C31. Detection of large-scale copy number polymorphisms in 
the human genome
C. Lee1, A. J. Iafrate1, L. Feuk2, M. N. Rivera1, Y. Qi2, S. W. Scherer2, M. L. 
Listewnik3;  
1Harvard Medical School / BWH, Boston, MA, United States, 2The Hospital for 
Sick Kids, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, 
United States.
Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) experiments, using 1 megabase interval microarrays containing Bacterial Artiﬁcial Chromosome (BAC)-based DNA clones, were performed in pair-wise analyses using genomic DNAs from 39 unrelated and apparently healthy individuals. These experiments led to the identiﬁcation of over 200 loci in the human genome that contain large-size copy number polymorphisms, scattered throughout the human genome and account for locus-speciﬁc variations, some of which involve hundreds of kilobases of DNA. An average of 12 large-size polymorphisms were detected in a given individual when a pooled DNA source containing 10 unrelated, healthy individuals was used as a control DNA source. Over 50% of these genomic regions overlap with known genes and approximately 25% of the identiﬁed loci map to regions previously thought to contain segmental duplications. Interestingly, some 10% of the loci reside within 100 kb of gaps in the current presentation of the human genome. Together, these large-sized copy number variations may represent as much as a ten fold increase in human genetic variation than single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We have established a searchable database that will provide an updated catalog of these large-size variations for accurate interpretation of whole-genome-directed array-based CGH assays in the research and clinical settings. This previously unappreciated large-scale genomic heterogeneity argues for a more dynamic impression of the structure of human genome. Further studies will likely yield evidence for whether these regions are associated with disease-associated rearrangements or account for genetic differences in susceptibility to diseases or reaction to speciﬁc environmental 
stimuli.
C32. Identiﬁcation of submicroscopic DNA alterations in mental 
retardation using whole genome tiling-resolution arrayCGH
B. B. A. De Vries, R. Pfundt, M. Leisink, D. A. Koolen, L. E. L. M. Vissers, 
N. De Leeuw, D. Smeets, E. Sistermans, A. Geurts van Kessel, E. F. P. M. Schoenmakers, H. G. Brunner, J. A. Veltman; 
 
Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Background: Mental retardation occurs in 2-3% of the general 
population and is caused by microscopically visible chromosomal 
aberrations in approximately 10% of the cases. The frequency of submicroscopic chromosomal alterations in these patients is, as yet, unknown. Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (arrayCGH) allows for the detection of submicroscopic chromosome alterations and, through this technology, the complete human genome can now 
be analysed at a 100 kb resolution.Methods and patients: In total 100 patients with mental retardation 
and/or congenital anomalies were included in this study. Prior routine cytogenetics, including subtelomeric analysis, failed to reveal 
anomalies in all cases.We constructed a 32K tiling resolution BAC array with complete coverage of the entire human genome. DNA from all patients were hybridized in duplicate onto this array, and novel statistical algorithms were developed for automated copy number analysis. Predicted alterations were validated by FISH and MLPA, and parents were tested 
for de novo  occurrence.
Results: Tiling resolution arrayCGH screening detected DNA copy number alterations in most patients. Analysis of parental samples, however, indicated that the majority of these alterations were inherited large scale copy number variations, i.e., polymorphisms. Fourteen patients exhibited de novo alterations, 10 deletions and 4 duplications. 
These clinically relevant alterations varied in size between 300 kb and 
10 Mb, and were scattered throughout the genome.
Conclusions:  This study demonstrates the diagnostic value of 
tiling resolution DNA copy number screening in patients with mental retardation and congenital abnormalities, revealing causative 
submicroscopic alterations in ~14% of the cases.
C33. Interchromosomal segmental duplications of the 
pericentromeric region on the human Y chromosome
S. Kirsch1, B. Weiß1, T. L. Miner2, R. H. Waterston2, R. A. Clark3, E. E. Eichler3, 
C. Münch4, W. Schempp4, G. Rappold1;  
1University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Genome Sequencing Center, 
St. Louis, MO, United States, 3University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United 
States, 4University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
Basic medical research critically depends on the ﬁnished human 
genome sequence. Two types of gaps are known to exist in the human genome: those associated with heterochromatic sequences and those embedded within euchromatin. We have identiﬁed and analysed a euchromatic island within the pericentromeric repeats of the human Y chromosome. This 450 kb island, although not recalcitrant to subcloning and present in 100 tested males from different ethnic origin, was not detected and is not contained within the published Y chromosomal sequence. The entire 450 kb interval is almost completely duplicated and consists predominantly of interchromosomal rather than intrachromosomal duplication events that are usually prevalent on the Y chromosome. We deﬁned the modular structure of this interval and detected a total of 128 underlying pairwise alignments (≥90% and ≥1kb in length) to various autosomal pericentromeric and ancestral pericentromeric regions. We also analyzed the putative gene content of this region by a combination of in silico gene prediction and paralogy 
analysis. We can show that even in this exceptionally duplicated region of the Y chromosome eight putative genes with open reading frames reside, including fusion transcripts formed by the splicing of Concurrent Sessions70
exons from two different duplication modules as well as members of 
the homeobox gene family DUX.
C34. Natural antisense transcripts (NATs) associated with genes 
involved in eye development
S. Banﬁ1, G. Alfano1, C. Vitiello1, T. Caramico1, A. Carola1, C. Caccioppoli1, M. 
Szego2, R. R. McInnes2, A. Auricchio1;  
1TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 2University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Natural antisense transcripts (NATs) are a class of genes whose role in 
controlling gene expression is becoming more and more relevant. We describe the identiﬁcation of eight novel mouse NATs associated with transcription factors (Pax6, Pax2, Six3, Six6, Otx2, Crx, Rax and Vax2) that play an important role in eye development and function. These newly-identiﬁed NATs overlap with the mature processed mRNAs or with the primary unprocessed transcript of their corresponding sense genes, are predicted to represent either protein coding or noncoding RNAs and undergo extensive alternative splicing. Expression studies, by both RT-PCR and RNA in situ hybridization, demonstrate that most of these NATs, similarly to their sense counterparts, display a speciﬁc or predominant expression in the retina, particularly at postnatal stages. We found a signiﬁcant reduction of the expression levels of one of these NATs, Vax2OS (Vax2 opposite strand) in a mouse mutant carrying the inactivation of Vax2, the corresponding sense gene. In addition, we overexpressed another NAT, CrxOS, in mouse adult retina using adeno-associated viral vectors and we observed a signiﬁcant decrease in the expression levels of the corresponding sense gene, Crx. These results suggest that these transcripts are functionally related to their sense counterparts and may play an important role in regulating the molecular mechanisms that underlie eye development 
and function in both physiological and pathological conditions.
C35. Dissection of gene regulatory networks in liver cells using 
chromatin immunoprecipitation and high resolution genomic 
arrays of the ENCODE regions.
C. Wadelius1, A. Rada Iglesias1, O. Wallerman1, C. Koch2, G. Clelland2, K. 
Wester1, S. Wilcox2, O. M. Dovey2, P. D. Ellis2, V. L. Wraight2, K. James2, R. 
Andrews2, J. Komorowski3, C. Langford2, N. Carter2, D. Vetrie2, F. Pontén1, I. 
Dunham2;  
1Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Linnaeus Centre for Bioinformatics, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
Detailed information on how genes in the human genome are regulated is not available. One objective for the ENCODE project is to evaluate methods to analyse this in 1% or 30 Mb of the genome. Antisera against HNF3b, HNF4a, USF1 and acetylated histone H3 were used in chromatin immunoprecipitation to enrich DNA interacting with each protein in the liver cell line HepG2. Precipitated DNA and reference DNA were differentially labelled and hybridised to a high resolution tiling path genomic array of ~19500 PCR fragments covering 75% of the ENCODE region. Spots with highly signiﬁcant signal for the enriched DNA were identiﬁed. The results indicate that HNF3b and HNF4a are frequent regulators of gene activity in HepG2 cells, with 117 and 132 binding sites respectively. USF1 is more specialised with 29 binding sites. Many sites are in 5’ ends of genes but presumed regulatory sequences are frequently also found in intronic and intergenic regions. Acetylated histones are mostly found at 5’ ends of genes but also in other locations. Protein distribution was also determined in tissue microarrays comprising 45 different normal tissues, 20 cancers and 50 cell-lines. HNF4a is mutated in type 2 diabetes (MODY1) and together with HNF3b important for fatty acid metabolism. USF1 is proposed as the cause of familial combined hyperlipidemia so the results are of importance for common human diseases. This strategy can be used for many other transcription factors and with improvements in array 
technology may be scaled up to still larger parts of the genome.
C36. Identiﬁcation of miRNA on chromosome 21.
C. Borel1, C. Tapparel1, E. T. Dermitzakis2, A. Kouranov3, A. G. Hatzigeorgiou3, 
S. E. Antonarakis1;  
1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva 
Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, 
Wellcome Trust genome Campus, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 3Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, P A, 
United States.
The 21-22 nucleotides long microRNA (miRNA) are an abundant class of non-coding RNA, that regulate gene expression. Hundreds of miRNA genes have been reported, and many of these were shown to 
be phylogenetically conserved.To identify novel miRNA, we aligned the HSA21 genomic sequence with the syntenic mouse sequences and selected sequences between 36 and 99 bp long conserved with more than 70% identity and no gap. Note that more stringent criteria, i.e. sequences longer than 100bp, more than 70% identity and no gap were previously shown to be unsuitable to identify miRNAs, but perfect for Conserved Non-Genic sequences and coding-exons. We isolated a total of 2796 of these sequences and kept the seven candidates with the following features that characterize miRNAs: a) folding energies below -32.5 kcal/mol; b) 1 to 4 nt bulges and mismatches; c) GC content between 32.8% and 
62.5%; and d) evolutionary conserved secondary structures.To experimentally verify that these sequences were encoding bona ﬁde miRNAs we tested their expression by RNase Protection Assay in total RNA extracted from 3 different cell lines. This procedure allowed to readily show that at least three of the candidates sequences hybridized to ~21-24 nt RNA. Further we analyzed their function with the DIANA-microT program (http://www.diana.pcbi.upenn.edu ). We searched 
18,000 UTR’s of human genes and found more than 10 targets being 
conserved in human and mouse.Our study provides novel insights into the identiﬁcation of human miRNAs. We are currently investigating their target genes in order to validate their functionality.
C37. Whole Genome Genotyping (WGG) on High Density DNA 
BeadArrays .
K. L. Gunderson , F. J. Steemers, K. Kuhn, G. Lee, H. Ren, L. Zhou, P. Ng, C. 
King, C. Tsan, W. Chang, D. Bullis, J. Musmacker, M. S. Chee, D. Barker, A. 
Oliphant, R. Shen;  
Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, United States.
High resolution genotyping is a fundamental requirement for linkage disequilibrium-based disease or pharmacogenomic association studies. Even with the judicious selection of tagging SNPs by the International HapMap Project, at least several hundred thousand SNPs will need to be scored requiring a highly multiplexed genotyping assay that allows the user to select SNPs of interest. Standard PCR-based genotyping assays typically do not scale effectively and complexity reduction approaches cannot target speciﬁc SNPs.As such, we have developed a novel, array-based whole genome genotyping (WGG) assay that overcomes the multiplexing barrier and effectively enables unlimited SNP genotyping from a single sample preparation. This was accomplished by hybridizing the product of a single-tube whole genome ampliﬁcation (WGA) reaction to 50-mer probe arrays and conducting an array-based allele-speciﬁc primer extension assay. This approach is unique among genotyping methods in that essentially the entire genome is present in the sample; there is no need for a complexity reduction step. With this approach, multiplexing is only limited only by the number of features on the array.We have combined this WGG assay with our high density BeadChips which currently support over 250,000 bead types (corresponding to 125,000 SNP assays) to create a BeadChip with over 100,000 “exon-centric” SNP assays. Processing of these BeadChips including hybridization, washing, array-based primer extension, and signal ampliﬁcation is performed on an automated slide processing robot --- the Tecan Genesis GenePaint system. Details and performance of the 
100k chip will be presented.
C38. Disentangling linkage disequilibrium and linkage from 
dense trio SNP data
G. M. Clarke , L. R. Cardon;  
Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Parent-offspring trios are widely collected as part of disease gene 
mapping studies, and also being extensively genotyped as part of the International HapMap Project [1]. Transmission of haplotypes from parents to offspring is dependent on both linkage disequilibrium (LD) and linkage. With dense maps of markers on parent-offspring trios, the effects of LD and linkage can be separated allowing estimation of Concurrent Sessions71
recombination rates in a model-free setting. We deﬁne a model-free 
multipoint method based on dense sequence polymorphism data from parent-offspring trios to estimate recombination rates between adjacent markers. We present simulations to show that this method can detect recombination hotspots (>25 times background intensity) over a region typed with as few as 10 markers (p<0.001) and that the numbers of markers required to locate a hotspot of a given intensity decreases with marker density. Using Centre d'Etude du Polymorphism Humain pedigree data across a 10Mb region of chromosome 20, a comparison of population recombination rate estimates obtained from our method with estimates obtained using a coalescent based approximate-likelihood method implemented in PHASE 2.0 [2] shows detection of same coldspots and most hotspots. Spearman rank correlation 
between the two sets of estimates is 0.58 (p<2.2 x10-16).
[1] The International HapMap Consortium \emph{The International 
HapMap Project}. Nature 2003;426:789-796.[2] Stephens M, Donnelly P \emph{A comparison of Bayesian methods for haplotype reconstruction from population genotype data}. AJHG 2003;73:1162-1169.
C39. A 2-locus TDT for testing gene-gene interaction: 
Application to the study of HLA-DRB1 and CTLA4 in Multiple 
Sclerosis
S. Kotti , M. Bourgey, H. Mohamdi, E. Génin, F. Clerget-Darpoux;  
Inserm U 535, Villejuif, France.
Given the increasing interest in gene-gene interactions in the research of genetic factors in complex diseases, it is important to have reliable methods to assess these interactions. Here, we propose a straightforward method: the 2-locus TDT which considers the segregation of alleles for two independent genes conditionally to the parental genotypes at each locus. This approach may be used not only to test the effect of each gene but also their interaction. We develop this method to reconsider the suggested interaction between the HLA-DRB1 and CTLA4 genes involved in the predisposition to multiple 
sclerosis (Alizadeh et al, J Neuroimmunol, 2003).The typing of 1266 members of 422 French family trios (one affected patient and his two parents) is available for HLA-DRB1 gene and the -651 SNP (C/G) located in the promoter region of the CTLA4 gene. The effect of each gene is conﬁrmed by applying the 2-locus TDT but without evidence of any interaction between the two genes. In contrast, when the transmission rate of the CTLA4 C allele from heterozygous parents is compared between the HLA-DRB1*15 positive and negative patients (homogeneity transmission test), we show a signiﬁcant difference and we conclude to an interaction.To explain this discordance, we study the robustness of the two approaches to population stratiﬁcation. We show that the 2-locus TDT is robust against population stratiﬁcation unlike the homogeneity transmission test. This latter test, which is often used in the literature, 
may thus lead to a spurious conclusion of interaction.
C40. Multivariate linkage analysis of speciﬁc language 
impairment
E. J. Banﬁeld1, The SLI Consortium2;  
1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Ox -
ford; Cambridge Language and Speech Project (CLASP); Newcomen Centre, 
Guy's Hospital, London; Department of Child Health, University of Aberdeen; 
Molecular Medicine Centre, University of Edinburgh, Various, United Kingdom.
Speciﬁc language impairment (SLI) is deﬁned as a difﬁculty in 
developing language skills normally despite adequate intelligence and opportunity. Previous studies within the SLI Consortium have involved a full genome scan of 98 families affected with the disorder (wave 1), resulting in the identiﬁcation of two possible quantitative trait loci (QTL) on chromosomes 16q (SLI1) and 19q (SLI2), and a replication of the two linkage regions using an additional 86 affected families (wave 2). All linkage results were obtained by applying Haseman-Elston and variance-components approaches univariately. Investigations have suggested that in certain situations multivariate analysis of traits would offer more power to detect linkage. This study therefore uses the multivariate variance-components approach on the original genome scan data to detect further QTL, and also to investigate the previously determined SLI1 and SLI2 using the combined sample of waves 1 and 2. The multivariate genome scan highlighted three new possible QTLs on chromosomes 4, 5 and 10 with p-values < 0.003. The multivariate method also allowed us to investigate the relationship between phenotypes inﬂuenced by loci SLI1 and SLI2.
C41. Chromosome 6p22 risk haplotype for dyslexia is associated 
with a reduced expression of KIAA0319  gene
S. Paracchini, R. Wade-Martins, B. J. Keating, T. Caffrey, C. Francks, J. C. 
Knight, A. P. Monaco;  
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Dyslexia is one of the most prevalent childhood cognitive disorders and 
is caused in large part by genetic factors. We have recently identiﬁed an association with a haplotype on chromosome 6p22 and dyslexia 
(Francks et al., 2004). The haplotype spans a 77 kb region of strong 
inter-marker linkage disequilibrium, encompassing the ﬁrst four exons 
of KIAA0319, the entire TTRAP gene and the ﬁrst exon of THEM2 . 
Mutation screening by DHPLC of all exons and predicted promoters did not detect obvious functional variants that would disrupt any of the three genes. The risk haplotype might inﬂuence gene transcription regulation. To test this hypothesis we used the MassARRAY (Sequenom) platform to determine relative differences quantitatively in allele-speciﬁc transcription in cell lines that were heterozygous for the risk haplotype. We identiﬁed six lymphoblastoid and three neuroblastoma cell lines, which carry one copy of the risk haplotype and were heterozygous for at least one marker within the transcript of each of the three genes. Heterozygous markers in proximity of the promoters were also analysed in immuno-precipitated chromatin (haploChIP assay) from the lymphoblastoid cells. All markers analysed for 
TTRAP and THEM2  
showed no quantitative differences between transcripts generated either on the risk or non-risk haplotypes. Conversely, all the markers used for 
KIAA0319 showed consistently a transcription reduction of 
about 40% associated to the risk haplotype. These data show, for the ﬁrst time, a link between a genetic background and a biological 
mechanism that might be involved in the development of dyslexia.
C42. The molecular basis of autoimmunity: using celiac disease 
as a model to unravel common pathogenic pathways using a 
functional genomics approach
C. Wijmenga, A. Monsuur, E. van Oort, M. Bevova, L. Franke, A. Zhernakova, 
B. Diosdado, M. Wapenaar;  
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Celiac disease (CD) is the most common food-induced (gluten) 
autoimmune disorder (AID) in the western world. CD patients have an increased risk of developing other AIDs, including type 1 diabetes, autoimmune thyroiditis and rheumatoid arthritis, implying a common genetic origin to AIDs. AIDs affect more than 5% of the population and are often associated with speciﬁc HLA alleles. CD is the best understood HLA disorder at the moment. However, HLA can only explain part of the genetic susceptibility. Notably, genetic studies indicate that certain non-HLA loci appear to predispose to multiple AIDs, suggesting common pathogenic mechanisms. Moreover, CD is characterized by alterations in intestinal mucosa permeability and these are also observed in other AIDs, suggesting a common pathogenetic role for an impaired integrity of the intestinal barrier at the onset of AIDs.Using a sibpair approach we recently identiﬁed new CD loci on 6q, 9p and 19p. The 6q locus might represent a more common autoimmune locus. Large-scale SNP studies using Illumina technology are currently used in a cohort of 480 case/control pairs to ﬁne-map these three regions. Using genetic-proﬁling on intestinal biopsies (the site of disease lesion) of CD patients revealed major disturbances in the cell differentiation/proliferation ratio. A more comprehensive study determined the effects of gluten withdrawal on the restoration of the intestinal mucosa and has led to novel insights into the role of the 
enterocytes and the epithelial barrier in CD.This combined genetic/genomic approach will help to increase our knowledge on AID pathogenesis.Concurrent Sessions72
C43. Interstitial deletion of chromosome 9q22.32-q22.33: a novel 
cause of syndromic overgrowth
R. Redon1, G. Baujat2, D. Sanlaville2, M. Le Merrer2, M. Vekemans2, N. P. 
Carter1, A. Munnich2, L. Colleaux2, V. Cormier-Daire2;  
1The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2INSERM 
U393 and Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, 
France.
Overgrowth syndromes are characterized by a height over + 2 SD 
in association with a variable combination of macrocephaly, mental retardation, facial dysmorphic features, advanced bone aging and hemihyperplasia. Apart from well know conditions and chromosome anomalies - such as Sotos syndrome or del(22)(q13.1q13.2) - a 
number of overgrowth patients remain undiagnosed.In the course of a systematic screening of patients with unexplained overgrowth syndrome using microarray-based CGH, we identiﬁed two children with congenital overgrowth and nearly identical de novo
 
interstitial deletions del(9)(q22.32-q22.33). The clinical manifestations include macrocephaly, pre and postnatal overgrowth (> + 2.5 SD), and distinctive facial features (frontal bossing, down-slanted palpebral ﬁssures, epicanthal folds, long tubular nose, small triangular mouth with thin upper lip, long philtrum, low-set ears). They both have a psychomotor delay (walk at 24 months and a few words at 4 in case 1 and no walk and no speech at 33 months in case 2) and a strabismus. In addition, one child has a craniostenosis and the other a thyroglossal 
cyst.Further analyses, based on the development of DNA microarrays covering the whole breakpoint intervals with fosmids and small-insert-clones (1.5 to 4 kb), allowed us to delineate the deletion breakpoints within 5-kb intervals and demonstrated that, although similar, the 6-Mb segment deleted in each patient correspond to different deletion 
boundaries.These data suggest giving consideration to cryptic 9q22 deletions in the diagnosis of unexplained overgrowth syndromes and may help in understanding the mechanisms and genome architecture underlying 
chromosomal rearrangement in the 9q22.3 region.
C44. Pulmonary function abnormalities in children with 
osteogenesis imperfecta correlate with OI type and location of 
collagen mutation.
A. Flor-Cisneros1, H. Chaney2, J. Vojtova2, J. C. Marini1;  
1NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2CNMC, Washington, DC, United 
States.
Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is characterized by osteoporosis and bone fragility. OI patients with severe chest wall deformities and scoliosis develop respiratory insufﬁciency. To determine whether early pulmonary abnormalities are detectable in children with types III and IV OI and to learn whether these abnormalities correlated with OI type, severity of scoliosis or location of type I collagen mutations, we designed a retrospective cross-sectional clinical study. Fourty-seven children with OI types III and IV, age 4.9 to 23 years underwent 131 pulmonary function evaluations (PFT) over 7 years. In 39 children, the type I collagen mutation was identiﬁed. Multiple Regression analysis of FVC, TLC, VC (% of predicted), age, mutation, OI type and degree of scoliosis were performed. Our results reveal a PFT decline during childhood in both types of OI, (TLC: r=-0.41, p<0.0001; VC: r=-0.48, p<0.0001; FVC: r=-0.45, p<0.0001). Children with progressive type III OI had greater loss of FVC than moderate type IV OI. The decline of PFT with age was signiﬁcantly greater in a2(I) than in a1(I) collagen chain mutations. PFT abnormalities correlated with severity of scoliosis. However a signiﬁcant decline also occurred in children with minimal scoliosis. These ﬁndings suggest a direct effect of the abnormal collagen in lung tissue, (TLC: r=-0.42, p=0.01; VC: r=-0.31, p=0.0005; FVC: r=-0.43, p= 0.008). Pulmonary abnormalities are detectable in asymptomatic children with types III and IV OI. This data provides the basis for careful early monitoring and therapeutic intervention in OI 
children to prevent cor pulmonare in adulthood.C45. Brain malformations in oculocerebrocutaneous syndrome 
(OCCS)
U. Moog1,2, M. C. Jones3, L. Bird3, W. B. Dobyns4;  
1University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Research Insti -
tute Growth & Development (GROW), Maastricht University, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands, 3Children's Hospital San Diego, San Diego, CA, United States, 
4The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States.
Oculocerebrocutaneous syndrome (OCCS), also known as Delleman-Oorthuys syndrome, is a rare multiple congenital anomalies/mental retardation syndrome characterized by a trias of eye, skin and brain malformations. The ocular features consist of orbital cysts and an-/microphthalmia, and skin abnormalities comprise focal a-/hypoplastic skin defects and skin appendages. These features are well described. The neuropathological abnormalities however, have not been well delineated. Up to now, 28 patients have been reported, with a preponderance of males; recurrence has not yet occured. The cause 
of OCCS is still unknown.The brain imaging studies and further clinical data of 2 new and 9 previously reported patients could be (re)evaluated. We found a remarkably consistent pattern of malformations in eight of 11 patients, consisting of polymicrogyria, enlarged lateral ventricles or hydrocephalus, agenesis of the corpus callosum sometimes associated with interhemispheric cysts, and a novel mid-hindbrain malformation. The latter consists of a giant and dysplastic tectum, absent vermis, small cerebellar hemispheres in most cases, and a large posterior fossa ﬂuid collection. We hypothesize that this mid-hindbrain malformation is 
pathognomonic for OCCS.In particular the unique mid-/hindbrain malformation distinguishes OCCS from related syndromes with comparable forebrain anomalies (as Aicardi syndrome) and from syndromes with similar skin and eye features (as encephalocraniocutaneous lipomatosis, oculo-auricular-vertebral spectrum, and focal dermal hypoplasia). The described pattern of malformation thus shows that OCCS is a separate entity and helps in differentiating it from other entities. The mid-hindbrain malformation points to a defect of the mid-hindbrain organizer as the 
underlying pathogenetic mechanism.
C46. Carbohydrate-deﬁcient glycoprotein syndrome type Ia : 
clinical expression in 19 patients older than 12 years
D. Héron1, J. Albuisson1, V. Cormier-Daire2, V. Drouin3, C. Leanerts4, J. 
Marchais5, C. de Barace6, P. Khau Van Kien7, M. Mayer8, G. Ponsot8, J. Saudu -
bray2, H. Ogier9, A. Brice1, N. Seta10;  
1Hôpital Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 3Centre 
Hospitalier, Rouen, France, 4Hôpital d'Amiens, Amiens, France, 5Centre Hélio-
marin, St Trojan, France, 6Centre Hospitalier, St Brieuc, France, 7Centre Hos -
pitalier, Besançon, France, 8Hôpital St Vincent de Paul, Paris, France, 9Hôpital 
Robert Debré, Paris, France, 10Hôpital Bichat, Paris, France.
Whereas the paediatric symptomatology in CDG Ia syndrome is well documented, consisting in neurological symptoms and/or multivisceral disorder, the clinical expression of CDG Ia syndrome in adult patients 
is incompletly known. 
Methods We report the features of 19 CDG Ia patients from 16 
unrelated families, aged 12 to 39 years, detected by Western Blotting of serum transferrin, and conﬁrmed by phosphomannomutase (PMM) 
activities and PMM2 gene mutations.
Results Fifty percent of the patients had neonatal symptoms. All the 
patients had variable developmental delay : all but two were able to walk, 5 were able to read and write some words, and one followed a normal school course. Nine had failure to thrive but only one had microcephaly. Epilepsy was observed in 6 patients, and stroke-like episodes in only 3. Neurological and ophtalmological signs were : (1) hypotonia in 16 patients, (2) ataxia in 14, (3) peripheral neuropathy in 5, (4) strabismus in 13, (5) ophthalmoplegia in 1, and (6) nystagmus in 1. Retinal changes were detected by electroretinogramm in 4 of 6 cases. Extraneurological signs such as dysmophism, subcutaneous lipodystrophy, thoracic deformity and thromboembolic episodes were not frequent, except late or absent puberty in females. Severe internal organ symptoms were absent. There were 12 different genotypes and 
no obvious genotype-phenotype correlation. 
Conclusion This large series of teenagers and adults with CDG Ia 
syndrome highlights : (1) the great variability of disease expression, with the existence of mild forms, and (2) the non progressive course of 
CDG Ia syndrome after childhood. Concurrent Sessions73
C47. Congenital myopathy and brain migration defects with cutis 
laxa and a combined defect of glycan biosynthesis
S. Wopereis1, H. ter Laak1, M. Willemsen1, R. Wevers1, S. Gruenewald2, E. 
Morava1;  
1UMC Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Hospital for Sick Children, Lon -
don, United Kingdom.
Congenital cutis laxa presents with decreased skin elasticity, connective 
tissue involvement and variable associated features. In most cases the genetic etiology is not known. Based on a diagnosis of CDG type IIx in a child with cutis laxa we performed a screening for disorders of protein glycosylation including a test for defective O-mucin type glycosylation in ﬁve patients with cutis laxa syndrome. Three patients from unrelated consanguineous marriages had an inborn error affecting the synthesis of both N-linked and O-linked glycans. These three children presented with a severe neonatal cutis laxa, skeletal and joint involvement, microcephaly, delayed closure of the fontanel, normal growth, severe hypotonia, developmental delay and neurological ﬁndings. All patients had an evident progress in the psychomotor development gradually. A signiﬁcant improvement of the skin ﬁndings was observed with the development of fat-pads at an older age. Two of the three children were diagnosed with pachygyria and seizures and one with severe sensoneural deafness. In one patient with a brain migration defect, severe hypotonia and progressive congenital myopia a muscle biopsy was performed. This was combined with an immuno-staining for alpha-dystroglycan, a protein deﬁcient in O-mannosylation defects, like Walker Warburg and muscle-eye-brain disease. Alpa-dystroglycan carrys both O-mucin type- and O-mannoso-glycan groups. No muscular dystrophy, but a myopathy was conﬁrmed in our patient and the immuno-staining with alpha-dystroglycan was normal, suggesting that the congenital myopathy and pachygyria occurs due to a developmental defect different from that in O-mannoso-glycan defects secondary to a 
dysfunction of a still unknown glycoprotein.
C48. Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome in Dutch families
E. M. Leter, K. Koopmans, J. J. P. Gille, E. H. Jaspars, E. F. L. David, E. A. J. 
M. de Jong, P. E. Postmus, M. E. Craanen, R. A. Manoliu, T. M. Starink, F. H. 
Menko;  
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Background: Birt-Hogg-Dubé (BHD) syndrome is an autosomal 
dominant genodermatosis associated with skin ﬁbrofolliculomas, pneumothorax, renal carcinoma and possibly other neoplasms. A 
BHD  
gene on chromosome 17p has recently been identiﬁed.Study aim: To identify and characterize Dutch families with BHD 
syndrome, both at the clinical and molecular level.
Methods: Clinical evaluation of index patients with ≥ 10 skin ﬁbrofolliculomas, collection of family data and screening for 
BHD  
germline mutations by DNA sequence analysis.
Results: We identiﬁed 28 subjects from 16 families who were clinically affected and/or carrier of a pathogenic germline 
BHD mutation. 
Pneumothorax was observed in three subjects, symptomatic renal carcinoma of mixed histological types was found in two patients at ages 39 and 40 years. Other malignancies were reported in ﬁve cases, no colorectal cancer was observed. 
BHD mutation analysis revealed 
pathogenic mutations in 10 out of 13 (77%) index patients tested. The frequently reported c.1740dupC mutation was found in three subjects. A novel nonsense mutation c.1065_1066delGCinsTA was detected in three index cases. One mutation carrier had minor skin features at age 28 years. One mutation carrier had no ﬁbrofolliculomas or other BHD 
syndrome signs at age 67 years.
Conclusions:  BHD syndrome is highly variable at the clinical level. 
BHD mutation carriers around the age of 30 years may have minor skin features. The yield of mutation analysis is high. The novel 
BHD  
mutation c.1065_1066delGCinsTA may be a Dutch founder mutation. Further insight into BHD syndrome will facilitate early diagnosis and 
direct risk counselling and preventive measures.
C49. Ethics and Genetics: An Islamic Perspective
A. I. Al-Aqeel ;  
Riyadh Military Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
We are at a time of unprecedented increase in knowledge of rapidly changing technology. Such biotechnology especially when it involves human subjects raises complex ethical, legal, social and religious issues. A WHO expert consultation concluded that "genetics advances will only be acceptable if their application is carried out ethically, with due regard to autonomy, justice, education and the beliefs and 
resources of each nation and community".Public health authorities are increasingly concerned by the high rate of births with genetic disorders especially in developing countries where Muslims are a majority. Therefore it is imperative to scrutinize the available methods of prevention and management of genetic 
disorders.Islam is a religion which encompasses the secular with the spiritual, the mundane with the celestial and hence forms the basis of the ethical, moral and even juridical attitudes and laws towards any problem or 
situation.Islamic teachings carry a great deal of instructions for health promotion and disease prevention including hereditary and genetic disorders, therefore we will discuss how these teachings play an important role in the diagnostic, management and preventive measures including: genomic research; population genetic screening, including premarital screening, pre-implantation genetic diagnosis; assisted reproduction 
technology; stem cell therapy and genetic counselling.
C50. Towards cultural competence in cancer genetic counselling 
and genetics education: lessons learnt from Chinese-
Australians.
K. K. Barlow-Stewart1, S. Yeo2, M. Eisenbruch2, B. Meiser3, D. Goldstein3, K. 
Tucker4;  
1The Centre for Genetics Education, Sydney, Australia, 2Centre for International 
and Multicultural Health, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 
3Department of Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 
4Hereditary Cancer Service, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
In multicultural Australia, culturally determined attitudes to genetic testing and counselling may be incompatible with current genetics service provision. Australian guidelines for primary care medical practitioners on surveillance and referral to genetic counselling for breast, ovarian and bowel cancer are dependent on correct categorisation based on family history using Anglo-Celtic concepts (bilateral) of kinship. Many cultures have profoundly different understanding of kinship that is likely to impact on presentation of family history. Ethnographic studies to explore the diversity of beliefs about kinship, cancer and inheritance using Chinese-Australians, as a case. Participants in the ﬁrst study attended two major familial cancer clinics in NSW
1. Fifteen 
Chinese-Australian community members were interviewed to conﬁrm the ﬁndings.English speaking competence does not necessarily correlate with holding “Western” biomedical views: those holding traditional beliefs most often had maintained strong links with the Chinese community. In addition, barriers to family communication can occur where there may be incompatibility between “western” and traditional beliefs about inheritance and kinship. Family history taking can also be impacted unless recognition is made of the patrilineal concept of kinship prevalent in this community.The ﬁndings have been used to develop strategies for culturally competent genetic counselling for cancer susceptibility with Australian-Chinese patients and inform the development of genetics educational 
materials.
C51. Psychosocial impact of genetic counseling and testing for 
breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility genes.
V. Franková1,2, M. Havlovicová1, V. Krutílková3, A. Puchmajerová1, M. Korán4, 
P. Goetz1;  
12nd Medical School of Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute 
for Medical Humanities, 1st Medical School of Charles University , Prague, 
Czech Republic, 3Center of Medical Genetics and Prenatal Diagnosis Gennet 
s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic, 4Na Homolce Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
Last year our published data resulting from the study of psychosocial factors associated with genetic tests for predisposition to various types of cancer indicated the differences characteristic for patients in Czech Republic which might be explained by different social and cultural background. Further extension of this study allowed us to divide a group of female individuals tested for 
BRCA1/2 mutation. 
The aim of presented study was to evaluate separately in this group overall satisfaction with genetic services, motivation for undergoing Concurrent Sessions74
genetic testing, information and support needs, screening and 
prophylactic surgery practices, test result disclosure and concerns 
about discrimination.Questionnaires containing 20 multiple choice questions were distributed to female patients (N=77) who received pre- and post-test genetic counseling for BRCA1/2 mutations testing. The questionnaires were returned back by 61 individuals and were divided into two groups: individuals affected by cancer (N=41) and asymptomatic individuals 
(N=20).The preliminary results and high response rate (79%) show overall satisfaction with genetic services. Similarities in both groups were detected for further information needs (27%), professional psychological help needs (18%) and adherence to preventive screening practices (95%). Differences between cancer affected and asymptomatic individuals were observed in attitude towards prophylactic surgery (9% and 60% respectively), concerns about discrimination (14% and 30%) and principal motivation for undergoing testing. All individuals informed at least one member of family although the disclosure to distant relatives differs between affected (33%) and asymptomatic (20%) individuals. To support these ﬁndings statistic analysis also 
based on demographic data will be presented.
C52. Genotype-based screening for hereditary 
haemochromatosis in Germany
M. Stuhrmann1, C. Strassburg1, I. Nippert2, J. Schmidtke1;  
1Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2University, Muenster, Germany.
We conducted a pilot study on DNA-based screening of hereditary haemochromatosis (HH) in Germany. 5882 insurants of the sickness fund Kaufmännische Krankenkasse - KKH requested information on this project. 3961 of these individuals provided blood samples. The analytic speciﬁcity of the tests methods with respect to the detection of homozygosity for the 
HFE mutation C282Y was 100% (95% CI: 
99.95% - 100%), while the analytic sensitivity was 97% (95% CI: 92.5% - 99.2%). The direct costs ranged from 11.20 - 16.35 Euro per test method. 67 of the tested individuals were homozygous for C282Y. 42.6% of the homozygotes already knew their clinical diagnosis HH before sending the blood sample. Iron accumulation with clinical signs or symptoms of HH was present in 8 of 34 newly diagnosed C282Y homozygous individuals. 69.9% of the tested individuals believed that participation in the pilot study was probably beneﬁcial for them and 1% thought that it was probably harmful. 94.6% judged their decision to have participated as right and 0.3% as probably wrong. 59.1% of the KKH members would generally accept predictive genetic testing and 3.7% were objected to such tests in principle. We conclude that the employed test methods for C282Y are robust, highly sensitive and speciﬁc.A DNA-based HH-screening program can be performed at reasonable laboratory costs and appears to be generally accepted and beneﬁcial. Potential long-term negative psychosocial consequences should be taken into consideration when planning testing programs and can presumably be prevented by appropriate settings including 
genetic counselling and follow-up-services.
C53. Athlete’s hearts or hypertrophic cardiomyopathies
M. Tagliani , M. Pasotti, C. Lucchelli, E. Porcu, E. Disabella, N. A. Marsan, 
A. Repetto, C. Campana, G. Magrini, F. Gambarin, M. Grasso, L. Tavazzi, E. 
Arbustini;  
IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
Distinct diagnostic criteria should prevent misdiagnoses of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) in trained athletes with the so-called athlete heart; viceversa, clear criteria should guide diagnosis of HCM. These criteria include symmetrical versus asymmentrical, normal versus abnormal diastolic ﬁlling pattern, normal versus increased left atrial size, left ventricular wall thickness < or >16mm, left ventricular chamber normal or increased in athlete’s heart and reduced in HCM.We report six cases of current or past professional (n = 4), pre-competitive (n = 1) and amateur (n = 1) athletes who had long-lasting uncertain diagnostic work-up when they were involved in their sport activity. None of them complained of symptoms. The six cases share as common feature, the ﬁrst suspect raised by the electrocardiogram (ECG). Then all underwent echocardiography, that was repeated up to 11 times in at least 5 different centres and by different operators, and ﬁnally to cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
 MRI conﬁrmed the diagnosis of HCM.  We identiﬁed pathological mutations in the Beta-
MHC (MYH7) gene, troponin T (TNNT2) and myosin-binding protein C (MYBPC3), single in ﬁve (three MYH7, one TNNT2, one MYBPC3) and double in one (MYH7 plus MYBPC3). These cases document that when the diagnosis of HCM is uncertain, the identiﬁcation of the pathological mutation of the disease gene closes that diagnostic work-up and contributes to deﬁnitely convincing patients and families on the diagnosis. The psycological impact of an uncertain diagnosis and the decision of stopping both competitive activity and training are hard, 
especially in “healthy” fully asymptomatic athletes.
C54. Genetics education and general practice: impact of an 
intervention
S. A. Metcalfe1, A. Flouris1, M. Aitken1, J. Wallace2, C. Gaff3,4;  
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and Dept Paediatrics, University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 2Murdoch Childrens Research Institute 
and Genetic Health Services Victoria, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 3Genetic Health 
Services Victoria, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 4Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
We report here ﬁnal data evaluating a practical genetics educational intervention developed for general practitioners (GPs) in Victoria, Australia, following an earlier needs assessment. The intervention includes a resource, available as a printed up-dateable folder, CD-ROM and online, and a highly interactive case-based workshop. Content and format of the resource, The Genetics File, was informed by GPs and includes sections on a number of topics, and focuses on practical aspects of GPs’ roles. Resource/workshop content was developed in close collaboration with GPs, specialists and consumers. The educational intervention attracted maximum CPD points and 23 workshops were conducted, attended by 447 GPs. Evaluation included a validated questionnaire measuring categories of knowledge, attitudes, skills and behaviour, administered prior to workshop (n=332), then 1 (n=270) and 6 months (n=180) later. Referrals to clinical genetics services, genetic testing and support groups were also included in the evaluation. The mean rating of the intervention by GPs was 8.9 out of 10. Knowledge and behaviour were signiﬁcantly improved (p<0.001) at 1 and 6 months, and attitudes, already positive at baseline, improved further (p=0.032 at 1 month). These combined measures assess the impact of the intervention on practice of genetic medicine by GPs. Recognition of its success has led to it forming the basis of a modiﬁed national Australian program, currently under development. Furthermore, there has been international interest in this resource as a model, and views on the intervention and strategies for implementing this were outlined in interviews with GP educators in the USA and UK.
C55. JARID1C, a novel gene involved in X-linked mental 
retardation, is frequently mutated
L. R. Jensen1, M. Amende1, U. Gurok1, B. Moser1, V. Gimmel1, A. Tzschach1, A. 
R. Janecke2, G. Tariverdian3, J. Chelly4, J. P. Fryns5, H. V. Esch5, T. Kleefstra6, 
B. Hamel6, C. Moraine7, J. Gécz8, G. Turner9, R. Reinhardt1, H. H. Ropers1, S. 
Lenzner1;  
1Max Planck Institute, Berlin, Germany, 2Innsbruck Medical University, Inns -
bruck, Austria, 3University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4CNRS/INSERM, 
CHU Cochin, Paris, France, 5Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 
6University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 7CHU Bretonneau, 
Tours, France, 8The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 9University of 
Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia.
More than 30% of mutations in families with non-syndromic X-linked mental retardation (NS-XLMR) seem to cluster on proximal Xp and in the pericentric region. In a systematic screen of brain-expressed genes from this region in 354 families with XLMR, we have identiﬁed 12 different mutations in JARID1C, including one frameshift and three nonsense mutations introducing premature stop codons as well as eight missense mutations changing evolutionarily conserved amino acids. Affected individuals present MR in the range from mild to severe, and short stature seems to be a prominent feature. In cell lines from two affected families, mRNA expression studies revealed an almost complete absence of the mutated JARID1C transcript, suggesting that the phenotype in these families results from a loss of JARID1C function. JARID1C belongs to the highly conserved ARID protein family. It contains several DNA binding motifs linking it to transcriptional Concurrent Sessions75
regulation and chromatin remodeling, a process, which is defective in 
various other forms of mental retardation. The mutation frequency of 3.4% in our patient cohort suggests that mutations in JARID1C are a relatively common cause of XLMR, and that this gene might play an important role in human brain function. Further studies will include the characterization of mice deﬁcient in Jarid1c and expression proﬁling of the respective brain tissues. These investigations should shed more 
light on the pathogenesis of mental retardation.
C56. CDKL5 interacts with MeCP2 and it is responsible for the 
early seizure variant of Rett syndrome.
A. Renieri1, F. Mari1, S. Azimonti2, R. Caselli1, E. Scala1, I. Longo1, C. Pescuc -
ci1, F. Ariani1, V. Broccoli3, F. Bolognesi2, I. Bertani2, M. Zappella4, C. Kilstrup-
Nielsen2, N. Landsberger2;  
1Medical Genetics, Dept. Mol. Biol., University of Siena, Siena, Italy , 2Dip. Bio -
logia Strutturale e Funzionale, Università dell'Insubria, Busto Arsizio (VA), Italy, 
3DIBIT, San Raffaele Hospital, Milano, Italy, 4Child Neuropsychiatry, Azienda 
Ospedaliera Senese, Siena, Italy.
MECP2 is responsible for both classic and preserved speech variant of Rett syndrome. We report here the identiﬁcation of mutations in 
CDKL5  gene, encoding a putative kinase, in 3 female patients: 2 early 
truncating mutations interrupting the catalytic domain (c.163_166del4; c.838_847del10) and 1 late truncating mutation (c.2635_2636del2). All 3 patients showed convulsions very early in life: in the ﬁrst days of life in two of them and at 1,5 months in the third one. They all had stereotypic hand activities and the older patients, 9 and 8 years old respectively, showed acquired microcephaly. The clinical course of these patients is strikingly similar and they fulﬁll the criteria for the early seizure variant of Rett syndrome. We demonstrate that CDKL5 is a nuclear factor whose expression in the brain of developing mice signiﬁcantly overlaps the MeCP2 one. Moreover, we show in vitro and in vivo a direct interaction between MeCP2 and CDKL5. Functional characterization of CDKL5 showed that CDKL5 harbors an autophosphrylation activity, demonstrating that indeed it is a kinase. However so far we have been unable to demonstrate that CDKL5 modiﬁes MeCP2 under standard conditions. These results are in keeping with the fact that phosphorylation reduces MeCP2 dissociation from methylated DNA. If CDKL5 were a MeCP2 kinase, it would be unlikely that CDKL5 inactivation would lead to a phenotype similar to that produced by MeCP2 inactivation. In conclusion, our results indicate that a speciﬁc phenotype is associated with CDKL5 and trace out a molecular link 
between MeCP2 and CDKL5.
C57. Use of murine models as a tool to dissect cognitive and 
physical phenotypes of Williams-Beuren syndrome
V. Campuzano1, J. Lucena1, C. Carreiro2, M. C. Valero3, I. Barthelemi2, S. Pe -
zzi1, J. L. Barbero2, L. A. Pérez-Jurado1;  
1Genetics Unit. Dept. of Experimental Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 
Barcelona, Spain, 2Dept. of Immunology and Oncology. Centro Nacional de 
Biotecnología, Madrid, Spain, 3Molecular Genetics Unit, Hospital Ramón y 
Cajal, Madrid, Spain.
Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a developmental disorder 
occurring in ~1/20000 live births, caused by the heterozygous deletion of ~1.5Mb on chromosome 7q11.23. The commonly deleted region encompasses 26-28 genes ﬂanked by segmental duplications that predispose to the mutational mechanism in humans. The only phenotype unambiguously associated with deletion of a gene is supravalvular aortic stenosis and the elastin gene. However, detailed deletion mapping on atypical patients with smaller deletion has identiﬁed two genes (
GTF2IRD1 and GTF2I ), encoding members of a 
novel family of transcription factors, that are strong candidates for the 
main aspects of the cognitive phenotype.To investigate the putative role of the general transcription factor 
gene GTF2I , we have used gene targeting in mice. In our model, the 
deletion of exon 2 of Gtf2i containing the start codon, abrogates to the 
translation of a modiﬁed TFII-I protein lacking the ﬁrst 90 aminoacids. 
Previous in vitro studies have demonstrated that this mutated form is 
unable to bind DNA and does not activate transcription. Mutant mice are viable and display some craniofacial anomalies and mild postnatal growth retardation, obvious in the homozygous state. We are currently characterizing the neurocognitive and physical phenotype of these mutant mice, as well as the biochemical properties of the mutated protein and its effect in the normal biology of the mouse embryonic ﬁbroblast derived cell lines.
C58. Large genomic deletions inﬂuence expression levels of the 
non-hemizygous ﬂanking genes
A. Reymond1,2, R. Lyle2, C. Wyss2, C. Howald2, C. Monso-Hinard2, M. A. Mor -
ris2, M. Zabot3, S. Eliez4, G. Merla2;  
1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzer -
land, 2Department of Genetic Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzer -
land, 3Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital Debrousse, Lyon, France, 4Department 
of Psychiatry, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
An increasing number of human diseases, such as the Williams-Beuren 
(WBS) and the DiGeorge (DGS) syndromes, result from recurrent DNA rearrangements involving unstable genomic regions. Rearrangements are facilitated by the presence of region-speciﬁc low-copy repeats and result from nonallelic homologous recombination. It is assumed that these aneuploidies lead to underexpression of genes mapping to the commonly deleted regions. Furthermore, it is conceivable that these large chromatin rearrangements inﬂuence the transcription levels of genes that map centromerically or telomerically to the critical region and the repeats, even if these genes are present in two copies. To test this latter hypothesis we used quantitative real-time PCR to accurately measure the expression of genes mapping to the 7q11.23 and the 22q11.2 regions. We studied in 20 WBS patients, 25 DGS patients and 10 controls the relative expression of 36 and 40 genes mapping within the WBS and the DGS critical region, their ﬂanking repeats and neighboring regions in two different cell lines (skin ﬁbroblasts and lymphoblastoids). As anticipated in WBS and DGS samples almost all of the genes mapping to the common deletion intervals show relative levels of expression decreased by 50%. Remarkably, a decrease in relative expression, albeit not as large, was observed for the non-hemizygous genes that map on both sides of the common deletion region. Our results suggest that in “genomic disorder” not only the aneuploid genes but also the genes that map close to the rearrangement should be considered as candidate genes for the speciﬁc features of these pathologies.
C59. Mutations in Rab3 GTPase activating protein 
(RAB3GAP)catalytic subunit cause Microphthalmia, Cataract, 
Microcephaly and Micropenis (Warburg Micro syndrome)
I. A. Aligianis1,2, C. A. Johnson1, P. Gissen1, D. Chen3, D. Hampshire4, K. 
Hoffmann5,6, E. N. Maina1, N. V. Morgan1, L. Tee1, J. Morton7, J. R. Ainsworth8,9, 
D. Horn5, R. C. Trembath10, L. W. Harris11, S. Mundlos6, D. Tannahill3, C. G. 
Woods4, E. R. Maher1,2;  
1Medical and Molecular Genetics, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, 
United Kingdom, 2West Midlands Regional Genetics, Birmingham, United King -
dom, 3Embryo Gene Expression Patterns, The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Molecular Medicine Unit, St. James' University 
Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 5Institute of Medical Genetics, Charité Uni -
versity Hospital, Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany, 6Max Planck Institute 
for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 7West Midlands Regional Genetics 
Service, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 8Birmingham Midlands Eye Hospital, 
Birmingham, United Kingdom, 9Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham, 
United Kingdom, 10Division of Medical Genetics, Universityof Leicester, Leices -
ter, United Kingdom, 11Division of Medical Genetics, University of Leicester, 
Leicester, United Kingdom.
Warburg Micro syndrome (MIM 600118) is a severe autosomal 
recessive
disorder characterised by severe developmental abnormalities of the 
eye andcentral nervous system and microgenitalia. To elucidate the pathogenesis of Micro syndrome we undertook a 10cM genome-wide linkage scan in eight consanguineous families. We mapped the WARBM1 locus to 2q21.3 between markers D2S2282 and D2S2385 
(with a maximum 2-point LOD score of 8.016 (θ=0 at D2S1334) in ﬁve 
kindreds.We then identiﬁed homozygous mutations in the catalytic subunit of RAB3GTPase activating protein (RAB3GAP) in 12 kindreds. In mouse we found signiﬁcant expression of RAB3GAP in the developing eye 
and brain. RAB3GAP has a critical role in regulating the function of the four Rab3 family members that are implicated in neurotransmitter and hormone release by calcium mediated exocytosis. The Micro Concurrent Sessions76
syndrome phenotype demonstrates the that RAB3GAP for the normal 
development of the eye, brain and genitalia. We hypothesise that the underlying pathogenesis is a failure of exocytic release of ocular and 
neurodevelopmental trophic factors.
C60. Heterozygous mutations in the OTX2 gene cause structural 
malformations of the eye
N. K. Ragge1,2, A. Brown3, C. Poloschek4, B. Lorenz4, A. Henderson5, M. 
Clarke5, I. Russell-Eggitt6, A. Fielder7, D. Gerrelli8, J. Martinez8, P. Ruddle8, J. 
Hurst9, R. Collin2, A. Salt2,6, S. Cooper10, P. Thompson11, S. Sisodiya11, K. Wil -
liamson3, D. Fitzpatrick3, V. van Heyningen3, I. Hanson10;  
1Dept of Human Anatomy and Genetics, Oxford University, United Kingdom, 
2Moorﬁelds Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3MRC Human Genetics 
Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 4Dept of Pediatric Ophthalmology, University 
of Regensburg, Germany, 5Royal Victoria Inﬁrmary, Newcastle, United King -
dom, 6Great Ormond St Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 7Department of 
Optometry & Visual Science, City University, London, United Kingdom, 8Institute 
for Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 9Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals Trust, 
Oxford, United Kingdom, 10University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United King -
dom, 11Institute for Neurology, London, United Kingdom.
Major malformations of the human eye including microphthalmia, and anophthalmia are classical examples of phenotypes that recur in families yet often have no clear Mendelian inheritance pattern. Here we report heterozygous coding region changes in the homeobox gene 
OTX2 in 
eight families. The expression pattern of OTX2 in human embryos is 
consistent with the eye phenotypes observed in the patients, which range from bilateral anophthalmia to retinal dystrophy. Defects of the optic nerve, chiasm and brain were revealed by MRI in some cases. In two families the mutations appear to have occurred de novo in severely 
affected offspring and in two other families the mutations have been inherited from a gonosomal mosaic parent. These four families support a simple model in which 
OTX2 haploinsufﬁciency causes structural 
eye malformations. However a further four families display complex inheritance patterns suggesting that 
OTX2 mutations show reduced 
penetrance. The high incidence of mosaicism and reduced penetrance 
have implications for genetic counselling.
C61. 'Genetic PAP' at 5-12 gestational weeks: A new screening 
method for Down Syndrome?
A. Amiel1, M. Liberman1, M. Pomeranz2, M. Fejgin3;  
1Genetic Institute, Meir Medical Center, Kfar-Saba, Israel, 2Department of Ob -
stetrics and Gynecology, Meir Medical Center, Kfar-Saba, Israel, 3Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Genetic Institute, Meir Medical Center , Kfar-
Saba, Israel.
At present clinically available methods for prenatal chromosomal diagnosis (amniocentesis and CVS) are invasive, risky and costly. Screening techniques are cumbersome and expensive, and carry a false negative rate of 20%. We assessed the feasibility of utilizing exocervically retrieved extra villous trophoblast cells for screening for 
chromosome 21-aneuploidy and gender determination .
Methods- Samples of fetal cells were obtained from the external cervical os of pregnant women using a cytobrush. Eight slides were prepared using a cytospin centrifuge. Immuno-histochemestry was performed using HLA-G and other anti- trophoblast antibodies. The marked cells were identiﬁed and scored. FISH for chromosomes X and Y was applied and the previously marked cells were returned to for diagnosis. FISH for chromosome 21 was applied in a second run 
to the same cells.
Results- Initially, samples were taken from 290 women prior to elective pregnancy termination. In 252 (87%) were trophoblast cells detected. Gender diagnosis concurred with that of the placental in 236 (93.6%). Subsequently 190 on-going pregnancies were screened. Trophoblast cells were detected in 164 (86.3%). Sex was correctly determined in 146 (89%). There were 2 cases of trisomy 21 and both were identiﬁed. There were 2 cases of missed abortions both initially diagnosed to be XY. Placental tissue karyotyping revealed both of them to be mosaics, 46,XY/45,XO and 47,XXY/46,XY .
Conclusion - this simple and inexpensive procedure may have 
the potential to replace currently available non-invasive screening 
techniques for Down syndrome.C62. Molecular screening of Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome in 
pregnant women from the Czech Republic - present results
I. Drapalova1, J. Kofer2, R. Gaillyová3, J. Všetička4, L. Kozák1;  
1Center of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Dept. 
of Medical Genetics, Ústí nad Labem, Czech Republic, 3Dept. of Medical 
Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Dept. of Medical Genetics, Ostrava, Czech 
Republic.
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder. Clinical severity ranges from mild dysmorphism to severe congenital malformation and intrauterine lethality. SLOS is caused by the mutations in the gene for 3β-hydroxysterol-Δ
7-reductase 
(DHCR7), which maps to chromosome 11q12-13. The DHCR7 catalyzes the ﬁnal step in cholesterol biosynthesis. It results in an abnormally low cholesterol level and increased level of 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC). The incidence of SLOS is estimated around 1 : 10 000 to 1 : 40 000 in 
the Czech population.Pregnant women undergo biochemical screening examination for Down´s syndrome in the second trimester. When the level of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and unconjugated estriol (uE3) appears low, the suspicion for SLOS is registered. A group of 143 fetuses with high risk for SLOS were examined by DNA analysis. A rapid PCR/RFLP technique and sequencing was used to detect mutations in DHCR7 gene. Cultivated amniocytes and/or blood of both parents were usually used as material for DNA isolation.From the group of 143 pregnant women with the positive biochemical screening results, we found 3 fetuses with SLOS and 4 fetuses, which were heterozygotes for SLOS. Severe mutations IVS8-1G>C and W151X were identiﬁed in most of the cases. Moreover, in one case we found another mutation, W182C. Our results indicate that consequential molecular screening for Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome is 
important in pregnant women with low level of hCG and uE3.Supported by scientiﬁc project CEZ MZ/98/0001/00209627 from the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic and grant S 4031209 AV 
CR.
C63. Congenital diaphragmatic hernia and chromosome 15q26: 
Determination of a candidate region by use of array-based 
comparative genomic hybridisation and ﬂuorescent in situ 
hybridisation.
M. Klaassens, H. J. Eussen, C. Wouters, B. A. Oostra, D. Tibboel, A. de Klein;  
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
In the etiology of congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), a severe 
birth defect, multifactorial inheritance, teratogenic agents, and genetic abnormalities all have been suggested as possible contributors. To deﬁne candidate regions for CDH, we analysed data collected on CDH cases since 1988. Karyotypic analysis of 200 patients showed numerical chromosomal anomalies in 7% and structural anomalies in 5% of the cases. The most frequent structural anomaly is a deletion of chromosome 15q, found in 3 patients. For this study, we have used these patients along with genetic material from four other, previously published, CDH patients with a chromosome 15q deletion. We used array-based comparative genomic hybridisation (array-CGH) and ﬂuorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) assays to determine the boundaries of the deletions in the patients. Most of the deletions extended towards the distal 15q terminus. However, by including data from two non-CDH patients with terminal 15q deletions, we were able to exclude a substantial portion of the telomeric region of chromosome 15. Moreover, one CDH patient harboured a small interstitial deletion. Together, this allowed us to deﬁne a minimal deletion region of approximately 5 Mb at chromosome region 15q26.2. Our data 
identifying this CDH-region on chromosome 15q26 will be presented.
C64. Antenatal presentation of Bardet-Biedl : the so-called 
Meckel-like syndrome
T. Attié-Bitach1, H. Karmous-Benailly1, J. Martinovic1, C. Ozilou1, J. Augé1, S. 
Audollent1, N. Brahimi1, G. Goudefroye1, H. Etchevers1, A. Munnich1, F. Razavi1, 
M. Gubler2, M. Vekemans1;  
1Département de Génétique et Unité INSERM U-393, Paris, France, 2Unité 
INSERM U-574, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS, OMIM 209900) is a multisystemic disorder characterized by progressive retinal dystrophy, postaxial polydactyly, obesity, hypogonadism, learning difﬁculty and renal dysfunction. Concurrent Sessions77
Other manifestations include diabetes mellitus, neurological signs, 
heart disease, and hepatic ﬁbrosis. The condition is genetically heterogeneous and 8 genes have been identiﬁed during the 4 past years (
BBS1-BBS8). In addition, a complex triallelic inheritance has 
been established in this disorder, i.e. in some families, three mutations 
at two BBS loci are necessary for the expression of the disease.
The only clinical features that can be observed prenatally include polydactyly, a kidney anomaly and hepatic ﬁbrosis. Cystic kidney dysplasia, polydactyly, occipital encephalocele and liver anomalies (hepatic ﬁbrosis and bile duct proliferation) also characterise Meckel syndrome (MKS). Based on these observations, we have decided to sequence all identiﬁed 
BBS genes in a series of 13 antenatal cases 
mostly referred as Meckel or Meckel-like (because of association of a kidney anomaly, polydactyly and/or hepatic ﬁbrosis to a brain anomaly, or the familial history or the kidney histology). In 6 cases, we identiﬁed a recessive mutation in a 
BBS gene (respectively BBS2: 3 cases, 
BBS4: 2 cases and BBS6: 1 case). We also found heterozygous BBS6  
mutations in 3 additional cases. No BBS1, BBS3, BBS5, BBS7, or 
BBS8 mutation could be identiﬁed in our series. These results extend the clinical spectrum of BBS with possible brain anomalies or severe cystic kidney dysplasia and strongly suggest that MKS and BBS are 
overlapping conditions.
C65. Vitamin K dependent Chondrodysplasia punctata
S. G. Mehta , K. Metcalfe, J. Clayton-Smith, D. Donnai, U. Kini;  
Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetics Service, St Mary's 
Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Chondrodysplasia punctata (CDP) is a well known syndrome 
characterised by distinctive radiological features such as stippling in the epiphyses of the long bones and spine. The craniofacial abnormalities include a short nose with a ﬂat nasal bridge, short columella and maxillary hypoplasia. There are various forms of CDP reported in the literature, e.g. Binder anomaly described as maxillonasal dysplasia, which is reported to be associated with prenatal phenytoin induced Vitamin K deﬁciency. We report 4 cases with exposure to various agents which reduce Vitamin K levels in the feto-maternal environment and result in CDP.
Case Age Sex Exposure Clinical Features
121 
weeks 
fetal 
deathMaleMaternal an -
tiphospholipid 
syndromePoorly formed 
nose with maxillary 
hypoplasia.
2 2 years Male PhenytoinVery small nose 
at birth with short, 
stubby ﬁngers.
310 
yearsMale CarbamazepineMild learning dif -
ﬁculties, a small nose and ﬂat malar 
appearance
42 
weeksFemale WarfarinFlat face and 
underdeveloped 
nose.
It is known that factors such as exposure to antiepileptic medication, 
anticoagulants, and maternal disease such as Systemic Lupus Erythematosis or Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome may cause CDP by affecting Vitamin K dependent processes. Matrix Gla Protein, a Vitamin K dependent protein is upregulated by Vitamin D in bone cells. A rat model shows that nasal septal growth retardation occurs because the warfarin induced extrahepatic vitamin K deﬁciency prevents the normal formation of the vitamin K-dependent matrix gla protein in the 
embryo.Vitamin K dependent processes play a role in CDP. A detailed maternal history is important when diagnosing children with features of CDP. A skeletal survey is recommended. Treatment with Vitamin K in at risk mothers may reduce the risk of CDP.C66. CHD7  mutation in foetuses with CHARGE syndrome and 
expression during human development
D. Sanlaville1,2, M. Clément-Ziza2, H. Etchevers2, M. Gonzales3, F. Encha-
Razavi1, J. Martinovic1, G. Goudefroye1, C. Ozilou1, E. Detrait2, S. Sidi4, S. 
Lyonnet1,2, M. Vekemans1,2, J. Amiel1,2, T. Attié-Bitach1,2;  
1Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2INSERM U393, Paris, 
France, 3Hôpital Saint Antoine, Paris, France, 4Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MD, United States.
The acronym CHARGE refers to the association of congenital malformations ﬁrst described by Hall et al. (1979) and includes ocular 
Coloboma, Heart malformation, choanal Atresia, Retarded growth, 
Genital hypoplasia, Ear abnormalities and/or deafness. The CHD7  
gene was recently been shown to be mutated in 60 % of CHARGE postnatal patients (Visser et al. 2004). 
CHD7  belongs to a large family 
of proteins thought to play a role in chromatin organization through 
their conserved “chromodomain”.We studied the coding sequence of the 
CHD7  gene, in a cohort of 
11 severely affected CHARGE foetuses. We identiﬁed a truncating mutation in 10 cases conﬁrming the diagnosis. Anatomopathological examination and X-rays showed that semicircular canal hypoplasia as well as arhinencephaly are highly predictive diagnostic criteria. In addition to the C-H-A-E components of the acronym, facial dysmorphism or renal digestive and skeletal anomalies, should be considered to be minor diagnostic criteria for foetal CHARGE syndrome. In addition, we analysed the expression pattern of the 
CHD7  gene during early 
human development. CHD7  is widely expressed in undifferentiated 
neuroepithelium and mesenchyme of neural crest origin, and continues to be expressed toward the end of the ﬁrst trimester in dorsal root ganglia, cranial nerves and ganglia, auditory and nasal tissues and the neural retina. Absent from the myocardium, bones and genital ridge, 
CHD7  expression nevertheless correlates with defects in these areas 
because of its presence in neural crest cells and the pituitary.
C67. Functional signiﬁcance of minor MLH1  germline alterations 
found in colon cancer patients
T. E. Raevaara1, M. Siitonen1, H. Lohi1, H. Hampel2, E. Lynch3, K. Lönnqvist1, 
E. Holinski-Feder4, C. Sutter5, W. McKinnon6, S. Duraisamy6, A. Gerdes7, P. 
Peltomäki1, M. Kohonen-Corish8, E. Mangold9, F. Macrae3, M. Greenblatt6, A. de 
la Chapelle2, M. Nyström1;  
1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2The Ohio State University, Colum -
bus, OH, United States, 3The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 
4University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 5University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany, 6University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, United States, 7Odense Uni -
versity Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 8Garvan Institute of Medical Research, 
Sydney, Australia, 9University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is associated with deﬁciency of the mismatch repair (MMR) machinery. One half of 450 mutations reported in an HNPCC database affect the 
MLH1 gene. A 
signiﬁcant number of those are of missense type, whose pathogenicity is difﬁcult to interpret, and which are associated with a variety of clinical phenotypes. Here, the pathogenicity of 31 
MLH1 germline alterations, 
which were nontruncating and found in putative HNPCC families, was evaluated. For this, the expression level and subcellular localization of the MLH1 variants, and the functionality of the mutated MutLα (MLH1 and PMS2) complexes were studied. Furthermore, by correlating the genetic and biochemical data with clinical data, we tried to ﬁnd some genotype-phenotype correlations. Among the 31 
MLH1 mutations, 19 
affected either the expression or stability of the encoded MLH1 protein. These variants also affected the subcellular localization of MutLα. Fifteen mutations disrupted the MMR function of MLH1. Comparative sequence analysis correctly predicted functional studies for 82% of missense variants. The aminoterminal 
MLH1 mutations caused 
protein instability and defective MMR, whereas pathogenicity of the 
carboxylterminal MLH1 mutations was caused by protein instability or 
defective assembly of MutLα. The genotype-phenotype correlations indicate that the mutations which affect both the function and stability of MLH1, are associated with typical HNPCC phenotypes. Instead, 
the MLH1 mutations, which affect only mildy or cause no effect at all 
on the encoded protein, are found in families with variable disease 
phenotypes.Concurrent Sessions78
C68. Gene expression proﬁling of leukemic cell lines and 
primary leukemias reveals conserved molecular signatures 
among subtypes with speciﬁc genetic aberrations: identiﬁcation of fusion gene-speciﬁc transcriptional proﬁles and expression 
pattern of tyrosine kinase-encoding genes
A. Andersson1, P. Edén2, D. Lindgren1, J. Nilsson3, M. Fontes3, Å. Borg4, F. 
Mitelman1, B. Johansson1, M. Höglund1, T. Fioretos1;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 2De-
partment of Complex Systems, Theoretical Physics, Lund University , Sweden, 
3Center for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 4Depart -
ment of Oncology, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
Hematologic malignancies are characterized by balanced chromosomal 
abnormalities - translocations and inversions - that lead to deregulated expression of genes located in the proximity of the breakpoints or result in tumour-speciﬁc fusion genes. Although hematologic malignancies have been extensively studied, our understanding of how individual fusion genes elicit their leukemogenic properties is still quite limited. Today, the perhaps most widely used model system for studying the biological consequences of leukemia-associated chromosomal rearrangements is based on immortalized hematopoietic cell lines. Although cell lines are known to differ from both neoplastic and normal tissues, they provide powerful tools for investigating basic and applied aspects of leukemia cell biology. In the present study, we investigate a large number of cell lines, derived from all hematopoietic lineages, and analyze a large number of speciﬁc genetic aberrations. Using unsupervised algorithms, we show that immortalized hematopoietic cell lines maintain a gene expression signature correlating with their clinical subtype and primary genetic change. Moreover, by combining data from cell lines and primary acute leukemia samples, we show that the identiﬁed expression signatures in cell lines are present also in leukemic cells with identical genetic changes. By applying discriminatory analysis on the data set we have identiﬁed genes correlating with clinical subtype and genetic rearrangement. Finally, using supervised methods, the expression signature of genes encoding protein-tyrosine kinases was studied, identifying members that could be targeted using 
tyrosine kinase inhibitory drugs.
C69. Large scale variation copy number changes revealed by 
array CGH in CML
E. P. Nacheva, D. Brazma, B. Vaughn, L. Foroni, C. Grace;  
Molecular Cytogenetics, Academic Haematology, Royal Free and University 
College London Medical School, London, United Kingdom.
Chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML-BC) typically evolves in three distinct clinical stages: chronic and accelerated phases and blast crisis. The mechanisms responsible for transition of CML chronic phase into blast crisis remain poorly understood. While the acquisition of extra copies of chromosomes 8,19, the Ph and iso17q are recurrently found in the majority of CML-BC patients, the knowledge about aberrations 
at molecular level are sparse.Here we present a genome wide screening by array CGH at a resolution of 1Mbp (Spectral Genomics Inc) for genetic imbalances of total 36 samples of CML and 10 CML cell lines. Using the same array CGH platform Ianfrate et al., (Nature Genetics, 2004) identiﬁed 255 loci that contained large scale variations (LCVs) among unrelated individuals, of which 24 were present in more than 10% of the cases. Our ﬁndings 
seen in > 20% of the samples fall into four main categories:(i) LCVs affecting the loci reported in normal individuals (Ianfrate et all, 2004) but seen in the CML patients at much higher frequency (from 
38% to 56%) and in combinations (on average 3.1 LCVs per patient);(ii) Unique to CML patients LSVs affecting four loci in 23 - 42% of the 
cases;(iii) Segmental loss of the 8p13 and ampliﬁcations at 8q24.12 regions;
(iv) Novel features of the der (9) chromosome deletion map.These data not only support the notion that the newly established heterogeneity underlines susceptibility to disease, but also provides new insight into the genetic aberrations associated with disease 
progression in CML.C70. Chromosome radiosensitivity and apoptosis in breast 
cancer susceptibility
J. G. Barwell1, A. Georgiou2, L. Pangon3, I. Kesterton3, R. Gilchrist4, J. Ball3, C. 
Langman3, T. Carrier clinic collaborators5, J. Morris6, L. Wilkinson1, H. Hamed3, 
E. Solomon6, Z. Docherty3, J. Berg7, R. Camplejohn4, R. Eeles8,5, S. Hodgson1;  
1St George's Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Guy’s Hospital, London, Unit -
ed Kingdom, 3Guy's Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4St Thomas' Hospital, 
London, United Kingdom, 5The Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United King -
dom, 6King's College, London, United Kingdom, 7Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, 
United Kingdom, 8Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom.
BRCA1, BRCA2 and CHEK2 proteins are known to be involved in cell cycle check points, the repair of DNA breaks and breast cancer susceptibility. However, it is not known whether individuals who are heterozygous for 
BRCA1 , BRCA2 and CHEK2 mutations have an 
altered cellular phenotypic response to irradiation. We have investigated apoptosis, chromosome breakage and cell cycle dynamics in response to irradiation in peripheral blood lymphocytes in the following:- 53 
BRCA 1/2 mutation carriers and age and sex-matched unaffected 
controls and three CHEK2 mutation carriers treated for breast cancer.
The CHEK2 mutation carriers had a signiﬁcant increased number of 
breaks per cell compared with the BRCA mutation carriers (p<0.001), age matched controls (p<0.001) and newly diagnosed breast cancer patients (p<0.002) using the classical G2 assay and also in metaphase spreads enriched for cells in S phase at the point of irradiation. The 
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers also have an increase in 
radiation induced chromosome breaks and gaps compared with controls (p<0.001) using the S phase assay.We have also investigated the apoptotic response to 4Gy in peripheral blood lymphocytes. Overall, there is no evidence for a reduction in radiation-induced apoptosis in 
BRCA1 , BRCA2 and CHEK2 mutation 
carriers vs controls (mean apoptotic response 50% vs 53% vs 52% 
P=0.15).There is no evidence of a difference in peripheral blood lymphocyte cell cycle dynamics between 
BRCA1 , BRCA2 and CHEK2 mutation 
carriers and age-matched controls in response to irradiation. The results will be discussed in relation to possible mechanisms for cancer susceptibility.
C71. MicroRNAs as potential diagnostic and prognostic markers 
of disease
J. Shingara, K. Keiger, J. Shelton, P. Powers, I. Wolf, R. Jarvis, M. Byrom, A. 
Cheng, R. Conrad, E. Labourier, D. Brown;  
Ambion, Inc., Austin, TX, United States.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, siRNA-like molecules encoded in 
the genomes of plants and animals that regulate the expression of genes by binding and modulating the translation of speciﬁc mRNAs. Several published reports have shown that the expression levels of some miRNAs are reduced in chronic lymphocytic leukemia, colonic adenocarcinoma, and Burkitt’s lymphoma samples providing possible links between miRNAs and cancer. We developed methods for isolating and quantifying all of the known miRNAs in tissue samples. We have used these procedures to analyze tumor and normal adjacent tissues from patients with lung, colon, breast, prostate, bladder, thyroid, and pancreas cancer. Each tumor type can be readily distinguished from the accompanying normal samples based on the expression levels of 3-10 miRNAs. While each different tumor type was characterized by it own unique miRNA proﬁle, it is interesting to note that several miRNAs appear to be up- or down-regulated in almost all tumor samples relative to normal adjacent tissue. This suggests that speciﬁc miRNAs might play roles in tumor suppression. Putative mRNA targets for a number of these miRNAs are known oncogenes providing a potential link with oncogenesis. We have developed reagents for up- and down-regulating speciﬁc miRNAs that have allowed us to identify genes (like RAS and MYC) and cellular processes (like proliferation and apoptosis) that are regulated by miRNAs. Further analysis of miRNA expression proﬁles in various disease states also suggests that these bioregulators play a 
role in disease progression.Concurrent Sessions79
C72. Cloning and Characterization of the Novel Tumor 
Suppressor Gene DEAR1
S. T. Lott1, M. Rodriguez1, D. Chandler1, H. Xie1, S. Sen1, K. Chaung1, K. Keyo -
marsi1, A. El-Naggar1, S. M. Hewitt2, A. M. Killary1;  
1M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States, 2National Cancer 
Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States.
The development of biomarkers for human tumorigenesis remains one 
of the most important goals of current cancer research. An exciting candidate has been identiﬁed by our laboratory that maps into a region highly implicated by LOH and cytogenetic studies in the development of numerous tumors, including breast, colon, prostate and lung. This novel gene, 
DEAR1, is a member of the TRIM family of proteins, 
known for their involvement in cellular differentiation, proliferation, development and apoptosis. Expression of 
DEAR1 at high levels 
is limited to the ductal epithelium of numerous tissues; however, dramatic downregulation of 
DEAR1 expression has been documented 
by immunohistochemistry in tumors of the breast (40% of samples), pancreas (62% of samples) and colon. Downregulation of 
DEAR1  
has also been observed by Northern and RNase protection assays in breast, renal, colon and lymphoma cell lines. Mutation analysis of breast cancer was undertaken in both cell line and tumor samples. Signiﬁcantly, mutations were observed in 14% of samples examined (6/43). Complementation of a missense mutation in the breast 21MT cell line reverted growth in SCID mice from an aggressive, poorly differentiated tumor to a morphology reminiscent of ductal carcinoma in situ, suggestive that 
DEAR1 participates in the early differentiation 
of ductal epithelium, the aberrant regulation of which could be critical to breast tumorigenesis. Thus, based on its ubiquitous expression in normal tissues, downregulation or loss of expression, speciﬁc mutation in breast cancer cell lines and tumors, and in vivo restoration of differentiation, 
DEAR1  is a strong candidate tumor suppressor gene.
C73. The ﬁrst genome wide linkage disequilibrium map
W. J. Tapper, A. Collins, J. Gibson, M. Nikolas, S. Ennis, N. E. Morton;  
Southampton University, Southampton, United Kingdom.
Genetic maps describe patterns of recombination and can be used to identify genes affecting a particular phenotype. Recombination is measured in Morgans over a single generation in a linkage map, but may cover thousands of generations in a high resolution linkage disequilibrium map measured in LD units (LDU) (Maniatis et al, 2002). The HapMap project (IHMC, 2003) has led to a huge increase in the genotyping of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that are the main source of LD information. We have used a subset of the September 2004 Caucasian HapMap data, consisting of 493,408 SNPs, to create the ﬁrst genome-wide LD map which covers 99.7% (2,934 Mb) of the euchromatin. Recombination (Kong et al, 2004) accounts for 96.8% of the variance in LD in chromosomal arms and 92.4% in their deciles. The Malecot model predicts that the ratio of corresponding distances in LDU and Morgans estimates the effective bottleneck time t in generations (Zhang et al, 2004) which is constant between chromosomes. The LD maps estimate t as 1435 generations implying a bottleneck time of ~35,875 years, assuming 25 years per generation. Presumably, this low estimate reﬂects the partly cumulative effect of bottlenecks since the out-of-Africa migration. There are signiﬁcant deviations in t between chromosome arms and deciles due to physical size, marker density and holes in the LD map. These differences may reﬂect inﬂated Morgan length due to underestimates of interference and the effects of selection, particularly on the X chromosome, and 
stochastic variation shortening LDU maps.
C74. Contribution of gene conversions to the genetic diversity of 
DNA segments
D. Labuda1, J. Lefebvre1, C. Moreau1, C. Labbé1, S. Langlois1, P. Beaulieu1, M. 
Théberge1, H. Bélanger1, D. Sinnett1, &. Genome Quebec Regulatory Genetics 
Consortium2;  
1Université de Montréal, Centre de recherche, Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montreal, 
PQ, Canada, 2McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Mon -
treal, PQ, Canada.
Studies of human DNA diversity lead us to better understanding of 
human origins, demographic history and population structure; critical elements in genetic epidemiological quest of complex diseases. In 22 genes, promoter regions, arbitrarily deﬁned as 2kb segments directly upstream of the ﬁrst exon, were screened by dHPLC in 40 individuals of African, Middle-Eastern, European, East-Asiatic and Amerindian descent. Polymorphisms were characterized by sequencing and genotyped in an extended panel of 80 individuals representing the same population groups. We found between 3 and 18 (average of 10) segregating sites in these 2kb segments. Nucleotide diversity estimates of 0.03 to 019 %, from both allele frequencies (average 0.08%) and the number of segregating sites (0.1%) ﬁt well the genomic average. Haplotype worldwide diversity was 0.65 (0.27 to 0.84) and their numbers from 4 to 21 (average 10) correlated well with the count of segregating sites, as if recombination was negligible. Yet, in more than one third of these segments four-gametes test indicated the presence of recombinant haplotypes suggesting that some of these segments recombined more often than expected. Indeed, our estimates of the population recombination rate Rho exceed signiﬁcantly the expected genomic average of about 0.4 per kb. Further comparative analysis of the Rho estimates in 2kb segments and along the whole sequence of 100 genes (from the University of Washington) suggests the important effect of gene conversion in the shaping of haplotype diversity. These haplotype characteristics may be of great importance in genetic linkage 
and association studies. Supported by Genome Quebec/Canada.
C75. LD mapping in diagnostic marker and gene discovery in 
acute myocardial infarction, hypertension and type 2 diabetes in 
founder population
J. T. Salonen1, R. Fuentes1, O. Kontkanen1, M. Pirskanen1, P. Uimari1, J. M. 
Aalto1, J. Kaikkonen1, T. P. Tuomainen2;  
1Oy Jurilab Ltd, Kuopio, Finland, 2University of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland.
Traditional genome wide scans (GWS) using microsatellite markers with linkage analyses have not succeeded in ﬁnding many genes causing common polygenic diseases. With advancements in genotyping technology, the ﬁrst dense enough marker maps have become available for LD mapping the entire human genome in genetically homogenous founder populations. We studied molecular etiology of acute myocardial infarction (AMI), hypertension (HT) and type 2 diabetes (T2D) in the East Finland population, one of the genetically and culturally most homogenous founder populations. We used the Affymetrix early access 100k SNP typing assay in sets of rigidly deﬁned familial cases and extremely healthy controls, which both were drawn from the same extensively examined prospective cohort. We discovered associations of 1875 SNP markers and 902 genes with AMI, 1154 SNP markers and 436 genes with HT and 1962 SNP markers and 838 genes with T2D in either single-SNP or haplotype pattern mining analysis, with false positive probability of 5-20%. Multivariate diagnostic models including 8-24 SNPs and a few phenotypic measurements predicted about 95% of each disease. These preliminary ﬁndings include large numbers of novel disease-associated genes including potential drug targets and both non-coding regulatory and coding markers as well as several new etiologic pathways. We are conﬁrming our ﬁndings by re-testing them in over 1000 cases and 1000 controls in each disease from East Finland and other more heterogenous populations and by disease pathway analysis. We are happy to collaborate with research groups that are interested in testing our ﬁndings in their study populations.
C76. Plasma lipids: heritabilities, apoE, and effects of inbreeding 
in a genetically isolated population
A. Isaacs, F. A. Sayed-Tabatabaei, Y. S. Aulchenko, A. F. C. Schut, M. C. Zil -
likens, W. P. F. Rutten, H. A. P. Pols, J. C. M. Witteman, B. A. Oostra, C. M. van 
Duijn;  
Erasmus University MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Despite progress in elucidating genetic determinants of dyslipidemia, most ﬁndings are based on families with extreme phenotypes. To further dissect these complex traits, an extended pedigree not derived on the basis of phenotype was ascertained from the population of a recent genetic isolate in the Netherlands. Thus far, 938 individuals, related within this single pedigree containing more than 60,000 people, have taken part in physical examinations and medical interviews in this ongoing study (the Erasmus Rucphen Family Study, ERF). Laboratory analysis of these subjects included determination of fasting plasma lipids. Heritabilities for total plasma cholesterol (TC), HDL, LDL, and TG, estimated using SOLAR and adjusted for multiple covariates, were found to be 0.35, 0.51, 0.29, and 0.21, respectively. Inclusion of Concurrent Sessions80
apoE genotype in the model decreased heritability estimates slightly 
yet signiﬁcantly. A further analysis, which used regression to estimate plasma lipid means by inbreeding quartile, showed that TC and LDL levels increased when the extent of inbreeding increased. These trends were statistically signiﬁcant (p
trend = 0.006 for TC and ptrend = 0.025 for 
LDL). In conclusion, our studies in an unselected pedigree show that genetic factors play an important role in the variation of plasma lipid levels. Common polymorphisms such as apoE account for only a small portion of this variance, but suggest that this population would allow for the localization of lipid genes with comparatively small effects.
C77. European distribution of cystic ﬁbrosis (CFTR) gene 
mutations: correlation with disease incidence and application to 
screening
M. Macek Jr.1, M. Macek Sr.1, A. Krebsova1, H. Cuppens2, E. Dequeker2, J. 
Cassiman2;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Center for 
Medical Genetics, Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium.
Although there have been many reports on population speciﬁc distribution of 
CFTR gene mutations in the classical form of cystic 
ﬁbrosis (CF), little attention has been given to integrating these ﬁndings into a global understanding. Thus, a long-term collaborative effort was launched to determine the distribution of 
CFTR mutations 
in the European populations in order to provide guidelines for routine screening, by the provision of detailed regional data. Final analyses were based on genotypes from 15606 CF patients (31212 CF chromosomes), using data compiled from over 102 original papers and from 82 collaborating European centres. The entire CFTR gene coding region was analysed in 73% of cohorts and altogether 729 mutations were detected. We also examined CF incidence, including regional mutational heterogeneity in a subset of populations via a cascade “data ﬁltering” strategy. 422 alleles occurred only once, while in the remainder the 20 most common CF alleles comprise: F508del (63.45%); G542X (2.73); N1303K (2.22); W1282X (1.60); G551D (1.25); 1717-1 G->A (0.94); R553X (0.79); 621+1 G->T (0.59); 3849+10kb C->T (0.57); CFTRdele2,3/21kb/ (0.55); 2183AA->G (0.48); 394delTT (0.45); R1162X, 2789+5 G->A (0.44 each); 3659delC, R117H (0.43); I507del (0.36) and R347P, R334W (0.32). There are marked differences in regional / ethnic distribution of particular mutations among various populations. Moreover, statistics revealed a signiﬁcant positive correlation between F508del frequency and the incidence of CF. From comprehensive data assessment we offer recommendations 
for optimized mutation screening strategies.Due to the space constraints all collaborators could not be 
acknowledged; supported by VZ00000064203.
C78. Phylogeographic analysis of mtDNA and Y chromosome 
lineages in Caucasus populations
I. Kutuev1,2, R. Khusainova1,2, M. Bermisheva1,2, B. Yunusbaev1, M. Reidla2, S. 
Rootsi2, E. Metspalu2, T. Kivisild2, R. Villems2, E. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Estonian 
Biocenter, Tartu, Estonia.
The Greater Caucasus marks a traditional boundary between Europe and Asia. Linguistically, it is one of the most diverse areas of the continental Eurasia, while genetics of the people living there is poorly understood. Mitochondrial DNA and NRY variability was studied in 23 Caucasus populations speaking Caucasus, Turkic, and Indo-European languages. Total sample comprised more than 1700 individuals on Y chromosome and more than 2100 individuals on mtDNA. Genetic outliers among the studied populations are relatively recently arrived Turkic speaking Nogays. The indigenous Caucasus populations possess generally less than 5% of eastern Eurasian mtDNA and Y-chromosomal haplotypes - in a profound contrast to the Turkic-speaking people at the other side of the Caspian, but not so dissimilar compared to the Volga-Turkic Tatars and Chuvashis or to the Anatolian Turks. Haplogroup frequency variation within the Caucasus populations, in some instances signiﬁcant, appears to be caused primarily by speciﬁc aspects of the demographic history of populations. Phylogeographically, a particularly intriguing ﬁnding is the presence, though at low frequencies, of a predominantly northeastern African haplogroup M1 in many North Caucasus populations, though they lack sub-Saharan L lineages, relatively frequent in the Arab-speaking Levant. Results obtained help to place the Caucasus populations into the scenario of the peopling of Eurasia with anatomically modern humans. Possible migration routs, peopling of steppe and mountain parts of the Caucasus and causes of high linguistic diversity presence in this region is analyzed in this study.
POSTERS
P0001. Peculiar symptoms of respiratory oxalosis without 
progressive course as a genetic complex disease
G. P. Pospekhova1, L. Aleshina1, V. G. Vakharlovsky2, O. Voronina3, T. Razore -
nova1, M. Zorina1, M. O. Mkheidze1;  
1Medical Academy for postgraduate education, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion, 2Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St.Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 3Institute of Experimantal Medicine RAMS, St.Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Authors have reported on a new form of COPD as a genetic complex disease (G. Pospekhova, 1989). 80 probands (70 females, 10 males, sex ratio 7:1) and their relatives (56) were under our observation. The main diagnostic sings of this form were typical habitus, systemic oxalosis, hyperoxaluria and lack of progressive, progrediens, inﬂammation course ((ROPC(-)). In 35 families we have observed ROPC(-) in 3 generations. Set of diagnostic laboratory features included intensive tolerance of peripheral blood mononuclears to the polyclonal antigen FGA in RSML test. Using RSML test monocyte migration was found to be stimulated vs. be inhibited in patients with ROPC(-) and their relatives independently of inﬂammation phase and age. Probands with ROPC(-) had low level of FGA sensitivity. Authors supposed immune cell alteration to be connected with family food preference providing underdoses of natural agents like FGA and be inherited.. Risk of ROPC(-) was found to correlate with genetic relationship: all ﬁrst degree relatives have had RTML test inverted vs. 5% of the third degree relatives. Males with ROPC(-) have had some sings of hypogonadism and have been childless. Ascorbic acid has provoked disease manifestation or worsened its course. Our diagnostic set allows 1) to create group with high risk of ROPC(-) using RSML test, 2) make easier diagnostic process 3) put into practice predictive 
counseling, 4) start preventive correct medicinal management
P0002. Risk factors in abdominal wall defects
M. Roth , B. Dott, Y. Alembik, C. Stoll;  
Genetique Medicale, Strasbourg, France.
The aim of this study was to describe the prevalence at birth of two abdominal wall defects (AWD)and to identify possible etiologic factors. The AWD came from 320,984 consecutive births registered for the period 1979 to 2002. Request information was obtained for cases and for controls. Hundred twenty one cases with AWD were analysed, 55.4 % were omphalocele and 44.6 % were gastroschisis. The mean prevalence rate for omphalocele was 2.18 per 10000 and for gastroschisis 1.76 per 10000. Associated malformations were found in 74.6 % of omphalocele compared with 53.7 % of gastroschisis; 28.3 % of fetuses with omphalocele had an abnormal karyotype, 44,7 % had a recognizable syndrome, association or an unspeciﬁed malformation pattern; 51.8 % of fetuses with gastroschisis had additional malformations that were not of chromosomal origin, but 1 case. Antenatal ultrasound examination was able to detect 45 (67.2 %) cases of omphaloceles and 31 (57.4 %) cases of gastroschisis. In 35 (52.2 %) cases of omphalocele and in 8 (14.8 %) cases of gastroschisis parents opted for termination of pregnancy. The overall survival rate was 16 (23.9 %) for omphalocele and 35 (64.8 %) for gastroschisis. Weight, length and head circumference at birth of infants with AWD were less than those of controls. The weight of placenta of infants with AWD was not different from the weight of placenta of controls. Gastroschisis was associated with signiﬁcantly younger maternal age than omphalocele. Pregnancies with AWD were more often complicated by threatened 
abortion, oligohydramnios and polyhydramnios.Posters81
P0003. Life adaptation in 8 women with Rokitansky Séquence
S. Turyk ;  
Hospital Británico de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
This report provides information about the adult life adaptation of 
8 women with Rokitansky Sequence (R.S.), ranging now from 23 - 34 years of ages. R.S. is a defect of development of the caudal paramesonephric ductus, with incomplete or atretic vagina, rudimentary 
uterus, normal hormones and normal karyotipes.The R.S. propositus were identiﬁed throughout the clinical examinations, hormonal and ecographic studies and chromosomal analysis of peripheral blood cells between 1982 and 1997.The diagnosis in the propositus was made between 11 and 18 years old. In order to obtain information about the life progress of participants, the following speciﬁc content areas were addressed: surgery made, educational progress, relationships, employment, sexual identity and orientation and leisure activity.Results: In 5 of 8 propositus, the corrective surgery was made. In education, 4 patients made the secondary school (12 years degree), 2 patients made the University ( 16 years degree ) and 2 patients did the master ( 18 years degree). 7 patients were employed full time and 5 propositis got married. All the patients present heterosexual identity. All propositis described a wide range of interests and choices. In conclusion, RS adults demonstrated good levels of cognitive and 
psychosocial competence and their adaptation has been positive.
P0004. Cytogenetic Evaluation of Infant Males with Mitral Valve 
Prolapse
S. Turyk1, M. Sakurai1, C. Croxatto2;  
1Hospital Británico de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Hospital Nacio -
nal Profesor Alejandro Posadas, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Mitral valve prolapse has been reported in patients with Klinefelter Syndrome . Because the clinical features in K.S. are not present until adolescence in boys with 47,XXY karyotype, we report here a detailed clinical history and karyotypes of 26 male infants with mitral valve prolapse. The ages of the studied children were 1-13 years, being the mean 5,8 years. 24 patients (92,4%) presented 46,XX karyotipe and 2 patients (7,6%) presented 47,XXY karyotype. No phenotypic abnormalities ( small testes or gynecomastia) , no developmental delays and no learning difﬁculties were observed in affected boys. Because of the signiﬁcant medical and psychological beneﬁts of early diagnosis of Klinefelter Syndrome, we recommend cytogenetic study for all cases of mitral valve prolapse among infant males, even without 
dysmorphic features
P0005. Structural central nervous system (CNS) anomalies in 
Kabuki make-up syndrome
T. Ben-Omran, A. S. Teebi ;  
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Kabuki make-up syndrome (KMS) [MIM147920] is a rare multiple congenital anomalies/mental retardation (MCA/MR) syndrome originally described by Niikawa et al. [1981] and Kuroki et al. [1981]. It is now well recognized worldwide with more than 350 cases reported in the literature. Most cases of KMS are sporadic, however several familial cases displayed autosomal dominant transmission. Duplication of chromosome 8p22-8p23.1 was recently demonstrated in multiple cases of KMS from different races, suggesting a possible common etiologic basis. KMS is characterized by a peculiar facial appearance, mild to moderate mental retardation, short stature, skeletal anomalies, and unusual dermatoglyphic patterns. The most striking feature is the peculiar face that consists of long palpebral ﬁssures and long eyelashes, eversion of the lateral one-third of the lower eyelid, arched and notched eyebrows with sparseness of their lateral one-third, and prominent and anteverted ears. Since the facial appearance often reﬂects the developing brain, it is not unexpected to observe a relatively higher frequency of CNS anomalies compared with disorders with minimal facial dysmorphism. A number of reports have indicated an apparent increased frequency of such anomalies. Here we report on three unrelated patients with typical KMS and structural CNS anomalies and, brieﬂy review literature pertaining to these anomalies 
in KMS patients.P0006. Clinical Manifestations associated with Familial Partial 
Trisomy 11
T. Ben-Omran1, E. Kolomietz2, I. E. Teshima3, M. Mah4, D. Chitayat5;  
1Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, the Hospital for Sick Children, Uni -
versity of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Department of Laboratory Medicine 
and Pathology, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Can -
ada, 3Department of Pediatric Laboratory Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Department of Psychiatry, Toronto 
General Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 5Division of Clini -
cal and Metabolic Genetics, Hospital for Sick Children, The Prenatal Diagnosis 
and Medical Genetics Program, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
The etiology of mental retardation, often presenting in childhood, is 
unknown in approximately 50% of the cases. Cytogenetic analysis is regarded as the mainstay in the diagnostic process. Identifying a chromosomal abnormality in patients with mental retardation provide necessary information for genetic counseling regarding prognosis, recurrence risk, and prenatal diagnosis options. In addition, determination of the clinical manifestations associated with abnormal karyotypes is an important tool for the identiﬁcation of genetic disorders and the genes causing them. Here we report on a family with three members having mild to moderate mental retardation with learning disabilities, microcephaly, subtle dysmorphic features and mood disorders . The ﬁnding of the same mood disorder in all affected members of this family is important in determining genes associated with these disorders which are thought to have multifactorial inheritance.Cytogenetic and genomic microarray analysis revealed an unbalanced karyotype with duplication of a segment derived from the long arm of chromosome 11. This duplication was examined by genomic microarray and conﬁrmed by FISH. Within this duplicated region, estimated to be 12 Mb region of DNA, four brain-expressed genes appear to be particularly promising based upon their likely functional roles: i) NAALAD2, N-acetylated alpha-linked acidic dipeptidase 2; ii) GRM5, glutamate receptor, metabotropic 5; iii) MTNR1B, melatonin receptor 1B; iv) PANX1, pannexin 1. Possible role of these genes in 
the clinical manifestation in this family will be discussed.
P0007. Cerebrofaciothoracic syndrome
K. Boduroglu , Y. Alanay, E. Tuncbilek;  
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
Cerebro-facio-thoracic dysplasia is a rare congenital anomaly/mental retardation syndrome described by Pascual - Castroviejo in 1975. Autosomal recessive inheritance has been suggested because of parental consanguinity in 2 of the three reported families. The features include facial dysmorphism, multiple malformations of the vertebrae and ribs, and mental retardation. Costovertebral abnormalities are similar to those of spondylocostal dysostosis, Robinow syndrome and cerebrocostomandibular syndrome. Only a few cases have been reported since ﬁrst report.We report on a 3 year old girl with cerebro-facio-thoracic dysplasia. She was born at term from a 22 year old healthy mother. Birth weight was 4,000 g, birth length 49 cm. She was the ﬁrst child of ﬁrst cousin parents. Cleft lip and palate was noticed on ﬁrst physical examination after birth. Before her referral to our department at age 3, she had had corrective operations for cleft lip and cleft palate at 8 and 18 months, respectively. On physical examination at age 3, weight was 13,500 g (50
th centile), height 95 cm (50-75th centile) and OFC 49 cm (25-
50th centile). Brachycephaly, hypertelorism, epicanthic folds, low set 
ears, and short neck were noticed. Radiographs showed cervical and thoracic vertebrae anomalies and biﬁd and abnormal ribs.This is another case that suggests autosomal recessive mode of 
inheritance for cerebro-facio-thoracic dysplasia.
P0008. Spinal Muscular Atrophy. Towards a mutational spectra 
in Western Sweden.
E. L. Arkblad1, K. Berg1, J. Wahlström1, N. Darin2, M. Tulinius2, M. Nordling1;  
1Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska, Goteborg, Sweden, 2The Queen Silvia Chil -
dren’s Hospital, Sahlgrenska, Goteborg, Sweden.
Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disorder 
caused by degeneration of the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord. SMA is divided into type I, II and III on the basis of age at onset and the maximum motor function achieved. The incidence has been estimated to be 5x10
-5, for SMA types I and II, in western Sweden. The disorder is Clinical genetics 82
caused by the homozygous deletion/inactivation of the Survival Motor 
Neuron Gene (SMN1). The severity is in part related to the number of pseudogenes (SMN2) present and may be related to the size of the deletion. A higher number of SMN2-genes correlate with a milder or 
even asymptomatc phenotype.A new molecular genetic technique, Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Ampliﬁcation (MLPA), makes it possible to simultaneously determine the gene-copy number for SMN1, SMN2 and the nearby genes BIRC1 and GTF2H2. This is also a method suitable for carrier detection. Using this method in the clinical setting gives us a spectrum of SMA mutations in Western Sweden. During 2003-2004 we have analysed 110 individuals of whom 30 were patients with SMA, 34 were carriers and 46 had at least 2 copies of SMN1 and were therefore 
considered normal (33 diagnostic, 13 carrier tests).In a few patients, with strongly suspected SMA and only 1 copy of SMN1, further analyses of the SMN1-gene have been made. So far one point mutation and one partial deletion have been identiﬁed. Genotype / phenotype studies are being performed on this relatively 
well-characterised cohort of patients.
P0009. Molecular Study Of PKD1  & PKD2  Genes By Linkage 
Analysis In Several Iranian Families With Autosomal Dominant 
Polycystic Kidney
M. M. Haghighi1, R. Radpour1,2, M. Ohadi1, N. Nikzat1, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetic Res. Ctr. Of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences University, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Res. Ctr. of Health and Remedy, 
Faculty of Health and Remedy, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is an inherited disorder with genetic heterogeneity. Here we report the ﬁrst molecular genetic study of ADPKD and the existence of locus heterogeneity for ADPKD in Iranian population by performing linkage analysis on 15 affected families. Eleven families showed linkage to 
PKD1 and two families showed linkage to PKD2. In two families, PKD1  
markers are common in all affected members but PKD2 markers were 
not informative. The results of this study demonstrate signiﬁcant locus heterogeneity in autosomal dominant PKD in Iran. Analysis of clinical data conﬁrms a milder ADPKD phenotype for 
PKD2 families. Our 
results showed relatively high heterozygosity rates and PIC values for some markers, while the most informative markers were KG8 and 
16AC2.5 for PKD1 gene and AFM224x6 for PKD2  gene.
P0010. Aarskog Syndrome
B. Bozorgmehr ;  
Shahid Beheshti Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
We have two families with this syndrome. The ﬁrst family have two affected son. The second one have an affected son and a daughter 
with mild form of syndrome.Both families mothers have hypertelorism. The sons signs were hypertelorism, short stature, broad ﬁltrom, round face, cleft lip and cleft palate, down slanted palpebral ﬁssure, broad forehead, short hands and feet, simian crease, clinodactyly, brachydactyly, interdigital web, shawl scrotom, some degree of learning disabilities and mental 
retardation.It is a rare Xlinked semi dominant syndrome. Most cases have been males and transmission can occure through mild affected femals. Gen map by linkage analysis is Xq1.3 and Xp11.2.These families came to our clinic to know aboat the recurrense risk 
and
seeking advise.
P0011. Is there any association between ESRB  gene 
polymorphism and male infertility in Iranian infertile men ?
M. D. Omrani , K. Yazadanpanah, S. Samadzadae, M. Jahandidae;  
Uromieh Medical Science University, Uromieh, Islamic Republic of Iran.
It is clear that a signiﬁcant proportion of infertile male with azoospermia and severe oligospermia have a genetic etiology for reproductive failure. Cytogenetic analysis and Y-chromosome micro deletion and other conventional methods such FISH had major effects on ﬁnding the causes of infertility in last decade, but still after performing all these experiments in some cases we do not have clear answer for our patients. Therefore it would be advisable to ﬁnd new clues for this old 
but interesting problem.In this study we performed an association study between RsaI and AluI 
single nucleotide polymorphism in the ESRB gene of infertile patient in 
comparison with normal fertile male control.From 180 infertile male patients referred to our center after ruling out all the known causes of the infertility such as chromosomal abnormalities, Y-chromosome micro deletion and other pathologic disorders, 5 ml peripheral blood were obtained and DNA were extracted. PCR ampliﬁcation of the polymorphic region was carried out and after running the PCR products on 2% agarose gel, the frequency of the 
polymorphism were calculated.A 2.7% times higher frequency of the heterozygous 
RsaI genotype 
was found in men with oligospermia compared to controls (p=0.004). In the other hand, the proportion of homozygous 
AluI genotype was 
about 0.3% in comparison to our normal control (p=0.04). Our result could suggest that these SNP could play an important role in the 
spermatogenesis process in male.
P0012. Recurrence of anophthalmia within the same sibship: 
evidence for germline mosaicism for a heterozygous SOX2 
mutation
L. Faivre1, J. Fantes2, V. Faber3, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, A. Bron4, F. Huet3, K. 
Williamson2, V. van Heyningen2, D. R. FitzPatrick2;  
1Centre de Génétique, Dijon, France, 2MRC Human Genetics Unit, Western 
General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3Service de Pédiatrie, Dijon, 
France, 4Service d'Ophtalmologie, Dijon, France.
The etiology of anophthalmia is complex with environmental, syndromic, genic and chromosomal origins reported. Heterozygous mutations within the 
SOX2 gene has been identiﬁed in anophthalmia with 
associated extraocular features including neurological abnormalities (psychomotor delay, myopathy, spastic diplegia), external genitalia abnormalities and tracheo-esophageal ﬁstula. Here we report the ﬁrst recurrence of 
SOX2-associated eye malformation of the anophthalmia/
microphthalmia spectrum within the same sibship from unaffected unrelated parents. Severe bilateral microphthalmia and unilateral cryptophthalmia was associated with cerebral structural abnormalities, including corpus callosum agenesis, enlarged ventricles, hypoplastic inferior cerebellar vermis and hypoplastic white matter in case 1. Bilateral anophthalmia was associated with psychomotor retardation but normal cerebral MRI in case 2. A heterozygous SOX2 mutation (N46K), located at the 5’end of the HMG box and presumed to result in loss of function, was found in case 2. The mother carried the same mutation but as a mosaic. A segregation analysis revealed that some unaffected children carried the same maternal chromosome than our proband but did not carry the mutation. Those results explained both the eye malformation and the "pseudo-recessive" inheritance pattern in the family. This is the ﬁrst case of gonadal mosaicism for SOX2 and this has signiﬁcant implications for genetic counseling in such eye 
malformation.
P0013. A New Mitochondrial Disease in Bulgaria
B. I. Radeva ;  
High Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Mitochondrial diseases affect 6-17/100 000 of many populations but the frequency of these disorders in our country is unknown yet. About 15 cases have been registered up to now. We report a case with a new mitochondrial disease. Diagnosis was conﬁrmed by investigating mtDNA with the PCR-SBT method. The patient was a 4year old boy, born after a normal pregnancy and delivery. On the 3rd day after the birth his general condition worsened. He had hypotonia, clonic convulsions, tachypnea, hepatomegaly, clonus, missing reﬂexes of Moro and Robinson. Biochemical investigation showed metabolic alkalosis, hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, elevated transaminase and alkaline phosphatase. U/s of the brain showed oedema cerebri and hyperdensity. EEG showed paroxysmal activity. Despite a low protein diet and anticonvulsive therapy, he developed quadriparesis spastica and West syndrome. MRI at 1 year of age showed apical and occipital encephalomalacia.. PCR-SBT revealed mtDNA mutations: A5315G, A89016G, G9300A. The last is in the gene for cytochrome C3 oxidase and causes an aminoacid change of alanine to threonine. All these mutations are novel. These data conﬁrm a new mitochondrial disorders. The investigation are continuing.Clinical genetics 83
P0014. Nevus sebaceus of Jadassohn - a case with severe 
structural brain anomalies; clinical and pathological correlations
J. Behunova1, E. Zavadilikova1, N. Bobrov2, L. Podracka1, A. Vasilova3, M. 
Brozmanova4;  
1Safarik University Children Hospital, I. Pediatric Department, Kosice, Slovakia, 
2Safarik University Hospital, Department of Forensic Medicine, Kosice, Slo -
vakia, 3Safarik University Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Kosice, 
Slovakia, 4Commenius University Children Hospital, Department of Pediatric 
Neurology, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Nevus sebaceus of Jadassohn or linear/epidermal nevus syndrome is a 
rare condition that belongs to neurocutaneous hamartoses. Molecular base of disease is still unexplained. Here we report on a boy of gypsy 
origin with severe neurologic involvement and early death.The boy was from the ﬁrst pregnancy of a healthy young nonconsanguineous couple. The pregnancy was unremarkable until the 7th month, when the ventriculomegaly was found on ultrasound. Delivery was in the 38th week by C-section, the birth weight was 2940 g, length 49 cm, head circumference 38 cm. Clinical and imaging ﬁndings included right-sided facial hemihypertrophy, linear nevus sebaceus covering the right side of the face, right-sided dysplastic hemimegalencephaly with schisencephaly, lissencephaly and hydrocephalus, and atrophy of left hemisphere. Moderate clonic seizures started from the 3rd day of life and progressed to severe epilepsy. EEG record (epileptic discharges with burst suppression) together with clinical neurological ﬁndings showed evidence of early infantile epileptic encephalopathy. There were no other system malformations; ophthalmologic examination did not detect any abnormalities. Chromosomal analysis revealed normal karyotype. Family history was negative for brain malformations, mental 
retardation, epilepsy and skin anomalies.In the age of 4 month the patient suddenly died at crib at home. Forensic autopsy determined severe brain oedema as the cause of death. Macrosections of brain conﬁrmed the structural anomalies listed above. Unusual histological ﬁndings included distorsion of laminar character of cortical cytoarchitectonics, primitive layers of cortical neurocytes, spongioform changes of grey and white brain matter, and 
focal gliosis.
P0015. High resolution comparative genomic hybridisation 
analysis for detecting small constitutional chromosome 
abnormalities
V. Vranova1, P. Kuglik1, M. Pesakova2, I. Slamova2, D. Zezulkova2, M. Vile -
mova2, A. Oltova2, R. Gaillyova2;  
1Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk 
University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University 
Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic.
Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) is a molecular cytogenetic technique that allows geonome-wide analysis of DNA sequence copy number differences. Recently, modiﬁcation of CGH with increased resolution down to 3-5 Mb has been reported. This high resolution CGH (HR-CGH) allows characterization of redundant and missing cytogenetic material often unrecognizable by G-banding, and enhances sensitivity and speciﬁcity in the detection of aberrations.Although, the application of CGH is mainly in the ﬁeld of cancer genetics, its use in clinical cytogenetics also increases. In clinical cytogenetics CGH has been particularly suited for simpliﬁcation of identiﬁcation and characterization of intrachromosomal duplication, 
deletions, unbalanced translocations and maker chromosomes.In this work we are reporting about the application of the recently developed metod of HR-CGH for clariﬁcation of small terminal imbalances in 4 patients with abnormal karyotypes and dysmorphic features. The characterization of additional material on 1p, 4p, 6p and 17p chromosomes was performed and der(1)t(1;11), inv(4p), dup(6p) and der(17)t(11;17) were conﬁrmed by using HR-CGH. The results were subsequently conﬁrmed by FISH and spectral karyotyping 
(SKY).We conclude that HR-CGH can be used as an excellent diagnostic tool for clariﬁcation and identiﬁcation of chromosomal imbalances not 
apparent from a routine cytogenetic analysis.P0016. A child with Feingold syndrome (tracheo-oesophageal 
ﬁstula, oesophagus and duedenal atresia, and dysmorphic 
features) with an interstitial deletion of 2(p24p25)
K. Brondum-Nielsen1, J. M. D. Hahnemann1, L. A. Meza-Zepeda2, N. C. Chris -
tensen3, I. Jeppesen1, K. Nielsen1, S. H. Kresse2, O. Myklebost2;  
1The Kennedy Institute-National Eye Clinic, Glostrup, Denmark, 2Department of 
Tumor Biology, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Pediatric Depart -
ment, Soenderborg Hospital, Soenderborg, Denmark.
Feingold syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition with 
microcephaly, limb abnormalities and oesophageal or duodenal atresia. The gene maps to 2p23-p24 but remains to be identiﬁed.We report a girl delivered by Cesarian section after 34 weeks gestation due to asphyxia , with a birth weight of 1560g. She was operated on 2 days old for oesophagus atresia and tracheo-oesophageal ﬁstula. An annular pancreas, duodenal atresia and Meckel´s divertickel were also found. Furthermore, a small muscular VSD and ASD were demonstrated. She had dysmorphic features with sandalgap and simian creases bilaterally. A conventional chromosome analysis in the neonatal period was normal. 12 months old she was below -4 Standard Deviations for height, weight and head circumference. She had a dysmorphic facies with hypertelorism, epicanthus and ﬁne arched eyebrows. There was clinodactyly of second and ﬁfth ﬁngers. 
Development was retarded.High resolution Comparative Genomic Hybridisation (CGH) and 
subsequent FISH analysis demonstrated a del(2)(p24p25 ) de novo.
In order to generate a more detailed map of the deleted area, array based CGH was performed using a genomic microarray representing the human genome at approximately 1Mb resolution. The deleted area was delimited to a region of approximately 10 Mb in 2p25-p24 and extended from RP11-542B5 to RP11-262D22.
P0017. A screening strategy based on the analysis of Beta-
Myosin Heavy Chain, Cardiac Myosin Binding Protein C and 
cardiac Troponin T for Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
F. Girolami1, I. Passerini1, A. Mariottini1, I. Olivotto2, F. Cecchi2, F. Torricelli1;  
1Careggi Hospital-Cytogenetics and Genetics Unit, Florence, Italy , 2Careggi 
Hospital-Regional Referral Center for Myocardial Diseases, Florence, Italy .
Background.  Mutations causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) 
have been described in ten different genes of the sarcomere. However, 
three genes account for >50% of known mutations: Beta-Myosin Heavy Chain (
MYH7), Cardiac Myosin Binding Protein C (MYBPC3 ), 
and Cardiac Troponin T ( TNNT2). Thus, we prospectively assessed a 
screening strategy based on the comprehensive evaluation of MYBPC3, 
MYH7 and TNNT2 in a consecutive population with HCM. Methods. A 
total of 163 unrelated HCM patients were screened in MYBPC3, MYH7 
and TNNT2 genes by DHPLC and automatic sequencing. Results . 
We identiﬁed 54 mutations in 82 index patients (50% of the study cohort); 37 were novel. The prevalence rates for 
MYBPC3, MYH7 and 
TNNT2 were 34%, 12% and 4%, respectively. MYBPC3 mutations were 35, including 7 frameshift, 7 splice-site and 3 nonsense. All were “private” except E542Q, IVS24-2 A>G, insC1065, R502Q, M555T, and IVS12+1G>A, which were present in 2-5 unrelated patients. Moreover, E258K was found in 12% of the patients, suggesting a founder effect.
 One patient was homozygous for a MYBPC3 mutation. 
MYH7 mutations were 13, all missense; 8 were novel. In TNNT2, only 6 mutations were found. Ten patients carried a double mutation within 
the MYBPC3 gene (n=6), or were double heterozygous for a MYBPC3 
mutation associated with a mutation in MYH7(n=3) or TNNT2 (n=1). 
Conclusions . Mutations  of MYH7, MYBPC3 and TNNT2 accounted for 
50% of patients in a consecutive HCM cohort. Thus, the combined analysis of these 3 genes represents a rational and cost-effective initial 
approach to genetic screening of HCM.
P0018. VMD2 gene mutational screening in Italian families: 
identiﬁcation of a novel mutation associated with Best 
Maculopathy
I. Passerini1, F. Girolami1, A. Mariottini1, A. Sodi2, U. Menchini1, F. Torricelli1;  
1Careggi Hospital -Cytogenetics and Genetics Unit, Florence, Italy , 2University 
of Florence-Eye Clinic, Florence, Italy.
Background : Best's disease is an autosomal dominant, early-onset 
form of macular degeneration.VMD2 gene, considered responsible Clinical genetics84
for the disease, codiﬁes the protein Bestrophin: the function of this 
protein is not known. In the present study we screened for mutations the VMD2 gene in Italian patients with Best maculopathy.
Methods: Seven families with Best disease were recruited from central and southern Italy, and family members were evaluated by standard ophthalmologic examination. DNA samples were analyzed for mutations in VMD2 gene by DHPLC approach and direct sequencing 
techniques.
Results: Some mutations of the VMD2 gene have been detected in all the affected patients and in some unaffected relatives. Most of the mutations have already been described in the literature; a novel mutation (R218G) was detected. It is also interesting to remark that in this series the same mutation was associated with some differences in clinical phenotypes. In fact in one family the R218C mutation was associated with the onset of choroidal neovascularization (CNV) in the affected mother and her son, while no CNV was reported in another family sharing the same mutation. Another family with the R25W mutation showed a multifocal location of the vitelliform deposits, while another family with the samed mutation showed a typical isolated 
vitelliform disc in the macular area.
Conclusions: Some mutations of VMD2 gene have been detected in 
some Best's disease families; among them there is a novel missense mutation. In spite of the small number of studied families it was possible to remark a certain phenotype heterogeneity.
P0019. Stargardt Disease in Italian patients: identiﬁcation of nine 
novel mutations in ABCR gene
I. Passerini1, F. Girolami1, A. Mariottini1, A. Sodi2, U. Menchini2, F. Torricelli1;  
1Careggi Hospital -Cytogenetics and Genetics Unit, Florence, Italy , 2University 
of Florence-Eye Clinic, Florence, Italy.
Purpose : Stargardt disease (STGD) is a progressive juvenile-to-young 
adult-onset macular degeneration with severe reduction of central 
visual acuity and normal periheral vision..Mutations in ABCR gene are responsible for autosomal recessive Stargardt disease (arSTGD). In this study we determined the mutation spectrum in ABCR gene in a 
group of Italian patients with arSTDG.
Methods: Thirthy-two families from central Italy, some members of which were affected by arSTGD, were clinically examined. DNA samples were analyzed for mutations in all 50 exons of the ABCR gene 
by DHPLC approach and direct sequencing techniques.
Results: All the affected subjects showed bilateral central vision loss with macular atrophy and yellow-white ﬂecks at the posterior pole, typical dark choroid in ﬂuorescein angiography, normal electroretinogram, normal caliber of retinal vessels, no pigmented bone spicules in the retinal periphery. In all these patients we reported some mutations of ABCR gene. Some of these mutations have been already described and among them G1961E was the most frequent in our series. Nine novel mutations were identiﬁed: ﬁve missense mutations (N96K, T970P, F1015I, P1484S and L2221P); one nonsense mutations (Q21X); two small deletions (5109delG, 5903delG and 6750delA). These mutations were not detected in 150 unaffected control individuals (300 
chromosomes) of Italian origin.
Conclusions:  Some novel mutations in ABCR gene in STGD patients 
were reported. These data conﬁrm the extensive allelic heterogeneity of the ABCR gene, in agreement with previous observations in patients with Stargardt disease from Italy.
P0020. Genetic testing in familial melanoma: uptake and 
psychological implications
F. A. de Snoo1, S. R. Riedijk2, A. van Mil1, A. van Haeringen1, J. ter Huurne1, W. 
Bergman3, H. F. Vasen4, N. A. Gruis3, A. Tibben1, M. H. Breuning1;  
1Dept of Human&Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Dept. of 
Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 
3Dept of Dermatology, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 4Dept of Gastro-enter -
ology, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands.
We have started offering genetic testing for p16-Leiden (a CDKN2A founder mutation) and so far we have found no adverse effects. Uncertainties regarding the risk estimates associated with melanoma gene defects have prompted the International Melanoma Genetics Consortium to consider genetic testing premature unless conducted within a strict protocol. Accordingly, we have started offering predictive genetic testing in the p16-Leiden families for which we have well-deﬁned risk characteristics. The gene defect is associated with increased risks of the treatable and preventable cancer melanoma and with the non-treatable and non-preventable pancreatic cancer. Given these disease characteristics, decision-making is thought to be even more difﬁcult and therefore we aimed to evaluate uptake, motivation 
and psychological implications of genetic testing.Of the 403 eligible subjects, 166 (41%) opted for counselling. Variables signiﬁcantly predictive for counselling uptake were being a parent, higher prior risk and older age. A total of 127 (77%) counselees ﬁnally opted for genetic testing. Age was the only signiﬁcant predictor for test acceptation. Of the counselees, 94 (57%) were included in the psychological study. Counselees reported lower distress levels after the ﬁrst counselling session than those reported in other oncogenetic testing settings like HBOC and FAP, despite being informed about pancreatic cancer. In addition, these levels were not clinically elevated. Test acceptors had more positive expectations of the test 
than decliners.We report a relatively high uptake rate for p16-Leiden testing and no clinically worrisome levels of distress after the ﬁrst counselling 
session.
P0021. New mutations in the Protein Kinase Cγ gene associated 
with Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 14 (SCA14)
S. Klebe ;  
INSERM U679, Paris, France.
Objective To evaluate the frequency for PKCγ gene mutations and 
determination of the associated phenotype.
Background Autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (ADCA) 
are a heterogeneous group of movement disorders characterized by 
progressive ataxia that is variably associated with other neurological signs. In addition to the known expansions of repeated sequences, six point mutations have been described in the gene encoding protein 
kinase Cγ (PKCγ) accounting spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) 14.
Methods Direct sequencing of exons 1, 4, 10 and 18 of the PKCγ gene 
in 238 index cases from ADCA families that did not carried expansions in the SCA 1, 2, 3, 6, 12, 7, 17 and DRPLA genes.
Results Six missense mutations, including 5 newly reported, were 
identiﬁed in exon 4, 10 and 18. The mutations segregated completely with the disease and
 were located in highly conserved regions of the 
protein , except for a single mutation only conserved among mammals. 
The mutations were absent in 560 control chromosomes.The phenotype of the affected individuals consisted in a slowly progressive pure cerebellar ataxia with few additional neurological features (mild cognitive impairment, myoclonus, sphincter disturbances and decreased vibration sense) in some patients. The mean age of 
onset of was 33.5 ±14.2 years (range 15 to 60 years).
Conclusion Although SCA 14 remains a rare form (6/238) of ADCA 
in families without the classical repeat expansions, mutations in the PKCγ gene should be considered in patients with slowly progressive ADCA associated with myoclonus and/or mild cognitive impairment.
P0022. Bilateral upper extremity deﬁciency, unilateral absence of 
ﬁbula with oligodactyly and zygodactyly:a new clinical entity?
B. Eroglu Kesim, M. Tekkesin, U. Cetincelik;  
Sisli Etfal Research and Traning Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey.
We report a boy with multiple congenital extremity anomalies. The 
propositus is four years old. His parents, are both from the same region of Turkey but not relatives. He has reduction deformity of forearms and both hands. Especially, the distal part of the left leg was shorter than the right leg. He has oligodactyly on the left foot and zygodactyly on the right foot. Prominant radiologic ﬁndings include bilateral aplasia/hypoplasia of radii and ulna, absent carpals, nearly complete absence of metacarpals and phalanges. Both tibias were thickened and the left tibia was shorter than the right one. No ﬁbula was observed on the left side. He has four metatarsals, four toes on the left foot, whereas, he has four metatarsals, ﬁve toes on the right foot. This combination of features has not been described previously, and may present a new clinical entity.Clinical genetics85
P0023. Outcome of a pregnancy of a couple with Noonan 
syndrome in both partners
K. Becker1, H. Hughes1, K. Howard1, E. J. Lazda2, J. Short3, A. Shaw3, M. A. 
Patton3;  
1North Wales Clinical Genetics Service, Bodelwyddan, Rhyl, Denbighshire, 
United Kingdom, 2Fetal Malformation Unit, Institute of Medical Genetics, Univer -
sity Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3SW Thames Regional Genet -
ics Centre, St. George's Hospital Medical School, London, United Kingdom.
We report the outcome of the ﬁrst pregnancy of an unrelated couple 
with a clinical diagnosis of Noonan syndrome and a missense PTPN11 mutation in both partners. In addition to the 50% risk of having a baby with Noonan syndrome and one PTPN mutation, the couple also have a 25% risk of compound heterozygosity which has never been reported in the literature before, and for which the phenotype is unknown. The pregnancy resulted in an early fetal demise at 12 weeks. Hydrops and cystic hygroma were observed on a dating scan, and a subsequent fetal medicine scan showed that the fetus was no longer viable. Cytogenetic and molecular studies conﬁrmed compound heterozygosity. Our case suggests that homozygous Noonan syndrome is a severe condition 
presenting prenatally with severe hydrops and intrauterine death.
P0024. Phenotypic variability in families with mesiodens
E. Severin ;  
Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
Mesiodens is the most common supernumerary tooth also known as an extra incisor located in the midline between the two permanent central incisors. Mesiodens usually occurs singly and can be isolated or associated with other anomalies.Often does not erupt. The literature reports several theories, including the genetic one, concerning the cause of mesiodens but subject is still debated. 
Objective: to identify 
the genetic cause of clinical variability of mesiodens as observed in our 
cases. Subjects and Methods: investigation of mesiodens was carried 
out on 17 Caucasian patients ranging in age from 8 to 23 years; based on the phenotypic presentation of mesiodens (shape, size, location and eruption) we classiﬁed the patients in four groups; the mesiodens was diagnosed by oral and radiographic examinations; family study, cytogenetic and molecular analyses were performed. 
Results: 15 
patients presented mesiondens as an isolated trait; the affected members within the same family often exhibited variability in clinical presentation; 2 patients exhibited mesiodens in association with other dental anomalies; family history of the patients suggested either the mendelian pattern of inheritance (autosomal dominant with complete penetrance or X-linked dominant) or an unclear pattern of transmission; no cytogenetic aberration were found. 
Conclusions:  mesiodens is 
an inherited developmental anomaly; intrafamilial variability could be explained by variable expressivity of a single mutant gene or by the effect of modiﬁer gene; interfamilial variability could be well explained by locus heterogeneity rather than the molecular heterogeneity. Early 
diagnosis of familial mesiodens prevents the clinical complications.
P0025. Poikiloderma, Alopecia, Bilateral Optic Nerve Atrophy, 
Cerebral Calciﬁcation, and Bone Marrow Suppression: Severe 
Rothmund Thomson Syndrome?
N. A. Al-Sanna'a1, S. A. Al-Dhaﬁri1, A. S. Teebi2;  
1Dhahran Health Center, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, 2The Hospital for Sick Chil -
dren, Toronto, ON, Canada.
A Saudi Arab girl with poikilodermaous skin changes, generalized 
alopecia, bilateral optic nerve atrophy, cerebral calciﬁcation, and signiﬁcant delay of growth and development is described. The girl developed bone marrow suppression requiring frequent blood and platelets transfusions. She had a normal karyotype study on the blood. The parents are ﬁrst cousins and phenotypically normal. An older brother died of the same condition suggesting an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. We think this constellation of clinical features is likely to represent a severe variant of Rothmund Thomson Syndrome. Other conditions including gerodermia osteodysplatica and the severe autosomal recessive form of dyskeratosis congenital were 
also consideredP0026. Mosaicism in genetic counselling procedure(Belarussian 
registry of chromosomal abnormalities)
N. Rumyantseva , A. Polityko, O. Khurs;  
Institute for Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, Belarus.
Mosaicism is cause of widespread spectrum of pathological features: mental delay, growth retardation, malformations, dysmorphic signs, hypogenitalism, decreased fertility, reproductive failure. Carriers need 
for exact cytogenetic status detection and prognoses.We studied cytogenetical and clinical characteristics of 175 affected patients with mosaic chromosomal rearrangements (MChR) identiﬁed using GTG-banding analysis (lymphocytes). Mosaic abnormalities amounted to 6.7% of all number of aberrant karyotypes registered during 1983-2003 years (175/2619 cases). 48 different variants of 
MChR were detected.Cytogenetical data. Spectrum of MChR included: mosaic aberrations of gonosomes -79.4%; autosomes -18.9%; combinated mosaic cases -1.7%. Structural rearrangements amounted to 42.8% of all mosaic karyotypes (75/175 patients); sex chromosomes abnormalities prevailed among them -94.6% (71/75). Analyses demonstrated the presence of 2, 3 or 4 aberrant cell lines in single karyotype, including combinations of clones with normal and aberrant karyotype and abnormal clones only. Mosaic balanced karyotypes with inv(9) or inv(X) were registered in 4 cases (2%). 3 patients (1.7%) presented 
multiple aberrations.Clinical data. The frequent mosaic chromosomal syndromes were: autosomal imbalance presented 24 cases (13.7%) of Down syndrome, 7 cases (4%) numerical, structural aberrations of autosomes 5; 8; 9; 13; 18; 22; sex chromosomes abnormalities include 110 cases (62.8%) of Turner syndrome, 5 cases (2.8%) - female with polysomy X, including pentasomy X, 9 cases (5.1%) of Klainfelter syndrome. Other cases showed rare combinations of numerical and/or structural MChR of gonosomes, autosomes and markers expressed by MCA/MR 
phenotype or hypogenitalism/reproductive failure features.Spectrum of MChR and karyotype-phenotype correlations of rare 
variants will be presented.
P0027. Prenatal and postnatal MRI ﬁndings in Gomez-Lopez-
Hernandez syndrome.
T. Tan1, G. McGillivray1, S. Goergen2, S. M. White1;  
1Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, Australia, 2Department of Diag -
nostic Imaging, Monash Medical Centre, Melbourne, Australia.
Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez syndrome, or cerebellotrigeminal dermal dysplasia (MIM#601853), is a rare neurocutaneous disorder comprising cerebellar abnormalities, craniosynostosis, parietal alopecia, trigeminal nerve anesthesia, intellectual impairment and short stature. It has been reported in only ten patients, ﬁve of whom are Brazilian. Rhombencephalosynapsis is a rare cerebellar anomaly deﬁned as fusion of the cerebellar hemispheres and agenesis of the vermis. It is usually a sporadic isolated ﬁnding, but has been consistently reported in Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez syndrome. We present the clinical and radiographic features of a 35-week premature Caucasian Australian male who had rhombencephalosynapsis and other brain abnormalities diagnosed on prenatal fetal MRI, initially identiﬁed on ultrasound. The diagnosis of Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez syndrome became apparent at six week postnatal review when parietal alopecia and abnormal skull shape was noted. Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez syndrome should be considered as a syndromic association of rhombencephalosynapsis. 
There may be a common pathogenetic mechanism.
P0028. A 13-year old true hermaphrodite male with 46, XX/47, 
XXY karyotype, positive SRY and azoospermia factor genes, 
diagnosed through a ruptured corpus luteum
A. Mavrou1, A. Galani2, A. Kolialexi2, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, H. Fryssira1, E. Papan -
dreou2, K. Stefanaki2, K. Sophocleous1, C. Kanaka Gantenbein2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece, 21st Department of Pediat -
rics University of Athens, ²Agia Sophia² Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece.
The vast majority of true hermaphrodite patients - characterized by 
the presence of both ovarian and testicular tissue - show ambiguous genitalia or severe hypospadias and almost all have vagina. The most 
common karyotype is 46,XX.We report on a 13-year old boy, who presented with left inguinal hemorrhage after an accident while playing football. On clinical Clinical genetics86
examination, he had a left inguinal hernia, a palpable testis in the 
right semi-scrotum, normal male external genitalia and signiﬁcant gynecomastia. During the operation for the left inguinal hernia, the left gonad and the adjacent tissue were removed for histological examination, which revealed the presence of a normal ovary, rich in follicles and a ruptured corpus luteum and a normal ipsilateral adnexe with semi-uterus. Endocrinological assessment postoperatively depicted high FSH levels, testosterone levels at the pubertal range and low estradiol levels. Cytogenetic analysis in peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed a 46, XX (70%)/47, XXY (30%) karyotype. FISH analysis of left gonad showed a 46, XX (60%)/47, XXY (40%) karyotype and molecular analysis veriﬁed the presence of SRY and 
azoospermia factor genes.The importance of full histological, cytogenetic and molecular investigation in every single patient with sex differentiation disorders is highlighted by the constellation of normal male external genitalia with a 46,XX/47,XXY karyotype in this rare case of true hermaphroditism.
P0029. Czech dysplasia metatarsal type
I. A. Marik1,2, K. S. Kozlowski3, O. Marikova2, D. Zemkova1,4, M. Kuklik1,2;  
1Ambulant Centre for Defects of Locomotor Apparatus, Prague, Czech Repub -
lic, 2Department of Anthropology and Human Genetics, The Faculty of Science, 
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Medical Imaging, 
The Children´s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 4Second Paediatric 
Clinic Motol Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
The authors report about four further patients of the recently described new bone dysplasia - dominantly inherited pseudorheumatoid arthritis
 
that was diagnosed in eight members of one family. The patients of this report are not relative. They have a similar clinical history, the same distinctive phenotype and almost identical radiographic ﬁndings. The unique phenotypic hallmark is hypoplasia/dysplasia of the toes. The skeletal abnormalities are similar. They are localized predominantly in the spine, pelvis, hips and feet. They include a mild platyspondyly with irregularity of vertebral plates, narrowing of the joint and intervertebral disc spaces, rectangular shape of the lumbar spinal canal in the A-P projection, pelvic and proximal femoral dysplasia, and hypoplasia of the 3rd and/or 4th metatarsals. The disease is dominantly inherited with variable expressivity. The only major difference is absence of weather dependent articular pain that characterized the family of the previous study. All patients are Caucasians and originate from different parts of the Czech Republic. We conclude that patients in the previous study published under the name "Dominantly Inherited Pseudorheumatoid Dysplasia with Hypoplastic Toes" and those described in this report have the same disorder that is probably a quite common constitutional bone disorder in the Czech Republic. We propose this unique disease 
as a new nosological unit.
P0030. A French and Belgian collaborative study of 25 cases 
of Oral-Facial-Digital Syndrome Type 1: Clinical differences 
between patients with or without OFD1 mutation
C. Thauvin-Robinet1, M. Cossée2, V. Cormier-Daire3, L. Van Maldergem4, A. 
Toutain5, Y. Alembik6, E. Bieth7, V. Layet8, P. Parent9, A. David10, A. Golden -
berg3, G. Mortier11, D. Héron12, A. Bouvier13, F. Huet14, V. Cusin15, A. Donzel15, D. 
Devys2, J. Teyssier15, L. Faivre1;  
1centre de génétique, Dijon, France, 2Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, 
CHRU, Strasbourg, France, 3Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-En -
fants Malades, Paris, France, 4Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Loverval, 
Belgium, 5Service de Génétique, Tours, France, 6Service de Génétique Médi -
cale, Hôpital Hautepierre, CHRU, Strasbourg, France, 7Laboratoire de Géné -
tique, CHU Purpan, Toulouse, France, 8Unité de Cytogénétique et Génétique 
médicale, CH, Le Havre, France, 9Département de Pédiatrie et de Génétique 
Médicale, CHU, Brest, France, 10Service de Génétique médicale, CHU, Nantes, 
France, 11Centre de Génétique Médicale, Ghent, Belgium, 12Département de 
Génétique cytogénétique et embryologie, Hôpital La Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, 
France, 13Centre d’Investigation Clinique et d’Epidémiologie Clinique, Faculté 
de Médecine, Dijon, France, 14Service de Pédiatrie 1, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU, 
Dijon, France, 15Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU, Dijon, France.
The oral-facial-digital syndrome type 1 or Papillon-Léage-Psaume 
syndrome belongs to the heterogeneous group of oral-facial-digital syndromes and is characterised by X-linked dominant mode of inheritance with lethality in males. Clinical features include facial dysmorphism with oral, tooth and distal abnormalities, polycystic kidney disease and central nervous system malformations with wide inter- and intra-familial clinical variability. Mutations in the OFD1 gene are found in 50% of cases by direct sequencing. Large rearrangements and genetic heterogeneity could be postulated in order to explain this low mutation rate. A French and Belgian collaborative study collected 25 cases from 16 families and identiﬁed 11 novel mutations (9 frameshift, 1 nonsense and 1 missense mutation) by direct sequencing. We compared the phenotype of the 11 families with a pathogenic mutation with the phenotype of the 5 families with absence of mutation within the OFD1 gene in order to investigate which clinical features could suggest the presence or absence of an OFD1 mutation. There was no signiﬁcant difference for the presence or absence of hypertelorism, cleft lip and palate, buccal frenulae, tooth abnormalities, digital abnormalities, corpus callosum agenesis and mental retardation between both groups. Conversely, we found that the presence of polycystic kidneys (Chi²: 0.035) and short stature and the absence of lingual hamartomas (Chi²: 0.041) could suggest the absence of an OFD1 gene mutation, although such data could not be useful at an individual level. It is interesting to note that short stature have been found only in the group 
without OFD1 mutation (4/9 cases).
P0031. An unusual case of Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome 
with a mutation in the PTEN gene
L. Boccone1, V. Dessì2, S. Piga2, M. B. Piludu2, S. DeVirgiliis2, A. Cao3, G. 
Loudianos1;  
1Ospedale Regionale Microcitemie, Cagliari, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze 
Biomediche e Biotecnologie USC Italy, Cagliari, Italy, 3Istituto di Neurogenetica 
e Neurofarmacologia CNR cagliari Italy, Cagliari, Italy.
Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (BRRS) is characterised by macrocephaly, intestinal hamartomatous polyps, lipomas, speckled penis and mental retardation. Germline mutations in the tumor suppressor gene PTEN were described in patients with BRRS. Herein we report a case of BRRS with unusual clinical features and a novel mutation in PTEN gene He was born after uncomplicated pregnancy with birth weight and length at the 90th centile, head circumference at the 75th centile. At the ﬁrst observation (4.5 yrs) the patient has a height at the 90th centile, weight at the 50th centile and head circumference > +2 SD. He exhibited mild mental retardation and autistic features, joint hypermobility, macrocephaly, downward slanting palpebral ﬁssures and multiple hyperpigmented macules on the shaft and glans penis. Colonscopy revealed multiple intestinal lymphoid polyps, greater ﬂorid in the ileocecal region. The intestinal mucosa shows macroscopically numerous grey nodules and microscopically prominent large germinal follicules with polymorphous population of cells including B and T cell without any atypia. Mutation analysis revealed the presence of a missense substitution I135R in heterozygosity ﬂanking to the phosphatase core motif at a position in which a I135V has been 
already described.The peculiarity of our observation is related to the presence of intestinal lymphoid polyps, not yet described in BRRS, as well as the autistic features which have been rarely described in BRRS. Further studies are necessary to clarify the relationship existing between these 
features and the mutation described in our patient.
P0032. Cleft lip and palate and syndactyly in a father and son: 
new syndromic association?
L. E. Kim , R. Klatt, A. S. Teebi;  
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Cleft lip and palate is a common congenital malformation with an incidence of approximately 1 in 700 live births. It usually has a multifactorial etiology, with about 15% of cases being syndromic. This latter group is made up by a variety of syndromes, including Van der Woude syndrome as well as various chromosomal causes. We report on a father and son who were both born with bilateral cleft lip and palate and 3-4 syndactyly. The child was born at term after an unremarkable pregnancy and delivery to non-consanguineous parents. His father and mother were of Malaysian and East Indian descent, respectively. Aside from his father, the family history was non-contributory. He was noted at birth to have bilateral cleft lip and palate and was noted during our assessment to have partial 3-4 syndactyly of the left hand. There was a midline lower lip crease but no lip pits or bumps. The remainder of the medical examination was unremarkable. Development during Clinical genetics87
the ﬁrst few months of life was normal. Our examination of his father 
revealed a repaired bilateral cleft lip and palate. There were no lip pits or bumps. There was bilateral partial 3-4 syndactyly. Chromosome analysis on the son revealed a 46, XY karyotype and negative FISH for 22q11-. Hand X-rays on the father revealed no osseous abnormalities. We think that the association of these two ﬁndings may represent a previously unrecognized syndrome for which the inheritance pattern is 
likely autosomal dominant.
P0033. An unusual type of mixed gonadal dysgenesis 
associated with Müllerian ducts persistence, polygonadia and a 
45,X/46,X,idic(Y)(p) karyotype
S. Kofman-Alfaro1, K. Nieto2, P. Grether3, S. Frías4, I. Palma2, R. Alvárez2, L. 
Eraña5, G. Queipo2;  
1Hospital General de Mexico-UNAM, Mexico City, Mexico, 2Hospital General de 
Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico, 3American British Cowdray Hospital, Mexico City, 
Mexico, 4Department of Cytogenetic, Instituto Nacional de Pediatría, Mexico 
City, Mexico, 5Department of Urology, Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gó -
mez, Mexico City, Mexico.
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis (MGD) is a developmental anomaly in which most of the patients have a dysgenetic testis, a contralateral streak and a 45,X/46,XY karyotype. This entity involves an heterogeneous group of gonadal and phenotypic abnormalities with a wide clinical spectrum. Although the karyotype in these patients is 45,X/46,XY no genotype-phenotype correlation has been found to date. Müllerian ducts persistence (MDP) in MGD is rare; however, four patients with both entities and different karyotypes have been described. Here we present a newborn male assigned proband who was evaluated for ambiguous genitalia, two left testes, a right gonadal streak and Müllerian duct retention. The patient’s original karyotype was 45,X[6]/46,XY[94] while the father’s was 46,XY. Interestingly, the Y-chromosome in the patient was smaller than his father’s Y, which had a very long Yq. PCR analysis identiﬁed all the Y-derived sequences 
tested in the father, while the patient had them all except the AZF b
,c 
regions. FISH analysis of the paternal Y chromosome documented Yq paracentric inversion while in the patient an isodicentric chromosome with a Yp duplication was found, modifying the original karyotype to 45,X/46,X,idic(Yp). No mutations were observed in 
MIS/MISRII  
genes. Testicular ish karyotype showed X/XY dysgenetic testes and a 45,X streak gonad. We propose that the presence of the mosaic and the rearrangement of the Y chromosome in our patient could be responsible for the dysgenetic gonads leading to an abnormal function 
of MIS and androgens during early development.
P0034. Renal dysplasia and aortic coarctation: a report of four 
cases
L. S. Penney1, B. Lo1, C. R. Smith1, S. Keating2, R. Teitelbaum2, D. Chitayat2;  
1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Mount Sinai Hospital, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
Aortic coarctation is a narrowing of the aorta, usually distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery. Renal dysplasia is deﬁned as abnormal metanephric differentiation. Although untreated aortic coarctation may cause renal damage, most such cases detected prenatally are isolated or associated with Turner syndrome. We report four cases with renal 
dysplasia and aortic coarctation.Case 1- Parents were ﬁrst cousins of Pakistani descent. Fetal ultrasound showed severe oligohydramnios and bilateral multicystic, dysplastic kidneys. The pregnancy was terminated at 24 weeks. Autopsy conﬁrmed the renal ﬁndings and identiﬁed an aortic coarctation. The 
karyotype was 46, XX.Case 2- Fetal ultrasound showed oligohydramnios, abnormal renal tissue, and aortic coarctation. The child was delivered at 36 weeks gestation and lived 3 days. Autopsy revealed small, multicystic dysplastic kidneys, hypoplasia of the paraductal aorta and dysmorphic facial features. The karyotype was 46, XY and FISH for deletion 22q11.2 was normal.Case 3- Fetal ultrasound showed oligohydramnios and poorly visualized kidneys. Postnatal investigation revealed aortic coarctation and bilateral hypodysplastic kidneys. The karyotype was 46, XY inv(18)(q22.1q23)mat and FISH for deletion 22q11.2 was normal.Case 4- Fetal ultrasound revealed oligohydramnios, renal abnormalities and a VSD. Postnatal studies revealed a dysmorphic child with a duplex right kidney with a dyplastic upper pole, a multicystic, dysplastic left kidney and a small aortic isthmus. The karyotype was 46, XX.Each case reported by us presented with oligohydramnios, dysplastic kidneys and aortic coarctation. This combination was reported only 
once in the literature and may represent a new syndrome.
P0035. Microphthalmia, sclerocornea, linear skin defect, 
abnormal cardiac conduction defect and no Xp22.31 deletion: 
are we dealing with a new syndrome ?
A. Raas-Rothschild1, I. Lerer1, J. Dagan1, E. Levy-Lahad2, A. J. J. T. Rein3, B. 
Franco.4;  
1Department of Human Genetics,Hadassah Hebrew University Hospital, Jeru -
salem, Israel, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Medical Genetics Unit,Shaare Zedek Medical 
Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Division of Pediatric Cardiology,Hadassah Hebrew 
University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel, 4Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medi -
cine, Naples, Italy.
Microphthalmia, sclerocornea and dermal aplasia syndrome is a rare X linked dominant entity. We report on a family with three affected daughters: The ﬁrst daughter had congenital glaucoma and central leukoma of the left eye and Peters' anomaly. A second daughter had congenital diaphragmatic hernia, bilateral microphthalmia and died soon after birth. The third daughter was born with a linear facial skin defect, unilateral anophthalmia and sclerocornea. At the age of 6 months, she presented with junctional ectopic tachycardia which was ablated by catheterization. The two live affected daughters had a normal psychomotor development and no other malformation. The couple had 3 early spontaneous abortions, three healthy sons and one healthy daughter.The constellation of eye malformations, skin defect (third daughter), diaphragmatic hernia (second daughter) and conduction defect (third daughter) ﬁt the diagnosis of MIDAS or MLS syndrome.High resolution karyotype was normal. Molecular analysis using polymorphic markers showed that marker DXS9985 was compatible 
with linkage to Xp 22.31, marker DXS7108 was recombinant.The typical microdeletion of the known critical region for MIDAS/MLS was excluded in this family. Mutation analysis by direct sequencing of candidate genes located in the MLS critical region was negative in one 
of the member of the familyWith the association of the rare entity of congenital junctional ectopic tachycardia, the question is whether we are dealing with a new 
syndrome.
P0036. Folate gene alteration is related to maternal cause of 
Down syndrome in meiosis II chromosome 21 nondisjunction 
cases
A. Aleyasin , M. Ghazanfari, S. Rezaei;  
National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
The main origin of extra chromosome 21 in Down syndrome is usually maternal and occurs more frequently with advanced maternal age. In this study the parental origin, stage of meiotic error and folate gene alteration (C677T MTHFR) in 120 Iranian Down cases have been studied. Previous reports in that C677T MTHFR mutation have been studied as maternal cause of Down syndromes did not categorize Down cases according to their parental origin resulted mostly to a negative linkage. This is the ﬁrst study to incorporate data of parental origin and timing of the chromosome 21 nondisjunction error into investigation of common mutations in methylentetra hydrofolate reductase (MTHFR C677T) as maternal cause of Down syndrome in 120 mother of Iranian Down syndromes. The parental origin and stage of meiotic nondisjunction were determined in 100 Down children. Common mutation C677T of the MTHFR gene has been studied in mothers of Down syndrome and in 145 normal control mothers. Signiﬁcant linkage was obtained only for mothers with maternal MII origin (P<0.01, χ
2>9.4). 
All other categories showed negative linkage to the etiology of Down syndrome. This initial categorization of cases removes the sampling error and provides us with a better understanding of MTHFR gene mutation C677T as maternal cause of chromosome 21 nondisjunction. This ﬁnding shed light on etiology of Down syndrome and shows the importance of folate pathway gene alteration as a basic cellular failure to contribute signiﬁcantly in the nondisjunction event of chromosome 
21. Clinical genetics88
P0037. A diagnosis of LCHAD deﬁciency made 8 years after a 
child’s death
L. Cimbalistiene1, I. Vasiliauskiene2, B. Tumiene1, V. Kucinskas1;  
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithu -
ania, 2Center for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clin -
ics, Vilnius, Lithuania.
We report a family with 2 children. The ﬁrst one, a female, was born 
in 1996. Her mother reported severe vomiting during pregnancy. At 3 months of age the girl fell ill and was hospitalized with the diagnosis of varicella encephalitis and myopericarditis. An inborn error of metabolism was suspected because of hepatomegaly, hypoglycemia and failure to thrive. At 6 months of age she fell ill with an acute respiratory infection and died suddenly of cardiorespiratory failure. The second child, a male, was born in 1997 after an uneventful pregnancy. The child developed well. At 6 years of age he fell ill with an acute respiratory infection and died suddenly from respiratory failure. Postmortem biochemical analyses of both children were done on blood from Guthrie cards. Acylcarnitine analysis suggested a diagnosis of LCHAD for the girl. The test was negative for the boy, but long sample storage may have resulted in degradation of acylcarnitines. It was decided to evaluate both parents’ carrier status for a common mutation E510Q. Molecular studies (Dr. J.Zschocke, Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany) conﬁrmed that both parents are heterozygous for this mutation. After these tests we could conﬁrm the diagnosis of LCHAD deﬁciency for the girl 8 years after her death, but for the boy it is still uncertain whether he had LCHAD deﬁciency. Conclusion: these cases underscore the importance of comprehensive laboratory studies 
in patients with unclear deaths.
P0038. Analysis of Cx26 mutation: evidence for a Mediterranean 
ancestor for 35delG mutation
H. Belguith1, S. Hajji2, N. Salem3, A. Tlili1, I. Charfeddine4, A. Mégarbané3, A. 
Rebai5, A. Seﬁani6, S. Masmoudi1, H. Ayadi1,5;  
1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Faculté de Médecine de Sfax, 
Tunisia, 2Département de Génétique Médicale, Institut National d’Hygiène, 
Rabat, Morocco, 3Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Université Saint-Joseph, 
Beyrouth, Lebanon, 4Service d'O.R.L, C.H.U. H. Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia, 
5Centre de Biotechnologie, Sfax, Tunisia, 6Département de Génétique Médi -
cale, Institut National d’Hygiène de Rabat, Morocco.
Despite the fact that more than 22 genes have been identiﬁed in autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness (ARNSD), a single 
gene, GJB2, accounts for a high proportion of the cases. One 
particular mutation, 35delG, was shown to have a high allele frequency in Mediterranean population. Recent studies indicate that the high frequency of this mutation arises from a founder effect rather than a mutational hotspot. We analyzed 70 Tunisian and 12 Moroccan families affected with ARNSD. Sixteen (Tunisia) and 6 (Morocco) families were homozygous for the 35delG mutation. One Tunisian family was compound heterozygous 35delG/291insA. In order to bring further evidence that the 35delG mutation arose in the Mediterranean population from a single mutational event on a founder chromosome, we analyzed the haplotype distribution in 31 unrelated individuals homozygous for the 35delG mutation (16 Tunisian, 6 Moroccan, and 9 Lebanese) and 116 unrelated normal hearing with no 35delG mutation (45 Tunisians, 41 Moroccan, and 30 Lebanese). Two microsatellite markers and one single nucleotide polymorphism were used for the haplotype analyses. Signiﬁcant linkage disequilibrium (LD) between the 35delG mutation and the closet markers was observed. Our data suggest that the mutation is originated from one common ancestor in 
the Mediterranean population.
P0039. Mutation analysis of the TGFBI gene in families with 
hereditary corneal dystrophies from Ukraine
V. Pampukha1, G. Drozhyna2, L. Livshits1;  
1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics National Academy of Science of 
Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2The Filatov Institute of Eye Diseases and Tissue Ther -
apy Academy of Medical Science of Ukraine, Odesa, Ukraine.
Mutations in TGFBI gene encoding keratoepithelin are responsible for the group of autosomal dominant diseases of the cornea: granular (Groenouw type I), lattice type I, lattice type 3A, Reis-Bucklers and Avellino corneal dystrophies In our study ﬁve previously reported mutations of the TGFBI gene: R124C, R124H, R124L (exon 4), R555W, R555Q (exon 12) were analyzed using polymerase chain reaction followed by restriction digestion in 74 individuals from 30 unrelated families with different forms of corneal dystrophy from different regions of Ukraine. The R555W mutation was detected in patients from 5/10 families with suspected clinical diagnosis of granular corneal dystrophy. The R124C mutation was detected in 1 unaffected 10-year old individual and in patients from 11/18 families with lattice corneal dystrophy. The R555Q mutation was detected in 1 patient with clinical diagnosed Reis-Bucklers corneal dystrophy. As far as R124C mutation was detected in 1 patient with clinical diagnosed Reis-Bucklers corneal dystrophy we have concluded that this patient was misdiagnosed. These results show that TGFBI gene mutations analysis is important as well for early differential diagnosis of corneal dystrophies and genetic consulting in high risk families, as in future for development of effective preventive therapy.
P0040. Congenital aglossia with situs inversus totalis - A Case 
Report
Ö. Giray1, E. Bora1, A. Ulgenalp1, G. Pasaoglu2, D. Ercal1;  
1dokuz eylul university, Izmir, Turkey, 2Private Hospital Caria, Marmaris, Turkey.
A 13 - month old girl with difﬁcult swallowing, growth and developmental retardation was refered to DEUGDC. The patient had a 7 year-old healthy sister and was the second child of non-consanguineous parents. Her birth weight was 3.300gr. and experienced aspiration pneumonia four times during her ﬁrst months of postnatal history. Her physical examination revealed that, head circumference was 42cm. (<5p), height 60cm. (<5p) and weight 7.200gm (<5p). She has aglossia, high palate, dextrocardia, pectus excavatum, sacral dimple and pes planus. With ultrasonographic and radiological investigations situs inversus totalis was determined and her karyotype was 46,XX. The case was diagnosed as a rare syndrome named; Aglossia with situs inversus totalis. Although various genes which are thought to be responsible for the right and left axial development and misplaced body organs have been described previously, the etiology has been remained unclear. Description of the cases, comparison of the features with others and further detailed molecular investigations may lighten 
this complex subject.
P0041. Fragile X syndrome and alteration in folic acid pathway 
gene
S. Rezaei, A. Aleyasin;  
National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Fragile X syndrome happens due to the CGG repeat expansion and methylation of FMR1 gene. Fragile X syndrome has an incomplete penetrance approximately 70% in male and 30% in female. To date less attention was to study important genetic factors that may play role in neuropathology and severity of physical characteristic of fragile X syndrome. Folic acid, has been prescribed in some fragile X cases for reduction of hyperactivity and attention deﬁcit in prepuberty. Folic acid derivatives have important roles in DNA methylation and neural development and function as well as in synthesis of neurotransmitters and inﬂuence divers process in the CNS. Our hypothesis was to study impaired folate metabolism in fragile X patients as the ﬁrst step to evaluate the linkage between folate metabolism dysfunction and methylation of FMR1 gene. This is the ﬁrst study to assess this hypothesis by comparing the frequency of three common mutations in C677T, A1298C methylentetra hydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene, in 40 male fragile X patients and 100 normal control males. All cases have been initially diagnosed with fragile X syndrome by molecular methods. The statistical analysis showed a signiﬁcant linkage between C677T mutation with fragile X syndrome supported with a P value of 0.021 and chi-square of 7.719. However, no signiﬁcant correlations were obtained for A1298C MTHFR mutation. Signiﬁcantly high frequency of C677T MTHFR mutation may suggest effect of folate derivatives on neuropathology and methylation process and more investigations to 
perform on the role of folate metabolism in fragile X syndrome.Clinical genetics89
P0042. Screening of submicroscopic genomic aberrations in 
patients with X-linked mental retardation by high resolution 
array-CGH
G. Froyen1, H. Van Esch2, M. Bauters1, J. Vermeesch2, P. Vanhummelen3, J. 
Fryns2, K. Devriendt2, P. Marynen1;  
1Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology (VIB4), Leuven, Belgium, 
2University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Microarray Facility of the VIB, 
Leuven, Belgium.
Subtle gains or losses of genomic regions seem to account for a 
substantial percentage (5-10%) of causes in patients with idiopathic mental retardation (MR). Therefore, we introduced the recently developed technology of array-CGH, which is able to detect cytogenetically undetectable microdeletions and -duplications, to identify novel genetic anomalies, and hence candidate genes, in X-linked MR patients. We have constructed an X chromosome-speciﬁc array containing 1875 clones resulting in an X-array with a theoretical resolution of 80 kb. Target DNA was spotted in duplicate on 3-D CodeLink slides. After extensive validation, differentially labeled genomic DNA probes of XLMR patients were co-hybridized on the X-array. We identiﬁed aberrations (0.3 - 1.5 Mb in size) in 10% of the patients. These were conﬁrmed by real-time quantitation and 4 were not found in a control population suggesting a link with the MR phenotype. As an example, we report on a 1.5 Mb interstitial deletion at Xp22.3 that was detected in 4 unrelated MR patients with ichthyosis (XLI). Molecular analysis conﬁrmed that this recurrent deletion occurred via non-allelic homologous recombination of the CRI-S232 repeat sequences, each of which contains a VCX gene. Moreover, the recombination site in all 4 patients was ﬁne-mapped to a 1 kb repeat region present at the 3' end of the 
VCX-A and VCX-B genes, thereby deleting VCX-A but not 
VCX-B, providing additional evidence that VCX-A is the MR gene at 
Xp22.31. Additional data obtained with this X-array will be presented.
P0043. Association of TNFα promoter polymorphisms and 
cerebral palsy
H. Kapitanovic Vidak1, T. Cacev2, S. Kapitanovic2;  
1Special hospital for children with neurodevelopmental and motor difﬁ culties, 
Zagreb, Croatia, 2Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.
Cerebral palsy (CP) is a nonprogressive motor disorder caused by white matter damage in the developing brain. It is often accompanied with neurocognitive and sensory disabilities. The cause and pathogenesis of CP is multifactorial and continues to be poorly understood. Chorioamnionitis, clinical silent or manifest, has been reported to be a risk factor for CP both in term and preterm infants. TNFα is a cytokine produced by activated monocytes and macrophages, which play a key role in the inﬂammatory response. TNFα gene is mapped to chromosome 6p21.3 and a large number of polymorphisms of its promoter, called "high-production" polymorphisms, have been described. Increased TNFα levels in peripheral blood in premature and close-to-term birth have been found to associate with the development of CP. The aim of our study was to estimate allelic frequency for four promoter region SNPs in TNFα gene, -238, -308, -857 and -1031 in the children with the CP.DNAs obtained from peripheral blood of 40 CP patients and 150 unrelated healthy volunteers were genotyped for the TNFα -238, -308, -857 and -1031 SNPs using real-time PCR TaqMan
® SNP genotyping 
assays. There was statistically signiﬁcant correlation (p<0.05) between cerebral palsy and expression affecting allele variants of TNFα, -308A and -857T. The association between these polymorphisms and 
cerebral palsy has to be investigated in the future studies.
P0044. Analysis of the 12S ARNr gene : Detection of the A1555G 
mitochondrial mutation in a Tunisian family affected with non syndromic hearing loss and novel polymorphisms in Tunisian 
population
E. Mkaouar1, A. Tlili1, N. Louhichi1, I. Charfeddine2, M. Ben Amor2, S. Mas -
moudi1, H. Ayadi1, F. Fakhfakh1;  
1Laboratoire de genetique moleculaire humaine. Faculte de Medecine de Sfax, 
Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service d'O.R.L., C.H.U. H. Bourguiba de Sfax., Sfax, Tunisia.
Mitochondrial mutations especially in the mitochondrial 12S rRNA and 
the tRNA genes have been found to be associated with both syndromic and nonsyndromic hearing loss. In particular, the A1555G mutation in the 12S rRNA gene has been associated with non-syndromic deafness in many families of different ethnic backgrounds.Since mitochondrial mutations have not been yet searched in Tunisian deaf patients, we have attempt to explore the 12S ARNr and the 
ARNtSer(UCN) genes in our sample.
We have studied 125 patients affected with hearing loss and belonging to 114 Tunisian families for whom no nuclear mutation responsible of hearing loss have been identiﬁed.Searching for the A1555G mutation have been performed by PCR-RFLP. The entire mitochondrial 12S ARNr gene have been explored 
by direct sequencing.The A1555G mutation have been identiﬁed in one out of the 114 families and not in 100 normal individuals. After direct sequencing of the mitochondrial 12S RNA gene, we have detected known polymorphisms at nucleotides 709, 710, 750, 769, 825, 930, 1018, 1048 and 1438 in patients and normal individuals. We have also detected three novel 
polymorphisms in the same gene.The mutational screening of the mitochondrial ARNt
Ser(UCN) gene shows 
the absence of A7445G, 7472insC, T7510C, T7511C and T7512C mutations in this gene in the 125 patients and the 100 controls 
analysed.We report here the ﬁrst mutational screening of the mitochondrial 12S ARNr gene in Tunisian population which describes the second family harbouring the A1555G mutation in Africa and reveals three novel 
polymorphisms.
P0045. Mutation 35delG in the gene GJB2 and hereditary pre-
lingual deafness among the russian population.
S. G. Zhuravskiy , A. E. Taraskina, T. Sathiyaseelan, Y. A. Degtyareva;  
S'Petersburg I.P.Pavlov State Medical University, St.Petersburg, Russian Fed -
eration.
GJB2 is the gene which encodes the gap junction protein connexin 26. A homozygotic carrier of the mutation 35delG in this gene is to be a cause for recessive non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss or deafness in the pre-lingual period of the Caucasoid population. Investigation conducted among 44 patients with pre-lingual sensorineural hearing loss or deafness in St-Petersburg, 35delG/35delG genotype was found in 21 patients (47.7%), 35delG/wt in 7 patients (16%). At the mean time early childhood deafness associated with 35delG mutation was found more frequently among the children with healthy (heterozygotic) parents (43.8%) and less frequently among the children with deaf (homozygotic) parents (15%). Interestingly in the control group with 238 healthy donors, 14 (5.9%) were heterozygotic mutation carriers. This shows the highest level of heterozygosity among all Caucasoid 
populations.
P0046. Creating a Path for the Acceptance of Microarray-Based 
Genetic and Genomic Tests in the Clinical Laboratory
J. A. Warrington ;  
Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, United States.
Few inventions in the past ﬁfteen years have had as much impact 
on genetic and genomic research as microarray technology. This technology has captured the imaginations of clinical and laboratory researchers and made possible studies heretofore unachievable. The scope and breadth of the studies enabled by this technology is changing the practice of laboratory and clinical research and has led to the introduction of array-based diagnostic tests in the clinical laboratory. Whole genome analyses promise deeper insight into biological processes, biological reporters and discovery of new biomarkers and the volume of genetic and genomic data places pressure on scientists and clinicians to design experimental and analyses strategies that leverage the integration of clinical and molecular information. This new era of clinical genetics and genomics places increased emphasis on collaboration and teamwork including a signiﬁcant focus on well-deﬁned tissue banks and clinical databases. At the center of this paradigm shift is a requirement for the tools necessary for measuring technical performance of the platforms used for data collection. Reporting reliable information of known quality is key to the emergence of microarrays in toxicogenomics, pharmacogenomics, and as diagnostic devices in clinical medicine. Success in moving microarray technology into clinical and diagnostic laboratories requires building a research and development foundation in multiple areas including standardization across industry, development of clinical guidelines via accredited Clinical genetics90
processes, generation of validation data, diagnostics-suitable platform 
delivery and achievement of regulatory approval. Examples of key 
successful projects and partnerships will be shared.
P0047. Clinical variability in a Noonan syndrome family with 
PTNP11 gene A118G mutation
S. Kitsiou1, A. Xaidara2, E. Kanavakis1, A. Papadopoulou2, A. Fretzagias3, A. 
Mayakou2, A. Kolialexi1, A. Mavrou1, P. Nikolaidou3;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 2First De -
partment of Pediatrics, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 3Third Department of 
Pediatrics, Athens University, Athens, Greece.
Noonan syndrome (NS) characterized by craniofacial anomalies, short 
stature, congenital heart defects, cryptorchidism, skeletal and other organ malformations, is an autosomal dominant disorder with different mutations of PTNP11 gene in 60% of cases. We report on a family with NS transmitted through 3 maternal generations. All ﬁve affected members presented with the same morphological characteristics but different organ involvement. The index case a 5 years old girl with height in the 3
rd percentile is the product of a twin IVF pregnancy. Her 
phenotypic characteristics, common in all affected members, include: coarse and triangular - shaped face, hypertelorism, down- slanting, prominent eyes with epicanthus, low - set posteriorly angulated ears with thickened helices, nasal tip bulbous, big mouth with arched upper lip, short webbed neck, pectus excavatum and scoliosis. At the age of 1 year she was operated for pulmonary stenosis as was her twin sister who died after the operation. The 39 years old mother started menstruation at the age of 16 and has a history of bleeding diathesis. Maternal uncle 30 y.o. has a heart murmur. The grandmother died at the age of 30 years because of a heart attack. The molecular investigation revealed a maternally transmitted heterozygous missense mutation A118G in exon 3 of PTPN11. The infrafamilial variability of NS makes it essential for proper genetic counseling, so that ﬁrst degree relatives, even with atypical phenotype, should be screened for PTNP11 gene 
mutations.
P0048. The Neuroﬁbromatosis Type 1 - Multisystem Disease 
Requiring Multidisciplinary Approach
T. Marikova1, B. Petrak2, A. Krepelova1, S. Bendova1, E. Kocarek1, Z. Musova1, 
J. Kraus2;  
1Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, Charles University-2nd Medical 
School, Prague 5 - Motol, Czech Republic, 2Children Neurology Department, 
University Hospital Motol, Prague 5 - Motol, Czech Republic.
The Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common 
single gene diseases (the expected incidence is 1:3000). Around 50 % of cases represent fresh mutations, the carriers of this mutation have 50 % risk for their offspring without possibility of prediction of the age of manifestation and disease progression. The NF1 disease is characterized by extremely high interfamilial and intrafamilial variability.There was implemented a database of 200 records of patients suffering from NF1 in the Neurogenetic Centre of the Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Child Neurologic Department and Neurologic 
Department of the 2nd Medical School, Charles University.
By the family history analysis, the 40% cases have been identiﬁed as fresh mutations, in the 1/3 of cases the serious degree of the disease 
has been detected.The haplotype analysis has been carried out in 29 families. The complex investigation methodology in the patients with a NF1 has been veriﬁed. Both the molecular cytogenetic (FISH) analysis and the efﬁcient and reliable molecular genetic diagnostics (DHPLC) have been introduced 
with the goal to detect causal mutations.Several complicated cases which document the neccessity of the 
multidiciplinary approach will be demonstrated.Supported by the Project IGA MZ CR NR/7926-3P0049. Frameshift mutation in ZHFX1B gene in a Croatian girl 
with Hirschprung disease, mental retardation and epilepsy 
(Mowat Wilson syndrome)
R. Gjergja1, L. Cvitanovic-Sojat1, Z. Gjergja2, T. Sojat1, M. Goosens3, F. Dastot-
Le Moal3, D. Mowat4;  
1University Hospital "Sestre milosrdnice", Department of Pediatrics, Zagreb, 
Croatia, 2Pediatric Outpatient Clinic "Dr Sabol", Zagreb, Croatia, 3INSERM 
U468 et Service de Biochimie et Genetique, Hopital Henri Mondador , Creteil, 
France, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, The Children's Hospital at West -
mead, Sydney, Australia.
Background: Mowat Wilson syndrome (MWS) includes distinctive 
facial appearance, intellectual impairment, seizures and other malformations such as Hirschprung disease, congenital heart defects and agenesis of the corpus callosum. It is caused by heterozygous deletions or truncating mutations of the ZFHX1B gene on chromosome 
2q22.Case report: We present a 13-years-old Croatian girl born to healthy and unrelated parents. Because of short segment Hirschprung disease emergency colostomy was performed at 2
nd day of life. Dysmorphia, 
hypotonia and failure to thrive have also been observed. Since the 1st 
year of life the antiepileptic therapy was introduced because of seizures and pathologic changes on EEG. Brain MRI showed hypoplastic corpus callosum. At the age of 13 years she was normocephalic, but with severe mental delay, happy disposition and distinctive dysmorphic features: sparse hair and eyebrows, sloping forehead, telecanthus, broad nasal bridge, large ears, pointed chin and long ﬁngers and toes. We suspected clinically to the possible mutation in ZHFXB1 gene and de novo frameshift mutation 1352delC (exon 8) in the heterozygous state was found. It corresponds to the deletion of the nucleotide C 1352 of the gene coding sequence and results in a frameshift creating a STOP codon at position 453 of the protein.
Conclusion:  All children with syndromic Hirschprung disease should 
be tested for mutation or deletion in ZHFX gene. The early diagnosis of MWS enables adequate neuropediatric follow-up because in majority of children with MWS the epilepsy could appear during the ﬁrst year of life or later.
P0050. OPD2/Melnick-Needles syndrome with occipital 
encephalocele.
A. van Haeringen1, F. T. M. Lim2, F. Eulderink3, H. M. Zonderland4, S. Gal -
jaard5, S. P. Robertson6, M. H. Breuning1;  
1Department of Human and Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 
2Department of Gynaecology, HAGA Hospital, de Hague, The Netherlands, 
3Department of Pathology, Diaconessen Hospital, Leiden, The Netherlands, 
4Department of Radiology, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 5Department of 
Prenatal Diagnosis and Intra-Uterine Treatment, LUMC, Leiden, The Nether -
lands, 6Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Otago, Dune -
din, New Zealand.
Oto-Palato-Digital syndrome type 2 and Melnick-Needles syndrome both are X-linked dominant conditions with lethality in males. We report on a male patient with an additional feature. At 18 weeks of pregnancy, multiple congenital malformations (sharply bowed femora, occipital encephalocele) were found on ultrasound. The parents refused any further investigation and wished to carry on with the pregnancy. At 38 weeks of pregnancy, a stillborn macerated boy was born. Multiple malformations were noted. The skull was large with a large occipital encephalocele. The face was dysmorphic (hypertelorism, ﬂat nose, large tongue). The palate was closed. There were elbow contractures with webbing, missing terminal phalanges of both thumbs, small middle phalanges of all ﬁngers and small nails. There were sharply bowed femora, completely absent halluces and syndactyly of toes 4 and 5 bilaterally. There was a small penis with hypoplastic scrotum and absent testes. On X-rays the clinically noticed abnormalities were conﬁrmed. Moreover the boy had radiologically malformed claviculae and scapulae, high vertebral bodies and a markedly advanced bone age. Chromosomes were normal, 46XY. Internal organs were normal although the bladder was reported as large. The testes were not 
found.The combination of congenital malformations ﬁts in the OPD2/Melnick-Needles spectrum. However, occipital encephalocele was never reported in these conditions. Sequencing of exon 22 of the FLNA gene did not reveal a mutation. Further mutation analysis is in progress Clinical genetics91
and will be reported. Whether occipital encephalocele is an additional 
feature or a coincidental ﬁnding depends on further case reports.
P0051. Long-term follow-up of patients with Kabuki syndrome in 
Taiwan
J. Hou ;  
Chang Gung Children's Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan Republic of China.
Kabuki syndrome (KS), also called Niikawa-Kuroki syndrome, is a 
rare congenital disorder of unknown etiology. Most KS cases occur sporadically. Five major criteria delineate KS namely postnatal short stature, skeletal anomalies, moderate mental retardation, persistent fetal pads on the ﬁngers, and a characteristic facial dysmorphism. Long-term follow-up of twelve individuals with KS in Taiwan indicates a broad spectrum of neuro-psychiatric or metabolic dysfunction and mental ability. The incidence of seizure (generalized, complex partial, or atonic seizure) is 50% (6/12). Seizures were well controlled in 5 cases. Retarded mentality was noted in all child patients except for in a 40-year-old man. Hearing impairment was found in 8 patients probably after recurrent otitis media or microtia. Growth hormone deﬁciency was detected in two KS girls. Recombinat human growth hormone were administered with a favorable outcome in both cognition and body height. Attention deﬁcit disorder and hyperactivity occurred in 9 patients. Among these patients, a boy developed depressive psychosis after the age of 12 years. Obesity with relative short stature were common especially after the age of 8 years. One 13-year-old girl had obstructive sleep and fatty liver. She developed type 2 diabetes two years later. For KS patients, a long-term monitoring and evaluation of their neuro-psychiatric status, hearing function, and endocrinologic-metabolic proﬁle is recommended.
P0052. Polymorphism of metabolic genes and susceptibility to 
occupational chronic toxic hepatitis
K. O. Olga1, T. V. Victorova1, L. K. Karimova2;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Research 
institute of occupational health and human ecology, Ufa, Russian Federation.
In this study we investigated genetic polymorphisms of ﬁve metabolizing genes and their association with toxic hepatitis. PCR-RFLP was used to genotype the cytochromes P4501A1, 2D6, 2E1 (CYP1A1, CYP2D6, CYP2E1), microsomal epoxide hydrolase and the N-acetyltransferase 2. We recruited 73 patients with toxic hepatitis, 163 workers "groups of risk" on development of a toxic hepatitis, 94 healthy workers and 335 unrelated healthy control subjects. The controls were matched to the cases by sex, age as well as the hepthyle and ethylebenzene-styrene exposure duration. No signiﬁcant association was found between the control and petrochemical workers when CYP1A1, CYP2D6, CYP2E1, EPHX1 genotypes were included in the analyses. Among workers was observed the increasing frequency of a combination NAT2*4/*4 genes NAT2 compared with control group. Among the patients with a toxic hepatitis are established genetic markers of predisposition to development the disease: Ile/Val gene CYP1A1, Tyr/His gene EPHX1; combinations NAT2*4/*7 genes NAT2; and as slow phenotype microsomal epoxide hydrolase; combinations of genotypes IleVal/C1C1 of genes CYP1A1 and CYP2E1; combinations of slow phenotypes microsomal epoxide hydrolase and N-acetyltransferase 2.Our results suggest that genotype Ile/Ile of gene CYP1A1; genotype Tyr/Tyr of gene EPHX1; and as a normal phenotype microsomal epoxide hydrolase; a combination of normal genotypes of genes CYP1A1 and CYP2E1; a combination of normal genotypes of genes CYP1A1, CYP2E1, CYP2D6 and a normal phenotype microsomal epoxide hydrolase are protective variants. This study demonstrates a signiﬁcant combined effect of genes on the predisposition of pathology 
at workers exposed to hepthyle and ethylebenzene-styrene.
P0053. Case report: child with mosaic trisomy 3
K. Crkvenac Gornik, I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, L. Letica, R. Lasan, S. Huljev, D. 
Muzinic, D. Begovic;  
Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University 
Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
We report a case of mosaic trisomy 3 in a one year old boy. He is the ﬁfth child of normal, healthy parents with normal karyotypes. Cytogenetic analysis of blood lymphocytes was done for evaluation of dysmorphic features. Chromosome analysis of blood cells with G - banding showed only 47, XY,+3 karyotype while analysis of skin ﬁbroblasts revealed mosaic karyotype - 47, XY, + 3 / 46, XY. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis using an alpha satellite chromosome 3 probe performed on skin ﬁbroblasts demonstrated two signals in 198 nuclei (46,XY) and three signals in 2 nuclei (47,XY, + 3). This result conﬁrms the diagnosis of low level trisomy 3 mosaicism. The propositus was born after a full term pregnancy. Several dismorphic facial features were noted: caratacts of both eyes, cleft upper right lip and complete cleft of the palate. Heart ultrasound showed ASD secundum. Brain US and CT showed periventricular hypoxia with cystic leucomalatia. Genetic counselling in such a family can be difﬁcult. As both parents in the present case had normal karyotypes, the risk seems to be extremely small but it can also be further minimized if the next pregnancy is properly supervised. Additional cases of postnataly diagnosed mosaicism for rare trisomies are necessary for more accurate assessment of the signiﬁcance of our cytogenetic and clinical ﬁndings.
P0054. Quantitative analysis of  SMN1  and SMN2  genes based on 
DHPLC: A highly efﬁcient and reliable carrier-screening test
Y. Su1, C. Hung2, W. Lin2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan Republic of China, 2Institute of Biomedical Engineering, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China.
Autosomal recessive spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common, fatal neuromuscular disease caused by homozygous deletion/ conversion of the SMN1 gene in more than 95% of patients. However, a highly homologous 
SMN2 gene exists in the same chromosome, 
interval, centromeric to SMN1, and hampers detection of SMN1. We 
present a new, rapid, simple, and highly reliable method for detecting 
the SMN1 deletion/ conversion and for determining the copy numbers 
of the SMN1 and SMN2 genes by denaturing high-performance liquid 
chromatography (DHPLC). We analyzed SMN1/SMN2 gene exon 7 
deletion/ conversion by DHPLC. Eighty patients with spinal muscular atrophy lacking the 
SMN1 gene in seventy-ﬁve families, 500 control 
individuals from the general population and the family members were analyzed. By DHPLC analysis, we could detect the SMA-affected cases efﬁciently just by recognizing an 
SMN2-only peak. Furthermore, after 
speciﬁc primer ampliﬁcation and adjustment of the oven temperature, all of the SMA carriers with an 
SMN1/SMN2 ratio not equal to one 
could be identiﬁed unambiguously by this simple and efﬁcient detection system. To calculate the total 
SMN1/SMN2 gene dosages 
further, we developed a speciﬁc multiplex competitive PCR protocol by simultaneously amplifying the 
CYBB gene (X-linked), the KRIT1 gene 
(on chromosome arm 7q), and the SMN1/SMN2 gene ratio by DHPLC. 
By applying this technique, we could successfully designate all of the genotypes with different 
SMN1/SMN2 gene copy numbers, including 
equal and unequal amounts of SMN1 and SMN2. We demonstrated 
that DHPLC is a fast and reliable tool for detection of carriers of SMA.
P0055. Rapid detection of large deletions and duplications in 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy carriers by denaturing HPLC 
coupled with multiplex PCR
C. Hung1, Y. Su2, W. Lin1;  
1Institute of Biomedical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 
Republic of China, 2Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan Univer -
sity Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) with X-linked recessive inheritance is the most common neuromuscular disease in children. One-third of the affected patients come from de-novo mutations without family histories. About 65% of the cases involve large intragenic deletions, and about ~6% involve large intragenic duplcations of one or more exons in the dystrophin gene. We describe the ﬁrst use of denaturing HPLC (DHPLC) to identify the DMD carriers. We used multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify nineteen exons to analyze the dystrophin gene. We optimized multiplex PCR with DHPLC for rapid diagnosis of eleven DMD affected males, 23 obligate carriers and non-carrier from DMD families, and 50 individual controls with high sensitivity and resolution. By applying this technique, we could successfully calculate the ratio of test exon / reference exon in the dystrophin gene. Our study has analyzed several families for the dystrophin gene deletions and has shown that multiplex PCR/ DHPLC Clinical genetics92
analysis can be an effective and direct method for establishing the 
DMD carrier and noncarrier status of females. These results provide a strong support that DHPLC with multiplex genotyping is an efﬁcient and reliable tool for high throughput diagnosis of DMD. We demonstrated that DHPLC can be used to analyze the relative gene dosage from large deletions in the dystrophin gene. It is a fast, reliable and powerful tool for the identiﬁcation of DMD carriers by DHPLC coupled with multiplex PCR. We believe the described method will be suitable for 
routine clinical application in the future.
P0056. Study of CF Mutation in the CFTR Gene of Iranian 
patients
M. Amiri1, M. Jalalirad2, M. Houshmand2, R. Mirfakhraie2, G. Babamoham -
madi2, E. Talachian3, M. Raﬁei4, F. Mirzajani2;  
1Khatam Institute of Higher Education, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Na-
tional Institute for Genetic Engineering and biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Re -
public of Iran, 3Iran medical science University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
4Tabriz Medical science University, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator gene and characteristically leads to prominent lung and pancreatic malfunctions. Cystic ﬁbrosis is the most common autosomal recessive disease in the Caucasian population with a prevalence estimate of 1 in 2500 to 3300 live births. About 1000 mutations have been detected so far. A few mutations are spread 
worldwide, the majority are being“private” mutations.In this study Seventy unrelated Iranian CF families were screened for the presence of ﬁve common mutations (F508, G542X, W1282X, G551D, N1303K) using ARMS PCR .Exons 4 ,7,10,11,13,20,21 of the 
CFTR gene were tested for the presence of any possible mutation by SSCP and sequencing method. This study resulted in the identiﬁcation of 28 per cent of all CF alleles. DelF508 was detected in the 18 per 
cent of the tested alleles.Our ﬁndings suggest heterogeneity in the Iranian population, stressing the need to draw attention to sequence analysis in order to ﬁnd population-speciﬁc mutations.
P0057. del5p/dup5q in a 'Cri-du-chat' patient without parental 
chromosomal rearrangement: reminding gonadal mosaicism
I. Akalin1, K. Yararbas1, N. Akgul2, E. Babaoglu1, G. Gumus Akay3, S. Dyer4, N. 
Yurur Kutlay1, H. Ilgin Ruhi1, G. Kog2, A. Tukun1;  
1Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, An-
kara, Turkey, 2Social Security Women's Hospital, Neonatology Department, 
Ankara, Turkey, 3Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 
Biology, Ankara, Turkey, 4Birmingham Women's Hospital, Regional Genetics 
Laboratory, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
We report a full term male infant born to nonconsanguinous parents who presented at birth with multiple congenital abnormalities and distinctive high-pitched mewing cry. He was 2350g in weight (<3%), 46 cm in height (<3%), and had 31.5 cm head circumferences (<3%) at 11
th day. The physical examination revealed round face, hypertelorism, 
epicanthal folds, downward slanting of the palpebral ﬁssures, micrognathy, retrognathy, bilateral incomplete helical architecture of horizontally asymmetric low set ears, preauricular skin tag anterior to the left auricular region, long philtrum, bilateral simian line, bilateral hallux-valgus deformity, small muscular ventricular septal defect and 
secondary atrial septal defect.Chromosome study from the peripheral blood lymphocytes showed to be normal 46,XY karyotype. However, ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) studies using a cri-du-chat probe (5p15.2 and 5p15.3, 5qter: CP5102-DC, Appligene) demonstrated loss of cri-du-chat critical region. He also had terminal 5q region duplication. This ﬁnding was also veriﬁed using comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), which revealed a loss of 5p14 → pter and a gain of 5q33 → qter. Cytogenetic and FISH analysis were carried out for each parents to describe the derivative chromosome, but surprisingly, pericentric inversion or any 
other balanced rearrangement were not found.In this report, we describe the ﬁrst cri-du-chat case with partial monosomy of the short arm and partial trisomy of the long arm of the chromosome 5, but without any parental balanced chromosomal rearrangement. These results suggested a possibility of gonadal mosaicism for pericentric inversion of chromosome 5 in one of his 
parents.P0058. Is p53 gene polymorphism associated with multiple 
sclerosis in Iran?
M. Sanati, F. Biramijamal, B. Bayat, M. Banoei;  
National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
To investigate the relationship between p53 codon 72 polymorphism and risk for multiple sclerosis (MS), we collected samples from MS patients and healthy population from different region of Iran with different ethnicity groups (Fars, Mazandarani and Turk). The 
p53 
Pro72Arg genotypes were determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) in 207 healthy controls and 60 MS patients. Among the patients and healthy subjects with Fars, Mazandarani and Turk ethnicity, the genotype frequency of 
p53 Pro72Arg were 23.3% and 34.8% for Arg/Arg, 76.7% and 45.9% for Arg/Pro, 0% and 19.3% for Pro/Pro, respectively. Signiﬁcance differences were found for p53 allele distribution among patients and healthy individuals. Our ﬁnding suggested that the frequency of Arg/Pro genotype is more than healthy Iranian population and 
p53 
genotype may play an important role in developing multiple sclerosis 
among Iranian population.This work was supported by NIGEB project number 119, melli 2 and 
197.
P0059. A counseling dilemma posed by a fetus with a split-
hand/-foot malformation and a father with a short 3rd toe
T. Prescott1, H. K. Blaas2, H. Scheffer3, R. Meijer3, K. Eiklid4;  
1Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 2National Center for Fetal Medicine, University 
Hospital Trondheim, Trondheim, Norway, 3Dept of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands, 4Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
Split-hand / split-foot malformation (SHFM) occurs in isolation and as a feature of many syndromes. After birth, the various conditions can usually be distinguished clinically.SHFM was detected in a male fetus on routine ultrasound at 18 weeks gestation. A central ray defect was noted in three extremities. One hand had only four metacarpals.The other had ﬁve metacarpals, but only four ﬁngers. The two ulnar ﬁngers were webbed bilaterally. One foot had webbing of the 1
st and 2nd toes. There were no other abnormalities 
noted and the fetus was appropriate in size for gestational age.Examination of the mother was normal. The father had a normal 
physical exam except for a short 3rd toe unilaterally.
The family history was considered unremarkable. The pregnancy was terminated because of the possiblity of a syndromal form of SHFM with 
cognitive impairment.Subsequent mutation analysis of the 
p63 gene from leukocytes 
obtained by cordocentesis revealed heterozygosity for a mutation in exon 5 (R204Q). This mutation has previously been described in association with the EEC (Ectrodactyly-Ectodermal dysplasia-Clefting) 
syndrome.Mutation analysis of peripheral leukocytes in the father revealed heterozygosity for the same mutation (R204Q). No evidence supporting mosaicism was found on analysis of DNA from a buccal smear. On reassessment, it surfaced that the father had weak dental enamel and 
recurrent eye infections as an adult due to stenotic tear ducts.Our case underscores the heterogeneity of phenotypes associated with 
p63 mutations and the usefulness of mutation analysis in counseling 
for SHFM .
P0060. Delayed puberty and severe osteoporosis in 
genitopatellar syndrome
H. Koillinen1, M. Penttinen1, H. Niinikoski2, O. Mäkitie3, H. Kääriäinen4;  
1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital of Turku, Finland, 2Dept. of Pe -
diatrics, University Hospital of Turku, Finland, 3Dept. of Pediatrics, University 
Hospital of Helsinki, Finland, 4Dept. of Medical Genetics, University of Turku, 
Finland.
Genitopatellar syndrome (OMIM 606170), ﬁrst described by Goldblatt et al. in 1988, is a rare disorder with characteristic facial features, genital anomalies, absent patellae, ﬂexion contractures, microcephaly, renal anomalies, mental retardation, poor outcome and possible autosomal recessive inheritance. At present, eleven cases have been reported.We describe an adolescent Finnish female with ﬁndings consistent with genitopatellar syndrome. She is the second child of her healthy, unconsanguineous parents. She has microcephaly, broad nasal bridge, Clinical genetics93
midfacial hypoplasia, high palate, round cheeks, long chin, ﬂexion 
contractures of the hips and knees, absent patellae, clubfeet, limited movement of shoulders, brachydactyly with prominent joints, scoliosis, hypertrophic clitoris, dysplastic kidneys with mild hydronephrosis, hypoplastic corpus callosum and severe mental retardation and motor delay. The karyotype is normal examined from peripheral blood and ﬁbroblasts. Telomeric deletions and Smith-Magenis sdr have been 
ruled out with FISH.At age 14 years and 9 months she has hypothyroidism (TSH 17 mU/l, free T4 7.1 pmol/l., TRH- and ACTH-tests consistent with intact hypothalamus-hypophysis-thyroid and hypophysis-adrenal axes) and no signs of puberty (Tanner stage 1). The gonadotrophin values are prepubertal (LH <0.1 U/l and FSH 1.6 U/l). The growth hormone secretion is normal based on appropriate S-IGF-1 concentration. She also has abnormal bone structure and severe osteoporosis (gender and bone age-adjusted lumbar bone mineral density is -4.8 SD) with a 
history of seven bone fractures.Being the oldest reported patient with genitopatellar syndrome, our patient is the ﬁrst one showing abnormal endocrine ﬁndings including 
a lack of puberty and symptomatic osteoporosis
P0061. A furher case of Costello syndrome
F. Ozkinay1, H. Akin2, O. Cogulu1, H. Onay2, L. Midyat1, F. Hazan2, C. Ozkinay2;  
1Ege University, Medical School Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Tur -
key, 2Ege University, Medical School Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, 
Izmir, Turkey.
Costello syndrome is a rare genetic disorder of which underlying molecular defect has not been deﬁned. The patients with Costello syndrome (CS) have short stature, mental retardation, coarse facial features suggestive of a storage disorder, loose soft skin with deep palmar and plantar creases, joint laxity, increased skin pigmentation, skeletal abnormalities, cardiac problems, increased predisposition to 
solid tumors.We describe an 8 year-old boy who had characteristic features of Costello syndrome and showed feeding problem in late childhood 
period.The patient was born to noncansangineous parents at term after an uneventful pregnancy. Birth weight was 1900 gm. He was brought to hospital for the ﬁrst time at 5 years of age because of redundant skin and developmental delay. He was diagnosed to have cutis laxa . At 8 years old he was hospitalized due to anorexia and weight lost. He had mental retardation but he was quite social. He was noted to have coarse facial features with typical lips, blue sclera, high arched palate, dentalabnormalities, abnormal hair curve, redundant skin, deep palmar and plantar creases, joint laxity, dark skin. Laboratory tests including CBC, urinalysis, blood electrolytes and gloucose levels, VMA in urine 
were normal.He was reluctant to eat his normal daily diet. During hospitalization period he was given special formula containing high protein and kalori. 
He started to gain weight in a short period.In Costello syndrome feeding can be aproblem even in older ages and 
special diet can be required.
P0062. Clinical and molecular characterization of a novel 
autosomal recessive Norrie-like syndrome
H. Kayserili1, C. Netzer2, A. Uzumcu1, B. Chung2, O. Uyguner1, H. Hennies3, P. 
Nurnberg3, C. Kubisch2,4, M. Yuksel-Apak1, B. Wollnik1,4;  
1Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey, 
2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Cologne 
Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Institute of 
Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
Norrie syndrome is a rare X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder mainly characterized by blindness resulting from retinal malformations, opacity of the lens and atrophy of the iris. In some cases, children may 
have varying degrees of mental retardation and hearing loss.We here report the clinical ﬁndings of two brothers and a female cousin born from distant consanguineous marriages who had bulbophtisis, mental retardation, and a mild myopathy. The eye ﬁndings were almost identical to those found in patients with Norrie syndrome and characterized by corneal opacity, cataract, iris atrophy, retinal detachment, microphthalmia. progressing to bulbophthysis. EMG analysis revealed signs of slow progressive myopathy at the lower and upper limbs which correlated with the muscular atrophy mainly involving the lower limbs. All three patients had mild mental retardation. We excluded mutations in the Norrin gene by direct sequence analysis and propose that the disease in this family is a novel autosomal 
recessive Norrie-like syndrome.As a ﬁrst attempt to identify the molecular basis of the disease, we performed a genome-wide linkage analysis in the family using polymorphic microsatellite markers and found a statistical signiﬁcant linkage to a chromosomal region that has been not yet described for eye disorders complicated with mental deﬁciency and muscle involvement. Reﬁnement of the critical region and testing of candidate genes located 
in the region is currently performed and will be presented.
P0063. A family of ulnar-mammary syndrome with three affected 
members
C. Ozkinay1, H. Onay1, S. Pehlivan2, D. Cogulu3, O. Cogulu4, H. Akin1, L. 
Midyat4, A. Vahabi1, F. Ozkinay4;  
1Ege University Medical School Hospital,Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir , 
Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Izmir, Tur -
key, 3Ege University Faculty of Dentistry, Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege University Medical 
School Hospital,Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey.
Ulnar mammary syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by post axial ray deﬁciency, dental abnormalities, mammary and apocrine gland hypoplasia, genital developmental anomalies. Affected individuals may show variable phenotypic expression changing from full characteristics of the syndrome to only post axial ray defect. Recently mutations in the TBX3 gene have been 
demonstrated to cause ulnar mammary syndrome.We describe a family of ulnar mammary syndrome with three affected memebers. The proband was 2 year-old girl who had 6 ﬁngers on the right hand, 7 ﬁngers on the left hand. She also had syndactyly of the 4th,ﬁfth and 6th ﬁngers on the left hand. A skin appendage with a small underdeveloped nail was noted as the 7th ﬁnger. She had clinodactyly and absent distal ﬂexion crease of the ﬁfth ﬁnger and 6 toes on both feet. Canines of upper jaw were absent. She had scapula lata, absent nipples, truncal obesity, pes planus. She was operated due to 
hydrometacolpos in neonatal period.The son of matenal aunt had postaxial polydactyly on both hands. The son of maternal grandfathers brother had postaxial polydactyly in both 
feet.
P0064. Detection of subtelomeric chromosomal rearrangements 
by FISH analysis in cases with idiopathic mental retardation and 
dysmorphic features
M. Ozcan Caliskan1, S. Berker Karauzum1, E. Mihci2, S. Tacoy2, G. Luleci1;  
1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Akdeniz University, Faculty of 
Medicine, Antalya, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatrics, Akdeniz University, Fac -
ulty of Medicine, Antalya, Turkey.
Mental retardation (MR) has a 2-3% frequency in general population. The etiology is remains unknown in more than half of the cases. In recent years, technical improvement of molecular cytogenetics has proved that cryptic chromosomal rearrangements are a signiﬁcant 
cause of idiopathic MR. Subtelomeric regions of the chromosomes are enriched with CpG islands and are believed to have the highest gene density in the genome. The cryptic subtelomeric rearrangements resulting in gene-dosage imbalance might represent a signiﬁcant cause of idiopathic MR 
and dysmorphic features with normal conventional karyotypes. As the telomere regions of the chromosomes are G-band negative and morphologically similar, the abnormalities in these regions are thought to be particularly difﬁcult to detect by using conventional cytogenetic methods. The cryptic rearrangements of distal ends of the chromosomes that can not be detected by conventional cytogenetic methods have been proved by Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) using chromosome-speciﬁc subtelomeric probes.In our study, 20 cases with idiopathic MR and dysmorphic features with normal conventional karyotypes were investigated by FISH using subtelomeric probes. Subtelomeric chromosomal rearrangaments were detected in 3 of 20 patients. One patient had a familial cryptic unbalanced translocation between subtelomeric regions of the chromosome 5p and 15q. Another patient had a de novo cryptic unbalanced translocation between subtelomeric regions of the Clinical genetics94
chromosome 18p and 22q. 
In conclusion, the detection of subtelomeric chromosomal rearrangements are of great importance in offering genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis in both familial and sporadic cases with 
idiopathic MR and dysmorphic features.
P0065. A family of type I BPES with 5 affected members
E. Karaca1, O. Cogulu1, A. Ekmekci2, H. Onay2, S. Pehlivan3, F. Ozkinay1, C. 
Ozkinay2;  
1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir , Turkey, 
2Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir , 
Turkey, 3Ege University Faculty of Science, Department of Biology, Izmir, Tur -
key.
Blephorophimosis-ptosis-epicantus (BPES) syndrome is a rare genetic condition characterized by short palpebral ﬁssures, ptosis of eyelids, inverted inner canthal fold between upper and lower lids and lateral displacement of the inner canthi. It is transmitted by autosomal dominant inheritance and most cases are sporadic. More than 53 mutations in FOXL2 gene have been reported to be responsible fort he BPES. Type I in which the syndrome is transmitted only through males due to the female premature ovarian failure, whereas type II can be transmitted by both affected females and males. Type I is associated with menstrual irregularities and infertility. Here we present a family of BPES with 5 affected members. The proband who was a 15-year-old boy was referred to genetics outpatients clinic for genetic counseling. He showed all characteristic ﬁndings of the syndrome. Family history revealed 5 more affected cases of which 3 were operated due to severe blephorophimosis. Karyotypes of all cases were normal. We also point out the importance of distinction between two types of BPES 
in genetic counseling of female patients.
P0066. Spondylocostal dysplasia in a three generation family 
with 4 affected members
A. Ekmekci1, H. Onay1, O. Cogulu2, M. T. Arslan2, H. Akin1;  
1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir , 
Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir , 
Turkey.
Jarcho-Levin syndrome is an eponym that has been used to describe a variety of clinical phenotypes consisting of short-trunk dwarﬁsm associated with rib and vertebral anomalies. Molecular, clinical and radiological data have allowed further characterization of these phenotypes. Based on these ﬁndings, Jarcho-Levin syndrome has been divided into two types as spondylothoracic dysplasia and 
spondylocostal dysplasia.We report a 4.5-year-old boy showing typical features of 
spondylocostaldysplasia. He referred to us with short length, short neck and malformed 
trunk.The proband was a 4,5 year-old boy with typical features of spondylocostal dysplasia such as short stature,short neck, chest deformty. There was no parental consanguinity. He has a healthy 8 years old sister and his mother experienced 2 abortions at 10 weeks of gestation. Family history revealed three more affected members with variable expressivity in paternal side. Chest X-ray of the proband showed fusion defects of the ribs, biﬁd costa and vertebral deformities. He also had spina biﬁda, platyspondyly, scoliosis and vertebral fusions. We present our case as an example of autosomal dominant inheritance of Spondylocostal Dysplasia. We also point out the importance of distinction between two types in genetic counseling of Jarcho-Levin 
Syndrome patients.
P0067. Is empty Sella Syndrome the main cause of pituitary 
dwarﬁsm?
M. Bembea , C. Jurca, D. Bembea, R. Spineanu;  
Clinical Children Hospital Oradea, Oradea, Romania.
Introduction : The empty sella syndrome is a relatively new entity, 
developed in parallel with improved imaging techniques (CT and MRI). 
Empty sella refers to the absence of the pituitary gland on CT or MRI. The turcic sella is partially or completely ﬁlled with CSF. Empty sella syndrome is the pathologic variant of the imaging-described empty sella. 
Objectives: A review of current knowledge in empty sella syndrome and its association with pituitary dwarﬁsm. Material and methods
: We observed a series of 13 children with pituitary dwarﬁsm over a 10-year period. All patients were diagnosed with pituitary dwarﬁsm based on clinical features (including somatometrie) and conﬁrmed by dosage of serum growth hormone level. Of these, nine patients also had brain MRI done. 
Results: From the nine patients, eight had empty 
sella on the MRI. This very height percent (89 %) is most frequently than found in literature (5-58%). MRI is the elective imagistic method, other methods like X-rays, head ultrasound or CT may not be relevant. One of these eight cases was selected for presentation: it showed an association of empty sella syndrome, pituitary dwarﬁsm and polydactyly. The association of pituitary dwarﬁsm and polydactyly has been communicated in only four cases in the literature. 
Conclusions : 
The association of the empty sella syndrome and pituitary dwarﬁsm in our series is most frequently that in literature; deﬁning it will improve the knowledge of the etiology and pathogenesis of pituitary dwarﬁsm. The association with polydactyly is very rare and could be syndromic 
or random.
P0068. Investigations of hot spot regions in MYH7 genes in 
Iranian hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients
A. Paydar , M. Montazeri, M. Houshmand, M. Shafa;  
National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy occurs approximately 1 in 500 people. It is the most common cause of sudden cardiac death in young people. The disease is characterized by hypertrophy of left and/or right ventricles and intrventricular septum. Mutations in at least 11 genes (such as MYH7, MYBPC3 and 
TNNT2) encoding sarcomeric proteins 
and possibly in one gene encoding a non-sarcomeric protein ( PRKG2 ) 
have been associated with HCM so far. In this study we focused on exons 13-15 and 19-21 of 
MYH7 gene and introns located between 
them, which contain hotspots for so called “malignant mutations” that increase sudden cardiac death risk. 52 Iranian patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were selected . Exons 13-15 and 19-21 
of MYH7 gene and their related introns were ampliﬁed by polymerase 
chain reaction. Then PCR products were sequenced Mutations were detected in fourteen (28%) of the patients. Three mutations were found in exons. We have found a novel mutation, A10419C in exon 14, which was a missense mutation causing N444T substitution. Mutations in the 
MYH7  gene can be found in patients without a family history of HCM
P0069. Mucopolysacharidosis II: Biochemical and Linkage Study 
of the Iduronate-2-sulfatase Gene Defects in Taiwan
S. P. Lin1, C. K. Chuang1, J. H. Chang2, G. J. Lee-Chen2;  
1Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 2National Taiwan 
Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China.
Mucopolysacharidosis II (MPS II) is an X-linked recessive lysosomal 
storage disorder caused by a defect of the iduronate-2-sulfatase (IDS) gene. To investigate the molecular lesions underlying Taiwanese MPS II, 14 probands and families were identiﬁed and screened for IDS mutations by DNA sequencing and restriction analysis.Three novel (IVS2+1G>C, 1055del12, and G489D) and 7 previously reported (N63K, P228L, K347E, R468Q, R468W, I485R, and 1241delAG) mutations were found. R468Q and R468W together account for 42.8% of mutations detected in our patients. Haplotype analysis using ﬂanking probes DXS1113 and DXS1123 revealed that the unrelated R468Q alleles are independent in origin whereas the unrelated R468W alleles are probably of the same origin. The R468Q mutation in one patient and the I485R in another patient occurred de novo in male meiosis. Leukocyte IDS assaying showed signiﬁcantly different ranges of activities in normals and the carriers (19.2~70.6 vs 8.4~26.6 nmol/h/mg cell protein). The mean IDS activity in female carriers was less than a half of the normal level. However, due to a small overlapping range, the level of enzyme activity alone can not be used for carrier 
detection.Clinical genetics95
P0070. Report ot Cockayne Syndrome from Iranian Families
F. Afroozan, N. Almadani, Y. Shafeghati, R. Kariminejad, O. Van Diggelen, W. 
J. Kleijer, M. H. Kariminejad;  
Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Cocakyne Syndrome is an autosomal recessive multisystemic 
condition,characterized by usually senile-like changes beginning in infancy.Retinal degeneration,Impaired hearing and photosensitivity of thin 
skin.The disease is known to be genetically heterogeneous for which 3 different Loci have been identiﬁed on chromosomes 10,12,13.We have studied ﬁve Iranian families,each with one affected child(three male,two female).three of these cases are results of cansanguineous marrige and the parents of the two cases are offspring of unrelated couples.Their features and radiology were compatible with Cockayne 
Syndrome.The opthalmologist showed salt&pepper retinal pigmentation for two of the affected children and optic atrophy for other three cases.Assayes of DNA repair are performed on skin ﬁbroblasts.The most consistent ﬁnding in Cockayne Syndrome,ﬁbroblasts,marked sensitivity to UV radiation,deﬁcient recovery or RNA syntesis following UV damage(and impaired repair of) activity transcribed genes,or transcription couple repair.PND of CS has been reported by analysis of UV light sensitivity and DNA repair in fetal cells obtained by CV or Amniocentesis.
P0071. Chromosomal disorders in patients with azoospermia
O. Bellovits1, A. Rusz2, I. Romics2, E. Csonka3, G. Hadlaczky3, P. Sótonyi1, G. 
Bujdosó1;  
1Hungarian Academy of Sciences - Semmelweis University, Insitute of Forensic 
Medicine, Budapest, Hungary, 2Semmelweis University, Department of Urology, 
Budapest, Hungary, 3Institute of Genetics, Biologycal Research Center, Hun -
garian Academy of Sciences ,, Szeged, Hungary.
The aim of this study was to analyse chromosomal alterations in patients with azoospermia, candidates for testicular sperm retrieval (TESE) and intracytoplasmatic sperm injection (ICSI). The last three years 66 biopsies were performed in 64 patients for TESE. Mean age 
of the patients was 35 years (range 24-53).According to estimations, in 15% of infertile males it is a genetical disorder that stands in the background of seminal weakness. Male infertility can be traced back to numerical or structural chromosomal causes in 5% of the cases. Approximately 70% of these causes are due to sexual chromosome abnormalities, the most frequent being the XXY syndrome. Microdeletion of the Y chromosome is around 10%.In our study the most characteristic cases were numerical deviations, such as XXY, XYY and mosaic XO syndromes. In order to obtain an exact diagnosis, the traditional cytogenetic methods (Q-, G-band and FISH analysis with probes X painting, Y painting, X cen, Y heterochromatin, Y euchromatin) were complemented in combination with molecular genetic techniques (AzFa, AzFb, AzFc region). Patients were included in the assisted reproduction programme on the base of 
their genetic results.Non obstructive azoospermia was diagnosed in 51 patients (79%). Spermatozoa adequate for ICSI were found in 36 cases (54%), fertilisation rate was 57% and pregnancy rate 27%. Preoperative evaluation included routine andrological investigation with 2 semen analysis, ultrasound, hormonal and genetic examination. 
Cryopreservation of retrieved testicular tissue was also done.
P0072. Genetic and cellular analysis of Italian patients with a 
Nijmegen breakage-like phenotype
A. Antoccia1, A. di Masi1, M. Salvatore2, F. Berardinelli1, A. Silini3, C. Losi3, A. 
Plebani3, D. Taruscio2, C. Tanzarella1;  
1Dept. Biology, 'Università Roma Tre', Rome, Italy, 2Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 
Rome, Italy, 3Clinica Pediatrica e Istituto Angelo Novicelli, Brescia, Italy.
Normal development of the immune system requires the introduction of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) during antigen receptor gene assembly; defect in the repair of these damage can lead to profound immunodeﬁciency.The Mre11/Rad50/Nbs1 (M/R/N) complex plays a critical role in the repair of DSBs; in humans, mutations in the 
Nbs1 gene lead to the autosomic recessive genetic disorder Nijmegen breakage syndrome 
(NBS).Lymphoblastoid cells (LCLs) derived from ﬁve Italian NBS - like patients selected in relation to their clinical aspects were studied from a cellular and molecular point of view to determine defects in factors involved in DSBs repair.PCR ampliﬁcation of exon 6 showed the presence of both copies of the 
Nbs1 gene in all the investigated individuals. Normal levels of proteins involved in the repair of DSBs and in cellular response to DNA damage (NBS1, Mre11, Rad50,etc.) were detected.Radiosensitivity of some of the LCLs analysed was shown by the induction of chromosome aberrations in a G2-phase assay. Rejoin of 
DSBs was evaluated by PFGE.LCLs have been irradiated with 2-10 Gy of X-rays and proteins subjected to immunoblot with a p53 antibody , NBS1 and SMC1. 
Histone γ-H2AX focus formation after irradiation was also evaluated.Dissection of the clinical and cellular phenotype of NBS-like patients will help to identify a subset of individuals with the NBS clinical phenotype, whose analysis will allow for more clear-cut research of new genes involved in the maintenance of genome integrity.Supported by “ Test Genetici: dalla Ricerca alla Clinica”, ISS.
P0073. Elejalde Syndrome, a Case Report & Branchio-Oculo-
Facial Syndrome, a Case Report
E. Silhanova , S. Siruckova, I. Kaspercik, R. Curik;  
University Hospital, Ostrava, Czech Republic.
Acrocephalopolysyndactylous dysplasia, Elejalde syndrome (MIM 200995) and branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOF, MIM113620) are 
rare genetic disorders.Elejalde syndrome includes macrosomia, craniosynostosis, facial anomalies, short limbs, lung hypoplasia, organomegaly, excess subcutanous tissue of neck and trunc. Excessive amounts of connective tissue and perivacular proliferation of nerve ﬁbres is found in many organs. The mode of inheritance is autosomal recessive, the appropriate gene has not been identiﬁed yet.We present a patient with Elejalde syndrome born at 36 weeks of gestation. The infant died 11 hours after birth. This is the 7
th described 
case of Elejalde syndrome.Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome includes somatic changes, such as bilateral postauricular haemangiomatous skin defects, low set ears, preauricular ﬁstulas, cleft lip or cleft lip and palate, nasolacrimal duct obstruction, eye changes, malformed nose, hearing loss, growth retardation and renal dysplasia, aplasia or agenesis. Intelligence is mostly normal. Inheritance appears to be autosomal dominant, sporadic cases probably carry new mutations, however, the corresponding gene has not been identiﬁed so far. The situation is complicated by the clinical overlap with branchio-oto-renal syndrome (BOR, MIM 113650). This observation led to a suggestion that BOF and BOR are allelic variants of the same gene. However, new studies have shown, that 
they are distinct entities.A girl with a full manifestation of branchio-oculo-facial syndrome is 
presented.
P0074. Evolutive possibilities of Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I 
in two siblings
G. Sur1, O. Maftei2, L. Burac2, T. Pop1, G. Domnariu2, C. Barsan2;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2Pediatric Clinic 
II, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Introduction:  Crigler-Najjar type I syndrome is a very rare genetic 
disease with autosomal recessive inheritance. The disease begins in the ﬁrst days of life with the occurrence of an intense jaundice, with values of indirect seric bilirubin higher than 20mg/dl, in the absence of hemolytic manifestations or liver function alteration. The cause is the absence of hepatic UGT
1A1 (uridine diphosfo glucuronyl transferase) 
activity. Early diagnosis in Crigler-Najjar type I syndrome is very 
important for preventing kernicterus in newborn.
Methods: We followed two siblings having Crigler-Najjar type I syndrome who were admitted in our service. The ﬁrst one (R.G., male, now 12 years of age) was admitted in our service right after birth with intense jaundice. The suspicion of a Crigler-Najjar syndrome or an hemolytic jaundice was raised. The second one (R.F., female, now 10 years of age), the fourth child of the family, was admitted at the age of Clinical genetics96
3 months with intense jaundice, spastic palsy, opistotonus. Diagnosis 
of Crigler-Najjar type I syndrome was almost certain because the 
kernicterus was present and she had a brother with this disease.
Results: R.G.: bilirubin (total) = 22mg/dl; bilirubin (indirect) = 21,9mg/dl; Hb=15g/dl; phenobarbital stimulation did not inﬂuence the serum level of bilirubin. Genetic tests showed a defect of 2q3.7. R.F.: bilirubin 
(total) = 20mg/dl; bilirubin (indirect) = 20mg/dl; Hb=14,9g/dl
Conclusion:  Because in the second case no therapeutical measures 
were taken (phototherapy) kernicterus occurred. Molecular tests can prove the severity of the syndrome. Genetic advice is important for 
future births.
P0075. HLA DRB1*04 alleles in autoimmune hepatitis patients-
frequency and relationship with response to treatment
F. Esteghamat, M. Rezvani, M. Agah, H. Sendi, T. Ghaziani, M. Zali;  
Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is a rare frequent, multiplex disorder with undeﬁned etiology. HLA DRB1*04 has been identiﬁed as independent determinant of susceptibility to AIH, and HLA DRB1*04 positives are more likely to develop extrahepatic manifestation of their disease. We analyzed the association of HLA DR4 in Iranian patients with AIH . METHODS: HLA DRB1*04 genotyping was done for 70 patients (47 female) with AIH type I (deﬁned by international criteria IAHG, 1999 and fulﬁlled informed consent) referred to Taleghani hospital (Iran) and 95 healthy blood donors (61 female) matched by sex and age, respectively. PCR-SSP (PCR-Sequence Speciﬁc Primers) was used to detect HLA DRB1*04 allele. RESULTS: Mean age ± SD and the results of evaluation of AST (Aspartate aminotransferase) and ALT (Alanine aminotransferase) are shown in table 1. The frequency of HLA DRB1*04 allele are shown in table 2. There was no signiﬁcant difference in HLA DR4 allele frequency between cases and controls (p>0.05). HLA DRB1*04 positive AIH patients had higher AST and ALT. CONCLUSION: Our results do not conﬁrm the association between HLA DR4 allele and autoimmune hepatitis in Iranian population but there is association between HLA DR4 allele and response to treatment 
in Iranian patients with autoimmune hepatitis.
Table 1
Controls Cases
Mean age ± SD 35.4 ± 13.4 35.3 ± 11.5
AST 22.85 ± 10 381 ± 593
ALT 29.53 ± 16 347 ± 573
Table 2
Cases Cases Controls Controls
Male Female Total Male Female Total
HLA 
DRB1*04 
positive4 14 18 8 18 26
HLA 
DRB1*04 
negative19 33 52 26 43 69
P0076. Fragile X premutation Tremor/Ataxia Syndrome (FXTAS): 
an Italian Collaborative Study
E. Di Maria1, F. Faravelli2, M. Grasso2, F. Forzano2, V. Viassolo2, M. Melis3, N. 
Migone4, A. Murgia5, G. Neri6, S. Russo7, G. Abbruzzese1, C. Bagni8, P. Man -
dich1, F. Dagna Bricarelli2, on behalf of the Italian Collaborative Study Group_on 
FXTAS;  
1University of Genova, Genova, Italy, 2Ospedale Galliera, Genova, Italy, 3Uni-
versity of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 4University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 5University 
of Padova, Padova, Italy, 6Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 
7IRCSS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 8Università Tor Vergata, 
Roma, Italy.
FXTAS has recently been described in carriers of the premutation in the FMR1 gene. The clinical presentation includes gait ataxia or intention tremor at onset, associated with a wide spectrum of neurological symptoms. A ﬁrst study showed that the prevalence is age-dependent, ranging up to 75% in subjects older than 80 years (Jacquemont 2004). No data are available about the relationship between the number of CGG repeats and the age at onset or the clinical presentation.Based on a network of geneticists, neurologists and neuroradiologists, a concerted effort was initiated in order to recruit a large sample of male subjects from extended families in which the presence of FMR1 premutation was ascertained, and to investigate the occurrence of FXTAS. Premutation carriers, as well as a matched series of control individuals, will be examined for the presence of movement disorders and other neurological disturbances, through an extensive protocol which includes neuroimaging. Number of repeats, FMR1 mRNA and FMRP levels will be evaluated and their possible correlation with clinical features will be tested. Furthermore, the knock-in mouse model will be used to investigate the effects of the premutation at the cellular and molecular levels. We have already identiﬁed, in 266 families, 93 premutation carriers and 239 possible carriers. A telephone survey was carried out in a subgroup of families, in collaboration with the Italian patients’ association: 19 out of 51 male premutation carriers (37%) were referred to as showing symptoms suggestive of FXTAS.
P0077. Presentation of one case with Larsen syndrome 
recessive
N. Almadani, F. Afroozan, V. Hadavi, M. H. Kariminejad;  
Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
This syndrome is characterized by joint hypermobility, multiple joint dislocation, characteristic facies (Prominent forehead, depressed nasal bridge, wide-spaced eyes, Club foot, bilateral dislocation of elbows, hips and knee (most characteristically, Anterior dislocation of the tibia on the femur). Mutant gene is locat on 3p14-3p21. Our case is a 4.5 years old boy from ﬁrst cousin parents that he had bilateral dislocation of elbows and hip, prominent forehead, depressed nasal bridge, scoliosis, short and hypoplastic carps and joints laxity. Two children of his uncle with consanguineous parents are suffering from similar signs and symptoms. Radiologic studies for the parents of affected children were normal.
P0078. Extremely severe microlissencephaly associated with 
microgenitalism: a new syndrome distinct from XLAG?
F. M. Petit , O. Boute-Bénéjean, L. Devisme, A. Valat, M. Holder-Espinasse, A. 
Dieux-Coeslier, A. Moerman, S. Manouvrier-Hanu;  
Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France.
We report on a non consanguineous family with a severe form of microlissencephaly associated with microgenitalism, consistent with an X-linked pattern of inheritance. There are two affected sib ships of ﬁve males, born of two different fathers and sharing the same mother. Prenatal diagnosis of severe brain malformation and underdeveloped genitalia was made on ultrasound in all cases. Four pregnancies were terminated and pathological examination was performed in three foetuses, reporting identical anomalies in each of them. Extremely severe microlissencephaly was associated with absent corpus callosum, but cerebellar development was normal. Hemispheres were completely sideways divided with opened ventricular cavities in the cranium and excess of cephalo-rachidian ﬂuid. Major disturbance of early cortical organization and neuronal migration with nodular heterotopias of the white matter was noted. One twin pregnancy was followed since only one foetus was affected. The affected child lived until the age of 4 and presented with neonatal onset intractable epilepsy, poor temperature regulation and chronic diarrhoea.To our knowledge, this particularly severe type of X-linked microlissencephaly associated with microgenitalism has never been reported in the literature and could be linked with mutations in an unknown gene involved in early cortical organization. Although the cerebral disorder in these cases differs in some respect with the X-linked lissencephaly with ambiguous genitalia (XLAG), molecular analysis of ARX gene was performed. The results are still pending.
P0079. Intraparietal sulcus anatomical abnormalities in children 
with Williams syndrome
F. Mochel ;  
Service de Radiologie Pédiatrique, Paris, France.
Williams syndrome (WS) is a well deﬁned syndrome on both clinical 
and molecular levels. Indeed, owing to the size of the hemideletion of the WS critical region in 7q11.23, the syndrome encompasses more or Clinical genetics97
less of clinical features among supravalvular aortic stenosis, severe 
infantile hypercalcemia, growth retardation, dysmorphic features and neurobehavioral disabilities. While language and auditory short-term memory seem to be relatively spared, visuo-spatial constructive cognition disabilities are a constant hallmark of the WSCP. In order to search for putative structural abnormalities underlying such a speciﬁc neurodevelopmental disorder, we performed an anatomical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in 9 children (12 +/ 2.5 years) using optimized voxel-based morphometry (VBM). VBM is a fully automated whole-brain technique that delivers a voxel-wise assessment of regional grey and white matter concentration. The control group was composed by normal age-matched children. A signiﬁcant bilateral decrease of grey matter concentration was detected in the intraparietal sulcus of WS children (P < 0.05 corrected height threshold). The location of 
the present abnormalities coincides with the location of the structural abnormality with the same method in 13 WS adults. These intra-parietal abnormalities are consistent with cognitive proﬁle of WS; the dorsal stream dysfunction is probably involved in the visuospatial construction deﬁcit of WS patients. A better neuroimaging caracteristisation in WS should contribute to better deﬁne phenotype-genotype correlations in 
this syndrome.
P0080. Molecular screening of C6orf57  as a candidate gene in 
autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa linked to RP25 locus.
I. Marcos1, I. Barragán1, S. Borrego1, M. Abd El-Aziz2,3, R. J. Patel2, M. F. El-
Ashry2,4, S. Bhattacharya2, G. Antiñolo1;  
1Unidad Clínica de Genética y Reproducción, HHUU Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, 
Spain, 2Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Ophthalmology, London, 
United Kingdom, 3Department of Clinical Pathology, Tanta University Hospital, 
Tanta, Egypt, 4Department of Ophthalmology, Coventry and Warwickshire Uni -
versity Hospital, Coventry, United Kingdom.
RP25 locus was identiﬁed as a novel locus for autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (arRP) responsible for a considerable (14%) proportion of the arRP families of Southern Spain. It lies in the pericentromeric region of chromosome 6, between 
D6S257  and 
D6S1644  microsatellite markers. Here we report the mutation 
screening of the chromosome 6 open reading frame 57 gene ( C6orf57 ) 
in 7 families of the South of Spain linked to RP25  locus.
C6orf57  was selected according to its location within RP25 region 
and its tissue expression, since it appears to be highly expressed in peripheral retina. A molecular genetic study was performed on DNA extracted from one parent and one affected member of each studied family. The genomic structure was determined using bioinformatic tools. The molecular analysis revealed four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and a 3’-UTR AT- repeat polymorphism (IVS1-38T>C, IVS2-122G>A, Q46R, STOP+106A>G and (AT)n). The genotyping of 3’-UTR AT- repeat polymorphism in all the members of the affected families linked to 
RP25 and in 100 Spanish controls showed that the highly 
repetitive and homozygous alleles are signiﬁcantly over represented in the RP patients. The well-known role of the 3’-UTR AU-rich elements in the stability of mRNA makes it plausible the hypothesis that 
C6orf57  
could be implicated in the etiology or severity of RP in some of the 
RP25 families. Therefore, further functional studies are required for the assessment of the inﬂuence of this AT-repeat polymorphism on 
C6orf57  mRNA.
P0081. Mutation screening of three candidate genes, TFAP2β , 
GLULD1  and RIM1 , in autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa.
G. Antiñolo , I. Barragán, I. Marcos, B. Salud;  
Hospitales Universitarios Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain.
Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is the most common form of retinal dystrophy. It is featured by a great clinical and genetic heterogeneity. There can be found different patterns of inheritance, such as autosomal dominant and recessive, X-linked and digenic, exceeding 36 the number of identiﬁed RP loci. Here we report the identiﬁcation and exclusion of 3 candidate genes for autosomal recessive RP (arRP), the most frequently inherited form of RP, in 7 Spanish families with arRP linked to the pericentromeric region of chromosome 6. TFAP2β
, GLULD1  and 
RIM1 were selected on the basis of their location, function and tissue 
expression. TFAP2β, transcription factor AP-2 beta, is selectively 
expressed during early differentiation of amacrin and horizontal cells. 
GLULD1 , glutamate-ammonia ligase (glutamine synthase) domain containing 1, plays a key role in the uptake of glutamate in retina. 
RIM1, encoding a presynaptic protein involved in the glutamate neurotransmission, constituted as well a good functional candidate for a RP causing gene. Two polymorphisms were identiﬁed in the 
GLULD1  
gene, one of them changed the encoded amino acid (F246L) while the other one did not result in any substitution (E430E). The third change, silent as well (L222L), was found in 
RIM1. Genotyping of the SNPs 
was undertaken using Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET). These changes, however, were also present in Spanish controls. Although TFAP2β
, GLULD1  and RIM1 were excluded as the 
causative genes for these RP families, we could not rule them out as good candidates for other retinal degenerations mapping to the same 
chromosomal region.
P0082. Trisomy 10 mosaicism in 2-years-old normally developed 
girl
I. Stefanova1, Y. Anastassov2, T. Krastev1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital St.George, Plovdiv , Bul-
garia, 2Department of Pediatric Surgery,University Hospital St.George, Plovdiv, 
Bulgaria.
Total trisomy 10 has been detected in spontaneous abortions and stillborn. In the literature there were only four reported live born cases with trisomy 10, all of them mosaic. Although the trisomic clone have not exceed 30% in none of the cases all have demonstrated prenatal growth retardation and early death before the age of six months. Here we report on a 2-month-old female followed until the age of 2 years with total trisomy 10 mosaicism. Pathological vs. normal karyotype has been found in peripheral lymphocytes and in cultured ﬁbroblasts, respectively in 54% and 22%. Interphase FISH conﬁrmed these cytogenetical results ﬁnding respectively 51% and 26% trisomic cells. The affected girl shows physical and mental development in the normal range. Her dysmorphic features include left-sided cleft lip and median cleft palate (found prenatally by US screening), high prominent forehead, delayed closure of the fontanels (35/35mm at the age of 11 months), epicanthus, hypertelorism, delayed teeth eruption, both-sided single palmar crease, deep palmar and plantar creases. No inner anomalies have been found. Our case is the longest survival of a total trisomy 10 mosaicism reported so far and the only one with normal development, although it demonstrates comparable cytogenetical data 
with other literature reports.
P0083. Association of multiple supernumerary teeth with 
cleidocranial dysplasia
R. Purcarea , E. Severin, C. Albu, D. Albu;  
Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
Dental anomalies, including failure of eruption of permanent dentition or supernumerary teeth, are the major diagnosis criteria in cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD). Two cases with multiple supernumerary teeth as part of a genetic syndrome are presented. 
Objective: the aim of the study 
was to investigate the phenotype-genotype correlation. Subjects and 
Methods: the two patients with supernumerary teeth in association with CCD were investigated. The diagnosis of dental anomalies has been made by oral examination and evaluation of orthopantomographs. Physical and X-ray examinations had a valuable role in supporting clinical diagnosis of CCD. Family study, cytogenetic and molecular analyses were performed too. 
Results: Case 1: a 16-year-old female 
expressed failure of exfoliation of the primary dentition and failure of eruption of permanent teeth. She also presented the classical signs of CCD - complete absence of the clavicles and frontal bossing. Her family history shows no other affected members. Because CCD is usually inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder and about one-third of the cases appear to represent sporadic mutation, we suspected a new mutation has arisen. The results of cytogenetic and molecular analyses validate the occurrence of a new mutation in exon 2 of RUNX2 gene. Case 2: a 14-years-old female showed major problems in the eruption of permanent teeth. The girl presented partial absence of the clavicles. Her family history revealed an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. 
Conclusions : the two cases of CCD presented 
variability in clinical features and etiology. The phenotype cannot be 
predicted based on the genotype.Clinical genetics98
P0084. Intracranial hypertension in two children with Marfan 
syndrome
Y. Hilhorst-Hofstee, J. P. P. van Vugt, L. J. M. Kroft, W. C. G. Overweg-Plandsoen;  
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Two unrelated children are presented with recurrent intracranial 
hypertension. One child was known to have Marfan syndrome. In the other child the diagnosis Marfan syndrome was made during evaluation 
for the intracranial hypertension.Both children presented with complaints of headache, nausea and vomiting and one of them had papiledema. Both had increased cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) pressure (50-80 cmH
2O) and the complaints 
disappeared after a lumbar puncture. One child was treated with a ventricular peritoneal drain because of the frequent relapses of intracranial hypertension. The other child has episodes of intracranial hypertension with intervals of about a year and is treated with lumbar punctiures so far.Although severe headache has been reported in Marfan syndrome due to intracranial hypotension, this is to our knowledge the ﬁrst report of intracranial hypertension in Marfan patients. Our hypothesis is that our patients may have reduced dural resistance as a consequence of decreased plasticity of collagen due to the ﬁbrillin defect leading to cerebral venous compression impairing the cerebrospinal ﬂuid 
resorption.
P0085. Multiple basal-cell carcinomata of the skin, jaw 
keratocysts, skeletal and other malformations
M. Kuklík1, J. Handzel2, I. Mařík3, I. Žofková4, D. Zemková5;  
1Genet. Dept., 2nd Med.Fac., Charles Univ., Prague, Czech Republic, 2Dept.
of Stomatology, 1st Med.Fac., Charles Univ., Prague, Czech Republic, 3Amb.
Centre for Locomotor Disease, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Institute of Endo -
crinology, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Anthropol. Dept., 2nd Med.Fac., Charles 
Univ., Prague, Czech Republic.
Basal cell carcinoma syndrome (BCNS) has been described by Gorlin and Goltz in 1960 as an autosomal dominant condition. The main symptoms are multiple basal-cell carcinomata of the skin and jaw 
keratocysts and skeletal malformations.We report here about 8 families with BCNS. The condition is located at 9q233 and shows high degree of penetrance. A number of loci and 
possible candidate regions were in the past excluded.50 % our patients had the initial symptomatology in the orofacial area. Recurrent jaw keratocysts are the major symptoms - 50% patients). The pits - small palmar or plantar dyskeratoses, in the previously part of the suffered are present. Constant the numerous skeletal anomalies 
clinically and/or radiographic examinations were observed.We mentioned increased incidence of malignancies. In one case we noted ovarial carcinomas and the second patient had meningioma. The benign conditions we registered - in one case the cutaneous ﬁbromas 
of the trunk and in one female myomatosis uteri.Family members were classiﬁed as affected if they exhibited at least two of following criteria by the age of 18: two ore more basal cell carcinomata,odontogenic keratocysts,palmar pits or skeletal malformations. We noted unusual case of primary hyperparathyreoidism in a women with nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome. The adenoma of parathyreoid gland has not yet been described in patients with 
BCNS.All patients from our 8 families had macrocrania,wide bicristal diameter and small distantia biacromilalis, 6 from 8 families indicated autosomal genetic transmission, 2 are presented as fresh mutations or gonadal 
mosaicism.
P0087. Array CGH detection of genomic imbalances in mentally 
retarded individulas with normal G banded karyotypes.
K. Szuhai1, J. Knijnenburg1, B. Bakker1, M. Kriek1, A. van Haeringen1, E. Bi -
jlsma1, K. Hansson1, H. J. Tanke1, C. Rosenberg1,2;  
1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2University of São 
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
Mental retardation affects about 3% of the general population. Causative relationship for the underlying genetic alterations could be established in less than half of the cases. In order improve the diagnosis we have used array comparative genomic hybridization to detect genomic imbalances in cases mental retardation with dysmorphic features and 
normal karyotypes after G banding.In 22 of the 82 tested patients (27%) we have detected genomic imbalances from which 7 were de novo, 10 were inherited and 5 cases 
the origin could not be determined.A major limitation for the use array-CGH in genetic counselling is the identiﬁcation of those inherited imbalances that contributes to the 
abnormal phenotype.Although the introduction of array-CGH as a diagnostic tool for clinical genetics seems expensive and technically demanding, the resulting efﬁciency favours its implementation: for each 100 arrays performed, genetic counselling, and eventually pre-natal diagnosis, of 12-28 
families will be improved.
P0088. Severe neonatal hypertrophic cardiomyopathy caused by 
compound heterozygous mutations in the MYBPC3 gene
M. J. H. Baars1, J. J. Muurling-Vlietman1, J. Hruda1, J. M. van Hagen1, M. A. 
Alders2, R. H. Lekanne dit Deprez2;  
1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Academic Medi -
cal Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is an autosomal dominant disease characterised by unexplained left ventricular hypertrophy and by a characteristic histopathological appearance, myoﬁbrillar disarray. The disease is mainly caused by mutations in genes encoding sarcomeric proteins. One of the most frequently mutated HCM genes is the myosin binding protein C (MYBPC3) gene, (MIM 115197). Mutations in this gene generally cause a relatively mild phenotype with a late age of onset
. HCM in neonates is rare and often associated to another 
underlying condition.A full-term girl was born after an uneventful pregnancy and delivery. She was the second child of healthy non-consanguineous parents. On the third day of her life she was admitted because of poor drinking, cyanosis and difﬁcult breathing. Further investigation showed pulmonary oedema and cardiomegaly. ECG registration was abnormal. Echocardiography revealed hypertrophic non-obstructive cardiomyopathy with a poor left and right ventriclar systolic function. There was no structural congenital heart defect present. The heart failure was progressive leading to death at the age of 5 weeks. Autopsy conﬁrmed marked hypertrophy of both ventricles, myoﬁbrillar disarray and interstitial ﬁbrosis were demonstrated by electron microscopy. DNA-studies showed two mutations in the MYBPC3-gene: maternally inherited mutation c.2373
 2374 insG and paternally inherited splice-
donor mutation c.1624+1G>A. Further cardiologic examination conﬁrmed HCM in the father. Mutation c.2373
 2374 insG is a founder 
mutation originating from the Netherlands.These ﬁndings suggest the need for mutation analysis of genes encoding sarcomeric proteins in childhood HCM and the possibility of compound heterozygosity.
P0089. Identiﬁcation of NBS1 gene mutation carriers by PCR
A. di Masi ;  
University "Roma Tre", Rome, Italy.
Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome (NBS) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterised by microcephaly, immunodeﬁciency, hypersensitivity to X-irradiation and increased predisposition to 
lymphoid malignancies.The product of the underlying gene, NBS1, is a 95 kDa protein called nibrin, a member of the hMRE11/hRad50 protein complex, involved in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks.Over 90% of all NBS patients are of Central and Eastern European origin and are homozygous for the 657del5 mutation in exon 6. Nine further mutations have been found in families of different ethnic origin. These rarer mutations are located between nucleotides 657 and 1142 and are also predicted to truncate the nibrin protein downstream of the 
N-terminal domain, as observed for the classical 657del5.A PCR method to rapidly detect the private mutations 742insGG and 835del4 in exon 7 and 900del25 mutation in exon 9 of NBS1 gene was developed. In particular, NBS1 speciﬁc primers for wild-type and mutated alleles were designed and for each mutation a speciﬁc PCR protocol was optimized. This method was applied to analyse three 
unrelated NBS1 families, two from Italy and one from Morocco.The rapid and inexpensive screening technique, that we introduced in this study, could be used for larger population screening in order to estimate NBS heterozygotes frequency. Since NBS heterozygotes Clinical genetics99
might be expected to have increased risk of cancer and high sensitivity 
to irradiation, the identiﬁcation of carriers of mutant NBS1 alleles will results helpful in cancer therapy, possibly optimising treatment 
protocols for malignant disease.
P0090. Ehlers Danlos syndrome type VI in a girl
K. Salavoura1, M. Valari2, S. Giounta3, A. Kolialexi4, A. Mavrou4, S. Kitsiou4, B. 
Steinmann3;  
1Aghia Soﬁa Childrens Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Dept Dermatology, Aghia 
Soﬁa Childrens Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Dept Medical Genetics, Zurich, 
Switzerland, 4Dept Medical Genetics, Athens University School of Medicine, 
Athens, Greece.
Ehlers Danlos syndrome (EDS) type VI is a rare autosomal recessive connective tissue disease, involving primarily skin and joints. The main features of the condition are neonatal hypotonia, scoliosis and as rare complications, ruptures of arteries and the eye globe. We present a 4 year old girl born to consanguineous parents with multiple skeletal anomalies at birth: torticollis, bilateral dislocation of shoulders and hips, scoliosis and bilateral talipes equinovarus. At the age of 4, she presented with thin, bruisable, hyperelastic and easily stretchable skin with multiple petechiae, visible subcutaneous vasculature, without scarring, omphalocele and signiﬁcant hypotonia, joint laxity and scoliosis. Intelligence was normal for her age. The ratio of urinary lysyl / hydroxylysyl pyridinolines was increased. Sequencing of the 
PLOD1  
gene revealed a homozygous deletion in exon 13 (c.1362delC) leading to a frameshift and premature truncation of the lysyl hydroxylase (p.lle454llefsX2) and thus conﬁrmed the clinical diagnosis of EDS type VI. As our patient was diagnosed at a young age, a therapeutic trial with ascorbic acid 2gr/kg was initiated 1 year ago. No major complications from the cardiovascular system or the eyes have been noted so far. In this family, prenatal testing was performed and a normal fetus was 
predicted.
P0091. Mutation screening for atypical and adult onset Spinal 
Muscular Atrophy
P. A. James1, D. Stroud1, D. Hilton Jones2, F. Muntoni3, M. Donaghy2, K. Da -
vies1, K. Talbot1;  
1Dept Human Anatomy and Genetics, Oxford University, Oxford, United King -
dom, 2Dept Clinical Neurology, Radcliffe Inﬁrmary, Oxford, United Kingdom, 
3Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, Imperial College of Science Teachnology 
and Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
The Spinal Muscular Atrophies (SMAs) are a group of genetically 
determined conditions characterised by the congenital or progressive loss of lower motor neurons with the subsequent weakness and atrophy of skeletal muscles. The majority of cases present in childhood and are due to recessive mutations affecting the gene 
SMN1. A less common 
presentation involving slowly progressive SMA, often predominantly affecting distal muscle groups and presenting for the ﬁrst time in adulthood is also well described. In this study we investigated the role in the aetiology of adult onset SMA of mutations in 5 recently described genes; Glycyl tRNA synthetase (
GARS), the small heat shock proteins 
HSPB1 and HSPB8, the Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy 
gene ( BSCL2) and the vesicle trafﬁcking protein VAPB. The role of 
these genes was investigated in 74 individuals affected by SMA with a variety of clinical phenotypes. A pathogenic mutation was detected in each of the 
GARS , HSP27 , HSP22 and BSCL2 genes. In the ﬁrst 
3 families the affected individuals had a pure motor neuropathy with lower motor neuron involvement only. In the family affected by a 
BSCL2 mutation a mixture of upper and lower motor neuron signs were present, consistent with the previously described Silver Syndrome phenotype. Sequence variants were detected in a further 10 families. The mutations found in this group demonstrate that while the 
GARS , 
HSP27 , HSP22 and BSCL2 genes each make a contribution to the 
incidence of adult onset SMA it remains a genetically heterogeneous 
condition with further contributing genes yet to be discovered.
P0092. Effectiveness of the diagnosis of fragile X syndrome in 
mentally retarded patients from the West Siberia of Russia
E. N. Tolmacheva, L. P. Nazarenko, S. A. Nazarenko;  
Research Institute of Medical Genetics,, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
A comparison of the results both cytogenetic and molecular diagnosis 
of the syndrome Martin-Bell (SMB) in mentally retarded patients from the Western Siberia in Russia mainly young boys, was performed. Two groups of patients were examined: a group of 205 unrelated patients with mental retardation and minimal clinical features of SMB and 21 patients with Prader-Willi syndrome-like phenotype of SMB without muscular hypotonia and abnormality of chromosome 15. Molecular diagnosis included PCR analysis of the length CGG-repeats and assay of the methylation status CpG islands of the gene 
FMR1. The 
fragile site on distal part of the long arm chromosome X was detected in 14.6% cases. It was shown that the disease frequency in these patients conﬁrmed by molecular assays was only 66.7%. On the other hand, the frequency of SMB in males with mental retardation without fragile X-chromosome was 2.8%. We have found, that the minimal level of fragile site expression for correct diagnosis SMB is 4%. On the whole, the frequency of the SMB in patients with mental retardation, long face, hyperactivity, emotional disinhibition and joint hypermobility in patients from the Western Siberia in Russia was 10.2%. The value of this index in patients with Prader-Willi syndrome-like phenotype of 
SMB without muscular hypotonia was 4.8%.
P0093. The molar tooth sign phenotypes: evaluation of clinical 
features in 65 patients
F. Brancati1, E. Valente2, E. Bertini3, E. Boltshauser4, M. Castori1, E. Fazzi5, L. 
Giordano6, F. Emma7, C. D. Salpietro8, R. Battini9, V. Leuzzi10, R. Cilio3, M. Gen -
tile11, R. Fischetto12, L. Boccone13, M. A. Donati14, P. Parisi15, B. Dallapiccola1;  
1University of Rome "La Sapienza" and IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, 
San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel, Rome, Italy, 2IRCCS Casa Sollievo 
della Sofferenza and CSS-Mendel, Rome, Italy, 3Div. of Pediatric Neurology, 
Bambino Gesù Hospital, Rome, Italy, 4Dep. of Pediatric Neurology, University 
Childrens’ Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 5Dep. of Pediatric Neurology and 
Psychiatry, IRCCS Mondino, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 6Div. of Child 
Neuropsychiatry, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy, 7Div. of Nephrology and Dialysis, 
Bambino Gesù Hospital, Rome, Italy, 8Dep. of Pediatric Sciences, U.O. Pedi -
atric Genetics and Immunology, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 9Div. of 
Pediatric Neurology and Psychiatry, IRCCS Stella Maris, University of Pisa, 
Pisa, Italy, 10Dep. of Child Neurologic and Psychiatric Sciences, University "La 
Sapienza", Rome, Italy, 11IRCCS Saverio De Bellis, Castellana Grotte, Bari, 
Italy, 12Div. of Metabolic and Genetic Diseases, Az. Ospedaliera di Venere-
Giovanni XXIII, Bari, Italy, 13Ospedale Microcitemico, Cagliari, Italy, 14Dep. of 
Pediatrics, Meyer Pediatric Hospital, University of Florence, Florence, Italy , 15S. 
Andrea Hospital, Rome, Italy.
The Molar Tooth Sign (MTS) is a radiological ﬁnding that reﬂects a 
complex midbrain and hindbrain malformation. Although the MTS is the cardinal diagnostic sign in Joubert syndrome (JS), it has been also found in several other conditions named Joubert Syndrome Related Disorders (JSRD) in which the JS phenotype is associated with the variable involvement of other organs, mainly the eye, kidney and liver. The clinical classiﬁcation of JSRD is still complex, as incomplete and overlapping phenotypes exist and the complete spectrum of associated features still needs to be elucidated. We recruited 65 patients with proven MTS and evaluated their features. All patients presented psychomotor delay associated with hypotonia/ataxia (92%), mental retardation (87%), oculomotor apraxia (86%), breathing abnormalities (40%) and epilepsy (15%). Up to 25% of cases presented additional central nervous system malformations, including hydrocephalus and corpus callosum anomalies (11% each), encephalocele (6%), neuronal migration defects and Dandy-Walker/variant malformation (4% each). Overall, 67% of patients showed ocular involvement, mostly a retinopathy (46%), optical nerve atrophy (15%), ocular motility abnormalities (14%) and colobomas (9%). Kidney involvement was observed in 35% of patients, of which 27% had nephronophthisis/urinary concentration defects (evaluated with DDAVP test) and 6% had cystic dysplastic kidneys. Liver abnormalities and polydactyly were found in 17% and 15% respectively. Rarer associated features included congenital heart defects, cleft palate, intraoral frenula or lingual hamartomas, pituitary hamartomas and Hirschprung disease. The characterisation of the MTS associated features is relevant to delineate a diagnostic algorithm to timely manage multisystemic 
complications of JSRD.Clinical genetics100
P0094. The Frequency and Structure of Congenital 
Malformations in Infants of Rostov Region Rostov-on-Don 
Scientiﬁc Research Institute Of Obstetrics and Pediatrics. 
Ministry of Public Health of Russian Federation
K. I. Lazareva, S. S. Amelina ;  
State Health Institution, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation.
Monitoring of congenital malformations (CM) in infants of Rostov 
Region started in 2000 as a part of a State Public Health Programme. It provided 3,256 medical infant which became available thanks to the data of various Public Health Institutions of Rostov Region ( Maternity Hospitals, Children hospitals and Out-patients clinics, Prosection service).The total number of newborns in Rostov Region comprised 110,741 for the period mentioned, while the total number of infants with 
congenital malformations was 1,614.The frequency of the occurrence of CM in infants of Rostov Region 
comprised 14,5 %.All congenital malformations were subdivided into several groups according to the systems affected, as follows: 1.cardiovascular system abnormalities - 22,06%, 2. central nervous system abnormalities - 11,76%, 3. bone and muscular system abnormalities - 10,76%, 
4.genitourinary malformations - 9,23%.Basic frequences of CM determined by monitoring were as follows:Unencephalia - 0,21%; spinabiﬁda 0,60%; encephalocele - 0,07%; congenital hydrocephaly - 0,54%; microtia, anotia - 0,09%; cleft palate - 0.35%; cleft lip and/or cleft palate - 0,82%; transposition of the great vessels - 0,017%; hypoplasia of left heart - 0,06%; esophagoatre-sia - 0,18%; anal atresia -0,08%; renal agenesis or renal dysgenesis - 0,14%; hypospadiasis - 1,23%; exstrophy of the bladder - 0,02%; reduction malformations of extremities- 0,19%; congenital diaphragmatic hernia - 0,14%;omphalocele - 0,14%; gastroschisis -0,26%; Down`s syndrom 
- 1,40%; multiple congenital malformations 2,15%.The monitoring results obtained show that the spreading of certain nosologic forms of CM in a population of Rostov Region is similar to 
that in other populations.
P0095. An unstable intermediate allele in a family with the 
Fragile X syndrome
D. Marcus-Soekarman1, A. v.d. Wijngaard1, J. Herbergs1, L. A. Bok2, L. Curfs1, 
N. van Slobbe-Knoers3, J. P. Fryns4, C. Schrander-Stumpel1;  
1University Hospital, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Maxima Medisch Centrum, 
Veldhoven, The Netherlands, 3Universitair Medisch Centrum St Radboud, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4Centrum voor Menselijke Erfelijkheid, Leuven, 
Belgium.
A 1 year and 4 months old toddler presented with a developmental delay. He showed mildly dysmorphic features with length and head circumference above p80. A maternal cousin had a developmental delay that had never been analysed. Investigation of the FMR-gene as part of the work-up for mental retardation showed a full mutation as found in persons with classic Fragile X syndrome. Further analysis in this family showed that female carriers of the syndrome showed so-called intermediate alleles in the FMR-gene. In this family, a normal/intermediate allele became a full mutation in two generations. A review of the literature is given regarding the signiﬁcance of the size of premutations and their risk to be transmitted to next generations as 
full blown mutations.
P0096. Focal facial dermal dysplasia : congenital, bilateral 
vesicular facial lesions with a linear and symmetric distribution.
K. Devriendt1, T. Prescott2, B. Hamel3;  
1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Medical Genet -
ics, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 3Department of Human Genetics, University 
Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
We present three unrelated children with distinct congenital facial skin 
lesions.Patient 1 had a unilateral right cleft lip and cleft palate with late closure of the left lip. She presented congenital symmetrical skin lesions in an arc across each cheek starting preauricularly. These appeared as vesicles, with absent underlying skin, and contained a limited amount of ﬂuid. Follow-up revealed normal development. Patient 2 sustained an unexplained large left-sided intracerebral haemorrhage perinatally and developed seizures. Two symmetric, vesicular lesions, ½ to 1 cm in diameter were noted on each cheek at birth. One new lesion, more medially placed, erupted on each side at about 2-3 weeks. Patient 3 had a small chin and somewhat cupped ears, 1 nevus on the left foot. There were symmetrical lesions on both cheeks at birth which have persisted and have a collar of lanugo-like hair. This condition has been reported in the dermatological literature as focal facial dermal hypoplasia with 
preauricular  localisation. Familial occurrence, 
compatible with dominaint as well as recessive inheritance have been reported. The pathogenesis probably involves fusion defects of the mandibular and maxillary prominences of the developing embryonic face, which suggests that the cleft lip and palate seen in patient 1 are 
not coincidental.
P0097. 22q11.2 deletion in a series of paediatric at risk patients
I. Barisic1, I. Petkovic1, L. Morozin-Pohovski1, Z. Cvetko1, G. Stipancic2, M. 
Bagatin3;  
1Childrens University Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2University Hospital 
"Sestre milosrdnice", Zagreb, Croatia, 3University Hospital Dubrava, Zagreb, 
Croatia.
Background: 22q11.2 deletion syndrome is a common disorder typically consisting of dysmorphic facies, congenital heart defects (CHD), hypoparathyroidism, immunodeﬁciency and palate abnormalities. The associated phenotypic manifestations are extensive, highly variable from patient to patient and age-dependent. Patients with mild clinical manifestations presenting with apparently isolated malformation or dysmorphic traits can be easily overlooked. 
Objecitve: to ﬁnd out if 
the 22q11.2 deletion studies should become a part of a standardized diagnostic workup for patients presenting with isolated defects or with dysmorphic traits alone. Methods and patients: We prospectively 
studied the frequency of 22q11.2 deletion in an unselected population of 171 patients aged 4 days to 18 years referred because of: 1. CHD (64) 2. cleft palate (58) 3. hypocalcemia (18) 4. dysmorphic features suggestive of del22q11.2 (31). Detailed clinical evaluation, high-resolution chromosome and FISH analysis were performed. 
Results:  
FISH analysis revealed 22q11.2 deletion in 9.4% (6/64) patients with CHD. In the subgroup of patients with conotruncal anomalies del22.q11.2 was present in 17,8% (5/28) patients. From 18 patients referred because of the hypocalcaemia, 6 had 22q11.2 deletion (33,3%). In the group of 31 patients with dysmorphic features, the diagnosis was conﬁrmed in two patients (6.4%). 
Conclusions : Testing for 
the 22q11.2 microdeletion can be recommended in all patients with conotruncal heart defects and in patients with hypocalcaemia. It could be considered in patients presenting with at least 3 dysmorphic traits suggestive of 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome. A routine screening for the 22q11 deletion patients with an isolated palatal defect may not be 
warranted.
P0098. Familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Genetic and 
Clinical studies of eighteen cases in a Spanish family
J. Rueda1,2, C. Martín-Estefanía3, A. Pampliega3, M. Pérez-Arroyo1,4, A. Gar -
cía2, K. Huoponen5;  
1Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Miguel Hernández, San Juan de Alicante, 
Spain, 2Unidad de Genética, Hospital Clínica Vistahermosa, Alicante, Spain, 
3Servicio de Neurología, Hospital General Universitario, Alicante, Spain, 4Uni-
dad del Sueño, Hospital Clínica Vistahermosa, Alicante, Spain, 5Department of 
Medical Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder affecting motor neurons. Up to 20% of the patients have a family history of ALS (FALS), most commonly inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. Mutations in the SOD1 gene have been identiﬁed in about 20% of FALS individuals.We have identiﬁed a large Spanish family with 18 cases of FALS in six generations. In three of the cases, the coding region (exons 1-5) of the SOD1 gene was ampliﬁed with PCR and sequencing was carried out using ABI Prism 377 DNA sequencer. The identiﬁed mutation, affecting the 21
st codon in exon 1 (Glu21Gly), is already known in ALSorg 
database, although with few clinical data, and it is the sixth mutation of 
the SOD1 gen described in Spain.The mean age of onset was 47.2 years old, and the mean time of duration was 16.11 years, with a range 5-21. Symptoms in most of the cases (88,25%) started in the lower extremities and the remaining in the upper extremities. Neither bulbar symptoms nor dementia were observed. Electromyogram demonstrated electrophysiologic evidence Clinical genetics101
of lower motor neuron involvement in the control case (in which 
mutation was positive).
In conclusion, the Glu21Gly mutation showed long time of evolution with intrafamilial variability and homogeneous phenotype. The existence of two unaffected obligate carrier demonstrate that penetrance could be 
incomplete.
P0099. Amelogenesis Imperfecta (AI) and Nephrocalcinosis : a 
rare or unrecognized syndrome ?
G. Zanni1, I. Bailleul-Forestier2, D. Grifﬁths3, S. Whalen1, C. Vilain1, B. Lanas3, 
M. Molla2, C. Loirat4, D. Lacombe3, A. Verloes1,5;  
1Unité de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Faculté de Médecine Paris 
7, Paris, France, 2Service de Stomatologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Robert Debré, 
Faculté de Médecine Paris 7, Paris, France, 3Service de Génétique Médicale, 
Hôpital Pellegrin-Enfants, C.H.U Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 4Service de Né -
phrologie, Hôpital Robert Debré, Faculté de Médecine Paris 7, Paris, France, 
5INSERM E676, Paris, France.
Amelogenesis Imperfecta (AI) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disorders of enamel development. Enamel defects can occur in isolated or syndromic forms. Mutations in genes encoding for enamel matrix proteins (Amelogenin X, Enamelin ) have 
been identiﬁed respectively in X-linked and autosomal dominant families with apparently non syndromic AI.The AI-Nephrocalcinosis (AIN) or renal-enamel syndrome is an autosomal recessive condition with only few reported cases in the literature. Renal symptoms include progressive nephrocalcinosis without any apparent abnormality in calcium metabolism that could lead some patients to renal failure in the adulthood.
 Mutations of Kallikrein 
4(KLK4), a gene encoding for a enamel matrix proteinase have been recently identiﬁed in an autosomal recessive AI family. The kallikrein-kinin system has been implicated in glomerulotubular development and KLK4 could be a good candidate gene for this syndrome. We report two consanguineous families and three sporadic cases of AIN. Generalized enamel hypoplasia of both primary and permanent dentition was present in all affected patients. In two families delayed or absent molar eruption and microdontia were noted. None of the patients had impaired renal function. In one sibship, nephrocalcinosis was only present in 1/3 patients. As nephrological screening is not systematically done in AI patients, the incidence of this syndrome could be underestimated, and the risk of renal failure overestimated. As early diagnosis may lead to a better renal prognosis, all children with AI should at least have a renal ultrasonography performed to 
exclude nephrocalcinosis.
P0100. New cardiac ﬁndings in a case of Kabuki Syndrome
M. A. Soylemez, B. Geckinli, C. Sayar, A. Giray, G. Toksoy;  
Zeynep Kamil Woman Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
Kabuki syndrome is a rare multipl congenital anomaly/mental retardation syndrome with an estimated frequency of 1/32.000 in Japan. The Kabuki syndrome characterized by mental retardation (mild to moderate), skeletal abnormalities, postnatal growth deﬁciency, typical facial appearance and congenital heart defects. The incidence of congenital heart defects in patients with kabuki syndrome is estimated to be about 30%. To date, no speciﬁc type of heart malformation is 
known to be associated with the syndrome.We report a girl Who shows postnatal growth deﬁciency, a mild microcephaly with moderate mental retardation and skeletal abnormalities (hip dislocation, pectus excavatum, scoliosis, end plate abnormalities of vertabral body) and dysmorphic facies (arched eyebrows, long palpebral ﬁssures, large and protruding ears) and congenital cardiac defects. Cardiac echo revealed perforation of mitral valve, mitral insufﬁciency and anomalous pulmonary venous return. We propose to investigate these cardiac ﬁndings Kabuki syndrome patients survey in attempt to determine their real frequency and in 
order to improve clinical management.
P0101. Lack of association between Leber's hereditary optic 
neuropathy primary point mutations and multiple sclerosis in 
the region of Calabria ( Italy).
R. Cittadella1, V. Andreoli1, I. Manna1, A. La Russa1, M. Liguori1, A. Clodomiro2, 
P. Valentino2;  
1Istituto di Scienze Neurologiche C.N.R., Cosenza, Italy, 2Istituto di Neurologia-
Università "Magna Graecia", Catanzaro, Italy.The hypothesis that mitocondrial genes may implicate susceptibility to multiple sclerosis (MS) is supported by an increasing number of case reports on Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) - associated mithocondrial DNA (mtDNA) point mutations in patients with MS. A number of mtDNA mutations with primary pathogenic signiﬁcance for LHON, a maternally inherited disease causing severe bilateral visual loss predominantly in young men, have been detected in patients with an MS-like phenotipe. To evaluate the link between MS and Lhon primary point mutations, we investigated a cohort of non-related clinically deﬁnite MS Calabrian patients with optic nerve involvement, as well as a cohort of patients without involvement of the optic nerve as controls. Each subject recruited to the study was fully informed and gave his/her consent.We searched for the presence of Lhon mitochondrial mutations at nucleotide positions (np) 11778, 3460 and 14484 by mutation-speciﬁc polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism. Our results suggest that there is no association between Calabrian patients with typical MS and mtDNA point mutations at np 11778, 3460 and 14484. However, the presence 
of further mitochondrial mutations cannot be excluded in MS.
P0102. Novel CACNA1A  gene mutations in Spanish patients 
with episodic ataxia, familial hemiplegic migraine and infantile 
paroxysmal vertigo.
E. Cuenca-León1, I. Banchs2, R. Corominas1,3, N. Fernández-Castillo3, J. Arti -
gas4, V. Volpini5, A. Macaya1, B. Cormand3;  
1Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de Recerca 
Oncològica (IRO), Barcelona, Spain, 3Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, 
Spain, 4Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain, 5Institut de Recerca 
Oncològica (IRO), Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.
Mutations in the CACNA1A  gene, encoding the α1A subunit of the 
P/Q-type calcium neuronal channel, have been associated with the allelic disorders familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM), episodic ataxia 
type 2 (EA-2) and spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6).We have performed extensive mutational analysis of the 
CACNA1A  
gene in 41 unrelated patients with one or more of the following diagnoses: FHM, migraine with hemiparesthesic aura (MA), a childhood periodic syndrome, EA-2 and progressive ataxia (PA).For each proband, the whole coding region of the gene and the exon-intron boundaries were PCR-ampliﬁed from genomic DNA and sequenced, allowing the identiﬁcation of ﬁve new and one previously 
reported missense mutations in 6 patients.Two of the novel mutations, p.G638D and p.P1011A, were found in EA-2 patients. The novel mutation p.A454T was detected in a patient with MA and panic attacks. The other two new mutations were associated with FHM; p.V581M was carried by a pure FHM patient and p.Y1245C by a patient with FHM and antecedent of paroxysmal torticollis. The previously described p.R583Q mutation was present in a patient with PA and FHM and was found to co-segregate with EA-2/FHM/PA in 5 other affected relatives. No mutations were found in the 
CACNA1A  
gene in the remaining 35 probands, conﬁrming genetic heterogeneity 
in this group of channelopathies.The clinical spectrum of 
CACNA1A  mutations should be expanded to 
include some childhood periodic syndromes. Further clinical, genetic and functional studies are needed to elucidate the molecular bases of 
this group of related paroxysmal disorders.
P0103. Frequency of the GAG deletion of the DYT1  gene in a 
group of Polish patients with primary dystonia
K. Szczaluba1, J. Bal1, B. Kadziolka2, A. Szolna3, A. Friedman4, T. Mazurczak1;  
1National Research Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Postgradu -
ate Medical Center, Warsaw, Poland, 3Army Clinical Hospital, Bydgoszcz, Po -
land, 4Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
Dystonia is a heterogenous movement disorder characterized by sustained muscle contractions, frequently causing twisting movements or abnormal postures. To date, ﬁfteen well-deﬁned types of inherited dystonia syndromes or primary torsion dystonias (PTD) are known. Most cases of early-onset primary generalized dystonia cases are 
caused by a 3-base-pair GAG deletion in DYT1  gene (9q34).
The aim of our study is to investigate the prevalence of the GAG deletion in the 
DYT1 gene in Polish patients with primary dystonia. The 
preliminary analysis was carried out in a group of 50 patients (aged 11-68 yrs) with primary dystonia (28 with generalized type; 22 with focal/segmental of various localization), unreactive to L-Dopa treatment. Clinical genetics102
Detailed clinical characteristics of all the patients is provided.
Four patients (8%) in the analyzed group carried the GAG deletion in 
the DYT1 gene. They all had generalized-type dystonia starting in the 
lower limb, with age of onset ranging from 7 to 14 yrs. Progression of symptoms followed the pattern: foot → entire lower limb → trunk → 
upper limb/s.In patients’ families, additional 7 carriers of that deletion, of whom 5 were asymptomatic, were identiﬁed. Generalized, early-onset symptoms were observed in one of symptomatic carriers. In the other, writer’s cramp was the only manifestation.Our data conﬁrms that: generalized phenotype, early onset, primary foot involvement and presence of one additional affected member in the family can be predictors of type 1 dystonia. Recognition of 
DYT1 -
positive patients allows consideration of deep brain stimulation (DBS) as a method of effective treatment
P0104. Clinical and molecular studies in 15 patients with Noonan 
syndrome
J. Klapecki, M. Laniewski-Wollk, E. Obersztyn, A. Szpecht-Potocka, J. Bal, T. 
Mazurczak;  
National Research Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.
Noonan syndrome (NS, OMIM 163950) is an autosomal dominant genetic disorder characterized by following clinical symptoms: short stature, congenital heart defects, pectus deformities, pterygium colli, mild mental retardation and facial dysmorphism: hypertelorism, epicantic folds, low-set, prominent ears. Recently discovered PTPN11
 
mutations (gene located on 12 chromosome p24.1) are responsible for NS in almost half the cases. Results of preliminary clinical and molecular studies carried out in selected group of 15 patients with clinical diagnosis of NS are reported. The following inclusion criteria for molecular testing were used: dysmorphic features, short stature, congenital heart defects, pectus deformities or pterygium colli and cryptorchidism. Detailed clinical evaluation, including family history, dysmorphic features, pre- and postnatal development and congenital 
malformations, was performed.The most frequent symptoms in our group of patients were: dysmorphic features (hypertelorism (100%), low-set ears (79%), short neck (93%)), congenital heart defects (93%), short stature (79%) and pectus 
malformations (57%).To determine the character of mutation in PTPN11 gene, we performed 
a direct sequencing analysis of the exons 2-15. Mutation in PTPN11
 
gene was identiﬁed in 4 of 15 investigated patients. One mutation c.846C>G in exon 7 is novel; two others were previously reported - 
c.188A>G (exon 3) and c.1510A>G (mutation inherited from mother).All patients with PTPN11 mutation demostrated typical symptoms 
of NS, such as: short stature, congenital heart defects, widespaced nipples, pterygium colli and thick ear helix. The pulmonary stenosis (typical for NS) was found only in one patient, whereas the other three had different type of cardiac malformations.
P0105. Intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation due to a 
familial heterozygous missense mutation in the IGF-I receptor
S. G. Kant1, H. J. van der Kamp2, A. M. Pereira3, M. J. E. Walenkamp2, H. A. 
van Duyvenvoorde3, M. F. Kruithof2, M. H. Breuning1, J. A. Romijn3, M. Kar -
perien2,3, J. M. Wit2;  
1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 
2Department of Pediatrics, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Department of 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Intra-uterine and postnatal growth retardation with elevated plasma IGF1 has been reported in 2 children with mutations in the IGF1 receptor (IGF1R) gene. We now report a mother and daughter with 
growth failure due to a novel heterozygous IGF1R mutation.Mother had a birth weight of 2.6 kg (-1.9 SDS) and a length of 49 cm (-0.34 SDS). She had unexplained growth failure. GH provocation tests at 6 and 12 years showed elevated responses. At present (34 yrs), height is 144.6 cm (-4.0 SDS) and head circumference is 50.2 cm (-3.0 
SDS). IGF1, IGF2 and IGFBP3 are all in the high-normal range.After a pregnancy complicated by oligohydramnion the daughter was born with weight 2.1 kg (-3.3 SDS), length 42 cm (-4.2 SDS), OFC (at 2 months) 33.3 cm (-5.6 SDS). She has a triangular face, mild hypotelorism, a small mouth with thin lips and prominent ears. She had poor appetite, and at 13 months of age length was 69.2 cm (-2.6 SDS), weight 6.3 kg (-3.0 SDS), head circumference 39.7 cm (-6.1 SDS). Plasma IGF1, IGF2 and IGFBP3 were normal. An arginine stimulation 
test showed an elevated response (max GH 67 mU/L).A heterozygous missense mutation in exon 16 of the IGF1R gene (G3193A) was found, changing a negatively charged glutamic acid for a positively charged lysine. We conclude that heterozygosity for an inactivating mutation in the IGF1R leads to a variable degree of intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation, suggesting that maternal 
IGF1R is involved in intrauterine growth.
P0106. Three children with structural chromosomal aberrations 
and clinical features of overgrowth syndromes
I. M. Bradinova , E. Simeonov;  
Department of Pediatrics, Medical Faculty, Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Chromosome abnormalities are reported in a substantial part (4% - 28%) of the individuals with mental retardation. They are the single most common known cause found in series of unselected patients with mental retardation. Some of the chromosomal disorders usually have highly recognizable physical characteristics. In other cases the abnormality may be presented by small rearrangement of a particular chromosome that is rarely reported and the phenotype is nonspeciﬁc or still undetermined. Overgrowth syndromes include infants who are large for gestational age with or without excessive postnatal growth. The deﬁnition also includes increased weight, length, or head circumference, and/or asymmetric enlargement, singly or in 
combination.We present three unrelated mentally retarded children with structural chromosomal abnormalities and clinical features suggestive of overgrowth syndromes. Patient 1 is a 2 years old girl with karyotype 
46,XX,der(10)add(10)(q26)where the FISH analysis showed that the additional material probably origins from chromosome 10. Patient 2 is a 16 months old girl with 22q13 deletion, detected on conventional karyotyping and conﬁrmed by FISH analysis. Patient 3 is a 14 years old boy with karyotype 46,XY, 
add(5)(q35) where the additional materialwas shown to origine from the distal part of the 10p, i.e. this patient has partial trisomy 10p. In all patients the chromosomal abnormalities 
were de novo.These cases conﬁrm the necessity of chromosomal analysis in patients 
with mental retardation and somatic overgrowth.
P0107. DLL3-mutations in spondylocostal dysostosis type1 
(SCDO1)- report of 2 patients
E. Steichen-Gersdorf1, G. Reiter1, B. Fiebig2;  
1Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Institute for Medical Ge -
netics, Berlin, Germany.
The spondylocostal dysostosis (SCD) are a heterogenous group of disorders with severe axial skeletal malformations, characterised radiologically by multiple vertebral segmentation defects and rib 
anomalies, mainly reduction in number and dorsal fusion.An autosomal recessive form, designated SCD type1 (OMIM #277300) is linked to 19q13, which harbours the DLL3-gene (delta like 3). DLL3 encodes a ligand for the Notch signalling pathway.Clinically the patients present with an extremely short neck, low set nuchal hairline, a short chest, abdominal protrusion and an increased abdominal pressure. Therefore, inguinal hernia occurs frequently in male patients. Interestingly, despite of severe vertebral malformations, neurological complications are uncommon. Scoliosis is ﬁxed and not progressive. The two male patients were born to consanguinous 
turkish parents. Patient 1: born at term, c-section, BW 3380g, L 48cm, HC 36cm, no respiratory problems at birth, mild symptoms, slightly dysproportionate stature. Homozygous missense mutation in the DLL3-gene C209R 
within the delta-serrate-lag2 region (DSL)Patient 2: born at term, BW 2960g, L 43 cm, HC 34cm, developed a respiratory distress syndrome and was ventilated for 24h hours. Reduced compliance of the chest was noticed. An right sided inguinal hernia was operated in the neonatal period. Homozygous insertion of cDNA 603_604 ins GCGGT in exon 5 of DLL3 leading to a stop codon 
and protein truncation .We stress, that an essential prerequesite for genetic testing of DLL3 ist that there is irregular formation of 
all vertebrae (not segmental) usually Clinical genetics103
in association with abnormally aligned ribs, showing points of fusion.
P0108. Investigation of mtDNA Deletions and D-Loop 
Polymorphism in Iranian hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients
M. Montazeri, M. Houshmand, G. Dorraj, E. V.Zaklyazminskaya;  
National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a genetic disorder. It has 
variable presentations with a high incidence of sudden death in young. The disease occurrance is %0.05-0.2. As mitochondria are the major sites of energy production in the cell, it is not surprising, therefore, that an energy dependant tissue such as heart is affected by mitochondrial dysfunction. The aims of this study were investigating mitochondrial DNA deletions, identifying polymorphic sites In D-loop region of mtDNA and potential genetic background accounting for HCM in the Iranian population. In this study 52 unrelated HCM patients underwent genetic test on blood sample by DNA Extraction, PCR, and complete length sequencing of mtDNA. D-loop was sequencesed for 31 patients. The presence of mtDNA deletions was analyzed by multiplex PCR method and deletions break point were conﬁrmed by sequencing. The sequences were aligned upon the Cambridge Reference Sequence. Common deletion in 18 patients (15.3%), a 7.3 kb deletion in 7 patients (13.4%) and a 9kb deletion in 12 patients (23%) were detected. Deletions were locolized to an area including genes for COX I, II, III, ATPase, ND3 to ND6, and cyt b. In D-loop, the majority of mutations were nucleotide substitutions. Transitions (91%) were signiﬁcantly higher than transversions (8.3%). Thirty four polymorphisms were newly identiﬁed in this study, not published in the MITOMAP database. PCT changes at positions 303-309 were detected in 83% of our samples. Our results suggest that an increased level of HVS-I and HVS-II substitutions may be an indicator of mitochondrial DNA instability.
P0109. Case report of Usher syndrome in mother and daughter
C. Albu, D. F. Albu, E. Severin, R. Purcarea;  
"Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
Usher syndrome is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder characterized by congenital hearing loss and later development of progressive retinitis pigmentosa. It is one of the most frequent causes of deafness-blindness in humans. The present report is the case of a Caucasian mother and her daughter both born with Usher syndrome. Both had hearing impairment since birth and onset of visual impairment due to pigmentary retinopathy in late teens. Objective: to describe the 
clinical manifestation of Usher syndrome in this family and to study the phenotype-genotype correlation.  Methods: Tests as visual acuity, 
refraction, biomicropsy, ophtalmoscopy, visual ﬁeld, electroretinography and audiometry were helpful in diagnosis of Usher syndrome. 
Results : 
both mother and daughter were diagnosed with Usher syndrome type IIa with different clinical manifestation (sensorineural hearing loss and visual acuity varied in severity; neurological abnormalities and posterior sublenticular cataract as a later complications of the mother); family history revealed maternal greatgrandmother suffered from Usher syndrome and a familial predisposition for open-angle glaucoma; the family pedigree suggested an autosomal recessive mode of transmission for the disorder; no consanguineous marriage was noticed ; cytogenetic analysis showed no abnormalities in 
1q41. Conclusion: because of inevitable blindness as part of Usher 
syndrome phenotype the children who inherited the mutant gene from their parents should be tested for early diagnosis. Electroretinogram testing is recommended in children with bilateral sensorineural hearing 
loss.
P0110. A terminal deletion of the short arm of chromosome 3 [46, 
XY, del(3)(p25-pter)]: Report of a Case
M. Rohrbach , R. Babul-Hirji, D. Chitayat;  
Departement of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Hemizygous deletion of the short arm of chromosome 3: [46 XY,del(3) 
(p25-pter)] was reported to be associated with failure to thrive, microcephaly, characteristic craniofacial anomalies, mental retardation and musculoskeletal anomalies. Only 35 cases with a small deletion of the distal segment of 3p have been reported. Differences in the deletion size have been noticed to be associated with variability in the clinical manifestations. We report a 13-year-old patient with severe mental retardation, dysmorphic facial features, seizures and other characteristic ﬁndings of 3p deletion phenotype. This is the ﬁrst reported patient reported with deletion of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene, included in the deletion at the 3p25 segment. Von Hippel-Lindau gene deletion is known to be associated with a risk of developing the VHL disease including cerebellar hemangioblastoma, renal cell carcinoma and retinal angiomata. These features have not been reported yet as part of the 3p telomeric deletion syndrome. The clinical manifestations, genetic counselling and ﬁndings on follow up are reported.
P0111. Hereditary multiple exostoses disease- clinical and 
genetical aspects
C. Skrypnyk1, M. Bembea1, O. Vancsik2, M. Barbu2, C. Barbu2;  
1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine, Oradea, Romania, 2Clinical Children 
Hospital, Oradea, Romania.
Hereditary multiple exostoses (HME) is characterized by growth of multiple exostoses, which are benign cartilage-capped bone tumors that grow outward from the metaphyses of long bones. HME has a prevalence of 1 in 100 000 and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, with 95% penetrance. We report 15 cases of HME over a 20 years period. The diagnosis was established by clinical ﬁndings and comprehensive skeletal radiographs in individuals with exostoses arising in the juxtaphyseal region of long bones, exostoses grow in size and gradually ossify during skeletal development and bowing of the forearm or lower leg as associated deformity. The median age at diagnosis was 2 years and a half. 2 cases associated multiple exostoses with a cardiac malformation and with talipes respectively. The number of exostoses, number and location of involved bones, and degree of deformity varied. Most commonly involved bones were the tibia, the femur and the humerus.Males tended to be much frequent affected and more severely affected than females.The family history appeared to be negative in 40% of affected individuals, and we suposed a new gene mutation. Solitary exostosis have been found in 4 female cases.Symptoms arised secondary to mass effect were pain, motor deﬁcits, mechanical blocks to motion. The height of affected individuals falled within the normal range. We found no sarcomatous degeneration of an exostosis. None patients with hereditary multiple exostoses needed surgery. We could not study the causal genes EXT1, EXT2 and EXT3 
and we consider the cases open for molecular studies.
P0112. Two siblings with postaxial polydactyly, a congenital 
heart defect, ectopic pituitary gland and distinct facial features. 
A new entity?
H. Peeters1, L. Goossens2, S. Janssens2, H. Devlieger3, K. Devriendt1;  
1Department of Human Genetics, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, 
Belgium, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium, 3Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, 
Belgium.
We present two female siblings with a previously unreported 
syndrome. The parents are unrelated and family history is negative with regard to congenital malformations or mental handicap. Both siblings presented with unexplained intrauterine growth retardation (birth weight respectively 2640g (at term) and 1200 g (at a gestational age of 32 weeks)). Both had bilateral postaxial polydactyly of the hands, a congenital heart defect (a perimembranous ventricular septal defect (VSD) in the ﬁrst child, a VSD, pulmonary stenosis and an atrial septal defect secundum type A in the second child). Brain MRI revealed the presence of an ectopic neuropituitary gland in both children and additionally a hypoplastic adenopituitary gland in the youngest sibling. Developmental delay was severe in the ﬁrst child, the second child died at the age of 4 months. Both children had a marked facial dysmorphism, sparse coarse hair and temporal balding. Metabolic testing was normal. High resolution karyotype was normal. To the best of our knowledge, this constellation of features has never been described before. Autosomal recessive inheritance is likely.Clinical genetics104
P0113. Short stature of prenatal onset in a girl with terminal 
deletion 15q including the IGF1R -locus
A. Kuechler1,2, B. Albrecht2, D. Wieczorek2, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach2;  
1Institut für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Jena, Germany, 2Institut für 
Humangenetik, Essen, Germany.
We report on a girl that was referred to our department because of short 
stature. She is the ﬁrst child of a healthy, non consanguineous German couple. The pregnancy was complicated by growth retardation, ﬁrst recognized during 25
th week of gestation. Normal birth took place in 
the 37th week with reduced birth measurements: weight 1630g (-3.6 
SD), length 37 cm (-4 SD), OFC 30.5 cm (-2.8 SD). After birth, a heart defect (ASD) and clubfeet were diagnosed. Because of an occipital swelling with overlying haemangioma, an MRI scan was performed that showed an atretic cephalocele. X-rays revealed a hemivertebra of the lumbar spine and fused ribs 1 and 2 on the right. Bone age was 
retarded by one year at the age of 18 months.Clinical examinations at the age of 1 and 3 years showed microcephaly (-4.2 SD/-3.5 SD), short stature (-5.6 SD/-5.6 SD), dystrophy, facial dysmorphic signs (high forehead, short nose, small mouth) and clinodactyly of ﬁfth ﬁngers. Developmental delay was only mild, except 
for walking with 25 months (2 months after correction of clubfeet).Cytogenetic investigations showed normal results, as well as UPD analyses for chromosomes 7, 14, 16, and 20. Subtelomeric screening showed a subtelomeric deletion 15q which occurred de novo (normal results in the parents). Further investigations to deﬁne the breakpoint 
revealed that the IGF1R -locus is also deleted.
In the literature, most patients with terminal deletions 15q have a more severe phenotype with mental retardation, but patients with ring 15 
show similarity with our patient.
P0114. Phenotype/Genotype in 349 patients with Noonan 
syndrome (NS): ongoing French collaborative study
Y. J. M. Sznajer1,2, B. Keren3,4, S. Fereira5, S. Saba5, C. Baumann6, J. Elion7, H. 
Cavé7, A. Verloes6,8, E. for the French Collaborative Noonan Study Group9;  
1Hopital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Brussels, Belgium, 2Dept 
of Clinical Genetics - Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3Dept of Clinical 
Genetics - Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, Belgium, 4Laboratory of Biochemistry 
and Genetics, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 5Dept of Biochemistry and 
Genetics - Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 6Dept of Clinical Genetics - 
Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 7Laboratory of Biochemistry and Genetics 
- Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 8Inserm U676, Paris, France, 9Hopital 
Robert Debré, Paris, France.
IntroductionNS represents a multiple congenital anomaly entity characterised by dysmorphism (triangular face, hypertelorism, ptosis, downslanting palpebral ﬁssures, thick helix, low set, posteriorly rotated ears; deep philtrum, pterygium colli), cardiac defect, short stature, cryptorchidism in male, mental retardation. Mutation in PTPN11 gene was identiﬁed 
in ~= 40% of patients
ObjectiveDelineate phenotype/genotype correlation in a large cohort and provide 
clinical tools to optimize genotype screening
MethodsGeneticist (France, Belgium, Switzerland) recruited patient with clinical diagnosis of NS and for each, completed a booklet with antenatal, perinatal, growth parameters, cardiopathy, dysmorphic features, dermatologic anomaly, psychomotor milestones, pictures over time. Patients were included if they presented dysmorphic features and one additional anomaly. Informed consent, DNA sample and booklet were sent at Hôpital Robert Debré - reference center for NS in France. Patients with LEOPARD, Costello, CFC, Baraitser-Winter syndrome were excluded for this study. Mutation analysis performed by bi-directional direct sequencing on exons 2,3,4,7,8,12 and 13 on PTPN11
 
gene (> 98% of reported mutation)
Results349 patients were included. The mutation rate was 36% (126/349): 41.15% males (79/192) and 29.90% females (47/157). Among the studied parameters (see Methods), there were not statistically different between mutated and non mutated groups but for a positive correlation for cardiac defect: pulmonic stenosis 53.2% vs 26.5% -(p<0.001) and atrial defect: 25.4% vs 11.2% -(p<0.001). Inability to identify a mutation was associated with presence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Delayed mental development is noted in 34% of the cohort (30% in the 
mutated group vs 36% in the non-mutated group)
P0115. Hyperphosphatasia with cognitive deﬁcit and seizures: 
further syndrome delineation
M. M. Nezarati1,2, M. D. Thompson3, L. Dupuis1, A. E. Killoran4, P. A. Hwang5, 
D. E. C. Cole1,3;  
1Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2University of Toronto, Toron -
to, ON, Canada, 3Depts of Pathobiology & Laboratory Medicine, U of Toronto, 
Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Faculty of Medicine, U of Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 5North 
York General Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Hyperphosphatasia is a persistent elevation of serum alkaline phosphatase activity seen in many disorders, particularly those affecting bone turnover. There have been occasional reports of hyperphosphatasia associated with progressive postnatal neurodevelopmental disease and seizures (MIM#239300). Affected children exhibit consistently elevated alkaline phosphatase (ALPL) of uncertain origin. There are no other laboratory ﬁndings of note and no evidence of any abnormality of bone or liver metabolism, or altered skeletal architecture. Affected siblings and/or consanguinity suggest autosomal recessive inheritance, but the underlying pathogenesis is 
unknown.We describe a new case and review the clinical features in the context of 16 previously reported children. Our proband is a 5½ yr-old girl born to consanguineous parents, who presented with marked developmental delay and dysmorphic features (brachycephaly, coarse facies, hypertelorism, bulbous nose with prominent nasal bridge, and downturned corners of the mouth) at ﬁve months of age. Subsequently, failure to thrive, acquired microcephaly, and autistic behaviours were observed. Seizures and an abnormal EEG were also seen. The hyperphosphatasia (867±72 IU/L, n=7) is associated with decreased pyridoxal 5’-phosphate (B
6), and the question of aberrant vitamin 
B6 metabolism has been raised in this condition before. Pyridoxine 
challenge (100 mg bolus) resulted in normalized EEG activity. The patient’s tonic-clonic and absence seizures have not been evident since phenobarbital withdrawal and treatment with 100 mg pyridoxine daily. Our case illustrates two points: 1) alkaline phosphatase should be assayed in children presenting with similar ﬁndings; 2) pyridoxine-EEG challenge should be attempted to determine whether other affected children show pyridoxine-responsiveness.
P0116. Rare coexistence of Saethre-Chotzen phenotype with 
46,X,add(X),(p21) karyotype
E. L. Katsanda1, T. I. Kadurina2, S. K. Shandlorenko2, J. B. Perevesenceva1, M. 
O. Mkheidze3;  
1Child’s consultative-diagnostic center, Sant-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Center of human genetics, Sant-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Medical 
Academy for Postgraduate Education, Sant-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Classic Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS, acrocephalosyndactyly type III, MIM#101400) is characterized by coronal synostosis, facial asymmetry, ptosis, and characteristic appearance of the ear. Mutations in the TWIST1 gene, chromosomal locus 7p21, are associated with this syndrome. Occasionally, affected individuals have chromosome translocations involving 7p21 or ring chromosome 7. Some patients with an overlapping phenotype have a mutation in the FGFR3 gene (4p16.3) and in the FGFR2 gene (10q26). Our proband, one-and-a-half-year-old female, with SCS phenotype is under our observation. She was born after the third pregnancy to a 34-yr-old female and 40-yr-old male by spontaneous vaginal delivery. Proband parents are not consanguineous. Her mother is healthy, her father, father’s mother have mild hearing loss. Proband birth weight was 2100g (25th centile), length was 49cm (< 3rd centile). She had some distinctive features that were typical for CSC: at the age of one-and a half year her length was 76cm (5th centile); her weight was 8.2kg (<3rd centile); acrocephaly, open fontanelle, ﬂat face, high forehead, mild facial asymmetry, maxillary hypoplasia, shallow orbits, hypertelorism, ptosis, beaked nose, narrow palate, broad chest, mild syndactyly of the 2nd-3rd ﬁngers, syndactyly of the 3rd-4th toes, hallux valgus, sacral sinus. Moderate sensorineural deafness was revealed with otologic examination. Proband’s karyotype was found to be 46,X,add(X),(p21). Having used routine chromosome analysis we had no chance to identify the character of this additional 
piece of X chromosome. Her parents karyotype was normal.Clinical genetics105
P0117. Phenotypic characterization of two patients with Rett 
syndrome carrying mutations in exon 1 of the human MECP2 
gene
D. Bartholdi1, A. Schinzel1, E. Boltshauser2, M. Weissert3, W. Berger1, G. Má -
tyás1;  
1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zürich, Schwerzenbach, Switzer -
land, 2Department of Neurology, Childrens Hospital, University of Zürich, Swit -
zerland, 3Childrens Hospital, Kantonsspital St. Gallen, Switzerland.
Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder inherited in 
an X-linked dominant manner. The clinical course is characterized by near-normal development during the ﬁrst months, followed by a decline of acquired functions, progressive microcephaly and severe developmental delay. The gene responsible for RTT, MECP2, functions as a general repressor of transcription. About 70-80% of RTT cases are attributed to de novo mutations detected by sequence analysis, in 16% of patients with a classical RTT phenotype large deletions of 
MECP2 are present.The human MECP2 gene comprises 4 exons whereof the ﬁrst exon has been considered as non-coding. Very recently, however, an alternative splice variant composed of exons 1, 3 and 4 has been identiﬁed, utilizing exon 1 as protein-coding sequence. This new isoform appears 
to be the predominant MECP2 transcript in the brain.So far, no details have been reported on the clinical picture of patients with mutations of the new MECP2 isoform. We have therefore screened patients with suspected RTT in whom sequencing of exons 2, 3 and 4 did not reveal MECP2 mutations for the presence of large deletions and point mutations in exon 1 by DNA sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA). We identiﬁed one girl with a large deletion and one girl with a nonsense mutation in exon 1, most likely affecting the new MECP2 isoform. A detailed clinical description 
of these patients will be given.
P0118. Deletion of chromosome 13 in a child with bilateral 
retinoblastoma, dysmorphic features and developmental delay 
due to a maternal insertional translocation
E. Lopez-Rangel1,2, M. Hrynchak3,2, K. Paton4,2, S. L. Yong1,2;  
1Children's & Women's Health Centre of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada, 2University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3Department 
of Pathology, Royal Columbian Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 4Department 
of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Retinoblastoma (RB) is the most common pediatric intraocular tumor with an incidence of 1/20,000 liveborns. The majority of cases are sporadic. RB is caused by a loss or inactivation of both alleles of the RB1 gene located at 13q14.1-14.2. In 5% of cases RB is the result of a constitutional chromosomal deletion involving 13q14. There have been ﬁve families (15 patients; 10 patients from one family) reported in the literature where individuals with RB had 13q14 deletions resulting from malsegregation of a familial insertional translocation involving 
13q14 and various other chromosomes.We report a 21 month old dysmorphic female with bilateral RB, congenital heart disease and developmental delay. The family history was positive for a maternal uncle who had RB and died at age two years. Chromosome analysis of the proband revealed a 13q14 deletion [46,XX,del(13)(q14.11q21.2)] due to the malsegregation of a maternal insertional translocation [46,XX,ins(8;13)(q23.3;q14.1q21.2)]. The child’s mother was 11 weeks pregnant at diagnosis. CVS revealed a fetus with the same 13q14 deletion as seen in the proband. A literature review of previously described cases of familial insertional translocations with deletions of 13q14 and RB reported developmental delay in all cases and dysmorphic features and/or congenital anomalies in 13 of 15. Cytogenetic analysis is indicated in all cases of RB as 5% have a chromosomal deletion or structural rearrangement. A karyotype 
is necessary for precise genetic and prenatal counseling.
P0119. Somatic microsatellite mutations in spontaneous 
abortuses
T. V. Nikitina , A. G. Tokareva, S. A. Nazarenko;  
Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
In the mutation rate analysis of 10 microsatellite tetranucleotide DNA repeats in 95 spontaneous abortuses with normal karyotype and 51 control group of medical abortuses, 4 embryos (4,2%) demonstrating presence of additional alleles absent in both parents were found. In the group of medical abortuses we observed no mutational events for investigated loci what allow to exclude hypermutability of these markers as a reason of increased mutation rates in the spontaneous abortuses sample. The difference between two groups is statistically signiﬁcant (p<0.05). Appearance of the “new” alleles which is absent in both parents serve as consequence of the somatic mutation occurred during embryogenesis. In spontaneous abortuses, the mean mutation rate in the tetranucleotide repeat complexes analyzed was 0.88õ10
-2. 
This value was higher than the mean spontaneous mutation rate of these human STR loci. It can be suggested that genome instability detected at the level of repeated DNA sequences can involve not only genetically neutral loci but also active genomic regions crucial for embryonic viability. This results in cell death and termination of embryonic development. Our ﬁndings indicate that the death of embryos with normal karyotypes in most cases is associated with an 
increased frequency of somatic microsatellite mutations.
P0120. Does Xp22.3 deletion cause mental retardation? The 
contribution of VCX-A  and NLGN-4  to cognitive development
M. Macarov1, J. P. Newman2, D. Strich3, V. Sury1, M. Zeigler1, V. Meiner1;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School 
and Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Department of Neurol -
ogy and the Agnes Ginges Center for Human Neurogenetics, Hebrew Univer -
sity-Hadassah Medical School and Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, 
Israel, 3Pediatric Specialty Clinics, Endocrinology and Diabetes, Clalit Health 
Services, Jerusalem, Israel.
Patients with Xp22.3 interstitial and terminal deletions have been shown to be affected by mental retardation or autism. Previously, 
VCX-
A (variably charged protein X-A), located at Xp22.3, was introduced as a gene for mental retardation and its presence was suggested to be sufﬁcient to maintain normal mental development. Recent reports suggest that mutations in 
NLGN4 (neuroligin 4), located at that same 
region, are involved in autistic disorders and mental retardation.In the current study we describe a pedigree of 3 generations affected by contiguous gene syndrome that includes the clinical features of X-linked ichthyosis and Kallmann syndrome. Molecular analysis revealed the presence of an interstitial deletion spanning approximately 3.5Mb at Xp22.3. The centromeric breakpoint was localized between markers DXS1467 and DXS8051, proximal to 
KAL-1. The telomeric breakpoint 
was localized within the coding region of NLGN4. The deletion of VCX-
A and the truncation of NLGN4 in this family prompted us to examine 
the cognitive functions of our two adult patients using comprehensive intellectual and neurocognitive assessment. Normal intellectual function was found in one patient and only mild mental retardation was revealed in the other. Neither patient met any DSM-IV criteria for a pervasive developmental disorder such as autism. These results suggest that normal mental development can be achieved despite the deletion of 
VCX-A and the partial deletion of NLGN4, emphasizing 
the importance of environmental factors and suggesting the possible 
contribution of modifying genes.
P0121. Cytogenetic proﬁle on cataract patients in and arround 
Coimbatore city
C. Praveen Rajneesh1, K. Sasikala2, B. Lakshman Kumar1, V. Balachandar1;  
1Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India, 2Bharathiar university, Coimbatore, India.
An experiment was conducted on 50 Cataract patients with different morphological categories. Among the total cataract patients, only 7 patients exhibited chromosomal abnormalities, in that 3 of senile cataract patients, 2 of Posterior sub capsular, 1 of Hyper mature and Anterior subcapsular. In the Senile cataract type 2 Female grouped under group I and II and a male grouped under I exhibited 46 XX or XY, (5;10) (p 11;q23) of a translocation between chromosome 5 and 10. The similar kind was detected in a female grouped under I with anterior subcapsular cataract. IN the hyper mature type a single male displayed 46 XY, t (4; 9) a translocation between chromosome 4 and 9. Two cases of male observed with a translocation of chromosome 5 and 10 (46 XY, t (5; 10) (p11; q24) in posterior subcapsular cataract. All the chromosomal abnormalities formed in patients were having O+ blood group (except one experimental male A+ blood group). In the present study showed that there is a close relationship between cataract and 
group "O" being recognized.Clinical genetics106
P0122. Interleukin-1β and its receptor antagonist gene 
polymorphism and the risk of respiratory distress syndrome in 
neonates from Russia
K. Danilko1, T. Victorova1, R. Bogdanova2, A. Fatyihova2, B. Viktorov2;  
1Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State 
Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) develops in an infant within 
the ﬁrst few hours after birth and manifests as respiratory failure and deﬁcient gas exchange. It is caused by a deﬁciency of pulmonary surfactant due to immaturity of the lung. There are a number of potential interactions between surfactant and cytokine effects on the preterm lung. Cytokines may be regulators of surfactant metabolism in the preterm infant. So genes that encode cytokines would be plausible candidate genes for RDS, such as interleukin-1 (IL-1) or receptors 
antagonist interleukin-1 (IL-1RN).Biallelic C/T polymorphisms at positions IL-1β -511 and IL-1β +3953 and 86-bp VNTR polymorphism in intron 2 of IL-1RN have been described. These polymorphisms are located within the regulatory regions of the genes and are of potential functional importance by 
modulating IL-1 protein production.Objective of this pilot study are to determine whether these polymorphisms is related to RDS. We determined genotypes and alleles frequencies of IL-1β and IL-1RN genes in infants with RDS from Russia (n=76) and healthy control group of neonates (n=36) using PCR. The obtained results showed, that the distribution of CT genotype of IL-1β (C-511T polymorphism) among RDS group and control group was 51,6% versus 38,8% (χ
2 =1,01, p=0,31, OR=1,68). 
The frequencies of other genotypes, alleles and gaplotypes in RDS group were not differing from control group.We concluded that polymorphic variants of IL-1β gene may play role in pathogenesis of RDS. There are no association between C+3953T polymorphic variants of IL-1β and IL-1RN genes and RDS 
predisposition.
P0123. Familial Cases of Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome (AIS)
M. Chipashvili , J. Kristesashvili;  
Zhordania Institute of Human Reproduction, Tbilisi, Georgia.
30 patients 16 and 27 years of age with the diagnosis androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) have been studied in the Zhordania institute of Human Reproduction for 10 years. There were 3 familial AIS cases, where two sibs were affected with AIS. All patients have undergone chromosomal, clinical, ultrasound and hormonal examination, pedigrees of families have been studied as well. In two families both sibs have complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) and in the third family one patient has CAIS and the other- partial androgen insensitivity syndrome (PAIS). In all cases kariotype was 46,XY. Phenotype includes, normally developed breast, scanty or absent pubic and axillary hair, blind ending vagina, normal male levels of testosterone. In the history of patients inguinal hernias and existence of testes in the hernial sac was frequent in 16 patients (53,3%). In the third family intrafamilial genotypic and phenotypic variation was observed. 21 years old one sib with CAIS had gonads located in abdomen. 20 years old sib had PAIS, mild hirsitusm, one testicle located in pubic area and at the age of 13 with the diagnoses of abdominal hernia unilateral gonadectomy was made. This case shows, that in the same family there can be observed different types of AIS.
P0124. Saethre-Chotzen Syndrome due to a novel TWIST 
mutation: phenotypic variability in a three generation family
U. Siebers-Renelt1, J. Kunz2, B. Behre1, I. Kennerknecht1, J. Horst1;  
1Institut für Humangenetik, Muenster, Germany, 2Zentrum für Humangenetik, 
Philipps University, Marburg, Germany.
We report on a German family in which Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (SCS) was diagnosed after the birth of a girl with highly asymmetric frontal bone, very wide fontanels, hypertelorism, asymmetric orbits and ﬂat mid face. X-ray showed asymmetry of the skull basis and the orbits, an anterior fontanel reaching up to the root of the nose and asymmetry of the mandibula. Neurosurgical correction was performed at the age of 2 years. At present the girl is 5 years old and shows normal development. Retrospectively, SCS was also found in the father and his mother who both have hypertelorism without a marked facial asymmetry. Both also report on a delayed closure of unusually wide fontanels. The grandmother additionally has got cutaneous syndactily of the 4
th and 5th toes, a feature often associated with this syndrome. 
Meanwhile, a second child was born also showing mild signs of SCS. The phenotypic variability in our family is in accordance to the literature underlining the necessity for a careful clinical examination of the parents as diagnostic clue. Molecular analysis of the TWIST gene revealed a mutation (409 A>G) not previously described which leads to an amino acid exchange in position 137 (T137A). The mutation is located in the functional bHLH-domain, a highly conserved sequence area, where a clustering of missense mutations associated with SCS is observed. Therefore, it is very likely that the mutation leads to a loss of 
function of the protein and can be regarded as disease causing.
P0125. Prenatal diagnosis of femoral-facial syndrome
K. Haug, R. Stressig, R. Hammer, J. Bewermeyer, P. Kozlowski;  
Praenatal-Medizin und Genetik, Duesseldorf, Germany.
We describe a case of femoral-facial syndrome (FFS) detected prenatally on second-trimester sonography. Fetal abnormalities shown by sonography included microgenia, bilateral hypoplastic femurs and bilateral talipes. The diagnosis was conﬁrmed after birth. FFS is a rare sporadic syndrome with femoral hypoplasia and unusual facies. The facial features include upslanting palpebral ﬁssures, short nose with broad tip, long philtrum, thin upper lip, microgenia, and cleft palate. The femora are mostly bilaterally affected and they are short with lateral bowing. Upper limb involvement is possible. In one third of cases the mother has diabetes mellitus. Mental development in FFS is normal. Stature is short due to short legs. There are therapeutic options for microgenia and short femurs. If microgenia and short, bowed femora 
are found on prenatal sonography FFS should be suspected.
P0126. Osteocalcin Gene Hind III Polymorphism and bone 
mineral density in children with insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus.
P. B. Glazkov , L. V. Tirtova, L. V. Erman, V. I. Larionova;  
Medical Pediatrics Academy, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Insulin-dependent diabetic mellitus (IDDM) individuals are known to develop disorders of bone metabolism resulting in osteopenia. The osteocalcin gene (OG) allelic variant HH was found to be overrepresented in women with osteopenia. The purpose of the present study is to determine the relationship between the OG polymorphism 
and BMD in children with IDDM.120 IDDM children (62 girls, 58 boys) were examined. The mean patient was 12.1 ±3.7 years. Testing was done on all patients to determine the Hind III polymorphisms in the promotor region and serum levels of intact osteocalcin, calcitonin, Ca
2+, phosphate, parathyroid hormone, 
25-OH-vitamin D levels, haemoglobin A(Ic), insulin measurement as well as radiographs and forearm osteodensitometry.Using the data of BMC we selected the children in two groups (with and without osteopenia). The distribution in the group with (without) osteopenia was: HH 4.5% (6.7%), Hh 25.4% (33.3%) and hh 70.1% (60%). There were no signiﬁcant differences between OG polymorphism and BMD in those groups. However, when IDDM children were controlled for sex and BMD we found some statistical signiﬁcance (χ
2 =4.5, P=0.1).
No signiﬁcant correlation was found between plasma osteocalcin 
levels and osteocalcin polymorphism.In summary, our preliminary study shows some relationship between the polymorphism of the osteocalcin gene, sex and BMD in children 
with IDDM, further research on this issue is needed.
P0127. Familial complex 10p;12p rearrangement unravelled by 
subtelomeric FISH analysis.
A. Battaglia1,2, C. Chines1, A. Novelli3, C. Ceccarini3, L. Bernardini3;  
1Stella Maris Clinical Research Institute, Calambrone (Pisa), Italy , 2Dept. of 
Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 3IRCCS-CSS 
Mendel Institute, Roma, Italy.
Subtelomeric analysis has been performed in over 2,500 MR individuals, with a 6% yield. Therefore, it is indicated as a second tier test after HRB in unexplained DD/MR-MCA. We describe a female patient and her maternal aunt, both showing an undiagnosed MCA/MR syndrome, associated with the same subtelomeric rearrangement. Subtelomeric analysis, performed respectively at age 2 9/12 and 28 years, showed, in Clinical genetics107
both, distal monosomy 10p and distal trisomy 12p as follows: 46,XX,ish 
der(10)t(10;12)(p15;p13.2)mat(496A11+,306F7-,137E24+). Parental subtelomeric analysis revealed the proband's mother and the maternal grandmother to have a cryptic balanced 10:12 telomere translocation. Both subjects had IUGR, DD/MR, no speech, hypotonia, lax ligaments. Proband (3 years) showed sparse, curly hair; frontal bossing; sparse eyebrows; blepharophimosis; bilateral ptosis/epicanthus; broad, depressed nasal bridge; low-set, overfolded ears; micrognathia; sacral/coccigeal dimples; puffy hands/feet; long hallux; height at 10°, weight 3°, OFC 2°-50°. Aunt (28 years) showed bilateral epicanthus; beaked nose; short philtrum; thin upper lip; hypoplastic left helix; micrognathia; high palate; crowded teeth; proximally implantated thumbs; concave nails; long hallux; toes/metatarsus valgism bilaterally; puffy feet; sacral dimple; height/weight <3°, OFC <2°. Both show overlapping features with Ohdo syndrome. The phenotypic differences among them appear to be age-related. Such subtelomeric rearrangement has never been reported. 10p- has been described isolated (never as subtelomeric) or as part of different rearrangements. Subtelomeric 12p+ has been reported twice, isolated or as part of a different rearrangement. Our patients show features of partial 10p- rather than partial 12p+. Our 
observation raises questions about the etiology of Ohdo syndrome.
P0128. Molecular analysis of Stickler syndrome with great 
interfamilial heterogeneity.
H. Frysira1, S. Psoni1, F. Psychou2, P. Paikos3, E. Kanavakis1;  
1Medical Genetics University of Athens "Aghia Sophia" Child. Hospital, Athens, 
Greece, 2Rheumatologic Department, "Aghia Sophia" Child. Hospital, Athens, 
Greece, 3Opthlmologic Department, "Aghia Sophia" Child. Hospital, Athens, 
Greece.
Stickler syndrome is an inherited connective tissue disorder with 
ocular, facial and skeletal abnormalities. We report a case of a 4-year-old male. He presented with high myopia, which was ﬁrst noticed at the age of 12 months, a mild sensorineural hearing loss, midface hypoplasia and arthralgias. He had mild developmental delay. The family history revealed that: 1) the patient's mother had unilateral retinal detachment due to high myopia, 2) The other two patient's siblings had high myopia, 3) The mother's brother also had high myopia, arthritis and slight mental retardation 4) The patient's grandmother and great grandmother (from the mother's side) also suffered from the same high myopia. The patient's x-rays showed mild platyspondyly. The slit lamp biomicroscopy revealed primary membranous vitreous anomaly. The karyotype was normal (46, XY). All the clinical and laboratory tests showed that our patient had Stickler syndrome. To conﬁrm the diagnosis we proceeded to DNA molecular analysis by dHPLC (WAVE). A heterozygous C >T missense mutation c.1486C>T was identiﬁed in exon 24 of the COL2A1 gene in all affected members of the family (p.Arg365Cys). Conclusions: Our study showed a high penetrance but great variability in the severity of the symptoms of the affeced members of the family. The prompt detection of the mutation at an early age is important for the continuous follow up in order to prevent any of the severe complications that may appear at a later age. It is also necessary for the correct genetic counseling of the family.
P0129. Cytogenetic and chromosome Y microdeletion analysis 
of infertile men from North-Adriatic region of Croatia
A. Buretic-Tomljanovic1, I. Vlastelic2, S. Ostojic1, J. Vranekovic1, L. Randic2, 
M. Kapovic1, A. Radojcic Badovinac1;  
1Dept.of Biology and Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Rijeka, Croatia, 
2Dept.of Human Reproduction, Clinical Hospital Centre, Rijeka, Croatia.
Microdeletions of the long arm of the chromosome Y and major chromosomal aberrations are common cause of male infertility. One hundred and twenty four infertile and fourty control fertile men from North-Adriatic part of Croatia were screened according to the Laboratory guidelines for molecular diagnosis of Y chromosome microdeletions. Microdeletions were determined in two patients in the nonobstructive azoospermia group (27 patients) making the frequency of 7,4%. In the other investigated groups of patients: severe oligoasthenozoospermia (19), oligoasthenozoospermia (44) and normoasthenozoospermia (34) or in the control group, no microdeletions of the long arm of chromosome Y were found. Microdeletion found in one patient was spanning AZFb and AZFc regions, while in the other one was restricted to AZFc region. Cytogenetic analysis was made in 85 patients included in the microdeletion testing. The overall frequency of chromosomal aberrations was 4,7%. Reciprocal translocation t(12,22) was found in normoasthenozoospermic man (1,2%), and Klinefelter syndrome was determined in three patients (3,5%) with azoospermia. The frequency of Y chromosome microdeletions 
is within values reported by other authors.
P0130. The inﬂuence of three Endothelin-1 (ET-1) 
polymorphisms on the progression of IGA nephropathy ( IGAN )
D. Maixnerova1, J. Reiterova1, M. Merta1, J. Stekrova2, S. Bloudickova3, O. 
Viklicky3, R. Rysava1;  
1Clinic of Nephrology, 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 2Dept. of Biology and Genetics of General Teaching Hospital, Prague, 
Czech Republic, 3Institute of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
Background:The clinical course of chronic renal diseases and their 
progression to end stage renal failure (ESRF)is highly variable.Different candidate gene polymorphisms, affecting mainly the onset/development of arterial hypertension, have been advocated as possible modulators of the progression. Endothelin-1 (ET-1) has been suggested to be a major disease promoting factor in renal disease. We investigated a possible association of three single-nucleotide polymorphisms of ET-1 K198N, T-1370G and 3A/4A with the progression of IGAN towards end stage renal disease, as well as the clinical and histological 
manifestations of IGAN.Methods:We examined a group of 173 patients (pts.) with histologically proven IGAN (99 pts. with normal renal function,74 pts. with ESRF), as a control group we used 200 genetically unrelated healthy subjects. DNA samples from collected blood were genotyped for three single-nucleotide polymorphisms of ET-1 K198N, T-1370G and 3A/4A by means of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with deﬁned primers, electrophoresis on 2 % agarose gel and UV light visualisation. We compared the frequencies of different genotypes between the IGAN groups with normal renal function and ESRF.Results: The ET-1 genotype distribution showed no differences among the groups of IGAN with normal renal function (1.K198N-64,6%KK,31,3%KN,4,0%NN;2.TT-69,1%TT,27,8%TG,3,1%GG;3.3A/4A-45,6%3A/3A,45,6%3A/4A,8,9%4A/4A),IGAN with ESRF(1.K198N-64,9%KK,33,8%KN,1,4%NN;2.TT-76,1%TT,22,5%TG,1,4%GG,3.3A/4A-51,6%3A/3A,35,5%3A/4A,12,9%4A/4A)and control 
group(1. K198N-62,5%KK,34,5%KN,3%NN,2.TT-
76%TT,22,5%TG,1,5%GG,3.3A/4A-51,5%3A/3A,45%3A/4A,3,5%4A/4A).The distribution of ET-1 genotypes did not differ among IGAN with 
normal renal function, IGAN with ESRF and control group.Conclusion:We excluded the effect of K198N, T-1370G and 3A/4A polymorphisms of ET-1 gene on the progression of IGAN to ESRF.Supported by the grant project NK 7733-3, VZ MŠMT 00216 208 06
P0131. SIX3 and ZIC2 mutations in a series of 
holoprosencephaly patients.
J. Herbergs1, S. Spierts1, D. Tserpelis1, A. Van Haeringen2, M. Kerstjens3, G. 
Mancini4, M. Kwee5, J. Hoogeboom4, I. Stolte-Dijkstra3, H. Smeets1;  
1Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Leiden Univer -
sity Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Academic Hospital Groningen, 
Groningen, The Netherlands, 4Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Neth -
erlands, 5VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a common severe malformation of the brain that involves abnormal formation and septation of the developing central nervous system. The prevalence is 1:250 during early embryogenesis, but the live born prevalence is only 1:16000. The etiology of HPE is extremely heterogeneous and can include both a teratogenic and/or genetic basis. We studied four genes known to be involved in HPE, namely SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF by sequence analysis. A series of in total 31 sporadic and familial HPE cases with a variable clinical spectrum has been analysed. We detected 7 pathogenic mutations (23%), 5 out of 28 sporadic cases (18%) and 2 out of 3 familial cases (67%). Three mutations were detected in the SIX3 gene and four mutations in the ZIC2 gene. A ZIC2 mutation in a sporadic case appeared not to be a de novo mutation, but was also found in a healthy mother with no clinical features of the HPE spectrum. This was also seen in a carrier of the mutation in a familial case. In this study the genetic heterogeneity of the disease and the extremely variable phenotypes in HPE families have been conﬁrmed.Clinical genetics108
P0132. The molecular-genetic study of Marfan syndrome in 
Russia.
R. Valiev, R. Khusainova, I. Kutuev, E. Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of biochemestry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an inherited autosomal dominant disorder 
of connective tissue. Abnormalities appear mainly in skeletal, ocular and cardiovascular systems. The prevalence is approximately 10:100 000 and about 30 % of them are sporadic cases.
 The prevalence 
of MFS in Republic of Bashkortostan is 2,5: 100 000. We suppose that such low ratio is probably concerned with insufﬁcient genetic counseling in remote areas: 83% of registered patients live in large cities. We also suppose that the prevalence of MFS depends on ecological background. Because of known associations of MFS with mutations in the FBN-1 gene we have carried out mutations screening of this gene by SSCP method with further direct sequencing. We analyzed 30 exons of FBN-1 gene in 70 patients with MS from different regions of Russia (Republics of Bashkortostan, Kabardino-Balkaria, the North-Osetia-Alania, Sakha-Yakutia). SSCP analysis revealed different abnormal migrating patterns. We identiﬁed 2 missense mutations (G1176Y in exon 28 and C2489Y in exon 60) which affect cbEGF-like motifs of ﬁbrillin-1 protein in two patients with classical MFS symptoms. We also revealed 5 mutations which don’t lead to amino acid substitutions (IVS15+10delA, 2952C>A in exon 24, 3294C>T in exon 26, IVS61+17InsG, IVS65+13InsG). We identiﬁed 4 reported polymorphisms (1875T>C
 in exon 15,  IVS17-46A>G, 
IVS28+15delTTTTA, IVS62+8A>C). Polymorphism revealed in exon15 
(1875T>C) has been found in 24 patients (30,4%).
P0133. Family case-report on the balanced translocation and the 
monogenic syndrome combination
N. V. Nikitina , M. G. Sumina, G. V. Pavlov, V. A. Sorokina;  
Medical Genetic Center, Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation.
A 6-month-old girl was sent to the geneticist’s consultation on suspicion of arthrogryposis. During the examination the narrow palpebral ﬁssures, the elbow joint contractures attracted the doctor’s attention. The early motor milestones corresponded to the girl’s age. The patient’s karyotype revealed a balanced translocation: 46,XX,t(1;18)(p10;q10). The family was invited for a thorough examination and the diagnosis speciﬁcation.The father’s phenotype includes blepharophimosis, ptosis of eyelids, inverted epicanth, arch-looking eyebrows, low-set prominent ears that goes into autosomic dominant syndrome BPES,OMIM:110100, which gene is localized on the 3q23. The intellect has not become worse. Karyotype: 46,XY,t(1;18)(p10;q10).The elder sibling, a 12-years-old brother, has his father’s phenotypic features, such as blepharophimosis, ptosis of eyelids, inverted epicanth, arch-looking eyebrows, low-set prominent ears. The intellect is on the level. Karyotype: 46,XY.The mother’s phenotype has not got any peculiarities. Karyotype: 46,XY.To sum up, the father exposed the balanced translocation and the monogenic syndrome combination. The son inherited the monogenic syndrome BPES and the daughter -the balanced translocation. At the same time, one can suppose the daughter possesses the incomplete penetration of the BPES. The narrow palpebral ﬁssures and joint contractures are described in the phenotypic features of this syndrome 
according to the McKusic catalogue.
P0134. Different genetic mechanisms resulting in Prader Willi 
syndrome - genetic counselling consequences
M. Havlovicová1, M. Simandlova1, G. Calounová1, A. Krepelova1, D. Novotná1, 
E. Kocarek1, P. Tláskal2, P. Krsek3, S. Kolousková4, P. Goetz1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical Faculty, University Hos -
pital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Paediatric Clinic, 2nd Medical Faculty, 
University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Child Neurology Clinic, 
2nd Medical Faculty, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Pae-
diatric Clinic, 2nd Medical faculty, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
Prader Willi syndrome (PWS) is a neurobehavioural disorder arising through a number of genetic mechanisms. All involve loss of paternal gene expression from chromosome 15q11q13. We present two PWS cases with different genetic etiology.First propositus exhibited severe after birth hypotonia, later on cardiac defect was evaluated. After the ﬁrst year of age gain of weight and 
typical appereance of PWS was observed.Cytogenetic investigation conﬁrmed translocation 46,XX,t(8;15)(q24.1;q21.2). The same translocation was found in the mother. FISH analysis for PWS detection didn´t prove deletion of the critical region. Finally uniparental maternal disomy was conﬁrmed.Second proband exhibits obesity, moderate mental retardation and severe epilepsy . Short after the birth he failed to thrive and was investigated due to hypotonia. The PCR using STR polymorphisms at 15q11q13 showed normal pattern. Finally methylation studies conﬁrmed the diagnosis of PWS, defect of IC centre is suspected.Altough the majority of cases of PWS are sporadic, precise elucidation of the causative genetic mechanism is essential either for the accurate 
diagnosis as well as for the precise genetic counselling.
Supported by GAUK, grant No 61/2004.
P0135. Two novel TNNI3 mutations in restrictive cardiomyopathy
R. Blok1, A. van den Wijngaard1, D. Merckx1, C. Marcelis2, E. Rubio1,3, R. de 
Coo4, C. de Die1, R. Jongbloed1, B. Smeets1;  
1Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 
2Clinical Genetics, Radboud Hospital Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 
3Pediatrics, University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 4Child 
Neurology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Troponine I (TNNI3) is a sarcomeric protein expressed in the human ventricular myocardium. The protein is essential for the coupling between the myosin heavy chain globulair head and actin during contraction of the cardiac ﬁbers. Occasionally mutations in TNNI3 are found in families with hypertroﬁc cardiomyopathy (HCM). Recently, also some mutations were reported in patients with restrictive cardiomyopathy. Restrictive cardiomyopathy is a rare cardiomyopathic disorder characterized by impaired ventricular ﬁlling with reduced volume, ultimately leading to heart failure. Especially in young children the prognosis is poor compared to adults where the clinical course is more variable. In this study we screened two exons of TNNI3 , known to contain the majority of previously identiﬁed mutations, in 69 HCM families for mutations by DHPLC. In addition, the complete TNNI3 gene was analyzed by direct sequence analysis in four families with idiopathic restrictive cardiomyopathy. No mutations were identiﬁed in the HCM families. However, in two of the four unrelated probands with restrictive cardiomyopathy we found three mutations. In proband 1 we found a novel splice site mutation (IVS7+2delT) and in proband 2 we found a known mutation (R145Q) together with a novel mutation (Arg192Cys). In both families the probands were young girls (age 0.5 and 9 years respectively). The disease manifestation is more severe in proband 1, which might be explained by the difference in the underlying genetic defect. These data indicate that TNNI3 should be analyzed completely when restrictive cardiomyopathy is diagnosed especially 
in young patients.
P0136. Familial stenosis of the pulmonary artery branches with a 
JAG1 mutation
A. Medeira1, A. B. Sousa1, B. M. Kamath2, N. B. Spinner3, I. Cordeiro1;  
1Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Divi-
sion of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3Division of Human Genetics, The Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
We present a case of familial isolated stenosis of the pulmonary 
artery branches, which was found to represent a mild form of Alagille 
Syndrome (AGS).AGS is an autosomal dominant disorder, characterised by intrahepatic cholestasis, heart, ocular, vertebral defects and typical facial features. A mutation in the NOTCH ligand 
Jagged1  (JAG1) is found in most 
patients. However, JAG1 mutations have been associated with a wide 
spectrum of clinical manifestations, from clinically insigniﬁcant ﬁndings to classical Alagille syndrome, with remarkable intrafamilial variation.The proband, aged 11 months, was diagnosed with mild stenosis of the pulmonary artery branches. His mother had been diagnosed with the same heart defect as a child. No striking dysmorphic features were noted. Karyotype was normal and FISH excluded 22q11 and 10p13 
microdeletions.Although the child had no peculiar facial features, he did have, as his Clinical genetics109
mother, a prominent forehead and deep-set eyes. Ophthalmologic 
examination revealed abnormalities of the eye anterior chamber in both. The mother also had minor vertebral ﬁndings. Both had normal liver function and abdominal sonography. This, together with reports 
of JAG1 mutations in familial isolated congenital heart defects, 
prompted us to study JAG1. Molecular analysis revealed a deletion 
in exon 9 (1126delG), which is predicted to cause a frameshift leading to a prematurely truncated protein. The mutation was shown to be of 
maternal origin.This family represents a case of mild AGS, illustrating the extreme variability of this syndrome, and underlining the importance of facial 
features in the evaluation of (familial) congenital heart disease.
P0137. Clinical and cytogenetic ﬁndings of 38 females with 
Turner syndrome in Estonia
R. Zordania1, T. Zõrjanova1, E. Kurvinen1, O. Bartsch2;  
1Tallinn` Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Institute for Human Genetics, 
University of Mainz, Germany.
Background. Turner syndrome (TS) is a signiﬁcant cause of growth 
retardation and/or ovarian failure in females. Patients do not initiate puberty or uterine development. Early cytogenetic diagnosis may 
improve their quality of life and enables timely hormone treatment.
Objective  was a survey of Estonian patients with TS.
Methods. We analysed clinical and cytogenetic data of all females with TS studied by geneticists at Tallinn Children's Hospital during 9 years (1996-2004). In some cases, diagnostic work-ups included FISH and/or chromosomal studies of skin ﬁbroblasts.Results. We identiﬁed 38 females with TS representing three age groups, (Group-1) 16 girls under 12 years, (Group-2) 11 subjects diagnosed from 12 to 17.9 years, and (Group-3) 11 adults diagnosed between 18 and 36 years. Group-1, 75% showed overt TS, 62% short stature under -2SD, 31% discrete anomalies, and 6% delayed puberty. Karyotypes included 45,X (n=14) and mosaics (n=2). Group-2, short stature was present in 81%, overt TS in 36%, and delayed puberty in 36%. Karyotypes included 45,X (n=7), mosaics (n=3), and complex complements (n=1). Group-3, 100% presented amenorrhea, 45% short stature, 36% overt TS, and 9% discrete anomalies. Five patients had karyotypes of 45,X and six showed mosaicism or complex karyotypes. 
The complex karyotypes will be presented in detail.
Conclusion.  TS was suspected based on growth retardation and/or the 
phenotype in most cases. In 1/3 of the cases, a delayed diagnosis was 
made based on absent or irregular menorrhea.
P0138. Noonan syndrome - clinical evaluation and molecular 
analysis in 11 portuguese cases
L. C. Ramos1, S. B. Sousa1, M. Venancio1, H. Gabriel2, I. Santos1, S. Beck2, M. 
Jorge1, L. Simão1, P. Tavares2, J. M. Saraiva1;  
1Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Centro de Genética Cli -
nica, Porto, Portugal.
Noonan syndrome (NS, MIM#163950) is characterized by typical facial 
features, short stature and congenital heart defect. Its prevalence is estimated 1/1000-2500 new-borns. Familial cases are generally autosomal dominant but neomutations are common. In 2001, the gene PTPN11 encoding for the non-receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2, was identiﬁed as being responsible for about 30-60% of the 
cases with SN.
In order to explore the genotype-phenotype correlation, direct sequencing of the exons 3 and 8 of the PTPN11 gene as well as a careful clinical, psychological and laboratorial evaluation was carried out in the Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra in 11 patients with NS (ten index cases and one with NS/neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 - NF1). Five additional patients with 
possible NS were also surveyed (two with NS/NF1).
Mutations were found in 2 index cases. In the only familial case evaluated (father and daughter), it was identiﬁed a mutation in the exon 8 hotspot N308D (922 A>G). The second case presented a de novo mutation in the exon 3 (D61G; 182 A>G), previously described. We conﬁrmed the lower prevalence of cardiomyopathy in patients with PTPN11 mutations and its absence in the SN/NF1 cases. Both index cases presented atrioventricular canal and chylotorax antecedents, not observed in other patients. The cohort studied had a high prevalence of mental retardation (8/9) as well as other features, likely to result 
from the referral to genetic units of only the most severe cases.P0139. Cytogenetic, moleculargenetic ﬁndings and syndromes 
in amenorrhoea etiology
E. Kurvinen1,2, T. Zõrjanova1, R. Zordania1, I. Vool1, Ü. Jakovlev3, T. Kahre4;  
1Tallinn Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2National Institute for Public 
Health, Tallinn, Estonia, 3East Tallinn Central Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 4Mo-
lecular Diagnostic Centre, United Laboratories, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, 
Estonia.
Primary amenorrhoea (PA) and amenorrhea caused by premature ovarian failure (POF) are heterogeneous groups of menstrual disorders 
where a genetic basis are suggested.
Purpose. To determine the role of genetic factors in patients with 
menstrual disturbances.Material and methods. Clinical and cytogenetical data of 56 PA 
and 22 POF patients were studied in Genetic Service of Outpatient s Children Clinic in the past 10 years (1995-2004). Clinical data and standard karyotypes using G banding were available in all cases, in some cases chromosomal study from skin ﬁbroblasts was performed for ﬁnal diagnosis. In POF patients premutations in FMR1 gene were 
detected.
Results. Normal female karyotype occurred in 71% (40/56) patients 
with PA. The variable forms of Turner syndrome [45,X; 46,XX/45X; 46,Xi(Xq)] were diagnosed in 13 cases. Two patients represents 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis. In 5 female Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster anomaly and in one MURCS association were diagnosed. Among POF patients normal female karyotype was detected in 68% (15/22) females. Turner syndrome (45,X; 46,XX/45,X) was estimated in two patients. X;autosome translocation 1/22, dicentric X-chromosome 1/22 and Poland syndrome 1/22 were possible causes of secondary amenorrhoea. Two POF patients showed premutation in FMR1 gene.
Conclusion. Our data conﬁrmed the heterogeneous etiology of 
amenorrhoea. The chromosomal abnormality value is quite high in 
both groups of amenorrhoeic patients.
P0140. An unknown case report
B. Azadeh ;  
Welfare Organization, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran.
An unrelated couple were reffered to Medical - Genetic center of Isfahan welfare organization due to their son's problems. The man was 59 years old, and an uneducated worker. The woman was 45 years old 
an uneducated housewife.This son is ﬁfth child of his parents. He was delivered normally by N.V.D and was good until 11 month's old. After that time some parts of 
his body grew more than other parts and became hypertrophic.According to evaluation from 11 month's old until several years the diagnosis was made as local hypertrophy + Neuroﬁbromatosis. But now which he is 19 years old he hasn't any signs and symptoms of Neuroﬁbromatosis or willm's tumor. He has asymmetric face, abnormal curve in cervical and dorsal spine, high patchy hypertrophy in many parts of his body including some ﬁngers, toes, face, and 
…. Because 
of unusual growing of his right knee, he was operated and his knee was ﬁxed .The report of pathology was proliferation on hyaline cartilage which has resulted in hypertrophy of joint cartilage and possibly of meniscus. There is no evidence of malignant change. Sonography of kidneys and Adrenals are normal. The reports of his radiographies are: sever cervical and dorsolumbar scoliosis with congenital vertebral fusion in cervical spine + L 3/4 spondylolisthesis. RT knee ankylosing + Atrophy + osteopenia, RT femoral neck widening, T9 wedge vertebra.His intelligent is good. He ﬁnished his high-school when he was 18 
years old.
So now what is your diagnosis?
P0141. Phenotypic differencies in Williams-Beuren syndrome
A. Puchmajerová1, M. Malíková1, V. Krutílková2, D. Novotná1, E. Kocárek1, A. 
Krepelová1, P. Goetz1, M. Havlovicová1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical Faculty, University Hos -
pital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Center of Medical Genetics and Prenatal 
Diagnosis Gennet s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic.
Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting several systems caused by a heterozygous deletion in the chromosomal region 7q11.23. A common interval that includes up to 17 genes reported so far is deleted in the great majority of patients. Speciﬁc contribution most of deleted genes to the WBS phenotype Clinical genetics110
remains unknown. WBS is transmitted in an autosomal dominant 
manner. Most of the cases arises de novo, but occasionally parent-to-child transmission is observed. Over 99% of individuals with the clinical diagnosis of WBS have this contiguous gene deletion, which can be detected using ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). The WBS phenotype is variable, and no single clinical feature is required to 
establish the diagnosis.We investigated 13 patients with a clinical diagnosis of WBS or WBS-like features, aged 4 months - 24 years (average 5,5 years). Deletion at 7q11 was found in all patients.All (100%) patients showed the typical dysmorphic signs, in most cases (11 of 13 = 77%) had some degree of mental retardation (usually mild mental retardation). 11(77%) patients had cardiovascular malformation, 7(56%) had a speciﬁc heart anomaly (supravalvular aortic stenosis), 2(15%) none. Growth deﬁciency and mild microcephaly was observed 
at 9(69%) patients. Hypercalcemia was observed at 4 (31%) patients.Our preliminary results are in accordance with the published data. To determine the extend of deletion molecular-genetics analysis using MLPA is in our Institute in progress. This analysis will enable us to 
evaluate precise phenotype-genotype correlation.Supported by grant projects IGA NE 6912-4 and IGA NE 5685-3.
P0142. Clinical and MRI features of patients with Shah-
Waardenburg syndrome associated with SOX10 mutations: a 
case report and review of the literature
J. B. G. M. Verheij1, D. A. Sival2, J. H. van der Hoeven3, Y. J. Vos1, L. C. Mein -
ers4, O. F. Brouwer3, A. J. van Essen1;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Center, Groningen, The 
Netherlands, 2Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center, Groningen, 
The Netherlands, 3Department of Neurology, University Medical Center, Gron -
ingen, The Netherlands, 4Department of Radiology, University Medical Center, 
Groningen, The Netherlands.
Shah-Waardenburg syndrome is a rare congenital disorder with variable 
clinical expression, characterised by aganglionosis of the rectosigmoïd (Hirschsprung disease), and abnormal melanocyte migration, resulting in pigmentary abnormalities and sensorineural deafness (Waardenburg syndrome). Mutations in the EDN, EDNRB and SOX10 genes can be found in patients with this syndrome. SOX10 mutations are speciﬁcally associated with a more severe phenotype called PCWH: peripheral demyelinating neuropathy, central dysmyelinating leukodystrophy, Waardenburg syndrome, and Hirschsprung disease.Neuronal expression of SOX10 occurs in neural crest cells during early embryonic development and in glial cells of the peripheral and central nervous systems during late embryonic development and in adults. The natural history of patients with SOX10 related Shah Waardenburg syndrome or PCWH is still unknown. We present a 4-year-old girl with a de novo nonsense mutation (S384X) in SOX10. Main clinical features were mental retardation, peripheral neuropathy, deafness, Hirschsprung disease, distal arthrogryposis, white hairlock, and growth retardation. She presented with hypotonia, developmental delay, reduced peripheral nerve conduction velocities, and radiologically assessed central hypomyelination. Subsequently formation of abnormal myelin within the central and peripheral nervous system was 
functionally and radiologically assessed.Children presenting with features of Waardenburg syndrome and neurological dysfunction should be tested for mutations in the SOX10 
gene to enable diagnosis and counselling.
P0143. A three generation family with dominantly inherited 
coloboma associated with a nonsense PAX6 mutation
B. Demeer1, M. Vincent2, Y. Alembik1, C. Speeg-Schatz1, J. Flament1, P. Cal -
vas2, H. Dollfus1;  
1Centre de référence pour les maladies héréditaires ophtalmologiques, Service 
de Génétique Médicale et Service d’Ophtalmologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de 
Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Service de Génétique Médicale et INSERM 
U563, CHU Toulouse-Hôpital Purpan, France, Toulouse, France.
The PAX6 gene, a member of the paired box family, encodes a 
transcription factor. PAX6 is involved in eye morphogenesis and is 
expressed in the developing central nervous system and numerous 
ocular tissues during development. Autosomal dominant aniridia was the ﬁrst condition to be associated with PAX6 mutations. Since then 
PAX6 mutations have been detected in various ocular anomalies including Peters’ anomaly, corneal dystrophy, congenital cataracts and dominantly inherited nystagmus, foveal hypoplasia, and a variety of optic nerve malformations. There is no clear cut phenotype-genotype correlation in ocular defects related to PAX6 mutations nevertheless nonsense mutations are predominantly associated with classical 
aniridia.Herein we report a three generation family with dominantly inherited coloboma showing a nonsense PAX6 gene mutation, 
R203X . Within 
the family the phenotypic spectrum of the typical coloboma and ocular malformation is wide, illustrating an intrafamilial variability of 
expression.Previously the 15 recorded cases of this nonsense mutation have been associated with the aniridia phenotype. Futhermore the typical coloboma phenotype caused by PAX6 gene mutations has only been 
reported three times, and in each case never showing a nonsense 
mutation.
P0144. Prenatally Detected Extra Structurally Abnormal 
Chromosome: a Dilemma for Genetic Counseling
O. Reish , M. Mashevich;  
Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, Zeriﬁn, Israel.
We describe a series of 3 cases with prenatally detected Extra Structurally Abnormal Chromosome (ESAC). All were of spontaneous conceptions. The ﬁrst was singleton, the second and third were ones of twins, bichorionic biamniotic and monozygotic respectively. In two cases amniocentesis was performed due to advanced maternal age and the ESAC was a co-incidental ﬁnding and in the third, amniocentesis was performed due to increased Nuchal Translucency in one twin. Utilizing Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH), ESACs were shown to be bisatellited and were derived from chromosome 15 in cases 1 and 2, inv dup (15), and monosatellited that derived from chromosomes 14/22 in case 3. The ESAC was maternally transmitted in case 2 but was de novo in cases 1 and 3. No mosaicism was detected in the ﬁrst two cases but a level of 80% was demonstrated in the third. FISH to the Prader Willi region in the 15-ESACs and Cat Eye Syndrome region in the 14/22-ESAC showed no signal. In all cases uniparental disomy was excluded. Following an extensive genetic counseling, pregnancy 1 was terminated while the other two pregnancies were continued. The decision making process particularly of monozygotic twins with hetero 
karyotypes is presented.
P0145. Two novel families with Borjeson syndrome ascribed to a 
recurrent PHF6 gene mutation
J. Tinat1, F. Prieur1, A. Combes1, S. Chabrier1, M. Cordier2, R. L. Touraine1;  
1CHU-Hopital Nord, Saint Etienne, France, 2CHU- Hopital E Herriot, Lyon, 
France.
A diagnosis of Borjeson syndrome was made in two families. The affected persons were 2 brothers in family 1, and 3 males (a young boy and his 2 uncles) and a woman (half sister of the 2 uncles) in 
family 2.In both families, diagnosis was made on clinical grounds for the 3 young boys. They had a similar presentation with intra uterine growth retardation and neonatal hypotonia. Developmental retardation became rapidly obvious, later with hyperactivity. They had feeding problems with failure to thrive. Nevertheless, after the age of 3 they developed obesity and hyperphagia. Facial gestalt suggested the diagnosis of Borjeson syndrome : we considered that the shape of their mouth and their ears is particularly noteworthy.3 of the 4 conducting women were totally asymptomatic. X inactivation 
was 100% skewed in these 4 conducting women.Other persons with mental retardation had been further identiﬁed in 
these 2 families and will be studied.The coding exons of the PHF6 gene were screened by DHPLC and the sequence of exon 10 revealed a nucleotide substitution conducting to the R342X nonsense mutation. This mutation has previously been described in 3 families, including the original family described by 
Borjeson.We therefore conﬁrm the recurrent nature of the R342X mutation of the 
PHF6 gene in our 2 independent families.Our observation further emphasize the possible expression in woman 
in spite of a totally skewed X inactivation.Clinical genetics111
P0146. Three novel CDKL5 mutations in patients with a severe 
early onset seizure disorder and phenotypic overlap with Rett 
Syndrome.
J. C. Evans1, H. L. Archer1, J. P. Colley2, K. Ravn3, J. B. Neilsen4, A. M. Kerr5, 
J. Christodoulou6, J. Gecz7, L. Lazarou8, R. Butler8, J. R. Sampson1, S. D. 
Whatley9, A. J. Clarke1;  
1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Wales Gene Park, Cardiff, United 
Kingdom, 3University Hospital Department of Genetics, Copenhagen, Denmark, 
4John F Kennedy Institute, Glostrup, Denmark, 5Glasgow University Department 
of Psychological Medicine, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 6Western Sydney Genet -
ics Program, Sydney, Australia, 7Department of Genetic Medicine, Adelaide, 
Australia, 8Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 9Department 
of Medical Biochemistry, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Objective
The CDKL5 gene has been implicated in infantile spasms in two 
females with X;autosome translocations. Recently, we described 
further mutations in two families with a Rett Syndrome (RTT)-like phenotype. We aimed to determine the frequency of 
CDKL5 mutations 
in different subtypes of RTT.
MethodsThe coding region of 
CDKL5 was screened by DHPLC and/or direct 
sequencing in 94 patients initially referred for MECP2 analysis :16 
males and 78 females, of whom 38 fulﬁlled the criteria for RTT and 33 had seizures in the ﬁrst year of life. All were negative for 
MECP2 
mutations both  by sequencing and quantitative analysis of exons 1, 
2, 3 or 4.
ResultsWe identiﬁed 3 novel, pathogenic mutations in 
CDKL5 . Two of these 
were splice site mutations, conﬁrmed by further RNA studies. One was a de novo missense change in a conserved region of 
CDKL5. Two 
patients presented with an epileptic encephalopathy and one with RTT. All had seizures in the ﬁrst 3 months of life. The phenotype will be discussed in the context of the other reported cases, and tentative 
genotype-phenotype correlations made.
ConclusionsThis study reinforces the observation that the 
CDKL5 phenotype 
overlaps with RTT. CDKL5 mutations are relatively common in patients 
whose seizures begin before the age of 6 months (3/17 in this study). 
CDKL5 analysis is indicated in patients with features of RTT and a 
severe seizure disorder commencing in the ﬁrst 3 months of life or infantile spasms. In addition it may be of value in undiagnosed epileptic encephalopathy.
P0147. A new autosomal recessive form of congenital 
extraocular muscular ﬁbrosis with associated malformations and exclusion analysis of ARIX gene
F. Duzcan1, C. Yildirim2, N. L. Satiroglu Tufan1, C. N. Semerci1, H. Bagci1, A. N. 
Akarsu3;  
1Medical Biology, Medical Faculty, Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey, 2Oph-
thalmology, Medical Faculty, Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey, 3Gene Map -
ping Lab., Pediatrics, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
Congenital extraocular muscle ﬁbrosis (CFEOM, MIM 135700) is an 
inherited strabismus characterized by restrictive ophthalmoplegia. To date, a total of three loci on chromosomes 12q12 (FEOM1) , 11q13 (FEOM2) and 16q24 (FEOM3) were reported. Mutations in KIF21A (12q12) and ARIX (11q13) genes are responsible for both autosomal dominant (AD) and recessive (AR) forms respectively. No gene has yet been identiﬁed for 16q linked families demonstrating AD inheritance with reduced penetrance and variable expressivity. Here, we report a nuclear pedigree with two affected and a normal sib born in a consanguineous parents. One affected member had restrictive exotropia with the globes frozen in abduction, and a normal levator function. The other subject demonstrated unilateral ptosis with contralateral loss of ocular movements. Both patients had a short stature, unusual facies, contractures of extremities, camptodactyly, pes cavus, patellar hypoplasia, and scoliosis. Electroneuromyography (ENMG) revealed normal neural motor and sensorial conduction velocities. This family tested for a linkage to AR-FEOM2 locus. The order of the markers with respect to ARIX gene are: D11S2006-(8.9Mb)-D11S4113-(1.66Mb)-D11S4139-(1.45Mb)-ARIX-(1.72Mb)-D11S4207/D11S2371-(6.29Mb)-D11S2002. Entire region was excluded by lack of homozygosity and no signiﬁcant linkage. Systemic malformations such as craniofacial dysmorphism, dental anomalies, scoliosis and ﬂexion contractures were previously described in few sporadic cases and no hereditary component has yet been reported. This family presenting AR-CFEOM associated with other system malformations and lack of linkage to 
ARIX region represents a new form of CFEOM phenotype (CFEOM4)
P0148. Raine syndrome : report of a new case
C. Coubes1, N. Bigi1, C. Rouleau2, M. P. Legac1, G. Lefort1, P. Sarda1, P. Blan -
chet1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Montpellier , 
France, 2Department of Histopathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Mont -
pellier, France.
Raine syndrome is a rare lethal osteosclerotic bone dysplasia, ﬁrst described in 1989. It associates generalized osteosclerosis and 
craniofacial dysplasia.We report a new case in an infant girl born to consanguineous 
Moroccan parents.Multiple fetal anomalies were detected on ultrasonography during 
pregnancy :microcephaly with craniostenosis and dysmorphic features including midface hypoplasia, exophtalmos, hypoplastic nose, low-set ears. Intracranial calciﬁcations and hydramnios were also present.Fetal karyotype on amniotic ﬂuid cultures was normal (46,XX).At birth, antenatal ﬁndings were conﬁrmed and additional features included cleft palate, hypertrophic gums, hirsutism and generalized osteosclerosis. The baby died shortly after birth of respiratory distress 
due to lung hypoplasia.Diagnosis of Raine syndrome is based on two major features : typical craniofacial dysplasia and generalized osteosclerosis. Prenatal diagnosis has not been reported for a ﬁrst case but would be possible when confronted with the association of intracranial calciﬁcations and characteristic craniofacial features.To date only 13 cases have been reported in the literature. Autosomal recessive inheritance has been suggested, but the underlying metabolic or molecular defects are not yet know.
P0149. Wilkie Oculo-Facio-Cardio-Dental (OFCD) syndrome
S. N. Whalen1, C. N. Vilain1, D. Bremond-Gignac2, I. Bailleul-Forrestier3, I. Pav -
lov4, A. Verloes1;  
1Unité de génétique clinique. Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 2Dpt Oph -
talmologie. Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3Dpt Stomatologie. Hopital 
Robert Debré, Paris, France, 4Dpt odontologie. Garancières Hotel Dieu. Inserm 
EMI 0110., Paris, France.
Wilkie Oculo-Facio-Cardio-Dental (OFCD) syndrome is a rare MCA syndrome with congenital cataract, microphtalmia, secondary glaucoma, ptosis, characteristic face, atrial/ventricular septal defect, cleft palate, dental and digital abnormalities. The facial dysmorphia consists in a long and narrow face, broad nasal tip, wich appears biﬁd and long philtrum. The dental abnormalities include hypo/oligodontia, radiculomegaly, delayed tooth eruption and dental fusion. OFCD is an X-linked dominant condition with presumed male lethality and probable skewed X inactivation in female carriers. It results from speciﬁc mutations in the 
BCOR gene, located on Xp11.4, wich is a key 
transcriptional regulator during early embryogenesis, particularly in the eye, skeleton and central nervous system. Mutations in 
BCOR are also 
found in MAA2 (microphtalmia with asociated anomalies type 2), one 
form of Lenz microphtalmia.We report the case of a 14 year old girl, who presented with bilateral congenital cataract, secondary glaucoma of the right eye, oligodontia, dental fusion and mild developemental delay. She had a long face, characteristic nose shape, asymetric eye globes with right microphtalmia, a nasal speech. Her dental examination showed fused medial and lateral upper incisors, large interdental space, and agenesis of the medial lower incisors. The diagnosis of OFCD syndrome has been proposed, despite the absence of heart defect and mild developmental delay. The molecular analysis of 
BCOR is still 
underway at time of submission.Clinical genetics112
P0150. A boy with facial dysmorphism, macrocephaly, and 
Dandy-Walker malformation due to familial unbalanced traslocation der(18)t(11;18)(q23.3;p11.21)mat
I. G. Balikova1, I. M. Bradinova1, E. G. Simeonov1, I. I. Kalev1, J. Fryns2, B. I. 
Dimitrov2;  
1Department of Pediatrics, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Centre for Human Genetics, Univer -
sity Hospital Gasthuisberg, KU Leuven, Belgium.
The proband is a 14-years old boy born after the ﬁfth normal pregnancy 
and delivery, born at term, in a family of young and unrelated Caucasian parents. Birth weight and length were 3300g and 52cm, respectively. He was referred to the clinic at 1 year and 7 months of age because of facial dysmorphism, cleft soft palate and developmental delay. He presented with macro-dolichocephaly, occipital encephalocele, dysmorphic facies, high prominent forehead, hypertelorism, ptosis, protruding eyes, convergent strabism, prominent philtrum, down-turned mouth corners, high palate, dysplastic ears, generalised hypotonia, hypoplastic genitalia with bilateral cryptorchidism, club feet and mental retardation. CT scan revealed a Dandy-Walker malformation. During his early childhood the diagnosis of Walker-Warburg syndrome was considered even the absence of speciﬁc ocular abnormalities.Clinical evaluation at 14 years of age revealed a distinct phenotype consisting of macrocephaly, peculiar face, prominent dysplastic ears, triangular mouth, generalized hypotonia, hypoplastic genitalia and cryptorchidism. Family history was positive for recurrent spontaneous miscarriages and perinatal deaths with multiple congenital anomalies. G-banded high-resolution re-examination of the karyotype revealed an unbalanced maternal translocation between chromosomes 11 and 18 resulting in partial trisomy 11q23.3→qter and partial monosomy 18pter→p11.21. Additional molecular cytogenetic analysis was performed to unravel the phenotype/genotype correlation in this 
unique patient.
P0151. Genotype-phenotype relationships in Noonan syndrome
I. van der Burgt1, M. Jongmans2, A. Rikken2, W. Nillesen2, R. Tamminga3, K. 
Noordam2, E. Sistermans2;  
1Academic Hospital, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2University Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3University Hospital, Groningen, The Netherlands.
Noonan Syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disorder, characterized by short stature, typical face and congenital heart defects. In approximately 50% of cases the condition is caused by missense mutations in the PTPN11 gene on chromosome 12, resulting 
in a gain of function of the protein SHP-2.In this study PTPN11 mutation analysis was performed in 170 unrelated 
NS patients. In 76 (45%) of them a mutation was identiﬁed. In total 24 different heterozygous missense mutations were detected; 48.7% were located in the N-SH2 domain, 48.7% in the PTP domain, and 2.6% within the C-SH2 domain. The 922A->G change was most often detected (21%). The beneﬁt of the NS scoring system developed by van der Burgt et al. [1994] is shown: among physicians who based their diagnosis on this NS scoring system the percentage mutation positive subjects was 54%, whereas this percentage was only 39% among the others. Of the 56 well documented mutation-positive NS patients, 38 patients (68%) had a valvular pulmonary stenosis, 4 patients (7%) had hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, and 14 patients (25%) had no heart defect. Two patients with classical NS and some uncommon manifestations had a mutation in the C-SH2 domain. A trend was observed in patients carrying the 922A→G change (Asn308Asp) 
receiving normal education.In one patient with NS and mild juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) the mutation 218C→T (Thr73Ile) was found. This conﬁrms previous ﬁndings indicating that individuals with NS with speciﬁc 
mutations in PTPN11  are at risk of developing JMML.
P0152. Trisomy 21 presenting as fetal heart rhythm anomalies
A. I. Toma1, D. F. Albu2, E. M. Severin2, C. C. Albu2, M. Dumitrescu2;  
1"Panait Sarbu" Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 2"Carol Davila" Medicine Univer -
sity, Bucharest, Romania.
Objective: To describe the clinical case of a neonate with Trisomy 21 associated with heart rhythm anomalies. Case Presentation: A male 
newborn was delivered at 36 weeks gestational age by emergency cesarean section for fetal bradicardia. The clinical examination of the newborn noticed a Down fenotype and bradicardia (40/minute). The electrocardiogram showed an aspect of total atrioventricular block with idioventricular rhythm. The heart ultrasound showed an Atrial Septal Defect of type ostium secundum, together with atrio-ventricular asynchrony. There were not associated other organ malformations. The block was not responsive to medical therapy and the patient died in the third day of life due to heart failure.
Conclusion:  This is an 
unusual form of presentation of a Trisomy 21 with a bad prognosis. This etiology should be taken into account in the differential diagosis 
of the fetal bradicardia.
P0153. The 22q13.3 microdeletion syndrome: description of a 
case with a particular phenotype
M. G. D'Avanzo1, M. Biondi1, D. De Brasi1, A. R. Colucci1, C. Rosania1, S. 
Guarducci2;  
1Division of Medical Genetics S.G. Moscati Hospital, Avellino, Italy, 2Genetics 
Unit, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
The ﬁrst case of 22q13 deletion syndrome was identiﬁed by the results of cytogenetic analysys in a family with pericentric inversion of chromosome 22. Approximately 70 patients with this syndrome have 
been reported and the clinical phenotype is now better delineated.We describe the case of a child, 8 years old, second daughter of non consanguineous parents, born at term from caesarean section performed in reason of macrosomic foetus. At birth a wide cheilognathopalatoschisis was diagnosed. After birth the newborn suffered from anoxia and hypoglycaemia. The proband was able to walk autonomously at two years of life. At the moment she pronounces only senseless sounds. In infancy several feverish seizures happened and antiepileptic therapy (valproic acid) was started. Clinical examination showed “Kabuki-like” phenotype with long palpebral ﬁssures, sparse lateral eyebrows, convergent strabismus, hypertelorism, large ears with “cup-like” aspect, thick lips, occipital exostosis, long ﬁngers and toes, bilateral syndactylia between II-III toes, overgrowth, diffuse hypotonia and severe mental retardation. The proband previously performed: standard karyotype (46 XX), diurnal and nocturnal video-EEG polygraphic registration (absence of sleep physiological pattern); cerebral MRI showed hypoplasia of corpus callosum and dysmorphic 
aspect of cerebellar vermis, amigdalas and IV ventriculus.A cryptic 22q13.3 deletion was detected by FISH analysis, using the 
VCFS/DGS FSH Kit (Oncor USA).Conclusion: we are now planning a deletion study at molecular level, to determine the size of the 22q13 deletion, in our patient, using minisatellite, microsatellite and FISH analysis, and to get phenotype/genothype correlation informations, comparing with the literature 
data.
P0154. Singleton-Merten Syndrome: Evidence of autosomal 
dominant inheritance in the ﬁrst European family
F. Rutsch1, H. G. Kehl1, N. Ruf2, J. Vogt1, J. Kleinheinz3, F. Rauch4, L. C. Hof -
bauer5, H. Rehder6, M. Arslan-Kirchner7, P. Nuernberg8;  
1University Children's Hospital, Muenster, Germany, 2Max Delbrueck Center 
for Molecular Medicine, Berlin-Buch, Germany, 3Department of Craniomaxil -
lofacial Surgery, Muenster University Hospital, Muenster, Germany, 4Shriners 
Hospital for Children, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 5Department of Internal Medicine, 
Marburg University Hospital, Marburg, Germany, 6Institute of Clinical Genetics, 
Marburg University Hospital, Marburg, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, 
University of Hannover, Hannover, Germany, 8Cologne Center for Genomics, 
Cologne, Germany.
In 1973, Singleton and Merten described two unrelated females with 
dental dysplasia, aortic valve calciﬁcation, glaucoma and widened medullary cavities of the phalanges. Up to now, only 2 consecutive case reports have been published, including one Canadian family with multiple affected family members of both sexes.A 28 year old German woman and her 23 year old brother presented with juvenile glaucoma, calcifying aortic valve stenosis, dental dysplasia with poor root development, acro-osteolysis of the hands and feet, widened medullary cavities of the metacarpals and phalanges and focally decreased bone density. In the female, the aortic and mitral valve had to be replaced because of extensive calciﬁcations at the age of 14 and 28 years, respectively. Both siblings had no pathogenic mutation in 
ENPP1, a gene recently linked to generalized infantile 
arterial calciﬁcation. Serum levels of receptor activator of NF-κB and osteoprotegerin (which, when deleted in mice, are associated with osteoporosis and vascular calciﬁcation) were normal. In the male 
proband, FBN1 sequencing analysis did not reveal a pathogenic Clinical genetics113
mutation. Family history revealed vertical transmission of the 
phenotype from the father, who lost his secondary dentition before the age of 18 and developed intracardiac calciﬁcations at the age of 39 years. This study presents the ﬁrst European family with Singleton-Merten Syndrome and conﬁrms autosomal dominant inheritance with variable expression. The ﬁnding of focal osteoporosis, dental dysplasia and cardiovascular calciﬁcations could point to an inborn defect of an extracellular matrix protein regulating bone resorption and soft tissue calciﬁcation.
P0155. Cofﬁn-Siris syndrome - a case with macrocephaly and 
anus displacement
A. Jezela-Stanek1, E. Marszal2, E. Jamroz2, E. Gluszkiewicz2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, 
Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Child Neurology, Silesian Medical University, 
Katowice, Poland.
Aim: to present a new case of Cofﬁn-Siris syndrome, a rare genetic 
disorder, characterized by the typical facial phenotype with absent/hypoplastic nail and terminal phalanx of the ﬁfth ﬁnger. The mode of inheritance is thought to be autosomal recessive, although majority of affected individuals are female (85%).Case report: a female infant, the ﬁrst child of healthy parents, born after 
vaginal delivery. At birth body weight, lengh and head circumference was normal but lumbosacral hypertrichosis, umbilical hernia and anus displacement were noted. Her psychomotor development was delayed and accompanied by hypotonia, feeding difﬁculties and reccurent upper respiratory tract infections. Physical examination at the age of 4 showed: macrocephaly with sparse scalp hair, ﬂat nasal bridge with wide nasal tip, upturned nostrils and wide mouth. Moreover hypoplastic ﬁfth digit nails and toenails were noted. She had expressive language delayed and was very irritable. X-ray of the hands shows absence of terminal phalanx of the ﬁfth ﬁngers. No other abnormalities on MRI of the brain and internal organs were noted. Metabolic testing for 
mucopolysaccharides excretion was within normal range.
Disscusion: The clinical features show typical stigmata of Coﬁn-Siris 
syndrome with: “coarse face”, absence of the distal phalanx of the ﬁfth ﬁnger and developmental delay. The presence of macrocephaly and anteriorly placed anus has not been described previously. Thus, this new clinical features further expanded the symptomatology of Cofﬁn-
Siris syndrome.
P0156. Prader -Willi syndrome - 5 years diagnostic experiences 
in prepubertal children in Slovakia.
D. Durovcikova1, J. Kršiaková2, F. Cisarik3, I. Cernakova1, D. Zmajkovicova1, K. 
Fiedlerova1, D. Brejova1, P. Capkova4;  
1Slovak Medical University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Dept. Med. Genetics, Faculty 
Hospital, Martin, Slovakia, 3Dept. of Med Genetics, Zilina, Slovakia, 43. Institut 
of Medical Genetics and Fetal Medicine, Faculty Hospital, Olomouc, Czech 
Republic.
Prader-Willi syndrome ( PWS ) is one of the most common recognized genetic forms of obesity due to loss of paternal genes located in the 15q11-13 region which spans a large cluster of imprinted genes. The disorders are caused by four genetic defects ( microdeletion, single gene mutation, uniparental disomy, imprinting defects ) and for their detection different laboratory methods are required. In this study we summarise clinical data on 13 Slovak PWS patients which were laboratory conﬁrmed in prepubertal age during the last 5 years. This group includes 10 boys and 3 girls with a mean age of 6.5 years. New PWS cases have been recently diagnosed in the ﬁrst year of life, including one newborn. The PWS score in our patients ranged from 5 to 10 points. Except for 3 children, microdeletion was detected by use of FISH methods. DNA analysis with a speciﬁc methylation probe conﬁrmed presence of only the maternal methylation pattern in 2 cases and uniparental maternal disomy was observed in one case. Managment of PWS patients including growth hormone substitution may have a positive effect on the health, functional abilities and longevity of affected individuals (Einholzer et al., 1998; Cassidy, 2001). This depends onearly diagnosis of PWS conﬁrmed by laboratory tests. Our results during the last ﬁve years reﬂect good coordination of continuing genetic education and close cooperation with endocrinologists and 
other medical specialists.P0157. Fragile X FMR1 triplet repeat detection by PCR
F. Q. Wang, M. L. Short , J. Cao, M. L. McCarthy, R. K. Saiki, Y. Li, K. M. Tacey, 
A. Grupe, M. A. Zoccoli;  
Celera Diagnostics, Alameda, CA, United States.
Fragile X syndrome is the most common cause of inherited mental retardation. The causative mutation in 99% of cases is full expansion of the CGG repeat in the 5' untranslated region of FMR1 (fragile X 
mental retardation), which is located on the X chromosome. Full mutation is associated with hypermethylation and absence of gene product, FMRP (fragile X mental retardation protein). Genetic testing for fragile X syndrome consists of identifying the CGG repeat length: normal size, 5-44 repeats; intermediates-grey zone, 45-54 repeats; pre-mutation, 55-230 repeats; full mutation, greater than 230 repeats. Carrier females and newborns with larger than normal repeats are difﬁcult to detect with PCR due to disproportionate ampliﬁcation of repeat sizes. Celera Diagnostics has developed research PCR reagents capable of amplifying more than 680 repeats. An ABI Prism® 3100 Genetic Analyzer research protocol was developed that accurately sizes normal repeats within one repeat and pre-mutation repeats within three repeats. Inclusion of a sex-linked gene that co-ampliﬁes in a multiplex with the triplet repeat allows gender and X chromosome number determination. Homozygote normal females with repeats of identical size can be identiﬁed and carrier females with large repeat size differences can be ﬂagged for reﬂex testing. The AB 3100 research protocol can detect up to 117 repeats while keeping small repeats on scale and maintaining normal allele copy number determination. We have developed an efﬁcient and robust PCR method for rapid and accurate detection of normal and pre-mutation 
CGG repeats in the FMR1  gene.
P0158. Molecular and cytogenetic analysis in IVF failure cases
R. Dada1, R. Kumar1, R. Sharma2, K. Kucheria1;  
1All India Institute of Medical Sciences, N Delhi, India, 2Army Reseach and 
Referral Hospital, N Delhi, India.
Chromosomal abnormalities in infertile couples results in spermatogenic arrest, premature ovarian failure, implantation failure and consequently failure of InVitro fertilization (IVF). Thirty eight infertile couples with IVF 
failure having poor blastocyst development and implantation were analysed cytogenetically and for molecular analysis of AZF loci in the 
men.Two females with recurrent IVF failure showed partial deletion of long arm of one of the X chromosomes and the other female had 10% cell line showing deletion of pericenteromeric region of long arm of chromosome number 1. The male partners in these cases were cytogenetically normal and had no microdeletion in the AZF loci.Of these couples microdeletion analysis of 30 cytogenetically normal infertile men, only two cases showed deletion; one with AZFc loci (STS deleted sY 254,sY255) and the other case had deletion of AZFb loci 
(STS deleted sY127,sY134).The couple where female partener had deletion of long arm of X chromosome(Xq-) resulted in repeated failure of blastocyt development, in 4 IVF cycles. The case with AZFb microdeletion had maturation arrest and case with AZFc deletion had hypospermatogenesis. In these cases sperms could be retrieved from the testis, to be used for IVF or Intracytoplasmic sperm injection. (ICSI).Thus AZF analysis determines the prognosis and management of these cases. In cases with sex chromosomal and autosomal aberrations there is probability of poor embryo development and consequently poor implantation , which may be a result of high segregation abnormalities and may negatively affect 
the outcome of assisted reproductive techniques. 
P0159. Prevalence of hereditary pathology in infants with 
congenital malformations in Moldova
E. A. Grigori ;  
National Centre of Health Reproductive, Medical Genetic &Family Planning, 
Chisinau, Republic of Moldova.
The present study deals with the data of medical genetic investigation of 2594 infants with congenital malformations (CM) born inthe period 1990-2000 ascertained by population-based monitoring CM in 
newborns in Moldova.The most frequent were MC multifactorial inheritance - 45.2% cases and included most isolated MC involving the heart - 19.8% cases, Clinical genetics114
musculoskeletal system - 26.1% cases, central nervous system - 
10.9% cases. Autosomal recessive pathology was in 5.1%, included 34 nosological forms with 133 infants. Parents were consanguinous in 11.3%. Autosomal dominant pathology was seen in 6.4%, included 32 nosological forms with 165 patients. 83.6% of cases were sporadic, determined by mutation de novo. X -linked diseases included 9 syndromes and constituted 0.5% X-linked recessive pathology and 0.2% X-linked dominant pathology in common structure. Associations were seen in 2.2% and comprised 11 nosological forms (54 infants). Chromosomal abnormalities were found in 11.2%. Major chromosomal abnormalities were Down syndrome - 84.6% cases, Patau syndrome - 0.7%, Edvards syndrome - 0.5%, Turner syndrome - 3.1%, Klinefelter syndrome - 0.3%, structural aberrations - 8.1%, disorders of sexual differentiation and development - 2.7% cases. CM of teratogenic aetiology were established in 5.8%. The most frequent was fetal alcohol syndrome - 39.1%, infection embryofetopathies - 37.8%. The non-classiﬁed complex of multiple MC consisted of 23.4% cases.
P0160. Microdeletion 2q31- redeﬁning the correlated clinical 
phenotype
B. I. Dimitrov1, I. G. Balikova2, E. G. Simeonov2, J. Fryns1, P. Debeer1;  
1Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Pediatrics, 
Medical University of Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Several patients with an interstitial deletion of chromosome 2q have been described till now. The clinical phenotype consists of a variety of digital anomalies of hands and feet, including a wide cleft between the ﬁrst and second toes, variable toe syndactyly, wide halluces and a spectrum of ﬁnger abnormalities, ranging from monodactylous limbs, through brachydactyly type E and D to camptodactyly. In addition there are different internal organ anomalies affecting the CNS, heart and uro-genital system. Hemizygousity for the HOXD13 and EVX2 genes have been proposed to be responsible for the clinical spectrum. Recently, based on the phenotype in patients with overlapping interstitial deletions of the 2q31 region, a new locus responsible for cleft foot-hand syndrome has been mapped proximally to the HOXD cluster between EVX2 and marker D2S294. A 4-year-old boy born to healthy, unrelated parents, presenting with microcephaly, complex CNS anomaly, hypotonia, cleft palate, camptodactyly, 4-5 toe syndactyly, short stature and mental retardation was referred for diagnostic evaluation. Karyotyping revealed an intersticial deletion 2q (23.4-3.1). Combining the deletion data in this patient with the small deletions within HOXD13 in other patients and the literature review, we reinforce the hypothesis that the variable phenotype in patients with an intersticial deletion of chromosome 2q31 is a result of hemizygousity 
for HOXD gene.
P0161. The case of combination of chromosomal anomaly with 
oral-facial-digital syndrome, type 1
M. Sumina , N. Nikitina;  
Medical Genetic Center, Ekatherinburg, Russian Federation.
We observed a female with combination of chromosomal anomaly (mosaic form of Turner′s syndrome) and monogenic syndrome (oral-facial-digital syndrome type 1). Chromosomal anomaly was revealed primary. The cause of cytogenetic study was three miscarriages in her anamnesis. Moreover she had several slightly expressed phenotypic features such as short stature, hypertelorism of eyes, brachydactyly and camptodactyly, polycystic kidneys (without any clinic symptoms). Karyotype was mosaic: 45,X/46,XX; 45,X met in 15% of cells. So phenotype was explained by this chromosomal abnormality. During the next pregnancy the fetus′s karyotype was deﬁned and it was normal (46,XX). The patient completed a full-term pregnancy without complication. The newborn girl had multiple congenital abnormalities: midline cleft of upper lip, clefts of maxillary alveolar ridge, multiple hyperplastic oral frenulae, lobulated and biﬁd tongue, prominent milia on the face, sparse hair, brachydactyly and clinodactyly, partial sindactyly. The child′s phenotype absolutely corresponded to oral-facial-digital syndrome, 1 type. The following thorough examination of the mother revealed very small biﬁd of the tongue and multiple oral frenulae. So the woman demonstrated partial expression of the syndrome and some main features of it were not noticed, especially after revealing of chromosomal anomaly, which seemed to be the only cause of her phenotype. It is unknown if there is connection between X-linked dominant syndrome, its not severe expression in phenotype and loss of X chromosome in the part of cells. Until this case we have met only one description of combination in female of sex-chromosome 
anomaly (47,XXX) with oral-facial-digital syndrome.
P0162. A two months old girl with the new autosomal recessive 
syndrome with Zellweger-like manifestations
R. S. -. Tincheva1,2;  
1University Pediatric Hospital, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, 
Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Zellweger syndrome is an autosomal-recessive disorder associated with peroxisomal absence and characteristic phenotypic features: high forehead, broad nasal bridge, epicanthal folds, upslanting palpebral ﬁssures and micrognathia, combined with severe hypotonia, hepatomegaly, renal cysts and developmental delay. This phenotype is 
characterized with elevation of very long chain fatty acids.We present a two months old girl with phenotypic features that are typically seen in Zellweger syndrome: high forehead, broad nasal bridge, epicanthal fold, upslanting palpebral ﬁssures, and micrognathia. In addition to the physical anomalies she has also severe psychomotor retardation , hypotonia and multifocal seizures. The hepar and rens are with normal size and structure, very long chain fatty acids and plasma acids level were normal. The child is born from healthy non 
consanguineous parents who have an older healthy son.Ahn and al.(2003)described two sibs born to Ashkenazi Jewish consanguineous parents with similar dysmorphic feature and normal VLCFA. They found respiratory chain abnormalities in muscle biopsy and suggest that this is a new autosomal recessive syndrome that 
could be due to a nuclear-encoded mitochondrial defect.
P0163. Is there genetic heterogeneity in Classical Hemimelia? 
An ongoing study in a large UAE national family.
M. Naveed, M. T. AlAli;  
Center For Arab Genomic Studies (CAGS), Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
The Arab population provides unique opportunities to identify and 
understand the genetics and biology of human traits and their variation. We have come across a very rare form of skeletal dysplasia in a multiple generation UAE national family, which is closely akin to a partially deﬁned genetic disorder known as Tibial Hemimelia (THM). At present, even the gene for the classical form of Tibial Hemimelia (MIM 275220) is not deﬁned. In this UAE national family, an initial analysis of six generations has identiﬁed 13 affected persons (both sexes) with a spectrum of skeletal anomalies. Of these, at least 10 are transmitted through a single parent. The ongoing study of some of the members of this family has revealed variable expression, skipped generations, incomplete penetrance, unilateral tibial hemimelia, bilateral tibial hemimelia, foot deformities, post-axial polydactyly (incomplete), syndactyly, oligodactyly and facial dysmorphism. One of the main skeletal abnormalities is Tibial Hemimelia. We will be analyzing whether this family represents a clinical heterogeneous form of previously deﬁned Tibial Hemimelia or a new entity. The ongoing studies we are pursuing in this family include FISH studies for 8q and 10q regions and a genome wide scanning for the candidate gene using micro satellite markers and SNPs. Identiﬁcation of the candidate gene in this family will be very helpful for carrier detection, prenatal and post-
natal diagnosis.
P0164. The Spanish Overgrowth Syndrome Registry
I. Incera, L. Magano, P. Arias, L. Fernández, M. Palomares, A. Delicado, M. L. 
de Torres, M. A. Mori, I. López Pajares, R. Gracia, P. Lapunzina ;  
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
The Spanish Overgrowth Syndrome Registry (SOGSR) has been 
established in 2003 aimed to record patients with Overgrowth 
Syndromes (OGS). It is located at the Hospital Universitario La Paz, 
in Madrid, SpainAll patients with OGS are included in a database. Most of these patients have laboratory tests for syndromes and in the majority of them biological samples (DNA; slides, tissues) have been stored. In addition, a clinical picture/s is also requested to document the ﬁles. Written permission for both clinical photographs and biological samples 
are obtained.The aims of the registry are: -to include all patient with any OGS in a Clinical genetics115
National database, -to compare frequencies of OGS; -to describe rates 
of incidence and prevalence; -to monitorise the outcome of associated malformations; -to develop guidelines and algorithms for clinical and cancer follow-up; -to known the frequency and outcome of mental retardation in the OGS; -to collaborate in the clinical, cytogenetic and molecular diagnosis of this syndromes; -to coordinate the molecular tests of each OGS performed in Spain and to create a site and a 
discussion forum for both physicians and patients or parents.The addresses are : www.overgrowthsyndrome.org  and www.sindrom
edesobrecrecimiento.orgThe Registry is organized in 4 main items. 1- management of the Registry, 2- ILaboratory and the handling of the biological samples, 3- Genetic Counselling and Prenatal Diagnosis, and 4- Projects and 
ResearchBy January 2005, 196 patients have been included in the Registry, most of them with Beckwith-Wiedemann, Sotos, Simpson Goalbi Behmel, 
Macrocephaly -cutis marmorata, Costello syndrome and others.
P0165. MOMO syndrome or new syndrome: description of a case
D. De Brasi, M. Biondi, C. Rosania, A. R. Colucci, M. G. D'Avanzo;  
Division of Medical Genetics "S.G. Moscati" Hospital, Avellino, Italy.
Obesity in genetic syndromes is a very common ﬁnding, but often it’s a 
part of complex clnical picture and remain undiagnosed.We describe the case of a child, second daughter of non consanguineous parents, with severe obesity, diffuse hypotonia and serious psychomotor retardation. She began to sit alone only after 12 months and at 5 years she spoke only few words. Since the second year of life an increasing appetite and consequent weight gain were observed. She suffers of recurrent asthmatic bronchitis. At age 7 years she was admitted to our observation. The girl has coarse round face, hypertelorism, bilateral epicanthal folds, large open mouth, lowset ears, short neck, adipomastia, tapering ﬁngers, genua valga and bowing tibiae, striae distensae at the roots of lower limbs. Anthropometric data: height 122cm (+0.58 SDS); family target height 162,5cm (+0.05 SDS). OFC 54 cm (+2.1 SDS). Weight 69.6 kg (>> 99° centile). BMI 46,7 (+24.1 SDS); waist circumference 94 cm; WHR 0.81; Tanner stage 
Ph1, B1. Bone age was slightly advanced.Serum calcium, phosphorus, PTH, calcitonin were in the normal range. Metabolic screening was normal. Karyotype: 46,XX. Molecular studies for Prader-Willi, Angelman syndrome and matUPD14 were carried out with normal results. Fundus Oculi: light pale optic discs, with shading edges. Neuropsychiatric evaluation showed severe mental retardation. 
EEG and cerebral MRI were normal.We propose the diagnosis of MOMO syndrome (Macrosomia-Obesity-Macrocephaly-Ocular abnormalities), even if no major ocular defects (i.e. coloboma, glaucoma) have been found in the proposita. 
Alternatively a new syndrome could be suggested.
P0166. Decreased mineral bone density: Previously 
unrecognized feature of Fabry disease
K. Benistan1, C. Mutschler2, J. Pouchot3, D. P. Germain1;  
1Department of Genetics, HEGP., Paris, France, 2Department of Radiology, 
HEGP., Paris, France, 3Department of Internal Medicine, HEGP., Paris, France.
Background : Fabry disease (FD, OMIM 301500) is an X-linked 
inborn error of metabolism due to the deﬁcient activity of alpha-galactosidase, a lysosomal enzyme. While the progressive deposition of glycosphingolipids throughout the body is known to have protean clinical manifestations, no data is available regarding the skeletal 
involvement.
Methods: We prospectively investigated bone involvement in 31 consecutive hemizygous males with a mean age of 32 years (median 28 years, range 16-61 years) affected with classic FD. Bone densitometry of the lumbar spine and femoral neck was assessed in all patients, using dual energy X-ray absorptiometry.
Results: Bone densitometry examination revealed a statistically signiﬁcant decrease in bone mineral density. Using the World Health Organisation (WHO) classiﬁcation of bone mineral density (BMD) abnormalities, the following results (N=31) were obtained at testing lumbar spine and femoral neck (Table).Twenty-four patients had normal kidney function.
Discussion  : This is the ﬁrst study demonstrating that FD is associated 
to an increased risk of developing bone mineral density abnormalities in male patients. Osteopenia and/or osteoporosis were detected in 84% (26/31) of our patients, even in the absence of renal insufﬁciency. We advise to perform bone densitometry in all FD patients to assess their risk of pathologic fractures. With emerging enzyme replacement therapies for FD and the hope of increased life expectancy, reduced bone mineral density may become an important symptom to consider .
WHO BMD ClassNumber of 
patients (%)
Normal 5 (16%)
Osteopenia at 1 site, normal value at 
other site10 (33%)
Osteopenia both sites 6 (19%)
Osteoporosis at 1 site, normal value at 
other site1 (3%)
Osteoporosis at 1 site, osteopenia at 
other site8 (26%)
Osteoporosis both sites 1 (3%)
Severe osteoporosis 0
P0167. An atypical swelling of the forearm
A. M. A. Lachmeijer1, P. H. Holwerda2, M. M. Weiss3, J. F. van der Blij4, J. M. 
van Hagen1;  
1Dept. of Clinical Genetics and Human Genetics, VU University Medical Centre, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Dept. of Pathology, Medical Centre Alkmaar, 
Alkmaar, The Netherlands, 3Clinical Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Centre 
for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, 
The Netherlands, 4Dept. of Pediatrics, Medical Centre Alkmaar, Alkmaar, The 
Netherlands.
Here we report on a 3 years old Tunesian girl, born from consanguineous parents, who was referred to the pediatrician because of a congenital swelling of her right forearm just below the elbow joint. A biopsy of the swelling was taken and histopathologic examination revealed that the lesion matched the criteria for a Gardner-associated ﬁbroma (GAF) 
which can be a feature of Gardner syndrome (GS).Gardner syndrome (MIM#175100) is characterized by intestinal polyposis and various bone and soft-tissue lesions, including e.g. osteomas, ﬁbromas, and desmoid ﬁbromas. It is considered a variant of familial adenomatous polyposis coli (FAP). GS patients inevitably develop intestinal carcinoma at a much younger age than those with sporadic intestinal carcinoma. Typically, the soft-tissue lesions occur before the development of intestinal polyps. GS is caused by truncating mutations in a portion of the APC-gene on chromosome 5q22-23 (codons 1403 and 1578) that differs from classic FAP (codons 
169-1600).In our proband a heterozygous truncating mutation in codon 1465 (exon 15); 4393_4394delAG (Ser1465fs) was found. DNA analysis in 
her parents and paternal half-sister did not show the mutation.Accurate histologic identiﬁcation of a GAF, even in an unusual place like our proband's forearm, represents a sentinal event for the detection of unsuspected GS. It allows for early and close monitoring of GS 
symptoms and for possible preventive interventions.
P0168. Diastrophic dysplasia - early detection of a new case
A. Sireteanu, M. Volosciuc, C. Rusu, V. Gorduza, M. Georgescu, E. Braha, M. 
Covic;  
Sf. Maria Hospital, Iasi, Romania.
Diastrophic dysplasia (Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome) is a very rare form of chondrodysplasia, recessively inherited, characterized by prenatal dwarﬁsm, limb shortening, abnormal ears, progressive joint deformities and contractures, typical hand defect (“hitchhiker thumb”), progressive spinal curvature and clubfeet. We present a new case in order to illustrate this rare entity and to discuss the diagnosis and the management. Our proband is a one-month-old male infant, the third child of a young, unrelated, apparently normal couple. The pregnancy was uneventful and no fetal ultrasound scan was done. He was born at 32 weeks gestation (Wt 1650 g, Ht 40 cm, HC 31 cm, Apgar score 6). A suspicion of diastrophic dysplasia was established after birth. The infant was reexamined one month later, when physical examination revealed: short limbed dwarﬁsm, dismorphic face (mild exophthalmia, Clinical genetics116
cleft soft palate, microretrognathia and low-set, thickened ears), 
short neck, thumbs and halluxes in abducted position bilaterally. Radiological examination showed typical aspects. We have established the diagnosis of diastrophic dysplasia based on the characteristic association of short limbed dwarﬁsm, cleft palate, thickened ears and “hitchhiker thumb”. Differential diagnosis was done with other types of short limbed dwarﬁsm (camptomelic dysplasia, Ellis van Creveld etc). The plan for the management and the follow up of the patient will be 
presented.In conclusion, we present a new case of diastrophic dysplasia in order to illustrate this rare genetic disorder, but also to discuss the importance of a complex medical specialist team for a correct diagnosis and management of the affected family.
P0169. A particular case of ring chromosome 5
C. Rusu1, M. Gramescu1, M. Volosciuc1, A. Sireteanu2, V. Streanga3, M. Covic1;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2Medical Genetics Cen -
tre, Children's Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 31st Pediatrics Clinic, Children's Hospi -
tal, Iasi, Romania.
Ring chromosome 5 is a rare chromosomal abnormality expressed clinically by features of cri-du-chat syndrome associated with other features depending on the fragment lacking from the long arm. We present a particular case of r5 chromosome in order to illustrate this rare entity and to discuss diagnosis and management. Our proband is a 2 years 5 months old female child, single child of a young, unrelated, apparently normal couple. The pregnancy evolved with polyhydramnios. No foetal ultrasound scan was performed. She was born at 9 months gestation (Wt 1550 g, Ht 38 cm, HC 28 cm, Apgar score 8) and needed intensive care. Postnatal development was severely delayed. Physical examination revealed: proportionate dwarﬁsm (Ht -2.86 SD, Wt -4.66 SD) associated with microcephaly (HC -5.08 SD), dismorphic face (triangular face, hypertelorism, abnormal, asymmetric ears), mewing cry and severe developmental delay. Echocardiography: subaortic VSD. Renal echography: normal. Psychological examination: IQ 45. We thought of Cri-du-chat syndrome reason why a karyotype was indicated. The result was: 46,XX,r5/ 45,XX,-5/ 47,XX,r5,r5. Differential diagnosis was done mainly with the typical form of cri-du-chat syndrome. The plan for the management and the follow up of the patient will be presented, as well as the hypothesis for the mechanism that led to this disorder.In conclusion, we present a particular case of ring 5 chromosome in order to illustrate this rare genetic disorder, but also to discuss the importance of different features for the diagnosis and the management of the family.
P0170. False-positive proportion for pediatric ammonia 
determination and its clinical impact
B. Maranda , J. Cousineau, M. Lambert;  
Hopital Ste-Justine, Montreal, PQ, Canada.
Objective: Plasma ammonia measurement is critical for the diagnosis and management of several inborn errors of metabolism. Its determination is subject to several sources of error. False-positive results might be harmful to patients. We wanted to evaluate the prevalence and clinical impact of false-positive results for plasma 
ammonia in a pediatric tertiary care hospital.
Design: Data from the clinical biochemistry laboratory were scrutinized over a 28-month period. Each case that presented at least one abnormal result was revised. These ﬁles were reviewed to determine if a medical condition could account for the initial elevation of ammonia 
and its subsequent normalization.
Results: 1980 ammonia measurements were obtained from 479 patients. Ammonemia concentration ranged from 5 to 1863 µmol/L. Median values for neonates (less than 1 month) and older patients were 65 and 50 µmol/L respectively (p<0,001). Elevated results were found in 42% blood samples from 151 patients. Among 86 ﬁles revised, we have found 41 false-positives for plasma ammonia, which represents 48%. Capillary samples were overrepresented among false-positives. There was also a long delay of 7,9 hours between the falsely elevated value and its subsequent normal value for hospitalized patients. The major clinical impact was regarding additional laboratory analyses. There were no prolonged hospitalization attributable to a 
false-positive.Conclusion : This study shows the high proportion of false-positive regarding ammonia measurement in pediatric population. Fortunately, the clinical impact seems to be limited but not negligible, especially for patients with inborn errors of metabolism. Capillary sample should be 
avoided for ammonia determination.
P0171. Clinical features in patients with mutations in JARID1C
A. Tzschach1, S. Lenzner1, A. R. Janecke2, G. Tariverdian3, J. Chelly4, J. 
Fryns5, H. Van Esch5, T. Kleefstra6, B. Hamel6, C. Moraine7, J. Gécz8, G. Turn -
er9, V. M. Kalscheuer1, H. Ropers1, L. R. Jensen1;  
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Department of 
Medical Biology and Human Genetics, Innsbruck Medical University , Innsbruck, 
Austria, 3Institute of Human Genetics, University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Ger -
many, 4Institut Cochin de Génétique Moleculaire, CNRS/INSERM, CHU Cochin, 
Paris, France, 5Center for Human Genetics, Clinical Genetics Unit, Leuven, 
Belgium, 6Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Centre, Nijme -
gen, The Netherlands, 7Services de Génétique-INSERM U316, CHU Breton -
neau, Tours, France, 8Women's and Children's Hospital, University of Adelaide, 
Adelaide, Australia, 9Genetics of Learning Disability (GOLD) Service, Hunter 
Genetics, University of Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia.
We have recently shown that mutations in JARID1C are one of the more common known causes of X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) (see abstract of Jensen et al. at this conference). Here, we report on the clinical phenotypes of 21 patients with JARID1C mutations. Mental retardation of various severity is the prominent clinical feature in all patients. In addition, short stature is also present in the majority of cases. Numerous dysmorphic signs and neurological features have been observed in some but not all patients. These include microcephaly, maxillary hypoplasia, cryptorchidism, macroorchidism, spasticity and epilepsy. We will give a detailed account of the individual phenotypes of the patients with JARID1C mutations. This will help to identify patients in whom mutation screening in JARID1C should be 
considered.
P0172. Mutational analysis of the 21-hydroxylase gene, CYP21, 
in 17 Estonian Patients Diagnosed with Congenital Adrenal 
Hyperplasia
S. E. Tobi1, H. Schlecht1, V. Tillman2, K. Liivak2, M. Coleman1, R. Elles1;  
1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Tartu 
University Children's Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
At least 90% of all cases of the autosomal recessive condition 
Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH) are caused by mutations in the 21-hydroxylase gene (CYP21). The most common mutations found in CYP21 are a result of either unequal crossing-over or gene conversion events involving the neighbouring, highly homologous pseudogene , CYP21P, on chromosome 6p21.3. We have screened 17 Estonian patients (in most cases with both parents), clinically diagnosed with CAH, for eight common CYP21 mutations using a series of PCR ARMS tests. 18 % (6/34) of all CYP21 alleles harboured a chimeric pseudogene:gene mutation consisting of 5’ CYP21P sequence and 3’ CYP21 sequence and arising from a large scale deletion event. A c.292 -13A/C>G (g.655 A/C>G) intron 2 splice site mutation, which is found at a similar frequency to CYP21 deletions/conversions in the UK population, accounted for only 6% (2/34) of alleles. The point mutations Ile172Asn, Gln318Stop, and Arg356Trp all occurred at a frequency of 9% (3/34) while one patient harboured four sequential point mutations suggesting a large conversion of the 3’end of CYP21 to CYP21P. Work is ongoing to identify further CYP21 mutations in remaining alleles by 
Southern blot and sequencing analysis.
P0173. A novel KCNQ2 splicing mutation causes BFNC in a large 
multi-generational family
D. Pinto1, G. J. de Haan2, D. Carton3, A. Bader1,2, L. Volkers1, J. Witte4, E. Pe -
ters1, M. Wapenaar1, M. G. van Erp5, W. Vandereyken6, E. H. J. F. Boezeman7, 
B. P. C. Koeleman1, D. Lindhout1;  
1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Stichting Epilep -
sie Instellingen Nederland, Heemstede, The Netherlands, 3Universiteitszieken -
huis, Gent, Belgium, 4Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Nether -
lands, 5Kempenhaeghe, Heeze, The Netherlands, 6Stadskliniek, Sint-Niklaas, 
Belgium, 7Sint Antoniusziekenhuis, Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.
Benign familial neonatal convulsions (BFNC) is a rare epilepsy disorder with autosomal dominant inheritance and high penetrance. Two Clinical genetics117
genes have been identiﬁed to be responsible for BFNC, KCNQ2 at 
20q13.3 and KCNQ3 at 8q24. KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 encode potassium channel subunits that mediate the M-current, which limits neuronal hyperexcitability through spike-frequency adaptation. The study of new pedigrees may help to detect new mutations and deﬁne genotype-phenotype correlations, leading towards a better understanding of the pathophysiologic mechanisms underlying neonatal convulsions. We revisited a BFNC family with 13 affected members in ﬁve generations in order to assess long-term outcome after 20 years of follow-up: 11 showed remission within two months with normal neurological development, one had mild learning disabilities and one developed photosensitive myoclonic epilepsy later in life. Molecular genetic analysis revealed linkage to chromosome 20 and a single intronic mutation IVS14-6 C>A in KCNQ2 that segregated with the BFNC trait in all affected members, and was absent in 100 unrelated controls. Taking advantage of the fact that tissue-speciﬁc genes may be expressed ubiquitously at very low levels (illegitimate transcription), we evaluated the effect of the KCNQ2 mutation at the mRNA level using reverse transcribed total RNA isolated from blood leukocytes. This mutation creates a new splice site preferentially used for splicing. Alternative splicing adds 4 nt containing a premature stop codon to the transcript, which results in a truncated protein after position R588. This novel KCNQ2 mutation cosegregates with BFNC but not with photosensitivity.
P0174. Clinic and genetic heterogeneity in Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome
M. Puiu , S. Dragan;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a heterogeneous group of 
hereditable connective tissue disorders characterized by articular 
hypermobility, skin hyperextensibility, and tissue fragility. EDS type IV 
being  the most life-threatening form. It is characterized by a type III 
collagen deﬁciency and this disease involves a col3A1 gene mutation. We report the case of a 47 year-old woman with type IV 
EDS. The 
medical history of our patient included multiple spontaneous bone fractures, anomalies of subclavian artery, moderate bruising and rupture of hollow organs such as the intestine and stomach, requiring repeated surgical interventions, generalized joint hypermobility, skin hyperextensibility, chronic joint pain, recurrent joint dislocations, extensive bruising, characteristic facial appearance, varicose veins, progressive scoliosis, osteopenia. Each of her two children presented clinical elements of EDS: her daughter (25 years old) presented especially molluscoid pseudotumours, subcutaneous spheroids joint hypermobility, chronic joint pain with recurrent joint dislocations, easy bruising and spontaneous bone fractures. Her son (18 years old) presented recurrent joint dislocations, moderate skin hyperextensibilty, articular hypermobility and autism. Clinic and genetic heterogeneity of the disease is very evident in this family, the three family members presenting clinical symptoms and comorbidities which made difﬁcult the attempt to integrate them in a certain EDS type; these three cases presented a various clinical expression and severity. Another particularity is also represented by the presence and high frequency of associated spontaneous bone fractures. Molecular investigations could probably explain the mechanism which associates Osteogenesis Imperfecta signs to EDS symptomps, but we couldn’t perform these 
investigations for the time.
P0175. Adolescental problems in KBG syndrome: our experience
M. Biondi , D. De Brasi, A. R. Colucci, C. Rosania, M. G. D'Avanzo;  
Division of Medical Genetics "S.G. Moscati" Hospital, Avellino, Italy.
KBG syndrome is a rare, but underestimated, autosomal dominant disease (40 cases described), characterized by macro-oligodontia, short stature, mild to medium mental retardation, skeletal defects and other clinical features. We report 7 sporadic cases, 3 M and 4 F, observed during adolescence.This period is characterized by the modiﬁcation of previous relationships, that leads, to a possible change in the role and importance of the family and reference ﬁgures.The child grows and “the chrysalis becomes butterﬂy”. The process seems complicated and difﬁcult in KBG patient. He links superﬁcially to other persons. His world remains limited to a biunivocal relation with the mother, that lasts longer than the other children, so remaining in a condition of passivity and greatest dependence. He understands he doesn’t overtake the daily problems without help. He reacts isolating from the real life, taking refuge in a fantastic world. He closes himself in a autistic passivity as the only answer to his own inadequacy. The world outside seems to him full of hostility.More than ten years ago we chose, in favour of patients with genetic syndromes, a multidimensional and multidisciplinary approach coordinated by a clinical genetist. Therapeutical results have been 
satisfactory in KBG patients.We noted: acceptance of their own body, more optimistic approach to life, improvement of school and working integration, higher control of 
nutritional and drug addiction.This experience improved our life and our profession, allowing a deep and empathyc interaction between patient and physician, that 
represents the true essence of every medical act.
P0176. A quantitative deﬁnition of monosomy 5p syndrome.
R. Posmyk1, B. Panasiuk1, A. Latos-Bielenska2, D. Wolnik-Brzozowska2, M. 
Piotrowicz3, V. Kucinskas4, L. Korniszewski5, B. Kozak-Klonowska6, G. Sorbaj-
Sucharska7, A. T. Midro1;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical University, Bialystok, Poland, 2De-
partment of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Poznan, Poland, 3Depart -
ment of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Lodz, Poland, 4Center of Human 
Gentics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 5Dept of Pediatrics, Section of Diabetology and 
Birth Defects, Medical University, Warsaw, Poland, 6Genetic Couselling Unit, 
Swietokrzyski Oncology Center, Kielce, Poland, 7Regional Childrens Hospital, 
Olsztyn, Poland.
Monosomy 5p syndrome (cri du chat)(OMIM#123450) belongs to a group of classical chromosomal entities with characteristic facial traits, organ malformations, functional impairment and developmental delay due to a partial monosomy of a short arm of chromosome 5. Although several hundreds of cases have been published to date, a systematic collection of its clinical symptoms and anthropological traits is missing in the literature. Today, as cases with sub-microscopic 5p deletions are known, and CDCS genes are being searched, more exact knowledge seems to be necessary. The main aim of this work is a contribution for quantitative syndrome deﬁnition obtained by systematic evaluation of clinical symptoms and anthropological traits. A group of 22 children with terminal 5p deletion aged between 1 month and 18 years were examined. A catalogue of well-deﬁned 807 dysmorphic and clinical features from the Munich Dysmorphology Database according to Stengel-Rutkowski was used. Anamnestic data were obtained from the parents and hospital records. A semi-standardized protocol was used for the assessment of rare anthropological traits in the skull, face, trunk and limbs. Facial measurements were performed from frontal and proﬁle photographs quantifying seventeen traits by age related indices. The trait list for each child was set up by checking all informative features for presence or absence. Seventy two clinical and anthropological features have been observed with a frequency of 50% or more (at least 5 informative features) in our group with monosomy 5p. On this basis quantitative phenotype deﬁnition of monosomy 5p 
syndrome was suggested.
P0177. The ﬁrst case of galactosialidosis (Goldberg syndrome) 
in the St.Petersburg population
O. L. Kolobova1, M. O. Mkheidze2, O. P. Romanenko3, I. M. Vorontcov1;  
1Medical Paediatric Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Medical 
Academy for postgraduate training, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Centre 
of Medical Genetics, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Galactosialidosis (GSL, Goldberg syndrome, MIM 256540) is a lysosomal storage disease with autosomal recessive type of inheritance, gene map locus 20q13.1. The condition is caused by a deﬁciency of carboxypeptidase-L protective protein, which forms a high molecular weight complex with alpha-neuraminidase and beta-galactosidase in the lysosomes. Proband, a male aged 1 year, 3 months and 25 days, is under our observation. He was born after the second spontaneous premature delivery. This pregnancy was complicated with late toxemia and threatened abortion. His parents are nonconsanguineous, his elder brother is healthy. Proband birth weight was 2850g. At birth severe oedema of eyelids, face and scrotum, moderate hepatosplenomegaly, hyperbilirubinemia were observed. At age1 year and 4 months the proband had some additional symptoms of dangerous illness: Clinical genetics118
coarse facial features, mental retardation, telangiectasia of skin, 
increased hepatosplenomegaly, hypotonia, some biochemical signs of metabolic disturbance. Oligosacchariduria and beta-galactosidase and neuraminidase deﬁciency were shown in the Scientiﬁc Centre of Medical Genetics, Moscow. These data conﬁrmed our presumed 
diagnosis of galactosialidosis, early infantile type.
P0178. Collecting oro-dental phenotypic data: standardisation 
and networking via D[4]/ PHENODENT
A. Bloch-Zupan1,2, J. Ennesser1, A. Musset1, M. Schmittbuhl1, P. Ashley2;  
1Faculty of Dentistry, Louis Pasteur University, Strasbourg, France, 2Eastman 
Dental Institute, University College, London, United Kingdom.
The aims and objectives of the D[4]/ PHENODENT project are to create a collaborative interactive biomedical database D[4] (Diagnosing Dental Defects Database) linked to a dynamic web site PHENODENT allowing standardisation of data collection and therefore assisting in 
oro-dental phenotyping.This tool will permit integration of these data within the medical and genetic general context enhancing multidisciplinary patient management approaches. It will facilitate understanding of dental and oral biology and associated disorders and diseases implementing science based evidence diagnosis and therapeutic options. These data might be used in public health as markers of gene/environment relationships in the case of acquired dental defects. D[4]/ PHENODENT will stimulate patient recruitment and install a basis for molecular analysis and anatomo-pathological investigations. It will allow the creation of larger cohorts of patients, presenting with these rare oro-dental defects, that could be involved in future research projects like - Oro-dental phenotypes in syndromes - Identiﬁcation of mutations in known genes involved in dental development and diseases - Phenotype/genotype correlation - Population genetics - New gene identiﬁcation - Gene expression during odontogenesis - Mouse/Human correlations. Standardisation 
will facilitate sharing of data and materials among investigators.PHENODENT will constitute a link between participating clinical diagnosis centres and research laboratories thus representing a powerful tool for national (French INSERM GIS rare diseases, Odontogenetics network) and international (European COST) 
networks.This work is funded partially via INSERM « Reseau de Recherche Clinique et Reseaux de Recherche en Sante des populations 2003 » and COST-STSM-B23-00900.
P0179. Detoxiﬁcation system genes involved into the resistance 
to the steroid therapy in asthmatic patients.
O. G. Sideleva1,2;  
1St.Petersburg State University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Zoological 
Institute RAS, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Steroids, using for the reducing of asthma symptoms in patient with severe disease was shown as non-effective in 34% of patients in St. Petersburg, Russia. The major role in inactivation almost all drugs, coming to the organisms from the environment, as well as steroid medications, play the detoxiﬁcation system enzymes. Mutations in the genes coding this enzymes lead to the loss of function of complete absence of them. Thus, asthmatic patients, having detoxiﬁcation genes deﬁciency, suppose to be very sensitive to the medications, using for asthma therapy. In the present study the distribution of normal and mutant genotypes Phase I detoxiﬁcation gene CYP1A1 and Phase II detoxiﬁcation genes NAT2, GSTT1 and GSTP1 did not show signiﬁcant differences in patients with positive and negative response to the therapy. At the same time, we found strong association between GSTM1 gene deﬁciency in asthmatics and their steroid resistance. 93.3% of resistant patients had GSTM1 0/0 genotype. In the group of asthmatics giving the best response to the steroid treatment predominated individuals with normal genotype GSTM1 +/+, GSTP1 A/A : 20% vs 4.5% in the group of the drug resistant patients, p=0.01 (in the control group from the general population of St.Petersburg 
distribution of this genotype comprise 34.4%, p=0.0001).Thus, Phase II detoxiﬁcation enzymes coding by GSTM1 and GSTP1 
genes are important for the steroid resistance of asthmatic patients.P0180. Segmental Neuroﬁbromatosis type-1 presenting as 
isolated plexiform neuroﬁbromas
J. L. Lauzon , R. B. Lowry, F. P. Bernier;  
Alberta Children's Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada.
We present a 41-year-old woman with recurrent plexiform 
neuroﬁbromas without signs of classical Neuroﬁbromatosis type-1 (NF-1). She presented with a superﬁcial plexiform neuroﬁbroma on the left scapula in adolescence. She was subsequently found to have a thoracic intraspinal neuroﬁbroma, two plexiform neuroﬁbromas in her left kidney and three plexiform neuroﬁbromas in the subcutaneous tissue of her left posterior chest wall. Our patient underwent surgical debulking of her tumors but the plexiform neuroﬁbroma in her chest wall persists. Physical examination reveals no café-au-lait macules, inguinal or axillary freckling, or Lisch nodules. There is no family history of NF-1 and her daughter has no clinical features of this disorder. There are a handful of Segmental NF-1cases describing the occurrence of localized deep-tissue plexiform neuroﬁbromas and no cutaneous manifestations. Local recurrence is common but malignant transformation of the plexiform neuroﬁbromas has not been reported in these cases. It is felt that this rare form of Segmental NF-1 is due to a post-zygotic mutation in the neuroﬁbromin gene in early development. Subsequent loss of heterozygosity in this cell line may account for the development of the plexiform neuroﬁbromas. Molecular investigations have been initiated in our patient to further characterize these tumors. We feel that this condition should be distinguished from generalized NF-1 and other similar disorders for the purposes of medical management and recurrence-risk counseling. Screening of individuals who present with isolated plexiform neuroﬁbromas for other tumors should be considered as they may have Segmental NF-1 and be at risk of developing further neuroﬁbromas.
P0181. Cornelia-de-Lange Syndrome, Phenotypic and 
Cytogenetic Analysis of 20 Iranian Cases; Clinical Case Report
A. Entezari1, G. Vakili1, J. Hourzad2, M. Kariminejad3, Y. Shafeghati1,3;  
1Genetics Research Center/USWR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran Med -
ical Science University Tehran Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Karimine -
jad/Najmabadi genetics center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Cornelia-de-Lange syndrome(CDLS) is a rare multisystemic 
malformative syndrome of uncertain etiology characterized by severe psychomotor and mental retardation, and multiple congenital 
anomalies.Here we report the phenotypic and cytogenetic analysis of 20 cases of Iranian patients who displayed the classical clinical symptomatology 
of CDLS.In this report , we have done necessary evaluation of clinical ﬁndings, 
chromosomal studies and laboratory investigations.Clinical manifestations in our patients were as similar as the cases were reported in the medical literature. Chromosomal analysis by traditional GTG banding technique; in all of the affected patients were normal. We did not do FISH analysis in our cases .The diagnosis of CDLS in this patients were based on clinical evaluation and comparison of the ﬁndings with reported cases by Brachmann in 1916 and Cornelia-de 
Lange in 1933 and other reported cases.
P0182. Severe zinc deﬁciency in Thalassemia Major patients on 
deferiprone
A. -. Saxena ;  
Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow , India.
Thalassemia major demands frequent blood transfusion to maintain lfe while hemosiderosis requires continuous iron chelation. Increased zinc excretion is known to occur in thalassemic patients receiving regular chelation therapy with deferiprone. This study was conducted, ﬁrstly, to examine seum zinc level in thalassemic patients in order to know how much zinc supplementation was required and secondly, to see if zinc supplementaion contributed towards better growth. Methods: Study was conducted on 86 thalassemia major patients on hyper-transfusion treatment aged between 4 and 19 years at SGPGIMS. Zinc levels were checked before and after zinc supplementation. Low dose of zinc 23.5 mg as Zevit capsule was given once a day for one year. Growth velocities and pubertal development were evaluated every 3 months. Results: Out of 86 patients 52 (60.4%) had low serum zinc level. Compliance to zinc supplementation was signiﬁcantly associated Clinical genetics119
with increased serum zinc levels. Pre supplementation mean height 
and weight velocities were 4.54 (± 2.26) and 1.4 (± 1.46) and post supplementation were 4.71 (± 2.38)cm and 1.7 (± 1.02) respectively. In individual cases post supplementation height and weight were higher compared to pre supplementation. Serum ferritin was negatively correlated (P<.001%) with pre and post supplementation growth velocities. Pre and post supplementation serum ferritin and hemoglobin levels were strongly correlated (P<.001%). Compliance to zinc supplementation was negatively correlated with pre-supplementation hemoglobin levels. Conclusion: With optimally maintained hemoglobin level zinc supplementation given in high doses can have beneﬁcial effects on growth.
P0183. GM1 gangliosidosis: Clinical and laboratory ﬁndings in 
one Iranian family with 5 affected patients.
G. Vakili1, A. Entezari1, Y. Shafeghati1,2, M. Roushandel2, R. Karimi-Nejad3;  
1Genetics Research Center/USWR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran 
Medical Science University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Karimi-Nejad/
Najmabadi Genetics laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
GM1 gangliosidosis is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder due to deﬁciency of lysosomal enzyme beta-galactosidase, with the consequence of tissue accumulation of especially GM1 ganglioside. In the present paper, we report the clinical and laboratory ﬁndings of an Iranian family that have had history of ﬁve affected patients. Four of them died in about four to ﬁve years of age, because of probable diagnosis of Neimann-Pick disease. Parents are ﬁrst cousin relatives there were no similar cases in other close relatives. The family have only one healthy daughter, she is 11-year-old and product of 8
th pregnancy 
of mother. Our proband is also suffering from the same clinical feature of deceased siblings. She was about 4-year-old when reffered to us. Hypotonia, neuromotor retardation, hepatosplenomegaly, and coarse facies were the cardinal clinical ﬁndings. The disease evolves towards convulsions and blindness, deafness,and ultimately decerebrate state. Leading to patient's death when she was ﬁve years old. After complete clinical and laboratory investigation, we found abnormal foamy histiocyte in the bone marrow aspirate. Then we sent blood and skin biopsy samples to the Metabolic Service of Erasmus University in the Netherlands. Because of complete deﬁciency of enzyme beta-galactosidase in her WBC, and skin ﬁbroblasts, ﬁnal diagnosis in this family was GM1 gangliosidosis.  This is the ﬁrst diagnosed family 
conﬁrmed by enzyme assay from Iran.
P0184. Myotonic dystrophy in the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) 
(Russia)
A. L. Sukhomyasova1, N. R. Maksimova2, M. N. Korotov1, S. A. Fedorova2, A. 
L. Danilova2, A. N. Nogovitcina1;  
1Republican Hospital №1 – National Center of Medicine, Yakutsk, Russian 
Federation, 2Yakutsk Research Center of RAMS and Government of RS(Y), 
Yakutsk, Russian Federation.
During last 20 years 105 patients with diagnosis myotonic dystrophy (MD) from 39 families are registered. Now 98 is alive (58,16 % - women, 41,84 %-men). 92 of them are Yakuts (93,88 %) from 35 families. The prevalence of MD in the Yakut population (total population is about 420 000) is 23,28 on 100 000. Disease is registered in 18 of 35 administrative units. Prevalence of MD in separate areas changes from 2,23 up to 122,22 on 100 000 population. Among agricultural population where the indigenous population makes the majority, prevalence MD in 4,2 times is higher, than among city.In regional medical genetic consulting department there are 81 patients with clinical diagnosis “myotonic dystrophy” in the age of from 0 till 63 years and 173 their clinically healthy relatives. Among affected patients usually occur classical adult form of MD (45,7%), in 2,5% - mild form, in 35, 8% - juvenile and congenital form - 3, 7%. Molecular-genetic diagnostics is carried out by method PCR with the subsequent electrophoresis. There were 9 prenatal diagnostic investigations in 8 affected families.Probably, one of the reasons of accumulation MD among indigenous population is the effect of the founder. The further researches are necessary for an explanation of the reasons of high prevalence MD in Yakuts, expansion of opportunities of medical-genetic consultation of families with MD with use of molecular-genetic methods with a view of 
reduction of a genetic cargo.P0185. Autosomal dominant inheritance of cardiac valve 
anomalies
M. Wessels1, D. Majoor-Krakauer2, B. de Vries3, P. Willems4;  
1Dept Obstetrics and Gynecology, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands, 2Dept Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands, 3Dept Clinical Genetics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4GENDIA, 
Antwerp, Belgium.
Anomalies of the atrioventricular and semilunar heart valves account for 25 -30 % of all congenital heart malformations (CHM). The majority of these heart malformations are sporadic, although some pedigrees with autosomal dominant inheritance of non-syndromic heart valves anomalies have been described. Cardiac valve anomalies can also be part of well-deﬁned syndromes with autosomal dominant inheritance (such as Noonan syndrome and Alagille syndrome).We describe here two multiplex pedigrees with non-syndromic forms of heart valve anomalies that segregate as an autosomal dominant 
condition.The ﬁrst family is a 3-generation pedigree with 9 family members affected with congenital defects of the cardiac valves, including aortic stenosis (4 patients), aortic (1 patient) and mitral (3 patients) valve insufﬁciency, and bicuspid aortic valve (2 patients). Pulmonary atresia, pulmonary stenosis and tricuspid insufﬁciency was present in one patient each. Several patients had septal defects. The second family consists of 7 patients in 2 generations with valvular aortic stenosis in 3 patients. Two patients presented with defects of the pulmonary valves; one with pulmonary atresia and narrow tricuspid valve and a second with valvular and infundibular pulmonary stenosis with intact ventricular septum. Both patients also had an atrial septal defect.These families might be instrumental in identifying genes involved in cardiac valve 
formation and malformation.
P0186. Michels Syndrome, Carnevale Syndrome, and Malpuech 
syndrome: Variable Expression of a Single Disorder (M2C 
syndrome) ?
A. Verloes1,2, L. Titomanlio1, S. Bennaceur3, D. Bremond-Gignac4, C. Bau -
mann1, O. Dupuy5;  
1Clinical Genetic Unit, Hôpital R Debré, Paris, France, 2INSERM U676, Paris, 
France, 3Maxillofacial Surgery Unit, Hôpital R Debré, Paris, France, 4Oph-
thalmology dept, Hôpital R Debré, Paris, France, 5Cytogenetic Unit, Hôpital R 
Debré, Paris, France.
We report a 3-year-old girl with Michels syndrome, a rare condition 
characterized by craniosynostosis, blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus, cleft lip/palate, abnormal supra-umbilical abdominal wall and mental deﬁciency. The phenotypic ﬁndings are compared with the 6 previously reported Michels cases, and with patients referred to as Carnevale, OSA and Malpuech syndromes. Michels syndrome is characterized by cleft lip and palate, anterior chamber anomalies, blepharophimosis, epicanthus inversus, and craniosynostosis. Carnevale syndrome shows hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral ﬁssures, ptosis, strabismus synophrys, large and ﬂeshy ears, and lozenge-shaped diastasis around the umbilicus. OSA syndrome resembles Carnevale, with humeroradial synostoses and spinal anomalies as extra features. Malpuech syndrome shows IUGR, hypertelorism, cleft lip and palate, micropenis, hypospadias, renal anomalies and caudal appendage. All are autosomal recessive.Despite the presence of distinctive key features, it appears that these 4 entities share multiple similarities in the facial Gestalt and the pattern of MCA. Those similarities lead us to postulate that they could belong to the same spectrum, which could be referred to as “M2C syndrome” 
(Malpuech-Michels-Carnevale syndrome).
P0187. Familial Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome
R. Teek1,2, R. Rein3, E. Essenson3, I. Marats3, K. Õunap1,4;  
1Medical Genetics Center, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute 
of General and Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 
3Children`s Clinic of Tartu University Hospital, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, 
Estonia, 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a clinically well-deﬁned syndrome characterized by a combination of broad thumbs and halluces, characteristic facial dysmorphism, growth retardation, and mental deﬁciency. RTS was shown to be associated with disruption of one copy of the CREB-binding protein gene, either by gross chromosomal Clinical genetics120
rearrangements or by point mutations. It was supposed that RTS 
has usually sporadic occurrence, but there have been few reports of familial cases with autosomal-dominant inheritance. We report a new familial occurrence of RTS in two generations (a boy, his father and fathers’ sister).Patient 1, 8-year-old boy has short stature (-2,5 SD), highly arched eyebrows, down-slanting palpebral ﬁssures, ptosis, epicanthal folds, short convex nose, long columella, long philtrum, low-set dysplastic ears, broad thumbs and halluces, clinodactyly of ﬁfth ﬁnger and unilateral cryptorchid testis. Ultrasound investigation showed horseshoe kidney. The speech disturbance was diagnosed. The father of patient 1 has only broad thumbs and halluces, but normal growth 
and development.Patient 2, 48-year-old aunt of patient 1, who also has short stature (-3,5 SD), obesity (+4,5 SD), normal mental development and similar facial features - down-slanting palpebral ﬁssures, short prominent nose, long columella, high palate, low posterior hairline, broad thumbs 
and halluces.At least 7 familial cases of RTS or Rubinstein-like syndrome have been described. Most of the patients in familial cases are mildly affected and with heterogeneous phenotype like in our described family. This family supports the conclusion of Bartsch et al. (2002) that mild alleles or modifying factors can lead to incomplete RTS.
P0188. Gene polymorphisms COL1A1 and VDR analysis in 
patients with syringomyelia from Bashkortostan.
A. S. Abulgatina , R. Khusainova, I. Khidiyatova, E. Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Syringomyelia is a neurodegenerative disorder, resulting from spinal cavity formation. To study the role of genes involved in the functioning of conective tissue, we perfomed SpI polymorphism analysis in the 
COL1A1 gene (collagen, type I, alpha-1, 17q21.3-2) and Fok-I RLPA analysis in the 
VDR gene (vitamin D receptor). The groups analyzed 
included 116 patients with syringomyelia and 185 healthy individuals from 3 ethnic groups: Russians, Tatars, Bashkirs.The SpI allele frequency distribution showed statistically signiﬁcant differences between patients of Tatar and Russian origin. There were no statistically signiﬁcant differences between Russians, Tatars and Bashkirs in the control group. There were also no statistically signiﬁcant differences in allele and genotype frequencies at this locus in affected patients as a whole and in ethnically different groups of patients as well as in controls, although in patients and controls of Russian origin the frequency of the s allele, corresponding to less active form of syringomielia was 0.258 in affected patients and 0.108 in controls (OR=2.863). This result lets us suggest that the s allele may be a risk 
factor for disease development.In the 
VDR gene Fok-I polymorphism there were no signiﬁcant 
differences in genotype frequencies between patients and controls. FF genotype is signiﬁcantly more frequent in patients than in controls (P=0.0005, OR=3.71). There were no differences in allele frequencies 
between patients and controls in this locus.So, according to our data, FF genotype may be considered as a 
susceptibility genetic marker for syringomyelia.
P0189. Preliminary results of hMLH1 and hMSH2 mutation 
analysis among Iranian patients with HNPCC
N. Abedin, B. Noorinayer, N. Rahnamaye-chitsaz, M. Shahmoradgoli, N. 
Karimianpour, F. Taghizadeh, H. Asadzadeh, M. Zali;  
The Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Background:
Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is one of the most common inherited cancer syndromes, accounting for 3-5% of all cases of colorectal cancer.Germline mutations in the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes MSH2 
and MLH1 are responsible for the majority of HNPCC patients
Methods:We screened 41 Iranian patients who fulﬁlled the bethesda criteria for HNPCC. Germline mutations for hMLH1 or hMSH2 genes were evaluated in all 41 patients. Mutation analysis was performed by PCR ampliﬁcation of the 19 exons for hMLH1 and 16 exons of the hMSH2 genes. The amplicons were screened by SSCP for mutations. Samples which showed band shifts on the SSCP were veriﬁed by 
direct sequencing.
Results:For the hMLH1 gene we found one missense mutation in the exon 11 at c.326T>C(Val - - Ala) and two nonsense mutations in the exons 13 and 19 at c.487C>T(Arg - - Stop) and c.2146_2147 delGT(Val - - Stop), respectively.For the hMSH2 gene an insertion was found at the nucleotide 3010 Ins G causing a frameshift in the exon 13.This mutation was found in four patients.In one of the patients another transversion was also found at c.677C>G(Thr - - Arg) in the exon 13 besides the 3010InsG.
Discussion:This is the ﬁrst report of the mutational analysis of patients with HNPCC in Iran. Our results provide further insight into the mutational spectrum 
of MMR genes in HNPCC families.
P0190. Genotype-phenotype correlations of the Wilson disease 
in Volga-Ural region.
A. Magzhanova1, A. Karunas1, R. Magzhanov2, E. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Insitute of Biochemistry & Genetics of Ufa Scientiﬁc Center Russian Acad. Sci., 
Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkirian State Medical University, Ufa, Russian 
Federation.
Wilson's disease is an autosomal recessive disorder of hepatic copper 
metabolism caused by mutations in the gene encoding a copper-transporting P-type ATPase (13 q 14.3-q 21.1) and leading to hepatic 
or neurological disease.Wilson disease has an irregular ethnic and geographic occurrence in populations and is characterized by interfamily and intrafamily variability.The purpose of this research was the analysis of the correlation between clinical features (neurological, neuropsychological and liver 
disorders) and types of mutations of 29 patients from Bashkortostan.Using SSCP analysis followed by sequencing of shifted exons we have identiﬁed 4 mutations: His1069Gln (43.5%), 3402delC(6.5%), 3559+1G>T (6.5%), the Glu1064Lys substitution was found to be 
heterozygous in two WD families.All patients were divided into 3 groups: 1-homozygous for the His1069Gln mutation, 2-compound-heterozygous on for the 
His1069Gln mutation and 3-patients with unknown mutations.Our results show that homozygotes for the His1069Gln mutation had a milder disease onset at a later age and rare severe liver disorder .
In several cases we found an interfamily variability between sibs in age of manifestation and character of clinical symptoms, which could not 
be explained by the types of mutation.According our studies Wilson disease is more frequently in the Tatar 
population and has a severe disease course.Our results indicate that Wilson disease has interfamily and intrafamily variability which needs to be studying further.
P0191. Sotos syndrome. Novel and known mutations of NSD1 
gene, in a new group of unpublished italian patients.
E. Andreucci , L. Giunti, S. Guarducci, U. Ricci, I. Sani, M. Ottaviani, E. Lapi, 
M. Giovannucci Uzielli;  
University of Florence, Dep Paediatrics, Genetics, Children's Hospital A.Meyer, 
Florence, Italy.
Sotos syndrome (OMIM #117550) is an overgrowth syndrome characterized by pre- and post-natal overgrowth, macrocephaly, advanced bone age, mental retardation, and typical facial features. The recent identiﬁcation of deletions and point mutations of NSD1 (Nuclear receptor-binding SET domain containing protein) in more than half (> 60%) of Sotos syndrome subjects has allowed the re-evaluation of clinical phenotype and natural history of this disorder for a genotype/phenotype correlation. In the same time, the interest t is growing to identify other molecular defects underlying about 40% of 
Sotos syndrome typical cases.We analyzed genomic DNA from 12 patients with Sotos syndrome (isolated and familial cases) for mutations of the NSD1 gene, by using direct sequencing and MLPA analysis. All patients were included in the register of our Unit with the diagnosis of Sotos syndrome, following an accurate clinical evaluation and a regular follow-up speciﬁc programme, performed in the same Genetics Unit since many years. In all cases, Clinical genetics121
G and Q banding chromosome analysis, from phytohaemagglutinin 
stimulated peripheral blood lymphocyte cultures using standard 
procedures, showed a normal karyotypeBased on the published genomic sequence, for the direct sequencing analysis, 40 primer pairs were used for PCR ampliﬁcation of exons and splicing junctions of the NSD1 gene. For the MLPA technique, we used the probemix P026B for 24 NSD1 gene regions.We were able to conﬁrm the clear predominance of point mutations, with the identiﬁcation of well known, or not yet described exonic mutations in 
the coding regions, and intronic mutation at the splicing sites.
P0192. Muenke craniosynostosis: mutational analysis of FGFR3 
gene improves the identiﬁcation of an otherwise clinically 
underdiagnosed disorder
I. Sani , L. Giunti, E. Andreucci, U. Ricci, S. Guarducci, A. Cecconi, M. Ottavi -
ani, E. Lapi, M. Giovannucci Uzielli;  
University of Florence, Dep of Pediatrics, Genetics, Children's Hospital 
A.Meyer, Florence, Italy.
Proline to Arginine gain-of-function mutation in FGFR3 gene (Pro250Arg), 
caused by a C749G transversion, results in Muenke syndrome (MS), characterized by coronal precocious synostosis , macrocephaly and abnormal skull shape. A high arched palate, sensorineural hearing loss, and developmental delay can also be evident.The FGFR3 gene maps to human chromosome 4p16.3: consists of 19 exons and 18 introns. FGFR (Fibroblast growth factor receptor) 3 gene, is associated with other genetic disorders (Achondroplasia, Hypochondroplasia, Saddan syndrome, Lethal Thanatophoric Dysplasia, some cases of Crouzon syndrome) with different, recurrent, mutations.We report the preliminary results of a two years project designed to identify the Muenke syndrome, associated with the FGFR3 gene mutations in newborns and childrens with apparently isolated coronal cranyosynostosis, or with a syndromic phenotype suggestive for 
Muenke syndrome.The direct sequencing analysis revealed the same Pro250Arg mutation in seven patients. One family with almost three affected subjects. A couple of MZ twins, and two other unrelated subjects with a de novo mutation.We emphasize the variable clinical phenotype, also in the same family: in particular, with complete or partial, bicoronal or unicoronal synostosis. In the MZ twins, craniosynostosis was identiﬁed during the pregnancy by morphological fetal study, early in the third trimester.
P0193. High frequency of skewed X chromosome inactivation in 
Rett patients and their mothers
G. P. S. Knudsen1, T. C. S. Neilson2, M. E. S. Bailey2, M. Hulten3, K. H. 
Orstavik1,4;  
1Faculty Division Rikshospitalet, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway , 2Division 
of Molecular Genetics,Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, University of 
Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 3Department of Biological Science, Uni -
versity of Warwick, Warwick, United Kingdom, 4Department of Medical Genet -
ics, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway.
Rett syndrome is an X-linked neurological disorder with a characteristic 
phenotype, and substantial phenotypic variability. This variability has been partly attributed to an effect of X chromosome inactivation. A higher frequency of skewed X inactivation in Rett patients has been reported. We report here a study of X inactivation ratios in DNA from blood and buccal cells of Rett patients (N = 69) and their mothers (N = 73). The mean degree of skewing in blood was higher in patients (71.1%) than controls (65.7%) (N = 58; p<0.01). Unexpectedly, the mean degree of skewing in blood was also higher in the mothers (71.5%) (p<0.01). The Rett patients and the mothers had a higher frequency (25 % and 29 %) of skewed X inactivation (deﬁned as >80 %) than controls (16 %), but the difference was not statistical signiﬁcant. The mean degree of skewing in buccal smear was lower than for blood, and was signiﬁcantly higher in mothers than in controls (p<0.05). To test whether the Rett patients with skewed X inactivation were daughters of skewed mothers, 53 mother-daughter pairs were analysed. There was no evidence for a relationship between skewing in patients and mothers; of 14 patients with skewed X inactivation, only 3 had a mother with skewed X inactivation. We conclude that Rett patients and their mothers may have a signiﬁcantly greater degree of X inactivation skewing than controls, and suggest that this phenomenon may be of interest in the analysis of genotype-phenotype correlations 
in Rett syndrome.
P0194. Oral clefts: associations with epidemiological and clinical 
characteristics among newborns in Lithuania, 1993 - 1997
A. Utkus1, L. Linkevičienė2, V. Kučinskas1;  
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics of Vilnius University, Vilnius, 
Lithuania, 2Institute of Odontology of Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
The clefts of lip, alveolar ridge and palate are common heterogeneous congenital anomalies. Epidemiological studies of oral clefts in various geographical and ethnical areas exhibit some differences. The incidence of oral clefts nowadays is not falling ans sometimes shows a tendency to an increase. The aim of the study was to establish the incidence rate of oral clefts in Lithuania and in its separate regions during 1993-1997; to create structural model registry and to perform a 
retrospective comparative analysis of oral clefts.The incidence rate of oral clefts for 1000 livebirths in Lithuania during 1993-1997 was 1.84 (1:544), and in separate regions of Lithuania the rate of clefts for 1000 livebirths was from 0.01 to 3.34. Isolated clefts formed 74.1% of all clefts. Syndromic clefts formed 25.9% of all clefts and comparing to the period 1953-1964 showed a statistically reliable increase owning to improved diagnostics and registration. Unilateral clefts are more frequent than bilateral, and the left unilateral cleft is more common than the right. The most common diagnoses were isolated palatal clefts forming 40.4% of all clefts and statistically reliably diagnosed more for female patients. Unilateral total upper lip, maxillary alveolus and palate cleft was diagnosed for 21.8% of all clefts and was statistically relaibly more common for male newborns. Different regions of Lithuania were divided into four clusters and the incidence of clefts cases per 1000 newborns in 1993-1997 did not differ statistically in the 
administrative regions of Lithuania.
P0195. Cytogenetics & Molecular Study of Acquired and 
Congenital Disorders
K. Kucheria ;  
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
The present study aimed to use ﬂuorescent-labeled probes for screening various congenital anomalies (sex chromosomal and autosomal), prenatal diagnosis and cancer genetics. Standard techniques were used for conventional cytogenetics and Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH). Sex chromosome aneuploidies (XXY, XO, XXX, XYY) were analyzed using probes for chromosomes X and Y. The cases with ambiguous genitalia were further analyzed using probe for SRY gene. Prenatal diagnosis included screening aneuploidies of chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y on uncultured cells and metaphases obtained from amniotic ﬂuid and chorionic villi samplings. Gene alterations were studied in Retinoblastoma and leukemias using speciﬁc probes. Response to therapy was assessed by evaluating minimal residual disease (MRD) in leukemia patients. Attempts were also made to analyze cells obtained from buccal mucosa and bladder epithelium that could facilitate rapid screening anomalies without 
painful invasive techniques.Prenatal diagnosis using FISH on uncultured cells provided accurate and rapid results within 24 hours. Molecular rearrangements that could not be detected with conventional cytogenetics were identiﬁed using FISH technique. The SRY region was detected in few cases of ambiguous genitalia that lacked the Y chromosome. Most leukemia patients in complete cytogenetic remission showed molecular evidence of MRD. Aneuploidies and gene rearrangements could also be detected on interphase (non-dividing) cells obtained from peripheral blood and bone marrow. To conclude, the present study stresses that FISH does add to the utility of cytogenetics by decreasing the time 
interval between sampling and diagnosis.
P0196. A patient with a de novo terminal deletion of 
chromosome 1q
M. C. Panzaru, C. Rusu, L. Butnariu, M. Gramescu, V. Gorduza;  
Medical Genetics Center, Iasi, Romania.
Terminal deletion of the long arm of chromosome 1 is characterized by multiple anomalies and neurological signs including psychomotor and developmental delay, hypotonia, seizures, microcephaly, characteristic facies, congenital heart diseases, bone defects and genital anomalies. Clinical genetics122
More than 70 cases were reported in the literature showing variable 
expressivity.We report a 3 years old male patient, the only child of an apparently normal, young, unrelated couple. He was born naturally, at term, after an uneventful pregnancy (Wt 2500g, Ht 47 cm). Postnatal development was delayed. One episode of seizures was recorded (1 year old). Physical examination performed at 3 years 4month revealed: growth retardation (Ht - 2 SD, Wt - 1,76 SD), microbrachycephaly, dysmorﬁc face (round face, upslanting palpebral ﬁssures, hypertelorism, epicanthic folds, broad nasal bridge, long philtrum, downturned mouth, thin upper lip, cupid’s bow, low set ears with preauricular pits), short neck, clinodactyly of IInd and IVth ﬁngers, hypospadias, cryptorchidism (operated), sacro-coccygeal sinus, hypotonia, developmental delay. Echocardiography identiﬁed an ASD. Abdominal echography was normal. Based on the association of multiple birth defects, a karyotype was indicated. Chromosome analysis revealed a terminal deletion 
(1)(q42.1qter); parental karyotypes were normal.In conclusion, we present this case to illustrate this relatively rare chromosomal abnormality and to compare the data of our patient with 
those presented in the literature
P0197. A large gap between age at diagnosis by screening and 
by symptoms in parent/offspring pairs with autosomal-dominant 
dilated cardiomyopathy
M. Pasotti1, A. Repetto1, A. Serio1, M. Grasso2, N. Marziliano2, C. Campana1, A. 
Brega3, M. Diegoli4, L. Tavazzi1, E. Arbustini2;  
1Department of Cardiology, Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 2Molecular Diag -
nostic Lab, Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3Department of Biology and Ge -
netics, University of Milan, Italy, 4Department of Pathology, University of Pavia, 
Pavia, Italy.
Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (IDCM) is inherited in about one third of cases. The new strategy of diagnosis familial diseases by means of the serial clinical screening of ﬁrst- and second-degree relatives has provided evidence that the disease may be diagnosed in as many as 6-10% of the asymptomatic relatives. We document a large gap in age between symptom-based and screening-based diagnoses of AD-DCM in 26 pairs/triplets of parents and offspring from 23 families. IDCM was diagnosed according to WHO criteria. The inclusion criteria were: 1)two contemporarily affected relatives from a same family: one parent and one of the offspring; 2)ﬁrst diagnosis and monitoring of all pairs/triplets of relatives at our Centre; 3)one of the pair/triplet of patients diagnosed by screening. The proband was the parent in 16 families with 17 pairs and two triplets of affected parent-offspring (group A), one of the offspring in seven families with ﬁve pairs and two triplets of affected members (group B). In group A, the clinical and functional ﬁndings were signiﬁcantly more severe in the probands than in the relatives diagnosed by screening, but this was not the case in group B where the clinical worsening of the disease was rapid. In pairs/triplets parent-offspring contemporarily diagnosed as having AD-DCM, there is a one-generation gap between a symptom-based and screening-based diagnosis. These data suggest that DCM has a long-lasting asymptomatic phase in pairs in which the proband is the parent, may be genetically anticipated in pairs in which the proband is one of the offspring.
P0198. Dysgerminoma (seminoma), gonadoblastoma and 
mixed germ tumor in two adult 46,XY females after estrogen-
progesterone treatment initiated at their 16 years of age
L. Jakubowski1, W. Alaszewski1, A. Jeziorowska1, A. Bielak1, T. Krawczyk1, A. 
Maciejczak1, I. Pinkier1, J. Słowikowska-Hilczer2, K. Kula2;  
1Polish Mother's Memorial Hospital - Research Institute, Lodz, Poland, 2Medical 
University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.
We report two XY females, 19- and 25-year-old, with clinical signs of 
pure gonadal dysgenesis. Both patients underwent a laparoscopic gonadectomy. Histological examination of the gonads showed in each case coexistence of gonadoblastoma and dysgerminoma. Additionally in gonads of the ﬁrst patient mixed germ tumor elements were found. PCR analysis showed no deletion of Y chromosome speciﬁc sequences in lymphocytes and ﬁbroblasts of gonads in both cases. In the ﬁrst case nonsense point mutation in the codon 81 within HMG-domain of 
the SRY gene  [SRY, GLU81TER] was diagnosed. The mutation was 
excluded in the father of this patient. In the second case the SRY gene 
was apparently normal in lymphocytes of peripheral blood as well as in gonadal ﬁbroblasts. SRY gene mutations are observed only in no more 
than 15% of patients with XY-gonadal dysgenesis and any of them is clearly connected with the risk of gonadoblastoma. The hypothesis of GBY locus existence has no direct evidence in cases of dysgenetic 
gonad tumors.We discuss that persistence of germ cells as well as sex cord elements in some cases of dysgenetic gonads. It may have the character of linear probability because of SRY presence. In consecutive cases the 
cellular components may undergo tumorgenesis under the inﬂuence of 
genetic as well as hormonal factors.The study was supported in part by the Polish Committee for Scientiﬁc 
Research, grant No 6 PO5E 135 21.
P0199. Gingival Fibromatosis, sparse hair and congenital 
glaucoma: broadening the phenotype?
F. Forzano1, V. Viassolo1, D. DeAngelis2, P. Brunamonti Binelli2, P. Quilici3, R. 
Bandelloni3, P. Balbi2, F. Faravelli1;  
1Human Genetics Department, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2Dentistry and 
Oral Medicine Service, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 3Histopatology Depart -
ment, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy.
Isolated gingival ﬁbromatosis is generally a sporadic condition, but occasionally is seen in families. In this case, the onset is within the ﬁrst ten years. Today, many patients had been described in literature, either presenting with gingival ﬁbromatosis as an isolated feature or in 
association with other signs.Jorgenson (1971) reported an adult female with gingival ﬁbromatosis who also had sparse hair, nystagmus, and myopia.Here we present a girl who suffers from gingival ﬁbromatosis, which is also affected by unilateral glaucoma and localized sparse hair. Karyotype on blood cells and gingival ﬁbroblast is 46,XX.We propose our patient represents an association of feature helpful in reﬁning phenotype of this condition.
ReferencesJorgenson RJ. Gingival ﬁbromatosis. BDOAS 1971;7(7):278-280.
P0200. Cytogenetic investigation of POF subjects in Coimbatore 
District, Coimbatore, India.
K. Sasikala, M. Vimala Devi, R. Sangeetha;  
Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, India.
Human infertility has become a growing problem in the world today. Infertility is a major public health problem in India and it has also been estimated that in India between 10-15 % of the couples are infertile. Premature Ovarian Failure (POF), is a common form of ovulatory dysfunction. POF, premature menopause, or early menopause, is a condition characterized by amenorrhea, hypoestrogenism, and elevated serum gonadotropin levels in women younger than 40 years. Premature failure (POF) is a "triad of amenorrhea, hyperandrogenism and hyperestrogenism and loss of fertility in women under the age of 40 years". POF is a typical feature in Turners syndrome. The most common etiology of gonadal dysgenesis is X monosomy (45, X), occurring in approximately 50% of individuals with the premature ovarian failure. A total number of 250 women were screened for infertility and nearly 144 patients showing Ovulatory Disorders were selected. Of them, 62 of them were with Premature ovarian failure. The 62 subjects presented with POF were presented with different types of chromosomal aberrations as, 45,X0 ; 47,XXX ; 45,X0/46,XY ; 46,XX,t(1p
_ ; 11q+); 
46,XX,del(Xq); 45,X0,22s+; 45,X0/46,Xi(Xq) ; 46,XX,t(8p_ ; 9q+); 
46,XX, t(6p+ ; 15q_). An major event of this investigation is to assess 
X chromosomal alterations in infertility related to women population of this part of the country and to determine if chromosomal abnormality corresponds with Ovulatory disorders and to assess whether either 
predicts clinical outcome in ovarian disorders.
P0201. Frequency of Y chromosome microdeletions in Iranian 
males with idiopathic infertility
E. Nobakht Haghighi1,2, M. A. Sedighi Gilani2, H. Imanian3, H. Najmabadi1,3;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Sci -
ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Kariminejad and Najmabadi Pathology 
and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Among couples with infertility problems, the male factor is the etiology in almost 50% of the cases and nearly 20% of all infertile men have idiopathic oligozoospermia. Recent studies reported that DNA Clinical genetics123
microdeletions on the long arm of the Y chromosome (Yq) may be 
responsible for some cases of idiopathic male infertility. The most important region of Yq is within intervals 5 and 6, which is designated the azoospermic factor (AZF). There are four subregions of this factor, named AZFa, AZFb, AZFc and AZFd, which we examined in our study to determine the frequency of Y chromosome microdeletions in Iranian males with idiopathic infertility. Microdeletions at the AZFa, AZFb, AZFc/DAZ, and AZFd regions were examined in 454 males with oligozoo-/azoospermia using PCR. Our results showed that 32 out of 454 subjects (7%) had Yq microdeletions: 30 with the AZFc/DAZ, 5 with AZFa, 5 with AZFb and 4 with AZFd microdeletion were found. Three patients with AZFabcd, two with AZFab, and one with AZFcd microdeletions were detected. Since microdeletion on the Y chromosome, especially at its AZFc/DAZ region, may be a major cause of oligozoo-/azoospermia resulting in male infertility in Iran, it is recommended that infertile men have Y chromosome microdeletion 
detection before in vitro  fertilization.
P0202. Premature ovarian failure (POF) in a mother and a 
daughter with a balanced translocation t(X;11)(q24;q13)
M. R. Mansouri1, B. Carlsson1, E. Stattin2, I. Golovleva3, N. Dahl1;  
1Dept of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Dept 
of Pediatrics, Umea University Hospital, Umea, Sweden, 3Dept of Clinical Ge -
netics, Umea University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.
Premature ovarian failure (POF) is deﬁned as the complete cessation of 
the menstrual discharge before the age of 40. The condition affects 1% of women and is heterogeneous. Several X;autosome translocations have previously been associated with POF. Here we report a mother and a daughter with a balanced translocation t(X;11)(q24;q13) and POF.Physical mapping using FISH localised the Xq24 breakpoint to within a gene not previously reported as associated with POF. Similarly, the 11q13 breakpoint was mapped to a 70 kb region containing a gene which is expressed in the ovaries. We hypothesize that a subnormal transcription of both genes may contribute to POF in the two patients. Further studies are in progress to characterise the two breakpoints, the X-inactivation pattern and to clarify the role of the affected genes in POF.
P0203. arthritis in two children with chromosomal abnormalities
C. Dracou1, K. Salavoura2, S. Drakonaki1, C. Sofocleous3, A. Kolialexi4, A. 
Mavrou4;  
1Paediatrics Rheumatology Outpatients' Clinic, 2nd Dept of Paediatrics, NHS, 
P&A Kyriakou, Athens, Greece, 2Immunology Dept, Childrens' Hospital Aghia 
Sophia, Athens, Greece, 3Dept of Medical Genetics, Athens University School 
of Medicine, Athens, Greece, 4Dept of Medical Genetics, Athens University 
School of Medicine, Athens, Greece.
Association of chromosomal abnormalities with arthropathies has been described before. In the present study, two children with juvenile 
rheumatoid arthritis and a chromosomal abnormality are presented.Patient A is a 9 years old girl with 18q minus syndrome and IgA deﬁciency. At birth she had dysmorphic features (hypertelorism, upslanting ﬁssures, small mouth and chin, dysmorpic ears) and secundum atrial defect. Karyotype and telomere investigation revealed 18q minus syndrome. At the age of 5 years, she developed painful swelling of her left knee. Within next months arthritis of her both ankles, wrists, hands and feet was added to her clinical picture. One year later she developed joint contractures. Patient B is a 9 years old child with developmental delay, autism, dysmorphy (blepharoptosis, small nose, low set ears) and joint hypermbility. At the age of 7 years, she developed fever, arthritis of her knees and of her both hands and toes of small joints. Karyotype was 47XX+15(pter-q13) and investigation of 
PWSR was normal.Conclusions: Juvenile arthritis in 18q minus syndrome has been described in 4 patients, but has not been connected with chromosome 15, previously. Further investigation may expand our knowledge as far as the probable existing association between chromosomal 
abnormalities and juvenille arthritis.P0204. The frequency of chromosome 22q11.2 microdeletion in a 
group of 48 patients with conotruncal heart anomaly depending 
on the qualiﬁcation criteria for FISH analysis used
M. Piotrowicz , T. Chilarska, N. Wieczorek-Cichecka, W. Hawuła, A. Ulańska, J. 
Kiełbasiewicz-Binikowska, K. Ostrowska, L. Jakubowski;  
Polish Mother's Memorial Hospital - Research Institute, Lodz, Poland.
DiGeorge/velo-cardio-facial syndrome (DG/VCFS, CATCH 22) is the 
most frequent observed chromosomal microdeletion syndrome. It is a contigous gene syndrome usually connected with conotruncal heart anomalies, characteristic facial dysmorphic features, velopharyngeal insufﬁciency, hypoplasia/aplasia of the thymus with T-cell deﬁciency, hypoplasia/aplasia of parathyroid glands with hypocalcaemia and 1,5-3 Mb deletion on chromosome 22q11.2.Congenital heart diseases occur in approximately 8 out of 1000 live births and conotruncal malformations account for about 50-60% of congenital heart defects diagnosed during the neonatal period. Recently many authors have proved that chromosome 22q11.2 deletion is very uncommon in isolated conotruncal heart defects. The percentage of cytogenetically conﬁrmed cases increased dramatically if the heart defect was accompanied by at least one additional manifestation of the DG/VCF phenotype.In our study we examined 48 children with conotruncal defects and accompanying extracardiac anomalies or dysmorphic features. The aim of the study was to establish qualiﬁcation criteria for the ﬂuorescent ‘in situ’ hybridisation (FISH), in order to assess the diagnosis efﬁciency depending on the qualiﬁcation criteria used. FISH was performed using DiGeorge DGCR2(“N25”,CLTD) region probe. We observed the best diagnostic rate in case of patients with conotruncal heart anomaly, velopharyngeal insufﬁciency and characteristic facial dysmorphism (22q11.2 microdeletion was conﬁrmed in 74% of cases). However, taking into account the possibility of complications connected with immunity deﬁciency and hypocalcaemia we suggest that testing for the 22q11.2 microdeletion in newborn and very young children with conotruncal anomalies and a mild dysmorphic features or extracardiac abnormalities should be 
always recommended.
P0205. Hemiduplication - A Dysorganization-like syndrome?
T. Ben-Omran1, K. Chung2, B. Mullen3, D. Chitayat4;  
1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medi -
cal Genetics Program , Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical and Meta -
bolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada, Toronto, ON, Canada, 22Department of Pediatrics, Division 
of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics,, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toro, ON, Canada, 
3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics 
Program, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
The mouse mutant disorganization phenotype was ﬁrst described by 
Hummel [1958, 1959]. It arises spontaneously and disrupts the orderly processes of development. It causes bizarre and variable developmental anomalies, such as mirror-limb duplications; hamartomatous skin 
papillae, and other internal organ abnormalities.We report the autopsy ﬁnding in a fetus with hemiduplication of most 
body organs.A 29-year-old primigravida woman presented with ultrasonographic ﬁndings of 2-vessel cord, bilateral club feet, and right diaphragmatic 
hernia.The couple is non-consanguineous. The pregnancy was uncomplicated. The fetal karyotype was 46,XX . The autopsy showed right hemifacial microsomia and hemiatrophy of the right trunk, labia majora, sternum and ribs. There was duplication of the right arm, to the mid-humerus level, right clavicle, right scapula, part of the right iliac wing, right adrenal gland, right kidney, right lung, stomach and most of the small bowel. The duplicated right kidney revealed multicystic dysplastic changes. There was a cloacal tag and malposition of the anus, right diaphragmatic hernia, pulmonary hypoplasia and deviation of the heart to the left. The uterus was bicornuate, the pancreas was annular and there was a segmentation defect of the upper thoracic spine. There were 11 pairs of ribs, bilateral talipes equinovarus and left sandal gap. The right leg was shortened with a right knee and right elbow pterygia and a single umbilical artery. The spinal cord showed myelodysplasia Clinical genetics124
and the gray matter was disorganized.
The above ﬁndings are unique and represent a variant of the mouse 
DS or a whole body twining.
P0206. 6q terminal deletions: presentation of two new cases.
A. Valetto1, V. Bertini1, G. De Vito2, R. Costa3, P. Simi1;  
1Cytogenetic and molecular genetic unit, Pisa, Italy, 2IRCS Stella Maris, Pisa, 
Italy, 3A.O. Massa, Massa, Italy.
Deletions of the distal part of the long arm of chromosome 6 have not been associated to a well distinctive and recognizable phenotype, even if an emerging ‘6q- terminal deletion syndrome’ starts to be 
delineated.In order to verify this, we compared the phenotype of two new cases with the cases described in literature. A common phenotype emerged from these reports, including psycomotor retardation, growth retardation, hypotonia, seizures, and ‘typical’ facial dysmorphisms, along with various non speciﬁc malformations. These differences can be ascribed to a different deletion extent or in difﬁculties in deﬁning precisely the 
breakpoints on the basis of only classic cytogentic studies.In our patients the deletion extent was further analyzed by molecular-cytogenetic techniques: in both of them the breakpoint was located in an interval of about 442 Kb, between the clone RP11-150P20 (present) and the clone RP11-152P19 (deleted). The breakpoints fall within the fragile site FRA6E, the ‘centre’ of which is overlapping with the PARK2 gene, that spans the telomeric half of the fragile site. A potential role of 
fragile sites in generating terminal deletion is suggested.The 8 Mb deleted region is known to contain several genes; two of them, PARK2 and TBP, are known to be associated with the autosomal recessive form of juvenile parkinsonism; and the autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA 17), respectively. All the cases reported were pediatric, thus it is not known if any of them has shown 
these neurological manifestations during years.
P0207. A new locus for brachydactyly type A2 maps to 
chromosome 20p
K. W. Kjaer1, K. Lehmann2, J. Correa3, P. Nürnberg4, N. Tommerup1, S. Mund -
los5,2;  
1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Medical Genet -
ics, University of Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Department of Medical Genetics, 
Charité Universitary Medicine Berlin (Campus Virchow), Berlin, Germany, 
3Department of Medical Genetics, Federal University of Sao Paolo, Sao Paolo, 
Brazil, 4Molecular Genetics and Gene Mapping Center, Max-Delbrueck-Center 
for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 5Max-Planck Institute for Molecular 
Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
Brachydactyly type A2, an autosomal dominant hand malformation, is characterized by short and laterally deviated second and ﬁfth ﬁngers. Also, the ﬁrst and second toes can be affected in a similar way. Heterozygous missense mutations in the gene coding for bone morphogenetic protein receptor 1b (BMPR1B) were shown to cause brachydactyly type A2 in some cases by acting in a dominant negative manner. Recently, we performed a clinical study in a large Brazilian pedigree presenting with brachydactyly type A2, including radiographic evaluation of hands, feet and spine. We further undertook a linkage analysis using the SNP-GeneChip Human Mapping 10K Array/Assay Kit from Affymetrix. Additional polymorphic microsatellite markers were used for the ﬁne mapping to narrow the deﬁned region. Using this approach, we mapped a new locus for brachydactyly A2 to a 17 cM region on chromosome 20p. As a candidate gene located within this new locus, we ﬁrst sequenced the coding region of BMP2, known as an important ligand of the BMPRs that mediates essential functions in chondrocyte differentiation and bone formation, but no mutation was found. Several other candidate genes located within the disease locus 
will now be sequenced.
P0208. Apparent intergenerational stability of CTG trinucleotide 
repeats in three generations of women with myotonic dystrophy.
D. Geneviève1, M. Jambou1, G. Gourdon2, Y. Dumez3, M. Masri4, A. Munnich1, 
J. Bonnefont1;  
1Département de génétique Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 
2Unité INSERM U383, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3Service 
de Gynécologie Obstétrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 
4Service de Gynécologie Obstétrique, Hôpital François Mitterrand, Pau, France.Mytonic dystrophy (MD) is a frequent neuromuscular affection due 
to an unstable CTG trinucleotide repeat (CTGtr) located in the 3’ untranslated region of the dystrophia myotonica protein kinase (DMPK) 
at 19q13.3.Normal subjects have 5 to 37 CTGtr copies which remain stable following intergenerational transmission while affected patients have over 50 CTGtr. In a majority of DM patients, the number of repeats is highly unstable and increases during parent-offspring transmission of the mutant allele, providing molecular basis to the anticipation phenomenon (increased severity of the disease in successive 
generations).We report on apparent CTGtr stability in three generations of women with MD. The number of the CTGtr in blood cells was estimated at 133, 121 and 109 for the grandmother, mother and daughter, respectively.We had the opportunity to analyse the CTGtr in several fetal tissues after termination of the pregnancy of the 121 CTGtr carrier woman for an affected fetus at 15 WG. The size of the CTGtr (n = 113) was strictly 
identical in muscle, brain, liver and heart and chorionic villi as well.These data suggest the existence of a dominantly inherited factor preventing the instability of the expanded CTG stretch during female gametogenesis in this family. Studies of some candidate genes are in 
progress.
P0209. A BAC tiling array for human chromosome 21: 
comparative genome hybridization (CGH) to map partial 
trisomies, deletions and translocations, and insertion-deletion 
polymorphisms
C. Gehrig1, G. Lopez1, S. Gagos1, J. M. Delabar2, E. A. Y. Graison2, M. Costan -
tine2, P. M. Sinet3, S. E. Antonarakis1, R. Lyle1;  
1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University of 
Paris Denis Diderot, Paris, France, 3Institut Paul Broca, Paris, France.
A major goal of Down syndrome (DS) research is to identify which genes or other functional genomic elements are responsible for particular aspects of this complex syndrome. Central to this is the concept of critical regions (CRs). That is, regions of Hsa21 which, when present in 3 copies (aneuploid), result in one or more of the characteristic features of DS. Based on rare indviduals with partial aneuploidy, CRs have been mapped for several features of DS. However, the extent of these regions have not been determined in detail. Studies of other rearrangements (for example, deletions and translocations) involving Hsa21 may also provide information on the contribution of Hsa21 
genes to DS.In order to provide high resolution mapping of pathogenic partial aneuploidies, deletions and translocations, and to identify polymorphic insertion-deletions, involving Hsa21, we have made a BAC array covering 21q. The array consists of 411 Hsa21 BACs (from RPCI and CTD libraries), with a mean overlap of 85kb giving an approximately 2-fold tiling path. The array also includes approximately 100 BACs for normalization and controls. This CGH array will be used to assess the Hsa21 content of partial trisomy cases of DS to aid in the understanding of genotype-phenotype correlations. In addition, we will characterize the extent of Hsa21 large-scale copy number variation which was recently identiﬁed in the human genome. More than 50 samples with Hsa21 genomic abnormalities are available to us and their analysis is 
in progress.
P0210. Cohen syndrome: molecular analysis of the COH1 gene 
in the Italian cohort of patients.
C. Pescucci1, F. Ariani1, F. Mari1, C. Speciale1, M. Bedeschi2, P. Veggiotti3, R. 
Fischetto4, R. Grasso5, R. Ghilardi6, A. Selicorni6, M. di Rocco7, M. Mantovan8, 
M. Priolo9, A. Mendicino10, R. Tenconi11, A. Renieri1;  
1Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit, ICP, Clinica Mangiagal -
li, Milano, Italy, 3Child Neuropsychiatry Department, Neurological Institute Ca -
simiro Mondino IRCCS, Pavia, Italy, 4Divisione Malattie Metaboliche-Genetica 
Medica, Ospedale Regionale Pediatrico Giovanni XXIII, Bari, Italy , 5Scientiﬁc 
Institute Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy, 6Ambulatorio Genetica 
Clinica, Clinica Pediatrica de Marchi, Milano, Italy, 7II Pediatria, Istituto Gaslini, 
Genova, Italy, 8Child Neuropsychiatry Azienda Ospedaliera Careggi, Firenze, 
Italy, 9Medical Genetics, Azienda Ospedaliera Bianchi-Melacrino- Morelli, Reg -
gio Calabria, Italy, 10UO Genetica AUSL RME, Roma, Italy, 11Medical Genetics, 
Dept. Pediatrics, Universiy of Padova, Padova, Italy.
Cohen syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive condition characterized Clinical genetics125
by mild to severe mental retardation associated with microcephaly and 
truncal obesity. Characteristic dysmorphic features are down slanting palpebral ﬁssures, short philtrum, open mouth, prominent upper central incisors, prominent nose. Beside the facial gestalt, major diagnostic criteria include retinal dystrophy and neutropenia. Cohen syndrome is a quite rare condition overrepresented in the Finnish population, with a highly homogeneous phenotype. In other populations clinical features may be remarkably different. We have collected a cohort of 15 Italian patients, originating from different regions. A diagnostic rating of ‘certain’ (5 patients), ‘probable’ (4) and ‘possible’ (6) was assigned on the basis of clinical criteria. DHPLC mutation analysis of the 
COH1  
gene, recently identiﬁed as responsible for Cohen syndrome is ongoing. Analysis of the ﬁrst 8 exons revealed three truncating mutations in heterozygous state. Two are novel mutations: p.Q721fsX744 and p.R1143X. One, p.R2535X, is a recurrent mutation previously identiﬁed in the German population. The mutation, p.C1117fsX1124, prevalent in the Finnish population, was not found. The above mutations were found in three patients who are likely genetic compounds as expected by the absence of consanguinity in the Italian cohort. Two patients were classiﬁed as ‘certain’ and one as ‘probable’ on the basis of clinical criteria. Presently, no mutations were found in the group of ‘possible’ Cohen although only 8 out of 62 exons were analyzed. Extension of the analysis to the entire coding sequence will allow to deﬁne Cohen 
syndrome clinical features in the Italian population.
P0211. Unusual observations associated with novel C-terminal 
MECP2  mutations
K. Oexle1, B. Thamm-Mücke2, A. Bier1, S. Tinschert1;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Technische Universität, Dresden, Germany, 
2Labor Reising-Ackermann, Leipzig, Germany.
We report novel C-terminal MECP2 mutations. One was a frameshift 
deletion, 1135_1142delCCCGTGCC, inducing a premature stop codon in a 19-year-old woman with mental retardation and epilepsy. Preservation of language capabilities, purposeful hand use and sufﬁcient locomotion implied an atypical variant of Rett syndrome. Occipito-frontal head circumference was large at birth (36 cm; SDS = 1.7) and increased to macrocephaly in the adult patient (58.5 cm; SDS = 2.3). Thus, head size and head growth appear to be of limited 
reliability in the diagnosis of MECP2 -associated phenotypes.
In a 3.7-year-old girl who presented with classical signs of Rett syndrome such as delayed head growth, stop of language development, and ataxia, four C-terminal 
MECP2-mutations were detected: an in-frame 
deletion of 3 nucleotides, 992_994del3bp, resulting in the removal of the lysine at position 331, a one-nucleotide frameshift deletion, 1027delG, a missense mutation 1061G>C, and a second frameshift deletion, 1160_1193del34bp. None of these mutations is contained in 
the MECP2 mutation databases. The 1061G>C mutation that causes 
an arginine to leucine substitution was present in the non-affected father of the patient indicating that this mutation probably is a normal 
variant .Our observations indicate a large variability associated with C-terminal 
MECP2  mutations.
P0212. Is there a novel locus for Hirschsprung disease(HSCR) 
on chromosome 15q11q14?
D. Wand, C. Gläser, I. Hansmann;  
Institut f Humangenetik u. Medizinische Biologie, 06097 Halle/Saale, Germany .
Hirschsprung disease (HSCR, MIM # 142623) is a major cause of 
functional intestinal obstruction with an incidence of 1:5.000 live births. HSCR is considered a multifactorial malformation with low and sex dependent penetrance and variable expression depending on the length of the aganglionic segment. At least 8 major genes have been identiﬁed to be involved in HSCR. Interstitial chromosomal deletions in combination with HSCR lead to the identiﬁcation of such genes like RET (10q11.2), SIP1 (2q22q23) and EDNRB (13q22.1q32.1). According to our knowledge, chromosome 15q11q14 has not been 
associated so far with HSCR.We report about a now 16 months-old girl with HSCR and major features of Prader Willi syndrome (PWS, MIM# 176270) associated with a de novo paternal deletion 46,XX,del(15)(q11.1q13/q14)(D15Z1x2,SNRPNx1,UBE3Ax1,PMLx2). Genotyping identiﬁed hemizygosity of 2 microsatellite markers (D15S1048; D15S976) with loss of the paternal allele. Heterozygosity and biparental inheritance was proven for D15S1007 at 15q14 and all other distal loci. Thus, approx. 15-20 Mb of proximal 15q including PWS region is deleted. So far no gene for HSCR has been identiﬁed within chromosome 15q11q14. HSCR in our patient might be related to hemizygosity of the deleted segment. However, none of the rare patients with comparable deletions (Windpassinger et al, 2003) demonstrate HSCR. Alternatively, one of the breakpoints may have interrupted sequences important to prevent formation of HSCR. Signiﬁcant might be the recent mapping of a novel locus for primary ciliary dykinesia (CILD4, Jeganathan et al., 2004) to a 
17cm critical segment overlapping with our distal breakpoint region.
P0213. Skewed X-inactivation in a family with mental retardation 
and PQBP1 mutation
C. Romano, M. Fichera, M. Falco, M. Lo Giudice, L. Castiglia, V. Guarnaccia, 
F. Calì, A. Spalletta, C. Scuderi, E. Avola;  
Oasi Institute (IRCCS), Troina, Italy.
We previously reported on a family with mentally retarded males, 
obligate carriers with skewed X-inactivation and the gene responsible for this condition mapping in the Xp11-q12 region. Here we present more clinical and molecular data within an expanded pedigree segregating a known four-bases deletion in the exon 4 of PQBP1 gene. The unusual X-inactivation pattern of the obligate carriers in this family raises the topic about a possible modulation of the carrier's phenotype by the X-inactivation status. Mental impairment within the affected males is widely variable, ranging from borderline intelligence to severe mental retardation. These data support the search for PQBP1 mutations when mentally retarded males in a family kindred compatible with X-linked inheritance show microcephaly, short stature, spastic diplegia/brisk reﬂexes.
P0214. Screening of mutations in the human NIPBL gene in 
patients with Cornelia de Lange syndrome by DGGE.
H. Gabriel, A. Lott, A. Gencik;  
Zentrum fuer Medizinische Genetik, Osnabrueck, Germany.
Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a clinically heterogeneous autosomal-dominant developmental disorder characterized by upper-extremity malformations, cardiac defects, growth retardation and gastrointestinal abnormalities. Additionally, typical facial features include rotated low-set ears, long eyelashes, thiner upper lip and 
depressed nasal bridge are found in patients.The prevalence of CdLS is estimated to be around 1/10,000. Most 
cases are sporadic, although several family cases are described.Recently, it was documented that CdLS is caused by missense and nonsense mutations in the human NIPBL gene. NIBPL is the human homolog of the Drosophila Nipped-B gene which is involved in Notch 
signaling.The human NIpBL gene consists of 47 exons. Mutations were found in 
the entire coding region (Gillis et al., 2004).To identify mutations in german CdLS patients we established a DGGE-screnning protocol for detection of mutations in all exons of the NIPBL gene.So far, we screened 20 german patients with suspected CdLS. Our preliminary data indicate that DGGE is a highly sensitive screening method for detection of mutations in the NIPBL gene.
P0215. Hemispheric polymicrogyria in a patient with a Sturge-
Weber-like Syndrome
H. Faghfoury1, W. B. Dobyns2, R. J. Leventer3, S. Blaser4, C. Trevors1, M. M. 
Nezarati1;  
1Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Hospital for Sick Children, T oronto, 
ON, Canada, 2Department of Human Genetics, Neurology and Pediatrics, Uni -
versity of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 3Children's Neuroscience Center 
and Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, 
Melbourne, Australia, 4Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Sturge-Weber syndrome is a rare neurocutaneous disorder 
characterized by facial cutaneous vascular malformations and leptomeningeal angiomatosis. Associated features include seizures or other neurologic consequences and glaucoma. We report here the case of a 3½-year-old girl born to consanguineous Amish parents. She presented with midline and right forehead port-wine Clinical genetics126
stains, left-sided weakness demonstrated by right hand preference, 
ﬁrst noted at 6 months, as well as eversion and rotation of the left foot. She developed seizures, responsive to carbamazepine, at the age of 2½ years. Physical examination showed no other dysmorphic features and appropriate growth. Imaging of the brain showed right hemispheric dysgenesis most prominent in the frontal lobe with an irregular microgyric pattern and apparent cortical thickening in the frontal, parietal and anterior temporal lobes, typical of polymicrogyria. There was reduced white matter underlying the polymicrogyria. The association of polymicrogyria in association with Sturge Weber syndrome has been rarely reported and may provide insight into the pathogenesis of polymicrogyria, suggesting an association with 
abnormal cortical vasculature during development.
P0216. Is there a speciﬁc phenotype associated with 3p14 
microdeletion?
F. Mari1, G. Gregato2, S. Gimelli2, T. Pramparo2, C. Pescucci1, C. Speciale1, E. 
Pretegiani1, M. Mencarelli1, K. Sampieri1, O. Zuffardi2, A. Renieri1;  
1Medical Genetics, Dept. Mol. Biol., University of Siena, Siena, Italy , 2General 
Biology and Medical Genetics, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
We report here a 26 year-old male patient with mental retardation and dysmorphic features. Facies is characterized by high forehead, narrow horizontal palpebral ﬁssures, epicanthic folds attenuating with the age, broad nasal bridge, bulbous and broad nasal tip with prominent columella, slightly posteriorly angulated ears of normal length with thick helix and hypoplastic lobules. He has a normal head circumference. He also has very small hands and feet and pes planus, contractures of ﬁnger joints and clinodactyly of the 5° ﬁnger. Language is absent. A brain MRI, performed at 14 years, showed hyperplasia of corpus callosum. During the examination he shows an aggressive and self-injuring behavior. Standard karyotype was normal. Whole genome array-CGH analysis revealed a deletion of about 8 Mb of the short arm of chromosome 3. High resolution karyotype conﬁrmed the presence of an interstitial deletion: 46,XY,del(3)(p14.3;p14.1). Interstitial deletions of proximal 3p were reported in other 13 cases. All of them were identiﬁed by standard karyotype. Two are slightly larger deletions totally missing the band p14 and the other partially overlap extending toward the centromere. This is the smaller reported deletion. Some dysmorphic features like high forehead, epicanthic folds and narrow horizontal palpebral ﬁssures seem to be consistent with deletion of this region. The ﬁnding of these features in a patient should represent a clinical hint for deeper investigation of proximal short arm of chromosome 3. Widely use of array-CGH may also lead to the identiﬁcation of additional microdeletions, further delineating a speciﬁc syndrome.
P0217. Mutational analysis of NSD1 gene in Finnish patients with 
Sotos syndrome
P. Vuorela1, K. Huoponen1, M. Peippo2, M. Penttinen3, H. Kääriäinen1,3;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Family 
Federation of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 3Turku University Central Hospital, 
Turku, Finland.
Sotos syndrome (OMIM #117550) is a rare childhood overgrowth syndrome characterized by pre- and postnatal overgrowth, typical facial appearance, advanced bone age, developmental delay and predisposition to cancer. Although most cases are sporadic, few families with autosomal dominant inheritance have been reported. Heterozygous point mutations in the NSD1 gene or a microdeletion covering the entire gene are the major cause of the syndrome. There is no hot spot for mutations and to date there are over hundred different published 
pathogenic mutations in the NSD1 gene.Here we report the results of a mutation analysis using denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and/or direct sequencing of the NSD1 gene in 17 patients with clinically diagnosed Sotos syndrome. All cases were sporadic but only in two cases we had parental samples. Out of the 17 patients 15 (88%) were found to carry a unique heterozygous mutation. Eleven of these mutations resulted in a truncated protein product and four resulted in amino acid changes. Twelve mutations are novel and three have been published previously. In the analysed families mutations had occurred de novo. Our results are 
concordant with the results of the previous studies, which have shown that in European populations point mutations are the major cause of the syndrome. Currently we are developing a quantitative real - time PCR method to detect also small deletions, to further clarify the mutational spectrum in Finnish patients, and improve the molecular genetic testing 
of the syndrome. Genotype - phenotype correlation will be discussed.
P0218. Cumming syndrome: report of two affected sibs
F. Lalatta1, F. Natacci1, T. Rizzuti2, U. Cavallari1, M. Rustico3, M. F. Bedeschi1;  
1Medical Genetics Unit, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy , 2Pathol -
ogy Unit, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy, 3Prenatal diagnosis 
Unit, Ospedale V.Buzzi, ICP, Milan, Italy.
In 1986 Cumming et al. described a stillborn male infant, born at 27 weeks’ gestation who had bowed limbs, marked cervical lymphocele polycystic dysplasia of the kidneys, pancreas and liver and 
polysplenia.Subsequently Urioste M. et al 1991 and Perez del Rio et al. 1999 reported four cases with similar ﬁndings. We have recently described (Am J Med Genet 2005) a 46,XX fetus with ascites, campomelia, multicystic dysplastic kidneys, polysplenia, absence of fallopian tubes and uterus and laterality defects of the heart and lungs suggesting the 
diagnosis of Cumming.The patient was the ﬁrst-born of healthy, non consanguineous Caucasian parents. Family history was unremarkable. Ultrasound examination at 22nd week showed a thoracic hypoplasia , ascites, mild hyperchogenic kidneys, oligohydramnios, shortening and bowing of the lower limbs.The fetal stomach was not visualised and there was a single umbilical artery was noted. Fetal blood chromosomes were 46,XX.The pregnancy was terminated. During the following pregnancy ultrasound at 16th week showed oligohydramnios, hyperechogenic kidneys, bowing of the lower limbs. Cytogenetic analysis on AL showed normal male karyotype. Pregnancy was terminated. Pathology: on external examination the fetus showed a cystic hygroma, ascites.Bowing femura and bilateral talipes equinovarus were present. Kidneys showed diffuse multicystic dysplasia. The external genitalia were male and testes were in abdomen. Other organs were normal in number 
and structure.The ﬁndings of our cases are similar to those reported by Cumming et al (1986). The recurrence of a similar clinical picture in two sibs 
supports the autosomal recessive inheritance of the syndrome.
P0219. Auditory function in Bardet-Biedl patients
A. Besancon1, M. Eliot1, V. Weyl1, V. Laurier1, C. Stoetzel2, P. Sardat3, S. 
Sigaudy4, M. Holder5, C. Mireille6, C. Brandt1, F. Perrin-Schmitt7, J. Mandel8, D. 
Kemp9, P. Beales10, H. Dollfus11;  
1Hôpitaux Universitairesde Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Laboratoire de 
génétique médicale ULP , Faculté de médecine, Strasbourg, France, 3CHU 
Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 4Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille, France, 5CHU 
Lille, Lille, France, 6Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 
7Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France, 
8IGBMC, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 9UCL, 
Center for auditory research, London, France, 10Institute Child health, Molecular 
Medecine Unit, London, United Kingdom, 11Hôpitaux Universitaires de Stras -
bourg, Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale ULP, Strasbourg, France.
Introduction:  Recently, the pathophysiology of Bardet-Biedl syndrome 
has been described as a primary ciliary dysfunction disorder. Ciliated cells are present in the inner ear.Methods:  A cohort of 21 patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome 
genotyped for 8 BBS genes was studied. Patients were evaluated for the auditory function with audiogramms and otoacoustic emission 
(recording of vibrations created by contraction of outer hair cells).Results:  Audiogramms showed normal hearing. The threshold was 
inferior to 20dB for twenty patients but was higher then expected for the age. One patient had moderate hearing loss. Otoacoustic emission was altered for 55% of the patients ( 31% absent and diminished for 
24%).
Discussion: The selective alteration at the level of the outer hair cells, revealed by the OAE may be due to a defect at the level of the kinocilium, a primary cilia (9+0) found at the top of outer hair cell bundle, probably necessary for the cellular organisation the bundle. No speciﬁc genotype -auditory phenotype correlation was identiﬁed 
to date.Clinical genetics127
P0220. Recurrence of Achondrogenesis type II caused by a 
dominant COL2A1 mutation and “patchy” expression in the 
mosaic father
F. Faravelli1, F. Forzano1, A. Superti-Furga2, G. Wildhard3, B. Zabel3;  
1Human Genetics Department, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2Division of 
Molecular Pediatrics, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3University of Mainz - 
Children's Hospital, Mainz, Germany.
Achondrogenesis type 2 (ACG2) is produced by dominant mutations 
in COL2A1. These occur de novo in the vast majority of cases. In rare cases, mutations leading to Kniest dysplasia in children have been found at mosaic state in one of the parents who ﬁtted the diagnostic criteria for Stickler syndrome or mild spondylo-epiphyseal dysplasia (Winterpacht et al, 1993; Spranger et al, 1994). In another family, recurrence of ACG2 in two fetuses of an healthy couple was interpreted 
as evidence for gonadal mosaicism (Faivre et al, 2004).We present a family in which three fetuses were affected by ACG2. Both parents were of normal height, but the father had had scoliosis as a child and showed slight body disproportion with short trunk as an adult. His femoral heads, pelvis and lumbar vertebrae (telltale sites for collagen 2 disorders) were normal on xrays; only some thoracic vertebrae showed mild ﬂattening and anterior wedging. Although a somatic mosaicism was considered unlikely, molecular analysis revealed a COL2A1 point mutation (G1037T) in the fetuses, and a signal consistent with mosaicism in father’s blood DNA.This evidence reinforces the need to consider mosaicism in families with newly recognized COL2A1 disorders and indicates that somatic mosaicism can lead not only to milder but generalized clinical phenotype but also to regional (“patchy”) expression, with some bones affected and others entirely unaffected. This may depend by the time of onset and the body region or segment in which the somatic mutation 
arises.
P0221. Results of prenatal diagnosis of thalassemia in the 
Iranian province of Hormozgan (2001-2004)
P. Nikuei1, M. Saberi1, H. Najmabadi2, G. Tabasi3, N. Ansarian4;  
1Social Welfare Organisation, Bandarabbas, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetics 
Research Center, The Social Welfare &Rehabilitation Sciences University, Teh -
ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Dr.Nikuei Mediical Genetic Counselling Center, 
Bandarabbas, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Dr.Nikuei Medical Genetic Counselling 
Center, Bandarabbas, Islamic Republic of Iran.
We review 126 persons (63 couples) with hemoglobinopathy attending two genetic counseling centers in Hormozgan province, which is located in the south of Iran in the north of the Persian Gulf, for the years 2001- 2004. After genetic counseling these couples were referred for molecular investigations. Results are as follows: 122 persons (96.8%) were Fars, four (3.2%) were Baloochis. Thirty eight couples had consanguinous marriages (61.3%). Twenty couples that were referred to us had an affected child. Among the patients who were referred to us, 111 individuals had beta thalassemia minor while 15 other individuals were carriers for other hemoglobin disorders such as alpha thalassemia, hemoglobin D and hemoglobin S. The mutation spectrum reveals IVS1-5 (76 cases) as the major beta thalassemia mutation in our province followed by IVSII-I (11 cases), IVS1-110, IVS1-6, C5, C15, C30. Two types of sampling were performed for prenatal diagnosis: CVS (chorionic villus sampling) and amniocentesis. In 50 cases prenatal diagnosis was done. The results were as follow: minor thalassemia: 26 fetuses (52%); normal homozygote: 11 fetuses (22%), major thalassemia: 13 fetuses (26%). Our result shows a Mendelian distribution in our prenatal diagnostic program in Hormozgan 
province.
P0222. Organising the management of patients with Fabry 
disease in the view of multidisciplinary approach
G. Fekete, M. Garami, A. Ponyi, R. Biacsi, K. Németh, T. Constantin;  
2nd Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University , 
Budapest, Hungary.
Objective: Fabry disease is a rare lysosomal storage disorder. The 
management of Fabry disease is very complex, included the clinical and molecular genetic diagnosis, the assessment of disease severity, the genetic counselling and the enzyme replacement therapy (ERT).
Methods: The complexity of the management has given the reason 
for established Fabry Work Group in our Institute. Through a case report we discuss the relevant clinical features, the molecular studies as well as our experiences with the ERT. Different levels of medical 
attendance will be also presented.Case report: A 27 years old male patient was admitted to our department 
with angiokeratomas and recurrent diarrhoea. The diagnosis of Fabry disease was conﬁrmed with the decreased plasma activity of GAL. The corneal involvement was revealed by slit-lamp examination. Cardiac 
manifestation was ruled out. Normal renal function was observed.We performed reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis using RNA isolated from whole-blood sample. The amplicons were subcloned and sequenced. A novel missense mutation was identiﬁed in the 266. codon (5. exon) of GAL: GAT (Asp) → TAT (Tyr).After 12 months of ERT the patients reported improvements in the ability to sense heat as well as in his general well being. Decreased numbers of diarrhoea were occurred. New organ involvement or 
progression was not observed.
Conclusion: ERT should be started in the early stage of the disease, 
before the irreversible complications are developed. To get this optimal point, cooperation of paediatricians, cardiologists, nephrologists, neurologists, ophthalmologists, dermatologists and molecular 
biologists should be performed.
P0223. Deafness : clinical and genetic evaluation of 102 patients.
B. Gilbert-Dussardier1, K. Barsotti1, C. Gohler1, N. Bourmeyster1, C. Magde -
laine2, P. Amati-Bonneau3, J. M. Klossek1;  
1Hopital Jean Bernard, Poitiers, France, 2CHU Dupuytren, Limoges, France, 
3CHU, Angers, France.
Deafness is the most prevalent (1/700) sensory defects in humans. It is an etiologically heterogeneous trait with many known genetic and 
environmental causes.We reviewed medical records from 102 patients who have been seen in our department of clinical genetics over 6 years. We analyzed clinical features of deafness : isolated or syndromic form, type and severity of hearing impairment, age of onset, uni or bi-lateral impairment, sporadic or familial case, and looked to medical investigations they had : presence of any malformation and/or dysmorphologic features, X-rays of inner ear, renal, cardiac, thyroïd, visual, physical and mental 
development, chromosomal and/or genetic screening.Out of 102 patients, there were 40 adults and 62 children. Sex ratio was 1.37 F/M. Half of them (49 %) had a syndromic form and 53 % had an isolated deafness. Out of the patients with syndromic forms, we could identify 15 Usher, 4 type I Waardenburg
, 3 Goldenhar, 
4 B.O.R. syndromes. One had a partial chromosomal del 2q. Out of 53 nonsyndromic cases, 16 were sporadic and 37 were familial. Transmission was clearly autosomal dominant (DFNA) in 13 cases and autosomal recessive (DFNB) in 10 cases. Seven cases were homozygotous for mutations in GBJ2 and 5 composit heterozygotous for a mutation in GJB2 and a mutation in GJB6. One familial case with a maternal transmission was due to the T7511C mitochondrial DNA 
mutation.We found few studies with such an approach of a global population of death patients. We will comment ad compare our results.
P0224. The effects of pentoxyﬁlline on drug allergy induced by 
α-galactosidase
T. Constantin , A. Ponyi, M. Garami, G. Fekete;  
2nd Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University , 
Budapest, Hungary.
Objective: Pentoxifylline is widely used to treat peripheral vascular 
diseases. Additional to this well-known indication, pentoxifylline is a promising new agent for the treatment of SIRS (severe immune response syndrome). Pentoxifylline decreases release of TNF-α, the central mediator of SIRS. It also inhibits cytokine-induced polymorphonuclear cell activation and adherence, as well as polymorphonuclear cell 
degranulation and superoxide anion production.
Methods: We report a case of a young male patient with Fabry 
disease in whom hypersensitive reaction developed against enzyme replacement therapy (ERT).Case report: A 25-year-old male patient was admitted to our 
Department with angiokeratomas, post-stroke and pain syndromes. After the diagnosis of Fabry disease was conﬁrmed, ERT was started.Since that, two episodes of adverse events were observed with severe Clinical genetics128
shiver and hypertension. The relationship between these events and 
the infusion were probable in both occasion. Although the pre- and post infusion IgE titres and the post infusion serum tryptase level were normal; the result of lymphocyte transformation test showed mild hypersensitisation against the drug. Regarding the patient’s progressive multi-organ involvement and the above mentioned results of laboratory studies, continuation of ERT with pre- and post infusion pentoxyﬁlline administration was decided. The patient received 14 
courses according to this protocol without any problem.
Conclusion: The clinical use of ERT is limited mainly by the treatment 
cost, the production of neutralising antibodies and the hypersensitive reactions caused by the antigenic effects of the drug. The presented method may be useful in the treatment of Fabry patients with 
hypersensitive reaction.
P0225. Carrier diagnosis of DMD/BMD deletions by QPCR
L. Alías, A. Freixas, M. J. Rodriguez, M. J. Barceló, M. Baiget, P. Gallano;  
Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
We sought to ﬁnd a technique to establish a direct DMD/BMD carrier diagnosis in families in which it was not possible to perform this kind 
of diagnosis.We applied the QPCR technique by Light Cycler using the Fast Start DNA master SYBR Green (Roche) to muscular and brain promotors and to 25 different exons scattered over the dystrophin gene.We diagnosed 64 women from 30 families presenting a risk of being DMD/BMD carriers. The women presented risk because they belonged to families in which a deletion in dystrophin gene was detected in the affected boy. The results were compared with the indirect analysis by 
STRs.The Light Cycler technique offers reliability and spead in the heterozygous carrier diagnosis. Furthermore, this technique allows us to avoid the hybridization with speciﬁc probes to each exon.Owing to this method it is possible to diagnose DMD/BMD carrier women in families in which other methods could not be applied or did not yield accurate results (sporadic cases, no informativity by STRs, 
unavailability of of parents of the women studied).
P0226. Molecular analysis of CTDP1 gene in consanguineous 
families presenting typical or partial CCFDN phenotype
T. Hamadouche1, C. Lagier-Tourenne2, V. Delague1, I. Boccaccio1, H. Dollfus3, 
N. Philip4, N. Lévy1,4;  
1Inserm U491, Faculté de Médecine de Marseille, Marseille, France, 2IGBMC, 
Strasbourg, France, 3Fédération de Génétique, Strasbourg, France, 4Départe -
ment de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d'enfants de la Timone, Marseille, 
France.
Congenital Cataract Facial Dysmorphism Neuropathy syndrome (CCFDN) is a complex autosomal recessive disorder involving multiple systems and organs. Initially reported from the Roma Gypsy group originating from Bulgaria, CCFDN is characterized by developmental impairments affecting eyes and face, peripheral and central nervous system, growth and intellect. Recently, the disease causing gene was identiﬁed, CTDP1, encoding an essential component of the eucaryotic transcription machinery. So far, a unique founder homozygous mutation, g.IVS6+389C>T, has been identiﬁed in CCFDN patients, resulting in an aberrant splicing and causing partial loss of expression. We report molecular analysis of three consanguineous Gypsy families with either typical or partial CCFDN. The homozygous mutation was identiﬁed in families G and B. Indeed, although typical CCFDN phenotype was observed in family G, in family B, a 5 years old girl mainly presented a demyelinating neuropathy with congenital cataract although developmental delay and facial dysmorphism were slight. In family L, initially diagnosed as non syndromic CMT4, the same mutation was found to be heterozygous in one patient. Investigation of other loci already known to segregate in Gypsies (NDRG1, HMSN-R) and transcriptional studies from cultured lymphocytes from CCFDN individuals of these families are in progress. However, despite the homozygous presence of the mutation in one affected patient (family B), the clinical phenotype is somewhat different, suggesting that typical CCFDN might be misdiagnosed at lower ages. We thus propose CTDP1 as a candidate gene in patients presenting a combination of peripheral neuropathy and congenital cataract, even in absence of 
others developmental features.P0227. The difﬁcult task of sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) in 
patients with idiopathic cardiomyopathies.
M. Diegoli1,2, M. Grasso2, E. Porcu2, E. Disabella2, M. Tagliani2, C. Lucchelli2, S. 
Ansaldi2, M. Pasotti3, A. Serio3, L. Tavazzi3, A. Brega4,5, E. Arbustini2;  
1Dpt. of Pathology - University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2Lab. Molecular Genet -
ics, IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3Cardiology, IRCCS Policlinico 
S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 4Dpts. of Biology and Genetics- University of Milan, Mi -
lan, Italy, 5Genetics and Microbiology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
SNHL may occur in patients with inherited cardiomyopathies both hypertrophic (HCM) and dilated (IDCM). To date, hearing loss has been reported in patients with mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) defects related to HCM, or occasionally described in patients with autosomal dominant cardiomyopathies. Recently the epicardin gene (locus 6q23-24) has been linked to familial IDCM associated with SNHL. No mutations has been identiﬁed to date in the epicardin gene.Aim of the study was analyzing mtDNA, epicardin, connexin26 (Cx26) and connexin30 (Cx30) in patients with cardioauditory syndromes, 
both HCM and IDCM associated with SNHL.The mtDNA, Cx26, Cx30 and epicardin genes were analysed in 15 patients with SNHL, 4 with HCM and 11 with IDCM. MtDNA, Cx26 and epicardin genes were analysed by direct sequencing (ABI 3100 Genetic Analyzer); Cx30 deletion was evaluated by amplicon size.We identiﬁed the A3243G and the G1644A heteroplasmic mutations in 2 of 4 HCM patients, both with familial matrilinear hearing loss and associated encephalomyopathy. The A3243G carrier also carried the heterozygous V37I mutation in the Cx26 gene. Of the 11 patients with IDCM, one was found to carry the heterozygous G22V mutation in the epicardin gene and one the Cx26 deletion (del30G). Of the remaining 9 patients with IDCM, none was carrier of mutations. A second mutation (D21E) in the epicardin gene was identiﬁed in one of 30 patients screened for SNHL.Genotyping process of cardioauditory syndromes should be based on clinical evaluation and addressed to the potential 
causative genes by the clinical ground.
P0228. Two novel cases of Taybi-Linder syndrome (MOPD I/III) in 
brothers: further delineation of the phenotype focusing on the 
cerebral malformations
P. Edery1,2, A. Labalme2, F. Dijoud3, J. Attia-Sobol4, M. Till1, L. Guibaud5;  
1Clinical Genetics Service, Lyon, France, 2EA 3739 University Claude Bernard 
Lyon 1, Lyon, France, 3Anatomy and Pathology Service, Lyon, France, 4Gyn-
aecology and Obstetrics Service, Lyon, France, 5Pediatrics and Foetal Imagery 
Department, Lyon, France.
Microcephalic and osteodysplastic primordial dwarﬁsm (MOPD) type I/III or Taybi-Linder syndrome is a very rare autosomal recessive syndrome (20 cases reported to date) of unknown cause, characterized by severe intrauterine growth retardation, dwarﬁsm with short limbs and dislocated hips and elbows, dry skin, sparse hair and eyebrows and microcephaly. Malformations of the central nervous system were previously reported in Taybi-Linder syndrome but very few accurate and illustrated descriptions are available to date. Here, we provide a complete phenotypic description of two affected brothers born to ﬁrst cousin healthy parents. Moreover, we show that, in both patients, supratentorial anomalies which include frontal polymicrogyria, agenesis of the corpus callosum and a large interhemispheric cyst are far more severe than the cerebellar ones that appear to be restricted 
to a mild vermis hypoplasia.
P0229. Anthropometric characteristics of the Polish group of 
patients with Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS)
M. Gajdulewicz , K. H. Chrzanowska, H. Rysiewski, K. Spodar, M. Krajewska-
Walasek;  
Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is a rare autosomal recessive disease characterized by microcephaly, growth retardation, immunodeﬁciency, radiosensitivity, and an elevated risk of cancer. NBS seems to be prevalent among Central and Eastern European populations, with Polish patients constituting approximately half of all registered NBS patients worldwide. All 84 Polish patients identiﬁed to date (Polish NBS Registry, December 2004) share the common founder mutation in the 
NBS1 gene, 657del5. A total of 43 patients 
aged from birth to 20 years, observed at a single centre (Children's Memorial Health Institute), were enrolled in this study. A detailed Clinical genetics129
physical examination encompassing about 55 phenotypic traits was 
performed. Anthropometric measurements, repeated at 6-12 month intervals, included in addition to height and weight, 18 somatic traits of the trunk and limbs, and 15 traits of the head. On the basis of anthropometric parameters it was shown that the somatic development of the patients was not only signiﬁcantly (p<0.001) delayed from the very earliest stages of life in comparison with age- and sex-matched controls, but was also characterized by a differentiated dynamic of ontogenesis. It was possible to identify three developmental stages in relation to height, weight, and chest circumference: delay (years 1-2 of life), acceleration (from age 2 to 10 years, depending on the parameter), and stabilization, and two in relation to head circumference 
(no acceleration).This work was supported in part by a grant No 2 P05E06628 from the State Committee for Scientiﬁc Research of the Republic of Poland.
P0230. Split hand / foot malformation (SHFM) in two members of 
a family with monosomy 17p13.3 and 22q11.
B. Gener1, M. Del Campo1, E. González-Roca2, M. Salido3, C. Orejuela4, O. 
Villa3, D. Godal4, M. Vilella4, F. Solé3, L. A. Pérez-Jurado1;  
1Genetics Unit, Department of Experimental Science,Universitat Pompeu Fab -
ra, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 3Cyto-
genetics Laboratory, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain, 4Residència Marinada, 
Grup Pere-Mata, Reus, Spain.
We report on a 30 year old man presenting with severe mental 
retardation, inverted nipples, glandular hypospadias and limb malformation consisting in monodactyly of both hands and lobster claw deformity of feet. Standard karyotype revealed 45,XY,der(17)t(17;22)(p13.3;q11.21),-22. The unbalanced rearrangement was also present in the proband’s sister, a mentally retarded woman with unilateral breast hypoplasia and unilateral split foot, and in their mother who had mild learning difﬁculties but no limb malformations. Short stature, hypernasal speech and a characteristic facial dysmorphism with variable severity 
was present in all three.FISH studies in the proband and his mother ruled out the deletion of 
LIS1 in 17p13 and conﬁrmed the deletion involving the DGS/VCFS region in 22q11.2 (
TUPLE probe) in all cells. CGH study on a microarray 
with the tiling path of chromosome 22 in these two patients showed a deletion extending from the centromere to the most proximal 1,5 Mb within the critical DGS/VCFS region. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst case of ectrodactyly (SHFM) in a patient with a chromosomal aberration involving either chromosomes 22 or 17. Only mild limb anomalies have been described in patients with the typical DGS/VCFS phenotype and deletion 22q11.2, and none of the 5 known SHSF 
loci map to either 
of these regions. Our data indicate that monosomy 22q10-q11.21 and/or 17q13.3-qter can lead to disruption of a pathway involved in the development of hands, feet, genitalia and breasts. Current studies aimed at identifying candidate genes for these anomalies are being 
performed.
P0231. Systematic assessment of atypical  deletions reveals 
genotype-phenotype correlation in 22q11.2
A. Rauch1, S. Zink2, C. Zweier1, A. Koch2, R. Rauch3, M. Weyand4, H. Singer2, 
M. Hofbeck3;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nurem -
berg, Erlangen, Germany, 2Pediatric Cardiology, University Hospital, Erlangen, 
Germany, 3Pediatric Cardiology, University Hospital, Tuebingen, Germany, 
4Heart Surgery, University Hospital, Erlangen, Germany.
Clinical variability associated with the common 22q11.2 microdeletion is well known and led to broad application of FISH diagnostics with probes for loci 
TUPLE1 or D22S75 (N25), although rarely reported 
atypical deletions associated with the same phenotypic spectrum would not be discovered by these probes. As most types of 22q11.2 deletions occurred between low copy repeats within the region (LCR22), we assumed that atypical deletions would be more common than reported. To address this question and the possibility of a deletion size related genotype-phenotype correlation, we used a set of 10 FISH DNA probes which is capable to detect all reported and hypothetical types of deletions in between the LCR22, and analysed a total of 350 
patients.Patients with conotruncal heart defects (ctCHD) or with typical VCFS phenotype showed the common 3 Mb and nested 1.5 Mb deletions in 18.5 % and 78.6 %, respectively, but no atypical deletion, while 5 % of patients with mildly suggestive, atypical phenotype, showed atypical distal deletions, which were not detected in a control sample. These statistical signiﬁcant differences demonstrate that atypical distal 22q11.2 deletions are very uncommon in patients with ctCHDs, while atypical congenital heart defects and mild dysmorphism is a recognizable feature of atypical distal deletions. Further phenotype-genotype analysis disclosed association of signiﬁcant developmental delay with the distal part of the common deletion region and choanal 
atresia and atypical CHDs with the adjacent distal deletion region.
P0232. Mutational analysis in NF1 patients screened for heart 
abnormalities
A. Gabriele1, M. Ruggieri2, G. Peluso1, C. Lucifora2, L. Matti2, P. Sciacca2, T. 
Sprovieri1, A. Patitucci1, A. Magariello1, R. Mazzei1, F. L. Conforti1, C. Ungaro1, 
M. Muglia1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences-National Research Couincil, Cosenza, Italy , 
2Department of Paediatrics,University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
It is still unclear whether cardiovascular malformations are more common in the NF1 population. Studies so far performed have analysed data from multiple centres or from selected NF1 populations and prevalence ﬁgures have ranged from 2.3% to 27%. Heart involvement has been associated to more severe NF1 phenotypes and large NF1 
gene deletions.The aim of this study is to evaluate the spectrum of cardiovascular abnormalities in nine NF1 individuals screened for mutations in the NF1 gene. We studied the heart (by means of electrocardiogram, complete 2-dimensional echocardiograms and Doppler studies) and performed (by means of DHPLC and DNA sequencing) a mutational analysis of the whole NF1 gene in nine NF1 patients (4 males, 5 females; aged 3 to 28 years) seen at the Department of Paediatrics of the University of Catania and the National Research Council of Cosenza, Italy.The results showed that none of the nine patients had or developed cardiovascular abnormalities. No large NF1 gene deletions have been detected, but the NF1 gene analysis revealed 1 stop mutation, 3 amino acid substitutions, 3 deletions, 1 insertion and 1 intronic change affecting splicing. The results conﬁrm previous data by Venturin et al. where the cardiovascular malformations were associated with "NF1 microdeletion syndrome" caused by a deletion of 1.5 Mb in 17q11.2 
region.
P0233. Orthomolecular therapy of mitochondrial 
encephalomyopathy lactic acidosis and stroke-like episode 
(MELAS): A review of ﬁndings and directions for future research
J. K. Brewer ;  
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
A recurring problem in the diagnosis and treatment of mitochondrial 
disorders is the diversity of clinical symptoms that accompany biochemical abnormalities. Well-controlled empirical data with sufﬁcient N are nonexistent. The body of literature with respect to MELAS consists of case reports of varied and inconsistent ﬁndings. Currently, there is no treatment for this disorder; however, some researchers have targeted the effects of supplementing patients’ diets with enzymes critical for electron transport in mitochondria. This qualitative meta-analytic review synthesizes the ﬁndings of 18 case reports both pre- and post-orthomolecular intervention. Most studies did not report speciﬁc neuropsychological scores or objective measures of psychiatric symptoms either before or after treatment, emphasizing patients’ subjective reports and biochemical ﬁndings instead. Generally, patients exhibited depressed IQ with gradual decline in global cognitive functioning. Some patients also exhibited sudden and/or unexplained language deﬁcits, including poor verbal comprehension, decreased word-ﬁnding, agraphia, receptive aphasia, phonemic paraphasia, dysarthria and semantic paraphasia. Almost all patients exhibited impaired motor control. Psychiatric symptoms always co-existed with neuropsychological deﬁcits. Patients with defects in the tempoparietal regions evidenced on neuroimaging exhibited impairments in the language domain. Patients with defects in the basal ganglia exhibited psychiatric symptoms. A suggested neuropsychological test battery emerged. Overall, the temporal correlation between patients’ clinical improvement and the commencement of treatment with enzymes or co-factors which upregulate oxidative phophorylation in mitochondria Clinical genetics130
suggests it may be a useful treatment of patients with MELAS 
syndrome. These ﬁndings may have far-reaching implications as to 
other disorders of movement and neurodegeneration.
P0234. Del(18p) syndrome with a single central maxillary incisor
M. Martins , R. Pinto Leite, B. Carvalho, M. Souto, E. Ribeiro;  
Centro Hospitalar de Vila Real-Peso da Régua,S.A., Vila Real, Portugal.
Introduction:Del (18 p) Syndrome (MIM 607500), which results from the deletion of the short arm of the chromosome 18, was ﬁrst described by de Grouchy et al. [1963]. There is a broad phenotypic variability associated with the syndrome but the main clinical manifestations are mild to moderate mental retardation, growth deﬁciency and craniofacial dysmorphism including mild microcephaly, round face, ptosis, epicanthal folds, low nasal bridge, hypertelorism, dysplastic ears, wide mouth with downturning corners, microretrognathia, and dental anomalies. Abnormalities of the limbs, genitalia, brain, eyes, and heart have also 
been described.More than 150 cases have since been reported, most of them sporadic, due to “de novo” deletion, although familial cases have been described. About 16% of the cases are due to translocations between 
chromosome 18 and acrocentric chromosomes.
Clinical Report:We report a 5-year-old girl that was referred for consultation due to mild mental deﬁciency, language delay and dysmorphic features including a single central maxillary incisor. Cytogenetics analysis, performed on peripheral blood lymphocytes, by using GTG and CBG banding techniques, showed a translocation between chromosome 13 and 18 resulting in monosomy 18p. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) studies with chromosome painting probes for the chromosomes involved were performed and conﬁrmed the result. Parent’s karyotypes 
were normal.
Discussion:Del (18 p) Syndrome is associated with a wide range of clinical manifestations. Although most of the cases are sporadic, family studies are necessary for proper genetic counselling. We emphasize the importance of long follow up of patients affected with del(18p) 
syndrome.
P0235. Severe myelopathy in brachytelephalangic chondroplasia 
punctata :a non exceptional complication?
C. Baumann1, A. Garnier2, V. Drouin -Garraud3, A. Delezoide4, C. Garel5, A. 
Verloes1;  
1Hopital Robert Debré/ UF de genetique clinique, Paris, France, 2Hopital Robert 
Debré/ service de réanimation polyvalente, Paris, France, 3Hopital Charles 
Nicolle /service de génétique, Rouen, France, 4Hopital Robert Debré/ UF de 
foetopathologie, Paris, France, 5Hopital Robert Debré/ service de radiologie, 
Paris, France.
Brachytelephalangic chondrodysplasia punctata (CPDX1) the RXL form of chondrodysplasia punctata, results from a deﬁciency in arylsulfatase E. It is usually considered as a minor disorder with mild growth disturbance and facial dysmorphism similar to Binder 
maxillofacial dysostosis.We report 4 cases of CPDX1 complicated with severe myelopathy.Two fetuses of a Caucasian woman were suspected for CPDX1 after the discovery of skeletal anomalies by ultrasonographic scan. TOP was done at 26 and 21 WG respectively because of a severe narowing 
of the cervical spinal cord observed by MRI in both cases.In two other unrelated newborns, ﬂat face was noted at prenatal ultrasound scan . CPDX1 was diagnosed neonatally .Both children showed neurological anomalies at birth: severe hypotonia, lack of bulbopontine reﬂexes and pyramidal signs. Medullary MRI showed vertebral dislocation with cervical spine compression. Both newborns 
died from neurological complications respectively at day 15 and 25.Those 4 cases had facial dysmorphism and skeletal anomalies characteristic from CPDX1 .Diagnosis was conﬁrmed by the identiﬁcation of mutations in the ARSE gene for the 3 families.Life threatening spinal cord complications has not been reported so far in CPDX1 . These 4 observations indicate that the prognosis of CPDX1 could be worse than usually reported .Careful, in utero or neonatal MRI imaging of the spine is recommended for fetuses or newborns with 
Binder face and stippled epiphyses .P0236. Identiﬁcation and characterisation of conserved non-
coding DNA sequences surrounding the human SOX2 gene
F. H. Sharkey, M. Ansari, P. Gautier, D. R. FitzPatrick;  
Medical Research Council, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Microopthalmia, anophthalmia and coloboma (MAC) are among the 
most common ocular malformations and a signiﬁcant cause of congenital blindness. Mutations in at least two genes, 
SOX2 and PAX6 are known 
cause anophthalmia in humans. The idea that animal development is controlled by non-coding regulatory elements is now well established in invertebrates. DNA regulatory elements surrounding 
SOX2 have also 
been identiﬁed and characterised extensively in chicken, with the chick genome believed to represent the best compromise for phylogenetic comparisons with mammals. Using multiple-species alignments we have identiﬁed ten conserved non-coding DNA elements surrounding the human 
SOX2 gene as candidate regions with a role in regulating 
the expression of the SOX2 gene during development. These 10 
sequences that were >95% identical at a nucleotide level across four species (human, mouse, chicken and Xenopus), were used for further analysis and had a size range of 80-280bp. To test the hypothesis that mutations in these regions may result in anophthalmia we used DHPLC analysis of PCR products covering these regulatory elements in 66 patients with structural eye defects. We found no evidence that mutations in these non-coding sequences surrounding 
SOX2 are 
responsible for structural eye defects in our patient cohort (MAC). This conﬁrms that SNPs are underrepresented in these highly conserved sequences. These regions will now be screened in patient cohorts for deletions and duplications using high resolution CGH microarray 
analysis.
P0237. Cypher/ZASP gene mutations cause idiopathic dilated 
cardiomyopathy (IDCM) with poor prognosis.
A. Pilotto1, M. Grasso1, M. Pasotti2, E. Disabella1, M. Diegoli1,3, C. Lucchelli1, E. 
Porcu1, A. Repetto2, C. Campana2, A. Gavazzi4, L. Tavazzi2, E. Arbustini1;  
1Lab. Molecular Genetics, IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy , 2Cardiology, 
IRCCS Policlinico S.Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3Dpt. of Pathology - University of Pa -
via, Pavia, Italy, 4Cardiology, Ospedali Riuniti, Bergamo, Italy.
IDCM is characterized by ventricular dilatation and systolic dysfunction with signs of heart failure and is inherited in 30-40% of cases. Genetic heterogeneity characterizes familial IDCM. Cypher/ZASP gene encodes a protein that is a component of the Z-line in both skeletal and cardiac muscle. Recent studies demonstrated that Cypher/ZASP knock-out mice develop cardiomyopathy and that defects of the Cypher/ZASP gene may cause familial IDCM. Six mayor cDNA isoforms of Cypher/ZASP have been identiﬁed in human striated muscle and are 
generated by alternative splicing of a single gene.We screened the Cypher/ZASP gene in 25 unrelated probands with familial AD-IDCM according to WHO criteria. Levels of serum creatine-phoshokinase were measured to evaluate skeletal muscle 
involvement.Three mutations, one novel and two known (Asp117Asn, Ser196Leu and Val588Ile) were identiﬁed in three probands (12%) and three related affected relatives. Two of these six patients underwent heart transplantation (a father and his young son), two died [sudden cardiac death (n=1), congestive heart failure (n=1)] while two, from two unrelated families (both young sons of affected patients), are stable in functional NYHA class I and II respectively. None of the patients showed echocardiographic features suggestive for non-compaction left ventricle (NCLV) (Chin et al. and McKenna et al. criteria). We conﬁrm 
Cypher/ZASP gene as candidate gene for familial IDCM independently on echocardiographic pattern of NCLV. The genetic heterogeneity of familial IDCM is further increasing thus making complex to address patients to the analysis of different disease genes according to the 
phenotype.
P0238. Mutation screening in DHH (Desert Hedgehog) gene in 
male infertility
F. Ganz , P. Dabrilli, C. Vinanzi, L. Bartoloni, C. Bedin, A. Ferlin, C. Foresta;  
University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
The DHH (Desert Hedgehog) gene codes for a signalling protein in Sertoli cells, following closely the expression of SRY. Its receptor (PTC1) is localized in Leydig cells and in peritubular cells. Adult and prepubertal Dhh null-mice display abnormal peritubular tissue and Clinical genetics131
restricted spermatogenesis. Mutations in the DHH gene are associated 
with 46,XY complete and partial Gonadal Dysgenesis. We present a mutation screening in the DHH gene on 100 male infertile patients affected by different testicular defects and 50 normal controls. 30 patients were affected by not obstructive azoospermia; 45 by severe oligozoospermia (<5million/mL); 25 by moderate oligozoospermia (5-20million/mL). All patients were previously studied for mutations in AR, INSL3 and for microdeletions in Yq. The three DHH exons were ampliﬁed by PCR and analyzed by direct sequencing and DHPLC 
technique.We detected two polymorphisms in third codon positions in exon 2, not changing codiﬁed aminoacid and present in controls: H181H (c>t) and A163A (g>t). We also detected a INV2-3c>a substitution in intron 2 in a patient affected by anorchia. The intronic substitution is carried by the father. This variation was found only once, thus having a frequency 
of 1/300.This work evidences that DHH mutations are not a common cause for human male infertility. According to software prediction, the intron 2 substitution could give alternative splicing. Expression studies on mRNA are difﬁcult as the patient lacks testicular tissue, where DHH is expressed. Familiar analysis of patients affected by anorchia does not 
exclude an hypothesis of imprinting for DHH gene.
P0239. Clinical, cytogenetical and molecular analyses of Sotos 
and Weaver syndrome in 50 patients
L. Burglen1,2, V. Malan3, P. Saugier-Veber4, M. F. Portnoi3, V. Drouin-Garraud4, 
D. Feldmann5, J. L. Taillemite3, T. Frebourg4, M. P. Vazquez6;  
1Unite de genetique Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 2UPRES EA 3497, Paris 
VI, France, 3Laboratoire de cytogenetique Hôpital St-Antoine, Paris, France, 
4Laboratoire de genetique moleculaire et INSERM U614, Faculte de Medecine 
et de Pharmacie, Service de Genetique, Rouen, France, 5Laboratoire de Bio -
chimie Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 6Service de chirurgie maxillofaciale 
Hôpital Trousseau and UPRES EA 3497 Paris VI, Paris, France.
Sotos syndrome is characterised by pre and post natal overgrowth with 
advanced bone age, macrocephaly, characteristic facial dysmorphism, and variable mental retardation. Microdeletions of 5q35 region or mutations of NSD1 gene are observed in 60-90% Sotos syndrome and in some patients affected with Weaver syndrome. Furthermore Rio et al. reported 11p15 anomalies in 2 patients with Sotos syndrome.We report on clinical and molecular ﬁndings in a cohort of 50 patients with Sotos and Weaver syndrome (age 5 months- 25 years). Large deletions were observed in 5 patients (10%). In 25 patients (50%) we identiﬁed NSD1 anomalies. In 20 patients without 5q35 or NSD1 anomalies 11p15 region was studied and was normal. Phenotype-genotype correlations were studied. As previously reported we observed more severe cognitive impairment in patients harbouring large deletions. One patient with a large deletion presented with a severe behavioural phenotype, autoagressiveness and autistic behaviour. No Renal, cardiac and ophthalmologic malformations were more frequent and more severe in the group with large deletions than in the group with NSD1 alterations. No tumor was observed in our cohort. Advanced bone age and overgrowth were inconstant features. Macrocephaly which was previously considered as a mandatory criterion was not 
present in 1/30 patients.
P0240. Genotype-phenotype correlations in Larsen syndrome
J. M. Graham1, S. P. Robertson2, R. Lachman1, D. Krakow1;  
1Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2University of 
Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
Autosomal Dominant Larsen syndrome (LS) is a rare, genetic connective tissue disorder characterized by multiple joint dislocations, distinctive hands and feet, kyphoscoliosis, and a characteristic face. Broad thumbs, cylindrical ﬁngers, short metacarpals, long proximal phalanges, short distal phalanges, and accessory and/or fused carpal and tarsal bones also occur. Similar but more severe features occur in Atelosteogenesis (AO) types I and III. In both LS and AO I/III there are segmentation anomalies of the vertebrae, with the cervical spine being the most severely involved. The typical face in LS reveals midface deﬁciency with a ﬂat nasal bridge, ocular hypertelorism, and occasional cleft palate. In adults, there may be progressive hearing loss in early adulthood, which is preceded by tinnitus during the late teens. Sequence analysis of FLNB has revealed heterozygosity for missense mutations in the actin-binding domain of ﬁlamin B. These data conﬁrm that dominant forms of LS can result from heterozygosity for missense mutations in FLNB. We have collected clinical materials on 10 genetically independent cases with LS. In 2 of cases, there were independent recurrent mutations that were identical to those found in the original report of FLNB mutations in Larsen syndrome patients. In one family we conﬁrmed germ cell mosaicism in a grandparent with subsequent dominant transmission. We performed a systematic comparison of the clinical characteristics and radiographic manifestations of 120 LS cases reported in the literature, and we 
compared these features with those in our research subjects.
P0241. Skewed X-chromosome inactivation in the peripheral 
blood but not in the skin lesion of a female patient with linear 
scleroderma 'en coup de sabre'
T. Ozcelik1, S. Bagislar1, C. B. Akyerli1, Y. Demir2;  
1Bilkent University, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology and 
Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Afyon Kocatepe University, Faculty of Medicine, 
Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Afyon, Turkey.
We describe a 27-year-old woman, diagnosed with scleroderma “en coup de sabre” who has differential patterns of X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) in peripheral blood and atrophic skin lesion cells. The patient presented with linear atrophy of the skin and fat tissue on the right side of her face that began four years before. Thinned epidermis, homogeneous collagen deposition in the dermis and perivascular lymphocytic inﬁltration was observed in the lesion area. The distribution of the lesion appeared to follow the lines of Blaschko. We recently demonstrated extremely skewed XCI in peripheral blood cells of female scleroderma patients. Based on the observations that frontoparietal or linear forms of the disease follow the lines of Blaschko, we hypothesized that extremely skewed XCI, especially in hematopoietic stem cells, may be involved in disease pathogenesis. Blaschko’s lines were originally described as unusual pigmented patterns on the skin, and the boundaries are patches of clonally related X-inactivation derivatives. To test this hypothesis, we analyzed the androgen receptor polymorphism and demonstrate that XCI mosaicism is extremely skewed with the allele ratios of (lower and upper alleles respectively) 96/4 percent in peripheral blood cells. However, XCI patterns were random with 49/51 percent in normal and 35/65 percent in lesion skin biopsy specimens. These results support the hypothesis that extremely skewed XCI could be involved in the pathogenesis of 
autoimmune diseases including scleroderma.Supported by grants from the Scientiﬁc and Technical Research Council of Turkey - TUBITAK-SBAG 2513, and International Center for 
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology - ICGEB-CRP/TUR04-01.
P0242. Alström Syndrome: Clinical and Molecular 
Characterization of two Portuguese families
C. Dias1, G. Soares1, J. Pinto-Basto1, M. Rocha1, S. Beck2, P. Tavares2, A. For -
tuna1, M. Lima1, M. Martins1;  
1Instituto de Genética Médica, Porto, Portugal, 2Centro de Genética Clínica, 
Porto, Portugal.
Alström Syndrome (MIM #203800) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by progressive visual impairment caused by cone-rod retinal dystrophy and early onset obesity. Most patients also develop insulin resistant diabetes mellitus and sensorineural hearing loss during the second decade. Other reported features are short stature, metabolic abnormalities, namely hyperlipidemia, dilated cardiomyopathy, mild to moderate mental retardation, acanthosis nigricans, and chronic renal 
and liver failure.Mutations in the 
ALMS1 gene are detected in 40% of individuals. No 
other genes have been convincingly associated with this syndrome.We report two unrelated Portuguese patients with Alström Syndrome. Case 1 presented to our clinic at the age of 13, with visual impairment, sensorineural deafness, obesity and acanthosis nigricans. He later developed end-stage renal disease. Case 2 presented at the age of 2 with mild mental retardation, obesity, nystagmus and photophobia. Her mother was already 12 weeks pregnant. Molecular testing of the patients conﬁrmed mutations in the 
ALMS1 gene in both cases and 
allowed the prenatal diagnosis of the ongoing pregnancy in Case 2.The clinical presentation of Alström syndrome at different ages is discussed. We also address the issue that this condition probably Clinical genetics132
remains underdiagnosed. Early diagnosis allows for opportune 
intervention, particularly early recognition and treatment of diabetes mellitus, nutritional planning, as well as monitoring of heart, liver and kidney function. We also emphasize the importance of early referral of these families for Genetic Counselling and pluridisciplinar 
management.
P0243. Genotype-Phenotype Correlation in a Deaf Italian 
Population: an Interdisciplinary Approach
P. Castorina1, P. Primignani1, F. Sironi1, U. Ambrosetti2, D. A. Coviello1, M. 
Travi1, F. Lalatta1;  
1Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy, 2Policlinico Hospital IRCCS, 
Milan, Italy.
GJB2 mutations represent the ﬁrst cause of congenital non syndromic 
recessive deafness (NSRD).
The 35delG “frameshift” mutation is very frequent in Caucasian 
population.Since year 2001 in our Medical Centre a team consisting of audiologists, clinical geneticists and molecular biologists is actively working to improve the etiologic diagnosis and the management of deaf patients. The multidisciplinary approach is relevant to help the patients to understand the meaning of the molecular results, the clinical picture of deafness and the therapies that can be offered.We analysed audiometric characteristics associated with various types of GJB2 mutations in a population of 289 Italian patients with prelingual hearing impairment to delineate genotype-phenotype correlations. 107 out of 289 patients (37%) presented homozygous 35delG mutation or double heterozygous mutations in GJB2, or the association of a GJB2 
mutation with the GJB6 deletion del(GJB6-D13S1830).Among the inactivating/inactivating genotype mutations 77% (63/81) were associated with profound hearing impairment, 20% with severe and 3% with moderate. For the inactivating/non-inactivating genotype category 73% were associated with profound deafness, 9% with severe and 18% with moderate. The non-inactivating/non inactivating category showed a predominant association with mild deafness (66%). Based on these results we agree with other studies conﬁrming that GJB2 related hearing impairment is mostly determined by the speciﬁc mutation combination but there remains phenotypic variability within 
genotypes.
P0244. Familial Pulmonary Fibrosis in Newfoundland: Evidence 
for a Novel Genetic Cause
B. A. Fernandez1, B. Noble1, G. Fox1, R. Batia1, E. Sala1, M. F. Beers2, M. O. 
Woods1;  
1Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, NF, Canada, 2University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF) belongs to the group of idiopathic interstitial pneumonias. This disease is limited to the lungs, and is usually an adult-onset disorder diagnosed between 50 and 70 years. The only treatment that improves survival is lung transplant. Without treatment, survival ranges from 2 to 4 years. The literature suggests that up to 3% of IPF patients have a familial form of the disease (familial pulmonary ﬁbrosis or FPF), with at least one other affected ﬁrst or second degree relative. Autosomal dominant mutations in the Surfactant Protein-C gene (
SP-C) on chromosome 8p21 have recently 
been shown to cause familial forms of interstitial lung disease.In Newfoundland, 11 FPF families containing 35 affected individuals have been identiﬁed. DNA has been banked from 250 participants, and cell lines have been established for 234. The study cohort also includes 24 sporadic cases. The medical and family histories of each participant have been reviewed. All participants have had pulmonary function testing and a high resolution CT of chest. The average age of 
diagnosis in our familial cohort is 55.3 yrs.The SPC gene has been sequenced from 1 affected individual from each of the families and no mutations were identiﬁed. Moreover, immunohistochemical staining of SPC on lung biopsies of 7 FPF patients, all from different families, showed a normal vesicular pattern, suggesting that the families are segregating a novel locus. Linkage simulation studies have been undertaken and have indicated that two families are suitable for genome-wide scans using microsatellite 
markers.P0245. Highly tissue speciﬁc distribution of the mitochondrial 
tRNALeu(UUR) 3243A>G mutation in a patient with deafness, 
diabetes and severe dementia
A. Schaller1, J. Nuoffer2, S. Gallati1;  
1Division of Human Genetics, Bern, Switzerland, 2Institute of Clinical Chemistry, 
Bern, Switzerland.
The 3243A>G mutation in the tRNALeu(UUR) gene of mitochondrial DNA 
(mtDNA) is associated with a number of different clinical presentations including mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes (MELAS), progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO), diabetes and deafness. The routine diagnosis of the 3243A>G mutation in blood is difﬁcult as mutation levels are known to decrease in this tissue over time, while in some patients it may be absent. Although the noninvasive genetic testing of blood samples is common for some mtDNA disorders, patients with the 3243A>G mutation have consistently higher mutation levels in postmitotic muscle than blood, introducing the potential for reporting false-negative results. Here we report the genetic testing of a patient suspicious for a mitochondrial cytopathy. Analysis of the mtDNA extracted from skeletal muscle biopsy specimen did not result in the detection of a mutation. However, postmortem analysis of the mtDNA isolated from brain parenchym revealed the 3243A>G mutation heteroplasmic at a level of 60%. Although muscle and CNS are postmitotic tissues and therefore, supposed to accumulate mtDNA mutations, our ﬁndings may be explained by the fact, that embryologically, muscle and CNS are derived from different germ layers. The ectodermal germ layer gives rise to the CNS, and the mesodermal layer to muscular and vascular system. Although, the molecular genetic analysis of skeletal muscle is widely acknowledged to the ‘gold standard’ in the investigation of patients with suspected mtDNA disease, our ﬁndings demonstrate, that molecular testing of muscle mtDNA still has the risk to yield false 
negative results.
P0246. Modiﬁer genes in cystic ﬁbrosis: frequency of hereditary 
hemochromatosis in the Hungarian cystic ﬁbrosis population
M. Garami , K. Németh, K. Staub, G. Fekete;  
2nd Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University , 
Budapest, Hungary.
Objectives: The variable clinical manifestations of cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) 
suggest the inﬂuence of modiﬁer genes. Gene of hemochromatosis 
(HFE gene 6p21.3) is a candidate modiﬁer locus for CF based on (1) the suggestion of an association between the HLA loci and CF phenotypes; (2) the location of the HFE gene near the HLA loci and; (3) the similarity between the gastrointestinal manifestations of hereditary hemochromatosis and CF. We have determined the frequency of the C282Y and H63D mutations in a group of 95 CF patients.
Methods: Direct mutation analysis: DNA ampliﬁcation (PCR) and 
RFLP analysis were used to test for 2 mutations in the HFE gene. These mutations account for approximately 90% of individuals with hereditary hemochromatosis patients. Patients' clinical statuses were retrieved from the Hungarian CF Registry.
Results: Six patients (3.1%) carried the C282Y and 22 patients (11.5%) 
the H63D mutations in heterozygous form. Homozigosity for C282Y mutation was not observed, whereas 2 patients carried the H63D mutations in homozygous form. In one case, we were able to detect both mutations (C282Y/H63D). The avarage gastrointestinal score of CF patients (7.56; n=173) was signiﬁcantly different from those who 
carried the HFE gene mutation(s), too (13.9; available n=21).
Conclusion: These data are suggestive of a relationship between the 
development of gastrointestinal diseases in CF and the HFE gene. 
Further study of a larger group of patients is warranted.
P0247. Mutations and polymorphysms in CFTR gene in patients 
with reproductive failure
R. Gaillyová, I. Valášková, E. Pokojová, P. Ventruba;  
University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic.
Cystic ﬁbrosis is one of the most common serious autosomal recessiv inherited disorders in Czech population. The frequency of the disease 
is around 1/2500 and the carrier frequency is around 1/27.In pairs with reproductive failures we recommend the analysis of CFTR 
gene as a preventive examination.In our laboratory we start with the basic mutation analysis - we examine Clinical genetics133
ﬁve mutations which are frequent in Czech population and in men with 
severe oligoasthenospermia the polymorphism IVS8polyT.If a mutation in CFTR gene is found for one of the partners, we analyze a set of 36 CFTR mutations for the other partner.This analysis detects about 95% of CFTR mutations in Czech 
population.2002-2004 we performed CFTR gene analysis in 1325 patients. We detected 55 carriers of one mutation in CFTR gene and two men with two CFTR mutations. In three families we identiﬁed both partners as carriers of a CFTR gene mutation. Frequency of CFTR gene mutations in our group is 1/24, 1/41 in women and 1/16 in men respectively .
It is the reason for us to recommend such preventive analysis of CFTR gene in at least one person of the pair with reproductive failure. Most effective is the analysis of men.In case of families with reproductive failure and with high risk of Cystic ﬁbrosis in offsprings we recommend genetic counselling and prenatal diagnostics or PGD. To people carrying CFTR gene mutations we recommend the analysis of CFTR gene to be done also for their 
relatives.
P0248. Tackling the diagnosis of sporadic retinitis pigmentosa 
with a genotyping microarray
D. Cantalapiedra, M. García-Hoyos, R. Riveiro-Alvarez, E. Vallespin, M. J. 
Trujillo-Tiebas, A. Queipo, C. Villaverde, C. Ramos, C. Ayuso;  
Fundacíon Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain.
Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) is a group of inherited and progressive 
retinal dystrophies that lead to blindness. There are more than 150 loci responsible for these dystrophies. Their genetic characterization becomes even more challenging, because of their additional allelic and clinical heterogeneity. Therefore, searching for the genetic cause of the disease is extremely costly and time consuming, making genetic testing in a clinical setting far from practical, especially in sporadic cases (SRP), which account for 40% of all non-syndromic forms of RP in Spain.The development of genotyping microarrays, speciﬁcally designed to detect all known mutations in every identiﬁed gene responsible for RP, will be a major breakthrough for the rapid genetic testing of many 
uncharacterized patients.We have started using the LCA microarray, which detects 293 mutations in 8 genes known to cause Leber Congenital Amaurosis, which is a form of severe congenital RP.A total of 27 SRP patients were genotyped with this microarray (23 with a severe and early-onset form of RP, 3 with moderate RP, and 1 
with mild RP).It detected mutations in 11 individuals (40.7%), of which 43.5% (10 in 23) were severe and early-onset RP, and 33.3% (1 in 3) were moderate RP.Our results conﬁrm that the vast majority of SRP cases are in fact 
autosomal recessive.Although most of these patients are not yet fully characterized, this approach promises to be the tool that could one day become the de facto standard in the diagnosis of RP and many other inherited 
disorders.
P0249. Giant Congenital Melanocytic Nevus: report of two 
Portuguese cases
G. Soares1, J. Pinto Basto1, C. Dias1, M. Rocha1, N. Estevinho2, J. Matos3, M. 
Martins4,1, M. A. Areias4, A. M. Fortuna1, M. Reis Lima1;  
1Instituto de Genética Médica, Porto, Portugal, 2Instituto Português de Oncolo -
gia, Porto, Portugal, 3Hospital Distrital de Chaves, Chaves, Portugal, 4Materni -
dade de Júlio Dinis, Porto, Portugal.
Giant Congenital Melanocytic Nevus (GCMN) is a rare lesion, with an incidence of 1/20000 live births. It is deﬁned as a pigmented lesion, present at birth, corresponding to a benign proliferation of cutaneous melanocytes, measuring 20 cm or more in largest diameter. Lesions can be ﬂat or nodular, with variable pigmentation intensity. Very large lesions are usually localised on the trunk, frequently with smaller satellite lesions on the periphery.The two main problems associated with this pathology are the risk of developing melanoma, in the nevus itself or in other locations, and the risk of occurrence of Neurocutaneous Melanocytosis (MIM: 249400), characterized by a proliferation of benign or malignant melanocytes in the central nervous system, which usually carries a bad prognosis.GCMN occurs sporadically, and has a low recurrence risk.Follow-up and treatment of affected children is aimed at surgical excision or curettage of the lesion to prevent melanoma and early detection of the referred complications. It also provides cosmetic 
improvement, an important issue for patients and their families.We report two patients with GCMN presenting at birth, from unrelated families. Both had large pigmented lesions involving mostly the trunk. No other clinical manifestations have been detected so far and cerebral MRI was normal in both. Both were referred to Paediatric Surgery 
outpatient clinic and keep follow-up in Genetics.
P0250. Genetic counseling of families with t(7;9)(q36.2;p21.2)
A. Jakubiuk-Tomaszuk1, E. Kostyk2, M. Debiec-Rychter3, B. Krzykwa2, B. 
Panasiuk1, B. Stasiewicz-Jarocka1, A. T. Midro1;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, 
Poland, 2Medical Genetic Department, Institute of Paediatrics, Collegium Medi -
cum, Jagiellonian University, Cracow, Poland, 3Center for Human Genetics, 
University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
We performed the segregation analysis directly from a relatively large pedigree of ﬁve t(7;9)(q36.2;p21.2) carriers in a series of ten pregnancies after ascertainment correction according to Stengel-Rutkowski and Stene. Pedigree was ascertained by a 5 years-old girl karyotyped because of dysmorphic features and distinct developmental proﬁle and monosomy 7q36.2-qter with trisomy 9p21.2-pter (double-segment imbalance) was found. The nature of chromosomal aberration detected using GTG, RBG was conﬁrmed by multicolor chromosomal analysis, utilizing the commercially available M-FISH KIT (MetaSystem GmgH, Altlussheim, Germany). The slide treatment, post hybridization washes and detection were performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The image analysis was done using an epiﬂuorescence microscope (Leica DMRB, Wetzlar, Germany) and image analysis software (QUIPS, Vysis, IL, USA). A study of morfological phenotype of proband according to uniform protocol of clinical and antropological traits taken from Munich Database elaborated by Stengel-Rutkowski. Quantitative features analysis showed that a total of 125 out of 807 (15,66%) of catalogued anamnestic and morphological traits was present in our child. Morphological phenotype of our patient compared 
to quantitative deﬁnition of monosomy 7q36.2-qter and to deﬁnition 
for trisomy 9p21-pter separately showed 24 of 125 (19%) features and 61of 125 (48%) features respectively. The individual probability assessment for unbalanced progeny at birth after 2:2 disjunction and adjancent-1 segregation were 30±14.5% (high) and 10±9.5% for miscarriages and similar for stillbirth/early death. These values of probability of occurrence of unbalanced progeny at birth and other unfavorable pregnancy outcomes may be used for individual genetic 
counseling of carriers with t(7;9)(q36.2;p21.2).
P0251. Mutations in CDKL5/STK9 are associated with X-linked 
infantile spasms and a severe variant of Rett syndrome
V. M. Kalscheuer1, J. Tao1,2, H. Van Esch3, M. Hagedorn-Greiwe4, K. Hoff -
mann1, B. Moser1, M. Raynaud5, J. Sperner6, J. P. Fryns3, E. Schwinger4, J. 
Gécz7, H. H. Ropers1;  
1Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Present af -
ﬁliation: State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics and Shanghai Institute of 
Hematology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Second Medical University, Shanghai,, 
China, 3Center for Human Genetics, Clinical Genetics Unit, Leuven, Belgium, 
4Institute for Human Genetics Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 5Services de Géné -
tique -INSERM U316, CHU Bretonneau, Tours, France, 6Department of Pedi -
atrics, University of Lübeck Medical School, Lübeck, Germany, 7Women’s and 
Children’s Hospital and The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
Recently, we showed that truncation of the X-linked cyclin-dependent 
kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) gene, also known as serine threonine kinase 9 (STK9), caused mental retardation and severe neurological symptoms in two unrelated female patients with balanced X;autosome translocations. CDKL5 is subject to X-inactivation in normal female somatic cells, and is functionally absent in the two patients due to 
preferential inactivation of the normal X.Subsequent screening of a small panel of patients who had been diagnosed with Rett syndrome (RTT) or a variant of RTT and no identiﬁed pathogenic mutation in MECP2, led to the ﬁnding of two additional mutations in CDKL5: a cysteine to phenylalanine amino Clinical genetics134
acid exchange in one patient presenting with early-onset seizures, 
psychomotor development delay and absence of speech, and an arginine to serine exchange in a monozygotic twin pair who exhibit almost identical clinical features of classic RTT, with a history of early-onset seizures. Both mutations most likely occurred de novo and affect highly conserved amino acids which are located within a predicted protein kinase domain. Our results strongly suggest that impaired CDKL5 catalytic activity plays an important role in the pathogenesis of this neurodevelopmental disorder. Further studies aim to elucidate the speciﬁc mechanisms by which CDKL5 alterations lead to impaired 
development.
P0252. Midline Anomalies in a Boy With Transverse Limb 
Defects: A New Syndrome or Adams-Oliver Variant?
C. Li ;  
University Health Network and The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
This one-year old boy was seen in genetics clinic because of multiple 
congenital anomalies. He was the product a non-consanguineous union of an Italian couple, after a non-eventful pregnancy, without maternal exposures to teratogens. He was delivered full term and discharged home within 2 days. At birth, he was noted to have transverse limb defects involving all ﬁngers and toes. Hypospadias was also noted. He subsequently developed feeding issues and was noted to be hypotonic. Cranial imaging detected partial agenesis of the corpus callosum, abnormal brain stem conﬁguration, a cleft in superior cerebella vermis and abnormal cerebella grey-white matter junction. The family history is non-contributory. On genetics assessment, he has relative macrocephaly with prominent occiput, with sparse scalp hair, eyebrows and eyelashes. He has low-set ears and carp shaped mouth. The ﬁngers end abruptly, as in amniotic band sequence, without visible ﬁngernails. The shoulders are slopping and narrow with dimples. The toes appeared tapered with rudimentary toenails. There was minimal 2-3 syndactyly of the toes. The length of the limbs was normal. The external genitalia were male with hypospadias, chodee and asymmetric foreskin with high insertion of the scrotum. Neurologically, he is hypotonic with severe global delay. His karyotype was of normal male, 46,XY. 7-DH and metabolic workup were also within normal limits. Genetic testing for Filamin A gene, responsible for oto-palato-digital syndrome types I and II as well as grey matter heterotopia, is underway. We are also considering subtelomeric FISH. 
Overall, this appears to be a new syndrome.
P0253. Deformities of the skull in children: clinical markers of 
the polymalformative syndromes
T. Marcovici , I. Sabau, I. Simedrea, M. Puiu;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Background: Craniostenosis is deﬁned as a premature closure of cranial sutures. The incidence of primary craniostenosis aproximates 1 per 2,000 births. The cause may be chromosomial abnormalities, genic anomalies or multifactorial. Most cases of craniostenosis are 
evident at birth.Matherials and methods: Four cases with congenital deformities of the skull are presented, two males and two females, aged 3-18 
months.
Results: By clinical examination, X-ray ﬁlms and CT scans of the skull was found scaphocephaly in two cases, turricephaly in one case and right parieto-occipital plagiocephaly in one case. Cortical atrophy and mental retardation and were present in all cases. Optic atrophy and seizures were found in two cases. Facial dysmorphism and kidney defects were present in two cases. Heart defects were associated in 
one case. Just in one case craniotomy was performed.
Conclusions : In 50% of cases the diagnosis was made after 1 year of 
age and just 25% of cases were operated. Without an early diagnosis and surgical correction of the deformities the growth of skull is inhibited 
and brain is serious damaged.
P0254. An eleven year old girl from Northern Lithuania with 
conﬁrmed early-onset torsion dystonia
A. Matuleviciene1, V. Kucinskas2,1;  
1Medical Genetics Centre, Vilnius university hospital, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Dept.
Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.Our patient is an eleven-year-old girl from the third non-complicated 
pregnancy of her mother. She suffers from torsion dystonia. The genealogy of this family is complicated: the girl’s grandfather and grandmother have suspected Parkinson’s disease; her grandmother’s brother has the same features as our patient. The onset of the disease started at age eight with splay gait. Two years after the ﬁrst focal manifestations the girl started to complain of writer’s cramp. The patient was evaluated using laboratory and instrumental investigations: ceruloplasmin, serum and urine organic acids and amino acids were without pathological changes. MRI of the brain was normal. Electromyography showed signs of denervation in both feet, but it was more expressed in the right. A heterozygous deletion 904-906GAGdel was detected in the 
DYT1 gene (in collaboration with Dr. 
F.A. Hol, Nijmegen). This result conﬁrms the diagnosis of early onset 
torsion dystonia caused by a mutation in the DYT1  gene.
The model of inheritance for early-onset generalized dystonia is autosomal dominant. But only 30 to 40% of those with a mutated 
DYT1  
gene develop symptoms of dystonia. Due to this variable penetrance about 60 to 70% of people who carry the mutated gene will not manifest 
symptoms.
P0255. A New X-Linked Craniofacioskeletal Syndrome with 
Female Expression and Male Lethality
C. E. Schwartz1, E. Spence2, K. Voeller1, R. J. Simensen1, A. J. Clark1, A. Re -
iss3, S. Robertson4, R. E. Stevenson1;  
1Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 2Carolina Medical 
Center, Charlotte, NC, United States, 3Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United 
States, 4University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
A syndrome with multisystem manifestations has been observed in three generations of a Caucasian family. The ﬁndings in six females provide a composite clinical picture of microcephaly, short stature, small retroverted ears, hypotelorism, full tip of the nose overhanging the columella, short philtrum, thin upper lip, soft tissue excrescences at the angle of the mouth, small mandible, small hands and feet with brachydactyly, ﬁnger V clinodactyly, ﬂat feet, an excessive number of ﬁngerprint arches, and mild impairment of cognitive function. Two males were more severely affected and died in the initial months of life. They showed intrauterine growth retardation, broad cranium with wide sutures and fontanelles, cardiac defects, small hands and feet with 
abnormal digital creases and small nails, and genital abnormalities.Chromosome analysis, FISH for 22q11 deletion, plasma cholesterol and 7-dehydrocholesterol levels have been normal. MRI studies of 4 of the females showed reduced total brain volume compared to age-matched controls without a reciprocal increase in CSF. This suggests a defect in an early neurodevelopmental process. X-inactivation studies show near complete skewing in two affected females, but were not 
informative in three others.The skewing of X-inactivation, the different severity in males/females and some overlap with OPD-II, suggested FLNA as a potential candidate gene. However, no pathogenic alteration was identiﬁed. Based on clinical presentation and the X inactivation data, we believe this family represents a new X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) syndrome and is a new member of the group of remarkable X-linked 
syndromes which occur predominately among females.
P0256. Molecular diagnostics of acute intermittent porphyria in 
Russia
J. V. Luchinina , S. L. Surin, A. V. Luk’yanenko, I. V. Karpova, Y. S. Pustovoit, 
S. K. Kravchenko;  
Hematological Scientiﬁc Centre RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Acute intermittent porphiria (AIP) is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder characterized by a deﬁciency of porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD), the third enzyme in the heme biosynthetic pathway. Clinically, AIP is characterized as acute neurovisceral attacks that are often precipitated by exogenous and endogenous factors such as hormones, drugs, alcohol and others. To date, at least 250 different mutations causing AIP are known.We inspected 46 unrelated Russian patients affected by AIP. Mutational analysis was performed by direct sequencing using PCR or RT-PCR gene or cDNA PBGD fragments, containing all functionally important gene regions, including exons, exon-intron junctions, promoter and poly(A)-signal. We identiﬁed 34 different mutations including 22 novel, Clinical genetics135
which have not observed in world literature before. Found mutations 
represent 15 splicing mutations, 10 missense mutations, 5 deletions, 3 nonsense mutations and one small insertion. 53delT (5 cases) and Arg173Trp (5 cases) were the most frequent mutations among our patients. Family-speciﬁc mutations were screened among relatives of 25 studied patients by restriction heteroduplex or sequencing analysis. Among 85 studied individuals 31 were asymptomatic carriers of AIP.Early diagnostics for mutations of PBGD gene allow to decrease the number of AIP cases which lead to severe complications, physical 
inability and lethal outcomes.
P0257. An inherited inversion of chromosome 6 and its clinical 
phenotype
V. Christophidou Anastasiadou1, A. Kotti1, E. Spanou Aristidou2, C. Sismani2, 
K. Kleopa2, P. Patsalis2;  
1Archbishop Makarios III Medical Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus Institute 
of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus.
This is the report on a family with two out of three siblings and their father presenting with the same neurological phenotype and an 
inherited chromosomal aberration.The young daughter of the family sought genetic counselling as she was concerned that the tremor and shaking that she had was inherited taking into account the fact that her father and brother also had similar 
symptoms.The proband, her brother and father presented with involuntary movements, abnormal body posture, dysarthria and squint. There was history of learning difﬁculties in the father and brother and evidence that they had mild mental retardation. The proband had no history of signiﬁcant learning difﬁculties.Chromosomal analysis revealed an abnormal karyotype with an 
inversion of chromosome 6p23q12 in all three patients.The clinical phenotype, full investigations family and medical history (including data on their general health and other aspects of their life) 
are discussed in this report.
P0258. Inherited ulcero-mutilating neuropathies CMT2B and 
HSN1 in Czech families.
P. Seeman1, R. Mazanec2, J. Boehm3, P. Ridzoň4, L. Baránková5, C. Windpass -
inger6, M. Auer-Grumbach7;  
1Child Neurology, DNA laboratory, Praha 5, Czech Republic, 2Charles Univer -
sity Prague, Praha 5, Czech Republic, 3Charles University Prague, 1st Faculty 
of Medicine, Praha 2, Czech Republic, 4Thomayer Memorial Hospital, Dept of 
Neurology, Praha 4, Czech Republic, 5Charles University Prague, 2nd Faculty 
of Medicine, Praha 5, Czech Republic, 6University Graz, Dept of Human Gen -
tics, Graz, Austria, 7University Graz, Dept of Neurology, Graz, Austria.
Inherited ulcero-mutilating neuropathies are rare axonal polyneuropathies with prominent sensory loss, foot ulcerations and 
usually autosomal dominant inheritance.Mutations in the RAB7 gene cause CMT2B neuropathy and mutations in the SPTLC1 gene cause HSN1. Only few such families were reported so far worldwide and no such cases have been reported from 
Czech Republic.
We describe two Czech families one with CMT2B and one with HSN1.
In the CMT2B four-generation family we studied two patients from two generations. The disease presented by painless foot injuries and prolonged and difﬁcult healing in the middle of the second decade. Motor deﬁcit presented with distal muscular weakness of legs in the third or fourth decade. Legs were earlier and more affected than hands. Tendon reﬂexes were absent in one patient and well preserved in the other. Electrophysiology showed prominent axonal polyneuropathy more pronounced in the legs and mild in arms. A previously reported 
mutation L129F in the RAB7 gene was detected in both patients.In the HSN1 four-generation family we studied eight affected patients from three generations. The age of onset was in the third to ﬁfth decade. Two persons underwent amputations in the legs in the sixth decade. All affected patients showed prominent sensory loss predominantly in temperature and pain and only mild in vibration. EMG showed axonal neuropathy with unexcitable nerves distally in the legs. Some patients presented increased patellar tendon reﬂexes. A previously reported mutation C133Y was detected in all eight affected patients of this family.Supported by IGA MH 1A8254.P0259. Particular features of the Congenital Heart Defect in 
Children over more than a decade
G. Doros, M. Puiu, A. Popoiu, M. Gafencu, M. Serban;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
The aim of the study is to present the evolution of the congenital heart defects(CHD) in children from Timisoara, over a period of 11 years, time in which we felt the consequences of the nuclear accident in Chernobyl-Russia and the war in Yugoslavia, country nearby.The study was done on a cohort of 1113 children with CHD, classiﬁed in two groups: 226 children between 1990-1994 and 887 children between 1995-2001.The number of CHD between ﬁrst and second group arise 3,92 times; the noncyanotic CHD arise 4 times and the cyanotic CHD arise 3 times.From the noncyanotic CHD, left to right shunts arise 3,5 times, complex malformations arise 7,5 times and obstructive CHD 5,4 times. In the ﬁrst group, 90,7% were noncyanotic, 9,3% were cyanotic.The noncyanotic CHD were composed of: 83,40% left to right shunt, 8,30% complex CHD and 8,30% obstructive CHD. From the left to right shunt malformations, the dominant were: ASD (55,12%), VSD (20,48%) and PDA (7,8%).In the second group, 92, 67% were noncyanotic and 7,32% were cyanotic.The noncyanotic CHD were composed of: 72,99%, left to right shunt, 15,69% complex CHD and 11,32% obstructive CHD.The dominant left to right shunts were: ASD (40,75%), VSD (19,82%), and PDA (12,40%). The number of CHD arise 3,9 times in the second period vs the ﬁrst one, most of the cases registered between 1997-2000.The noncyanotic CHD were dominant in both groups.The most important rising in complex CHD were in the second group, as a result of the teratogenic factors to which Romania 
was exposed.
P0260. Prognostic importance of complex abnormalities of 
caryotype in patients with myelodysplatic syndrome
I. S. Martynkevich, M. P. Ivanova, L. S. Martynenko, S. V. Gricaev, M. V. Mos -
kalenko, K. M. Abdulkadyrov;  
Researh Institute of Mematology and Transfusiology RAMS, St.Petersburg, 
Russian Federation.
Determination of caryotype in patients with myelodysplatic syndromes (MDS) during any leukemic transformation and cancer progression is an important prognostic factor. Intensiﬁcation of MDS treatment is connected with a diversity of complications, therefore determination of prognostic risk groups becomes more amd more actual goal. It is well known that chromosome abberations are distinguished in 60% of initially diagnosed patients with MDS approximately, complex 
abnormalities are observed in 10-30% of patients.150 patients with MDS were examined, complex abberations were observed in 21 patients (14%), age median of them was 55 years. Cytogenetic analysis revealed quantitative abnormalities of caryotype in 17 patients (81%) from 21 (17/21). Changes affected chromosomes 5, 7, 8, 10 and 21. Among structural anomalies, observed in all patiens, abberations of chromosome 1 - 4/21 (19%), del5q 4/21 (19%), del7q 6/21 (28,5%), different abberations of 12p13: t(3;12), del12(p13) and add12(p13) 3/21 (14%) - were found more often. Anomalies of 8q - del8(q13), t(8;17)(q24.1;p13) and t(8;18)(q24;q23) were observed in 4 patients from 21 (19%). Such rare abberations as dic(1;11)(p36;p15), t(11;22)(p14;p10), dic(5;11)(p15;q25), t(2;5)(p24;q23), 
t(16;17)(q24;q12), der(14;14)(q10;q10) and der(13;14)(q10;10).An application of immunosupressive therapy by cyclosporine A and standard schemes of PCT (polychemotherapy) was uneffective in 19 patients (90%) from 21, 16 patients (76%) have died. Obtained data point on very negative clinical course of MDS with complex abnormalities of caryotype that is probably caused by unstability of genome and particular biological features of cells of patients with 
MDS.
P0261. Study of the phenotype of unrelated patients (males and 
females) with premutation and intermediate alleles of FMR1 .
I. Fernandez1, B. Lopez1, M. J. Alonso1, J. J. Telleria1, N. Navarro1, R. Velasco1, 
R. Palencia2, F. Ramos3, A. Blanco1;  
1Universidad-IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2Universidad-Hospital Clinico, Valladolid, 
Spain, 3Universidad, Zaragoza, Spain.
The physical characteristics and behavioural phenotype of full mutation patients with fragile X syndrome are well stablished, while carriers of premutations and intermediate alleles of FXS are traditionally regarded Clinical genetics136
as being clinically unaffected.
Recent reports suggest that carriers of premutation and intermediates alleles may show phenotypical features: physical, psychological, speech-language problems, premature ovarian failure (POF) in women and a neurodegenerative disorder, fragile X associated tremor/ataxia syndrome(FXTAS) in older adult carriers.Patients attending the Neurological and Gynecological clinics were evaluated and when FXS was suspected, they were sent for molecular 
analysis. Informed written conset was given by the families.Southern blot analysis and PCR were carried out to establish the exact 
number of CGG repeats.We have found 14 premutation (12 females and 2 males) and 7 intermediate alleles (5 males and 2 females). Protein expression was 
studied in all, and it was within the normal range.In this study of unrelated patients with premutation and intermediate alleles, males and females (ages between 3 -12 years old) showed similar features: language impairment in concentration skills and /or distractibility, attention deﬁcit, anxiety, communication disturbance, speech and language problems (difﬁculty with generating and ordering words in sentences) and all presented delayed early language 
acquisition.Despite the limitations of the study, our ﬁndings suggest that CGG repeat lengths do not permit predictions about clinical features in patients with premutation and intermediate alleles, and therefore other 
studies must be established.
P0262. Molecular analysis of SMN gene of SMA Tunisian patients
M. Gribaa1, D. Hmida1, M. Yacoub2, S. Tilouch2, A. Saad1;  
1Department of Cytogenetic, Biology of Reproduction and Molecular Genetic, 
Farhat Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Paediatric Unit, Farhat Hached Hos -
pital, Sousse, Tunisia.
Introduction: With a prevalence of 1/6000 to 1/10000, Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) represents the second most common fatal Autosomal recessive disorder after cystic ﬁbrosis. SMA is characterised by degeneration of the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord resulting in 
progressive symmetric proximal muscular weakness.In this study we report molecular screening of 5 patients clinically 
diagnosed as SMA.Material and method: The most commonly used method to conﬁrm genetically the diagnosis of SMA is a qualitative PCR-RFLP assay to 
detect the homozygous absence of SMN1 (Survival Motor Neurone).Two highly homologous survival motor neurone genes, SMN1 and SMN2, are present at the same locus. The detection of the homozygous deletion of exon 7 of SMN1 gene, which is present in 90% to 98% of the patients, takes advantage of the base difference in this exon to 
distinguish SMN1 from SMN2.Results: Within those 5 patients, 4 are carriers of a homologous 
deletion of SMN1.Only one, despite clinical diagnosis of SMA, doesn’t show any 
deletion.Discussion: This qualitative method can be used to determine whether an individual lacks both copies of SMN1 exon 7, but can not distinguish carriers with one copy of SMN1 from normal individuals with two copies of SMN1. To identify SMA carriers necessitates a quantitative 
approach.Conclusion: The clinical diagnosis of SMA can be problematic, therefore genetic testing is ordered to identify patients and deliver a 
directed genetic council.
P0263. Clinical phenotype of a boy with karyotype 46,XY,t(11;22)
(q23.3;q11.2)
N. A. Gladkova1, L. A. Khitrikova2, M. V. Prozorova2, O. P. Romanenko2, M. O. 
Mkheidze1;  
1Medical Academy for postgraduate training, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
We report on a boy with rare set of sings and abnormal karyotype. For 
the ﬁrst time we examined the proband aged 13 yr. Initial diagnosis was hypogonadism, hypothalamic disfunction, neurovegetative dystonia (hypertensive type), obesity (moderate type), macrosomia (disharmonic type). Proband was born after the second gestation prolonged to 28-yr-old healthy female by spontaneous vaginal breech labor. The ﬁrst pregnancy ended in spontaneous abortion.. Proband’s father suffered from oligozoospermia. Ecute cardiovascular insufﬁcierncy caused exitus lethalis of proband’s father aged 40yr. His parents were not consanguineous. At birth proband weight was 3100g, his length was 51cm, head circumference was 35cm, chest circumference was 34cm. At the age of 13 years his length was 162cm, his weight was 80900g, testes 2ml and 2,5ml, penis 4,5x1,8cm. Test with human chorionic gonadotropine was positive. Attacks of severe headache (fronto-parieto-temporal areas), blood hypertension (150/100; 160/120 mmHg), nasal and ear haemorrages were the symptoms of his disease. Decreased levels of LG and testosteron were shown. Osteoporosis of hand more severe in distal parts, structure disturbance of radius were observed with X-ray investigation. Proband karyotype was found to be 46,XY,t(11;22)(q23.3;q11.2). This point of breakage is situated closely to Bernard-Soulier syndrome (BSS, MIM231200). Authors assume relationship between some clinical features like BSS and nature of 
chromosomal abberation.
P0264. Clinical and molecular ﬁndings in 41 Belgian patients 
with Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum
P. J. Coucke, O. Vanakker, B. P. Leroy, P. Van Acker, A. De Paepe;  
Center for Medical Genetics, Gent, Belgium.
Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum (PXE - MIM#264800) is a hereditary connective tissue disorder comprising cutaneous, ophthalmological and cardiovascular manifestations. It is caused by mutations in the ABCC6 gene (31 exons) located on chromosome 16p13.1, encoding a transmembrane transport protein of which the function and substrate 
are presently unknown.We present phenotypical and molecular data on 41 patients with 
biopsy proven PXE.Great variability in severity of the cutaneous lesions was observed, while ocular involvement was consistently present. A signiﬁcantly higher incidence of peripheral vascular complications and stroke were found, whereas coronary and valvular symptoms were much less 
common then suggested in the literature.Mutation analysis of the ABCC6 gene identiﬁed at least one mutation in all but one patient (98%), with R1141X being the most prevalent. Fourthy-eight percent of mutations were observed in exon 24, and 
22% were localised in exons 29, 28 and 18.Patients homozygous for R1141X (exon 24) had a signiﬁcantly higher incidence of peripheral vascular disease then those with at least one N-terminal mutation. This difference might be explained by the observation that N-terminal exons do not code for the important 
Nucleotide Binding Folds.We conclude that exhaustive clinical examination prior to mutation analysis results in a high mutation detection rate in this variable disease. Since analysis of 4 ABCC6 exons identiﬁes 70% of all mutations, a two-step method can be used, analysing these four prior 
to the rest of the gene.
P0265. Genetic factors modifying CADASIL phenotype?
M. Junna1, K. Mykkänen1, S. Tuominen2, S. Tuisku3, M. Pöyhönen4, M. Vii -
tanen5, H. Kalimo6;  
1University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland, 
3Keski-Pohjanmaa Central Hospital, Kokkola, Finland, 4Family Federation of 
Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 5Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 6Helsinki 
University and University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is an inherited systemic vascular disorder causing recurrent brain infarcts and leading to subcortical vascular dementia. The onset, duration and clinical symptoms of the disease are highly variable. The defective gene is 
NOTCH3 and over 
100 different pathogenic mutations have been identiﬁed. In Finland (population 5 millions) we have so far diagnosed 21 CADASIL families with over 100 patients sharing the same 
NOTCH3 mutation, R133C. 
Despite this uniform mutational background the phenotypes vary signiﬁcantly. This indicates additional genetic or environmental factors 
modify the phenotype.We selected two groups of patients having the same mutation (R133C): one group of patients with early onset and severe symptoms and 
another group with late onset and mild or no symptoms.
Seven intragenic NOTCH3 polymorphisms  causing a change in the 
amino acid were tested in both groups. None of the polymorphisms Clinical genetics137
correlated with the phenotype and therefore do not affect the clinical 
variation.
Apolipoprotein E allele  ε4 is a known risk factor in Alzheimer’s disease. 
In several studies it is also suggested to have an effect on vascular dementia. Thus our two patient groups were genotyped for 
APOE  
gene. Results of this analysis will be presented.
P0266. New polymorphic microsatellites provide a quick, cheap 
and reliable method to detect common and atypical duplications 
and deletions of the 22q11.2 region
L. Torres-Juan1, A. Perez-Granero1, M. Bernues1, N. Govea1, M. Juan2, J. 
Rosell1, D. Heine-Suñer1;  
1Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 2Hospital Son 
Llatzer, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
Low copy repeats (LCRs) are the cause of most duplications and 
deletions in the 22q11.2 region, causing the 22q11.2 duplication and deletion syndromes. The del22q11.2 syndrome is the most frequent genomic syndrome with an incidence of 1/4000 births. The most frequent deletion has a size of 3 Mb and is ﬂanked by two LCRs (LCR22-2 and LCR22-4). However, less frequent atypical deletions and duplications are also in most cases ﬂanked by other LCR22s of the same region (LCR22-3, LCR22-5 and LCR22-6). There is a total of 5 intervals ﬂanked by LCRs spanning approximately 6 Mb. We have developed a strategy that provides a reliable, quick and cheap method to detect deletions and duplications caused by these LCRs. This is based on the typing patient’s DNA extracted from blood or uncultivated amnyocytes with a panel of 9 highly polymorphic microsatellite markers that are distributed over the 5 intervals that could be duplicated or deleted by LCR-mediated illegitimate recombination. Heterozygous microsatellites demonstrate the absence of a deletion or a duplication (that would show 3 alleles in most cases).With this ﬁrst screening we are able to rule out deletions and duplications in over 85 % of patients. If microsatellites are non-informative within one LCR-ﬂanked region, microsatellites of a second panel are typed. Intervals with no informative microsatellites will be suspect of harbouring a deletion and further analysis will be required (linkage analysis with parental DNA or MLPA or FISH).
P0267. Craniofacial anomalies associated to camptodactyly and 
chest deformity : Teebi-Shaltout syndrome or new entity.
H. Chaabouni1,2, M. Chaabouni1, M. Trabelsi1, F. Maazoul1, L. Ben Jemaa1, R. 
M'rad1,2;  
1Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Medical school of Tunis, Tunis, Tuni -
sia.
We report the case of a Tunisian boy with unusual face, marked ﬂat 
occiput, camptodactyly, chest deformity ,normal thrive and normal 
intelligence. He was born to consanguineous parents.He had brachycephaly with marked ﬂat occiput, ﬂat supraorbital ridges, hypertelorism , epicanthal fold and bilateral ptosis. The palpebral ﬁssures were short and downslanting. He had depressed nasal bridge, broad nasal tip with wide nostrils. The philtrum was long with thin upper lip. He had maxillary hypoplasia , high and narrow palate , oligodontia and dental malocclusion . His ears were stickled with severe lobule hypoplasia. The hair was normal and his neck was short . He had thorax asymmetry, pectus excavatum and depressed low sternum . He presented moderate restrictive lung disease . We noted bilateral camptodactyly of all ﬁngers, and multiple cutaneous nevi.There was no other abnormality ,neurological examination was normal, and there 
was no clinical features of visceral malformation.He had normal psychomotor evolution and intelligence was normal. A skeletal survey was unremarkable except skull roentography showing deformity. The karyotype was 46 XY. A part form ptosis , ophthalmologic examination was normal. There was not hearing loss. The mother presented moderate left ptosis , unilateral left deafness and she had abnormal teeth position but normal teeth number. His grand parents, 
uncles and ants were phenotypically normal.Tthis phenotype may match with Teebi-Shaltout syndrome previously described, but some features are lacking such as hypotrichosis, 
hypohidrosis, frontal bossing, prominent occiput.Does this observation corresponds to Teebi-Shaltout syndrome or a new entity.P0268. Tumor necrosis factor β gene polymorphism in 
Myasthenia Gravis patients from Bashkortostan, Russia.
A. Ishmukhametova1, I. Khidiyatova1, R. Magzhanov2, E. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Scientiﬁc Center of Russian Acad -
emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, 
Ufa, Russian Federation.
Myasthenia Gravis (MG) is an autoimmune disorder mediated by autoantibodies against the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) of neuromuscular junction. The genetics of the autoimmune response in MG are not well understood, although different polymorphic sets of genes are currently under study. TNFB is the candidate gene as it encode cytokine TNFβ that play an important role in the regulation of the immune response through the induction of genes such as MHC genes and the activation of immune cells. The aim of our study was to analyze the association between alleles of the TNFB NcoI restriction fragment length polymorphism with MG and the disease subgroups in 98 MG patients and 78 healthy controls. Comparison of phenotype, allele and genotype frequencies of TNFB polymorphism did not reveal any signiﬁcant difference between patients as a whole and controls. Allele frequencies of TNFB gene polymorphism in patients and in healthy controls for allele TNFB*1 were found to be 30,7% and 30,8%, correspondingly. However, when patients were subgrouped according to clinical forms of the disease, the frequency of the TNFB*1 allele was found to be statistically signiﬁcant decreased in patients with the ocular form (4,5%) compared to patients with the generalized form (35,0%; p=0,0052) and healthy control (30,8%; p=0,0091). No TNFB*1/1 genotype were observed in patients with ocular MG. Thus, allele TNFB*1 and genotype TNFB*1/1 are negatively associated with the ocular form of the disease. Our results conﬁrm the hypothesis that the MG is a heterogeneous disease with the complicated pathogenic 
mechanisms.
P0269. Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl syndrome- case 
presentation
M. Gafencu, G. Doros, M. Puiu, I. Micle, A. Popoiu, M. Serban;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl syndrome has as principal abnormalities: obesity, mental deﬁciency, polydactyly and/or syndactyly, retinitis pigmentosa, genital hypoplasia or both, and has an autosomal recessive transmission. We present the case of a 16 year old boy, who was admitted to our clinic because of cyanosis, especially on effort, dyspnea and fatigue. On clinical examination, we noted an obese child, grade III, 82 kg, with cyanotic congenital heart defect, Fallot disease, oxygen saturation 64%, polydactyly (of the 1st metacarpal and phalanges) of the left hand, and radio-cubital synostosis of the same hand, with reduction in pronation-supination movement, moderate mental deﬁciency (IQ 69), anterior hypospadias, bilateral cryptorchidism, hypoplastic scrotum, micropenis with hypogonadism, and hirsutism. The insulin level was normal; FSH and LH hormone were much than normal, and the testosterone levels corresponded with Tanner Stage 4. The boy did not have retinitis pigmentosa, only myopic astigmatism. We considered the possibility of a diagnosis of Holt Oram syndrome, but all the associated abnormalities, except the skeletal and cardiovascular ones, are found mainly in Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl syndrome. In conclusion, complex abnormalities needs complex investigations and collaboration between the specialities, under the cover of the genetic consultation, early in childhood, to prevent and 
correct problems as far as possible.
P0270. Homozygous M34T mutation of GJB2 (CX26) gene 
associates with a recessive nonsyndromic prelingual hearing 
loss in several families with a clinical ﬁnding of a 2 kHz 
impairement in the audiogramm
T. Löppönen1, M. Väisänen1, H. Valtonen2, A. Kosunen2, J. Ignatius1, H. Löp -
pönen3;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, 90029 Oulu, Finland, 2Department of Oto -
rhinolaryngology, 70100 Kuopio, Finland, 3Department of Otorhinolaryngology, 
90029 Oulu, Finland.
Mutations in the gap junction beeta 2 (GJB2) gene are the most 
common cause of congenital nonsyndromic hearing impairement (HI). More than 80 GJB2 mutations have been reported and one speciﬁc mutation, 35delG, accounts for 60% - 70% of the cases. The Clinical genetics138
controversial allele variant 101T>C (M34T) has been proposed to 
cause autosomal dominant or recessive nonsyndromic HI or act as a nonpathogenic polymorphism with no clinical signiﬁcance.In our routine GJB2 mutation screening of patients with HI performed by direct sequencing, we found thirteen patients homozygous for the M34T mutation in northern and eastern Finland. They came from seven families with prelingual nonsyndromic sensorineural HI. In ﬁve families, where the fenotype of the M34T could be followed from all the affected and healthy family members, the HI segregated with the genotype M34T/M34T.We have analyzed the audiological data from the six families both from the affected persons and the family members. Out of the twelve children homozygotes for the mutation M34T, there was a signiﬁcant ﬁnding of a 2 kHz impairement of moderate to severe degree in nine of them and in two child the impairement was at 3 kHz. In one child the impairement was not as clear.Our ﬁndings give evidence that the M34T mutation is clinically signiﬁcant showing recessive mode of inheritance. Furthermore, a speciﬁc shape of the audiogramm with an impairement at 2 kHz was associated with homozygous M34T mutation in the families studied.
P0271. A new case of 3M syndrome
F. Maazoul , M. Trabelsi, M. Chaabouni, H. Chaabouni;  
Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
Three M syndrome is an extremely rare syndrome. About ﬁfty cases are reported in the literature. The syndrome was ﬁrst described in 1975 by Miller and al. Common clinical features are : low birth weight, short stature (dwarﬁsm), craniofacial malformations, bone abnormalities, and hypogenitalism. The syndrome is thought to be inherited as an autosomal recessive genetic trait. The differential diagnosis with other dysmorphic dwarﬁsms such as the Silver-Russel syndrome, the Mulibrey dwarﬁsm and the fetal alcohol syndrome . The cause and the 
molecular basis of this syndrome are still unknown.We report the case of a 9 years old dwarf Tunisian male. He was born from consanguineous parents, both have short stature. He was very small at birth, and he had characteristic craniofacial features with dolichocephaly, triangular-shaped face, pointed chin, high forehead, anti-mongoloïd palpebral ﬁssures, long philtrum, proeminent lips, high narrow palate, and large ears. He had a short neck, pectus excavatum, lumbar hyperlordosis, clinodactyly of the 5th ﬁngers, joints hyperextensibility, genu valgum, and ﬂat feet. He had a hypogenitalism and normal intelligence. Radiographs showed a spina biﬁda L4-L5, the vertebral bodies were tall, with a wide spinal canal; congenital dislocation of the hip, and a delayed bone age were noted. The hormonal investigation (GH, IGF1, TSH, FT4) showed normal levels. The karyotype was 46, XY. Treatment with growth hormone is attempted in order to allow the child an eventual increase of his ﬁnal size.The inheritance pattern and of the pathogenesis of this syndrome are 
discussed.
P0272. Evaluation of clinical and cytogenetical criteria presets 
for the diagnostic approach in a large group of Fanconi anemia 
cases
T. Tuncali, E. Baboglu, N. Kutlay, R. Akcay, K. Yararbas, F. Sadeghi, I. Akalin, 
H. G. Karabulut, A. Tukun, I. Bokesoy, H. I. Ruhi;  
Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Fanconi anemia (FA) was originally described as an autosomal disorder 
characterized by a progressive pancytopenia, diverse congenital abnormalities and increased predisposition to malignancy. Growth retardation, abnormal skin pigmentation and thumb anomalies are the typical manifestations along with some rather rare morphometric and systemic abnormalities found in FA patients While neither of these clinical presets are adequate, cytogenetic analysis should always be carried out following the clinical stigmatas and be acknowledged for the diagnosis of the disease. The current method of choice in cytogenetic analysis depends on the comparison of spontaneous versus diepoxybutane (DEB) induced chromosomal breakage for diagnosis. Here we present a data accumulated during last 15 years from the patients refered to our medical genetic department with FA prediagnoses. Out of 181 cases 103 were conﬁrmed as FA after DEB induced analysis. Multivariate logistic regression was utilized for modelling the effects of clinical and cytogenetical ﬁndings and revealed clearcut predictors between FA and non-FA groups.
P0273. Acromicric Dysplasia versus Geleophysic Dysplasia: 
report of a portuguese patient
M. Reis-Lima1, J. Pinto-Basto1, G. Soares1, C. Dias1, A. Fortuna1, M. Martins1, 
C. Godinho2;  
1Instituto de Genética Médica, Porto, Portugal, 2Hospital de S.Miguel, Oliveira 
de Azeméis, Portugal.
We report a girl, fourth child of consanguineous parents in fourth degree, with normal stature, and no relevant family history. She was referred to us at 6 months age because of severe prenatal and postnatal short stature, peculiar face with narrow palpebral ﬁssures, long eyelashes, short and wide nose, small and stubby hands and feet with very short distal phalanges with redundant skin. She had mild dorsal kyphosis, short neck and thorax and joint limitation. The mitral valve had a subvalvular anomaly and a L-R shunt, which required surgery. Mild squint and hypermetropy was diagnosed. Neurological examination was normal. X-ray study showed severe carpal bone age delay, very short and coarse second and third phalanges, femoral 
heads looked normal. No other anomalies were detected.She is now 8 years old and shows severe short stature, contractures are still evident, hands and feet remain very short and stubby, facial appearance is very appealing, there is no hepatomegaly, cardiac status remains stable. She is very shy and has a few learning problems. All other investigations were normal (brain MRI , EEG, abdominal US, immunological and endocrine tests, karyotype, LCFA , GAGs , 
metabolic screen).Although the phenotype could be compatible with Geleophysic Dysplasia and the parental consanguinity suppports this, the lack of evidence of accumulation features leads us to classify this patient as Acromicric Dysplasia. Once more, this case stresses the progressively 
accepted phenotypic overlap between these two diseases.
P0274. Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia associated with joint 
laxity and multiple dislocations, mental retardation, retinopathy 
and deafness
J. Pinto-Basto1, J. Ramos-Alves2, G. Soares1, C. Dias1, M. Martins1, A. For -
tuna1, M. Reis-Lima1;  
1Instituto de Genética Médica, Porto, Portugal, 2Hospital S.João, Porto, Portu -
gal.
The term spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD) embraces a large group of disorders, distinguished on the basis of clinical and 
radiological features.We report the ﬁrst and only son of a consanguineous couple (ﬁrst cousins), referred to us at 33 months of age for conﬁrmation of bone dysplasia. He showed severe short stature of prenatal onset, severe kypho-scoliosis and a skeleton x-ray compatible with a spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia. He also presented with congenital hip dislocation, joint laxity and multiple dislocations. Large eyes with blue sclera, and short neck were noted, but no real facial dysmorphism. Mild mental retardation and bilateral sensorineural deafness were ﬁrst noted at age 5. He also had astigmatism, mild optic atrophy and 
retinitis pigmentosa diagnosed at age 6.All the investigations performed thus far were negative (karyotype, metabolic screen, LCFA, lisosomal disorders screening, brain MRI, 
abdominal US and echocardiogram).The father has a similar face appearance, joint laxity with multiple 
dislocations, but no short stature or other anomalies.It is very difﬁcult to establish a clear mode of inheritance in this family, since SEMD with multiple dislocations has an autosomal dominant pattern and SEMD with joint laxity an autosomal recessive one. On the other hand, the association MR, retinopathy and deafness lead to mandatory exclusion of a mitochondrial disorder in dispite of consanguinity.We believe this patient may represent a unique form of spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia associated with other anomalies. To our knowledge, the only similar previously reported patient was also 
of Portuguese origin (Liberfarb RM et al., 1986).Clinical genetics139
P0275. Floating Harbor syndrome : report of 6 new cases
s. sigaudy , c. missirian, n. philip, a. moncla;  
Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Timone EnfantMarseille cedex 5, 
France.
Floating Harbor syndrome is a rare genetic disorder. Only about thirty 
patients have been reported since ﬁrst description in seventies. To date, genetic bases are unknown. Clinical diagnostic is based on characteristic facial dysmorphism including triangular face, deep set eyes, prominent nose, large columella, short philtrum and thin lips, proportionate short stature with delayed bone age and expressive langage delay. Most cases are sporadic but two patients with affected parents have been reported suggesting an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. One case of recurrence in sibs could be due to gonadal mosaicism. We report 6 new patients aged from 4 to 31 years. Four were sporadic cases and there was a familial transmission from father to daughter. All displayed typical facial dysmorphism and short stature. In addition, two patients had congenital cardiac defects (pulmonary stenosis and atrial septal defect), two boys presented hypospadias and two girls developed epilepsy. As psychomotor development is normal or midly retarded and associated malformations not usual, patients are 
generally refered to paediatricians because of growth retardation
P0276. Autosomal dominant perniosis maps to chromosome 3p
M. Linné1, M. Gong2, H. Schulz2, M. Meurer3, E. Schröck1, M. Gahr4, N. Hüb -
ner2, M. A. Lee-Kirsch1;  
1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Ger -
many, 2Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin-Buch, Germany , 
3Klinik für Dermatologie, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 
4Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Technische Universität Dresden, Dres -
den, Germany.
Familial perniosis is a novel autosomal-dominant genodermatosis. The clinical picture consists of painful purple-red inﬂammatory lesions in acral locations such as ﬁngers, toes, nose, and cheeks induced by a combination of cold temperature and moisture. The lesions may ulcerate and may be associated with arthralgias. Histologically, lesions are characterized by unspeciﬁc vasculitic changes with deposits of complement and immunoglobulin and absent hyperkeratosis. The disease onsets in early childhood and tends to improve in late adulthood. Thus, the clinical and histological ﬁndings are consistent with either perniosis or Chilblain lupus, a rare cutaneous form of lupus erythematodes. Extensive investigation of 3 affected individuals of a multigenerational nonconsanguineous German kindred could exclude the presence of antinuclear antibodies, complement deﬁciency, cryoglobulinemia, cold agglutinins, infections, traumatic injury, 
keratolytic winter erythema, or lupus pernio.Whole-genome linkage analysis was carried out on 25 family members including 16 affected individuals using the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Mapping 10K Array version Xba131. PedChek was used to detect Mendelian errors. Parametric linkage analysis was carried out with SimWalk 2 using a stepwise analysis of non overlapping marker sets covering 25-100 SNPs at a time. Assuming a fully penetrant autosomal-dominant trait the disease gene was localized within a 15 cM interval on chromosome 3p21-3p14 with a maximum location score of 4.7 for SimWalk 2 analysis.Identiﬁcation of the gene responsible for familial perniosis may shed light onto the pathogenesis of common forms of collagen vascular 
disease such as vasculitis or lupus erythematodes.
P0277. 13p and Yq homology have anything to do with male 
infertility status: A novel familial inheritance of 13p deletion
L. Rao1, A. Babu1, K. Murthy1, M. Deenadayal2, L. Singh1;  
1Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India, 2Infertility Institute 
and Research Centre, Hyderabad, India.
Answers to deviations regarding the decline in fertility rate, and altered 
fecundability have gradually focused on individual genetic make up. The natural transmission of microdeletion syndromes is occasionally reported. We present an interesting ﬁnding in a family with four males and two females with inheritance of p arm deletion of chromosome 13 for the past four generations. This defect is predominant in males of the family, with oligoasthenoteratozoospermia and low intellectual abilities, whereas females with the defect are normal. The deletion was conﬁrmed with G banding and ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization. This reveals genes on p arm of chromosome 13 have association with mental status and fertility aspects and is essential to deﬁne pathogenetic signiﬁcance of chromosome 13p deletion. Molecular investigations showed normal Y chromosome. Studies are in progress to narrow down the region of chromosome deletion breakpoint and map the candidate gene(s) for the cause in this region. Thus allows understanding the possible mechanisms by which deletion might affect meiosis in spermatogenesis and lead to infertility.Hypothetically, altered fertility rate observed among males in the four generations follows position-effect variegation (PEV) phenomenon. Sequence blast analysis of breakpoints in deletion region of chromosome 13p in affected individuals showed 85% homology with Yq region. Molecular characterization is currently underway to annotate underlying sequences with Yq region. This would further ﬁnd novel relationship between autosomal aberrations and testicular dysgenesis or spermatogenesis arrest and map corresponding regions on each autosome in regard to recorded aberrations accompanying these 
disturbances.
P0278. Clinical presentation of mitochondrial 
encephalomyopathies
J. Pilch1, E. Marszal1, M. Kajor2, E. Jamroz1;  
1Department of Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Po -
land, 2Department of Anatomopathology, Medical University of Silesia, Kato -
wice, Poland.
Mitochondrial diseases are a very heterogeneous group of congenital respiratory chain defects. Their diagnostics is difﬁcult because of the diversity of clinical presentations. The authors report four children with mitochondrial diseases based on clinical picture and muscle pathomorphology. In the youngest patient with miopathic presentation ﬁrst symptoms appeared at the age of 7 months. The next two boys presented with rapid fatigue associated with physical exercise and recurrent vomiting were observed at the age of 9 and 12 years. The mother of one of them is suffering from MELAS. In the last boy external progressive ophthalmoplegia was observed since the age of 9 years. All patients had hyperlactatemia. MRI of the head revealed abnormal disturbed myelination in three cases. Only in two patients myopathic pattern in EMG was noted. Based on the muscle tissue pathomorphology the ragged-red ﬁbers were not found only in the youngest patient, but in that case the diagnosis was conﬁrmed by the presence of structurally abnormal mitochondria. At all of them COX activity was negative and the respiratory chain enzyme activity was decreased. Nowadays, the molecular analyses of mtDNA are in 
progress.
P0279. Cerebral, cerebellar and colobomatous anomalies in 
three related males: sex-linked inheritance in a newly recognized 
syndrome with features overlapping with Joubert syndrome
H. Y. Kroes1, R. A. J. Nievelstein2, P. G. Barth3, P. G. J. Nikkels4, C. Bergmann5, 
R. H. J. M. Gooskens6, G. Visser7, J. K. Ploos van Amstel1, F. A. Beemer1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands, 2Department of Radiology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands, 3Dept. of Pediatric Neurology, Emma Childrens Hospital/Univer -
sity Medical Cente, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Department of Pathology, 
University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 5Dept. of Human Genet -
ics, Aachen University of Technology, Aachen, Germany, 6Department of Child 
Neurology, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 7Department 
of Metabolic diseases, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
We present a so far unrecognized X-linked mental retardation 
syndrome with features overlapping with Joubert syndrome.
Two brothers showed hypotonia, mental retardation, retinal colobomas and a breathing pattern compatible with Joubert syndrome. Neuroimaging revealed cerebellar vermis hypoplasia and ventriculomegaly. A tentative diagnosis of Joubert syndrome was made, and autosomal recessive inheritance considered most likely .
In a subsequent pregnancy that occurred after artiﬁcial donor insemination, ultrasound in the 22nd week revealed a Dandy-Walker malformation and hydrocephaly. At autopsy at 34 weeks of gestation, the male infant showed cerebellar vermis aplasia and abnormalities of the brainstem and cerebral cortex. He was considered to have the same disorder as his two half-brothers. This renders the pedigree 
highly suggestive of X-linked inheritance.Clinical genetics140
The clinical symptoms of this syndrome resemble Joubert syndrome. 
However, the absence of the molar tooth sign, the presence of supratentorial abnormalities, and the X-linked inheritance do not support Joubert syndrome. We propose the name X-linked cerebral-cerebellar-coloboma syndrome to distinguish the two disorders. Molecular analysis of several genes for X-linked syndromal mental 
retardation and Joubert syndrome is currently being performed.Differentiation of the two disorders is especially important in genetic counselling, where artiﬁcial donor insemination may be considered as a means of reducing the recurrence risk, or when female relatives of 
the patient are concerned.
P0280. Oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia with rare associations
M. Vishnuvardhan Reddy1, K. Jamil2, N. Satish Chandra Reddy2, K. Siva 
Sankar2;  
1Osmania Medial College, Government E.N.T Hospital, Hyderabad, India, 
2Department of Genetics Bhagwan Mahavir Medical and Research Center , 
Hyderabad, India.
A case report of three year old female child whose parents are of non consanguineous origin, who are not consistently exposed to any of the potent mutagens during pregnancy and so the role of any of the mutagens on the phenotype is not clear and the karyotype analysis of the proband appears to be normal (46,XX) with contracted gall bladder, doubtful chloeseatoma, fusion of fourth and ﬁfth cervical vertebrae along with various defects, mentioned in oculoauriculo vertebral dysplasia or goldenhar syndrome which includes hemi vertebrate, facial palsy, limbal dermiod cyst, sensory neural hearing loss, microtia and middle ear anamolies. The impact of pathogenesis of oculoauriculo vertebral spectrum might be the genes involved in notch signaling pathway, 
which plays an important role during somitogenesis are reviewed.
P0281. Trisomy 8p syndrome: A case report and review of 
clinical features
S. Totian1, F. Mahjoubi2, S. Kareeme2;  
1IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran.
Duplication of the short arm of chromosome 8, de novo or resulting 
from parental translocation, associated with craniofacial defects (high forehead, frontal or parietal bossing, carp mouth, full cheeks, and round face), brevicollis with redundant skin folds, mental retardation, absence of the carpus callosum, multiple minor skeletal abnormalities 
, and other abnormalities.Here, a one month old male baby is described with duplication of 8p as the result of a maternal balanced reciprocal translocation. His 
karyotype was ascertained as46,XY,der(13)t(8;13)(p11.2;p12). The father had normal karyotype. The mother had an apparently balanced translocation involving chromosome 8 and 13 (46,XX, t(8;13)(p11.2;p12).Our case had macrocephaly with subtle changes in facial appearance. Pethosis of the left eye and micrognathia were also detected. The case had probably cortical blindness. The patient did not show any response to voice. The right parietal bone was prominent but not the left one. Right and left coroner artery in their origin and Aorta were dilated as detected by echocardiography. Brian CT scan showed agenesis of 
carpus callosum.This case represents typical features of duplication 8p syndrome reported in the published cases. It should be noted that the phenotypic expression is related to the length of the duplicated segment. Furthermore, phenotype of dup8p resulting from
 a translocation is 
much more variable, probably because of different breakpoints.These ﬁndings, together with those reported cases with dup (8), deﬁne a syndrome that emphasizes the importance of genes on the 8p region for development of brain and heart especially.
P0282. Detection of chromosome 18 centromere instability and 
aneuploidy in Alzheimer patients by using Flurescent in situ 
hybridization
L. P. Zivkovic1, B. M. Spremo-Potparevic1, V. Bajic2, N. J. Djelic3;  
1Department of Biology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Belgrade, Serbia 
and Montenegro, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, 2Institute for Biomedical 
Research, Galenika a.d., Serbia and Montenegro, Belgrade, Serbia and Mon -tenegro, 3Department of Biology, Faculty of Veterinary medicine, University of 
Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro.
Premature centromere division (PCD) is an uncommon cytogenetic 
abnormality characterized with chromatides distinctively separated before anaphase movement. PCD or out-of-phase centromere division is found in ageing cells, Alzheimer disease (AD), various chromosome instability syndromes and cancers. It is also been proposed to be an important mechanism of aneuploidy (i.e. chromosomes 21 and X in AD patients). It is known that chromosome 18 separates ﬁrst in metaphase - anaphase transition of the cell cycle. FISH analysis revealed that the aneuploidy in AD cells is not appearing only at chromosome 21, but at 
least chromosome 18 may exhibit trisomy as well.The aim of this study was to estimate occurrence of PCD of chromosome 18. Peripheral blood lymphocytes were analysed in 6 AD patients (age 69.8±7.2) and 6 control subjects (age 69.8±7.5). FISH analysis for the alpha-centromeric probe of chromosome 18 on interphase nuclei has revealed that chromosome 18 expresses PCD in 2.59% in control group and 5.18% in AD patients, which is statistically signiﬁcant (p<0.05) increase. Using FISH on interphase nuclei, our results show that PCD can occur earlier that metaphase of mitosis, 
i.e., in interphase of the cell cycle, immediately after replication.Our results showed a signiﬁcant increase in hiperploidy (7.18% and 4.23%) and hipoploidy in Alzheimer patients compared to control subjects (8.21% and 5.08%), suggest that out-of-phase centromere separation can be seen as a manifestation of chromosome instability which may lead to aneuploidy.
P0283. Cytogenetic and FISH analysis in female patients with 
primary amenorrhea
S. N. Kokkinou , A. Varouta, I. Fotopoulou, D. G. Eliopoulos;  
Cytogenetic Unit, Halandri Athens, Greece.
Sex determination and development in humans is a very complex 
process.Many genetic or chromosomal events can alter the process and result 
in sex reversal.XY females can become from an abnormal interchange between the X and Y chromosomes or from a mutation in SRY gene.Cytogenetic analysis was carried out on 5 cases with primary amenorrhea, culturing peripheral blood lymphocytes and using GTG banding technique. Their age ranged from 17-37y.Chromosomal sexual assignment was established as 46,XY in 1 phenotypically female. One pt.had 46,XX / 47,XXY, while the rest had a female karyotype 46,XX.All the pts received hormone-replacement therapy and therapy for 
induced osteopenia as well.Using FISH technique,we used the LSI SRY(Yp11.3) s.o.and CEP X s.g./ CEP Y (alpha satellite) s.o.probes(VYSIS).The results conﬁrmed the diagnosis of sex reversal in the younger pt. Four pts with CEP X /CEP Y probe conﬁrmed their female sex, but with probe LSI SRY, speciﬁc for SRY gene at Yp11.3 region., it was found that about 30% of the interphase nuclei and more than three 
metaphases had a positive signal.We believe that in our pts there is material of Y-chromosome carrying the SRY gene and even more that this is responsible for their primary 
amenorrhea.We support the recommendation that FISH analysis with SRY probe in females with primary amenorhea should become part of the routine 
investigation .
P0284. Ring Chromosome 4 Proven by FISH Study in a Child 
With Cleft Lip and Palate, Iris Coloboma, Mid-Gut Malrotation, 
Hypospadias and Corpus Callosum Hypoplasia
S. Balci1, O. Engiz1, D. Aktas1, I. Vargel2, M. S. Beksac3, K. Mrasek4, T. Liehr4;  
1Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Genetics, Ankara, 
Turkey, 2Kirikkale University, Deptartment of Plastic and Reconstructive Sur -
gery, Kirikkale, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey, 4Institute für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, 
Jena, Germany.
We report a 16-month-old mental and motor-retarded male patient 
with ring chromosome 4 and multiple congenital anomalies such as unilateral cleft lip and palate, iris coloboma, microcephaly, hypospadias and double urethral oriﬁces. Peripheral chromosome analysis of the patient showed 46, XY, (r4) de novo. Multicolor FISH study was Cytogenetics141
also performed and according to multicolor banding (MCB) a r(4)(::
p16.3->q34.3~35.1::) was found in all metaphases. Subtelomere 4p was present but subtelomere 4q was absent. Cranial MRI showed hypoplastic corpus callosum ; delayed myelinization; cortical atrophy. Chromosomal analysis of both parents were normal. Amniocentesis for the second pregnancy revealed a normal 46,XY karyotype. Phenotypically normal baby was delivered. Phenotypic features of ring chromosome 4 cases change according to deleted part of the chromosome 4 although severe growth retardation , microcephaly, cleft lip and palate are consistent features. Midgut malrotation as seen in our case was only reported in a mosaic form of ring 4 associated with short bowel and dextrocardia. In conclusion, the ﬁrst ring 4 Turkish patient stressed that ring 4 chromosome anomaly should be suspected in every case with severe mental and motor retardation, microcephaly, hypertelorism, cleft lip and palate, corpus callosum hypoplasia and 
duodenal or midgut malrotation.
P0285. Evaluation of DNA damage induced by spilled Prestige  
oil exposure in a group of volunteers by means of comet assay
R. Fraga , B. Laffon, B. Pérez-Cadahía, E. Fernández, E. Pásaro, J. Méndez;  
University of A Coruña, A Coruña, Spain.
After Prestige accident, in November 2002, about 63000 tons of 
mixtures of fuel-oil and sea water reached Galician coast, and more than 200 beaches (150 Km of coast) were seriously affected. As a consequence, birds were contaminated with the oil. As many as 10000 died, and 2500 were taken to the two centres for bird recovery in Santa Cruz (Oleiros) and O Campiño (Pontevedra), where they were cleaned 
and cured.In this work, peripheral leukocytes from a group of young biologists involved in the cleaning of contaminated alive birds and in making the autopsies of dead birds were analysed by means of comet assay, in order to determine the DNA damage associated with exposure to the oil. A group of non-exposed students were used as controls. Additionally, volatile organic compounds were analysed in the ambient air of the work rooms by means of a gas chromatography coupled to 
ion trap mass spectrometry technique.Results obtained showed signiﬁcantly higher DNA damage in the group of exposed individuals, with comet tail length increasing with time of exposure. Individuals from O Campiño showed higher DNA damage than those from Santa Cruz, probably associated to their higher mean exposure time. No effect of protective measures (gloves, masks, overalls) has been detected, due to the low number of exposed 
individuals that did not use them.
P0286. Cytogenetic evaluation in a group of individuals exposed 
to Prestige  oil during autopsies and cleaning of contaminated 
birds
J. Méndez , R. Fraga, B. Pérez-Cadahía, E. Pásaro, B. Laffon;  
University of A Coruña, A Coruña, Spain.
In November 2002 the oil tanker Prestige, loaded with 77000 tons of 
crude oil, broke up in the Northwest coast of Spain, spilling more than 63000 tons into the sea water. This ecological disaster unleashed a great mobilisation of volunteers to carry out the labours of cleaning beaches, sea, contaminated birds, etc. The Prestige oil is classiﬁed as fuel oil No. 6 by the USEPA, and the IARC regards this grade of oil as 
possible human carcinogen (group 2B).In order to determine if exposure to Prestige oil causes cytogenetic damage, micronucleus (MN) test has been performed in peripheral lymphocytes from a group of volunteers that cleaned alive oil-contaminated birds and made autopsies of dead birds, and results 
have been compared with a control group.No signiﬁcant difference has been obtained between MN frequencies in the control and exposed groups, even at the higher time of exposure. Moreover, no effect of gender, age or smoking habits has been observed. These results suggests that protective measures adopted during the handling of birds have been suitable, at least to avoid any 
cytogenetic damage.P0287. Cryptic subtelomere chromosomal rearrangement 
screening in 19 patients with mental retardation / malformation 
syndromes
M. Stefanova1, B. Dimitrov2, I. Ivanov1;  
1Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 2Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Background: Mental retardation affects 2-3% of the general population, with an unknown cause in more than 50% of the cases. Cytogenetically undetected chromosomal imbalances have been indicated as an explanation. In recent years, due to the development of molecular cytogenetic techniques, it became possible to identify cryptic rearrangements involving the ends of chromosomes. Subtelomeric aberrations have been identiﬁed as a signiﬁcant cause of mental retardation and/or malformation syndromes. Material and methods:
 
Here we report a subtelomere ﬂuorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) study of well-selected group of 19 unrelated children with mental retardation (MR), dysmorphic features, and a normal karyotype. The preliminary ascertainment checklist comprises evaluation of MR or developmental delay, dysmorphism, growth defect, and abnormal pedigree. Recognized dysmorphic syndromes have been excluded from the study. Results and discussion: Our study has found two 
de novo subtelomeric rearrangements, deletions of chromosome 4ptel and chromosome 13qtel, and one normal polymorphic variant of chromosome region 2qtel, a maternally transmitted deletion of 2q37. Clinical ﬁndings of patient 1 covered a well-deﬁned Wolf-Hirshhorn syndrome features although the del(4)(p16.3) is cytogenetically undetectable. Patient 2 showing del(13)(q34) demonstrated growth and mental retardation, microcephaly, slopping forehead, bird-like nose, small chin, large ears, long ﬁngers with wide terminal phalanges, heart defect, ventral location of the anus. 
Conclusion:  Our ﬁndings 
showed 10.5% incidence rate of subtelomere rearrangements, which is comparable with previous reports on subtelomere abnormalities. This study highlights the importance of searching for cryptic subtelomeric 
rearrangements in non-syndromic mentally retarded patients.
P0288. Phenotypic and cytogenetic spectrum of chromosome 9p 
trisomy
A. M. Mohamed , S. A. Temtamy, A. K. Kamel, S. Ismaieel, N. A. Helmy, M. El 
Gammal, M. El Ruby, M. Aglan;  
National Research cetre, Cairo, Egypt.
In this study we investigated three cases with de novo short arm 
duplication of chromosome 9.The aim of this study was to identify the genotype / phenotype correlations and to use molecular cytogenetics to identify the exact duplicated part. Using GTG, DAPI stain, Whole chromosome paint , cetromere, telomere and 9p21 speciﬁc locus probes demonstrated that in case one trisomy was due to translocation between chromosome 9 and 13 and duplication of 9p giving i(9p), the second case due to free 9p trisomy and the 3
rd case due to duplication of whole short arm 
and part of the long arm ( partial 9 trisomy). This study suggests the 
presence of hot points for chromosome 9 breakage at proximal 9q.Although both patients 1 and 2 had the same trisomy involving 9p , Case one with i(9p) exhibits the classical clinical manifestations of 9p trisomy such as mental retardation, ear anomalies, hypertelorism, bulbous nose, down-turned corners of the mouth, and hand feet anomalies, while case 2 had overlapping features with Cofﬁn -Siris syndrome . The signiﬁcance of such observation may point to possible gene location to Cofﬁn -Siris syndrome on 9p. Case 3 had additional manifestations more than those typical of trisomy 9p. This could be due to duplication of 9q21 region. Each case had unique clinical and cytogenetic manifestations, this may be due to different gene 
involvement according to the molecular site of the breakage point.
P0289. Small supernumerary marker chromosomes 
characterized by multicolor FISH techniques: database of 
Belarussian Registry of Chromosomal Abnormalities
A. D. Polityko1,2, N. V. Rumyantseva1, H. Starke2, T. Liehr2;  
1Institute for Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, Belarus, 2Institute of Human Genetics 
and Anthropology, Jena, Germany.
Marker chromosome is structurally abnormal chromosome in which 
no part can be identiﬁed (ISCN, 1995). Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC) differ depending on chromosomal origin, euchromatic DNA-content, degree of mosaicism, possible of Cytogenetics142
uniparental disomy presence. sSMC occur in about 0.045% of the 
human population (72/161536 newborn infants) (Liehr, 2004 http://mti-n.mti.uni-jena.de/~huwww/MOL_ZYTO/sSMC).The characterization of sSMC is the important task of prenatal and postnatal cytogenetic diagnostics and genetic counseling, therefore a 
variety of special FISH approaches have been developed for that.Totally 45 cases with SMC in constitutional karyotype were registered in Belarussian Registry of Chromosomal Abnormalities among the individuals who were cytogenetically examined in Republic Genetic 
Service during 1983-2004 years.Comprehensive molecular cytogenetic methods were used for diagnostics of all available cases: M-FISH, cenM-FISH, microdissection of sSMC with subsequent reverse painting, acro-cenM-FISH, 
centromere-near BAC probe using, etc.We present data of origin, structure and mosaicism status of 20 prenatal/postnatal sSMC cases diagnosed, describe the signiﬁcant and rare clinical ﬁndings, and discourse the productivity of approaches 
used.
Karyotype Phenotype
47,XX,+inv dup(15)  
47,XY,+inv dup(15)  
47,XY+inv dup(15)  
47,XX,+inv dup(15)/47,XX,+r(15)/46,XX  
47,XX,+inv dup(15)*  
47,XY,+inv dup(15) mat*  
47,XX,+inv dup(15)  
47,XY,+inv dup(15)  
48,XXX,+inv dup(9p)/47,XXX  
47,XX,+inv dup(12p) (neocentromeric)  
47,XX,+inv dup(12p)/46,XX  
47,XY,+inv dup(18p)  
47,XX,+inv dup(22)  
48,XY,+der(19),+der(19)  
47,XY,+der(21)  
47,XY,+der(14)t(11;14)(p15;q11.2)  
47,XX,+der(21)t(11;21)(q21;q22) mat  
47,XX,+der(22)t(11;22)(q23;q11) pat  
47,XX,+der(22)t(11;22)(q23;q11)  
47,XY,+der(22)t(11;22)(q23;q11) matNormal  
Normal  
Normal  
Normal  
Normal  
CA 
CA 
CA 
CA 
CA 
CA 
CA 
CA 
CA 
Normal  
CA 
CA 
CA 
CA 
CA
*- mother and son
CA- congenital abnormalities[Supported in parts by DAAD 325/2003, DFG WER 17/01/04 and Dr. Robert Pﬂeger-Stiftung].
P0290. The different heteromorphic patterns in chromosome 9 
pericentric region - towards a better understanding
T. Liehr1, U. Claussen1, H. Tönnies2, H. Starke1;  
1Institut für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Jena, Germany, 2Institut für 
Humangenetik Charité Campus, Berlin, Germany.
Among the non-acrocentric human chromosomes, chromosome 9 presents with the highest degree of morphological variations. Variants, also called heteromorphisms, like 9qh+, 9qh- or inv(9)(p11q13) are common ﬁndings in routine cytogenetics. In a previous study we characterized in summary thirteen molecularcytogenetically different heteromorphic pattern of the pericentric region of chromosome 9 (Starke et al., 2002; Eur J Hum Genet 10:790-800). In that study we used a set of three ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) probes: a chromosome 9 speciﬁc alpha satellite probe, a chromosome 9 speciﬁc classical satellite III DNA probe and a microdissection probe speciﬁc for 9p12/9q13-21.1. This probe set was enlarged in the meantime by so-called subcentromeric BAC-probes located in 9p12 and 9q13, respectively (probes are speciﬁed in Starke et al., 2003; Hum Genet 114:51-67). Thus, we were able to characterize 3 additional, previously unreported heteromorphic pattern of chromosome 9 and to describe variants like ‘9ph+’ (acc. to Starke et al., 2002) in more detail. The biological and/or clinical signiﬁcance of chromosome 9 heteromorphisms is still unclear. Connection with reproductive failure, mentally retardation, schizophrenia, the Walker-Warburg syndrome, the oculo-auriculo-vertebral (Goldenhar) spectrum and even with cancer predisposition were suggested throughout the literature. The now available possibility to distinguish by FISH between the different heterochromatic patterns hidden behind the cytogenetic ﬁnding of a ‘heterochromatic variant of chromosome 9’ will lead to a clearer genotyp-phenotype correlation of chromosome 9 heteromorphisms in future. Supported by the Dr. Robert Pﬂeger-Stiftung.
P0291. Three families with a chromosome 5 inversion
V. Nedomova1, N. Jencikova1, Z. Zemanova2, G. Kreckova1, D. Raskova1, M. 
Louckova1;  
1Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Center of Oncocytogenetics, 1st Medical 
School, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
We present three familiar occurrences of the chromosome 5 inversions. Routine prenatal cytogenetic analysis by G-banding was indicated by positive screening results in one case and advanced maternal age in two other cases. There were no spontaneous abortions registered in any of these families, only a vanishing twin syndrome was identiﬁed in one pregnancy.Paracentric inversions: inv(5)(q23.2q33.3) and inv(5)(q22q35.2) in two families and a pericentric inversion: inv(5)(p12q13.2) in the third family were found. Breakpoints were veriﬁed by multicolor banding, supported by grant GACR 301/04/0407. Father was a carrier of the 
inversion in all of the three families.We also try to investigate karyotypes of other family members. The results of the investigations can be effectively used in prenatal cytogenetic analysis at prospective pregnancies in other 
consanguineous relatives.
P0292. Comparing different molecular cytogenetics methods for 
detecting subtelomeric rearrangements
A. Erjavec- Skerget , S. Stangler-Herodez, A. Zagorac, B. zagradisnik, N. Ko -
kalj-Vokač;  
Maribor Teaching Hospital, Maribor, Slovenia.
The subtelomeric regions are interesting from a genomic perspective, as they are gene rich and often involved in chromosomal rearrangements. Most telomeres stain light with G-banding, and small rearrangements are therefore difﬁcult to detect. Due to the development of molecular cytogenetic techniques, it is possible to identify cryptic rearrangements involving the ends of chromosomes. Screening method generally used for detection of subtelomeric rearrangements is multiprobe telomere ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization (T-FISH). With T-FISH and other two methods, multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA) and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) we analyzed subtelomeric regions of ﬁve patients, where the subtelomeric aberrations with T-FISH were ﬁnd. Among them we found two de novo subtelomeric deletion: del(X)(ptel) and del(9)(ptel) and three unbalanced subtelomeric rearrangements (two among them were consequences of familial translocations): t(10;13)(qtel;qtel)-de novo; t(8;21)(qtel;qtel); rec(X)(qtel;qtel). MLPA conﬁrmed all ﬁve subtelomeric rearrangements. With CGH we screened the whole genome of patients to ﬁnd possible deletion or ampliﬁcation. This technique conﬁrmed previous founded 
subtelomeric anomalies which were bigger than 8 Mb.Our study was used to determine the feasibility of these three methods for clinical testing on patients with mental retardation and/or developmental disabilities. We concluded that T-FISH and MLPA are both very useful and interchangeable methods with some exceptions. The choice of either method can be inﬂuenced by the technical conditions of the laboratory.
P0293. The ﬁrst experience of bone marrow karyotyping in the 
private laboratory of Lithuania
D. Jakiuniene ;  
Biomedical research center, Vilnius, Lithuania.
The culturing of bone marrow and karyotyping is a very popular and helpful method in diagnostic of hematological disorders. In Lithuania it was used in only a small area - for detecting of Filadelphia chromosome. The “Biomedical research center” is a private laboratory in Lithuania, ﬁrst started in last year to perform a full karyotyping on bone marrow. In period from 2004 Jun to 2004 12 was performed 36 karyotypes from Cytogenetics143
bone marrow of patient with different age and diagnosis. The material 
was send from largest hematological clinics of Lithuania. The bone marrow was cultured according to standard methodic (direct and overnight culture; in some cases a more long culturing depending on preliminare diagnosis). In about 2/3 off all cases an abnormal karyotype 
was detected .
P0294. Detection of numeric chromosomal aberrations using 
multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation
B. Zagradisnik, S. Stangler Herodez, A. Erjavec Skerget, A. Zagorac, N. Kokalj 
Vokac;  
General Hospital Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia.
Numeric chromosomal aberrations are usually identiﬁed with 
cytogenetic analysis. A variety of other methods can substitute karyotyping to detect aneuploidy but all have downsides; some are time-consuming, labor-intensive, some require high quality DNA, etc. Recently, a method, multiplex ligation-dependent ampliﬁcation (MLPA), was described which can be used to detect the correct number of all chromosomes in the small amount (50ng) of genomic DNA in a single reaction by measuring the gene dosage differences. The method relies on ampliﬁcation and quantitation of probes added to the test sample. In this study, MLPA was compared with cytogenetic analysis of cultured 
fetal tissues.Genomic DNA was extracted from 24 samples from spontaneously terminated pregnancies routinely sent to cytogenetic analysis. All samples were cultured and when possible karyotyped. The MLPA analysis was performed with the subtelomeric kit from MRC-Holland which includes one speciﬁc probe per chromosomal arm in a single 
reaction.The cytogenetic analysis conﬁrmed the chromosome number established with the MLPA analysis in 17 samples. Several common numeric chromosomal aberrations were detected. Lack of cell growth precluded karyotyping in 7 samples where only MLPA results were 
obtained.The MLPA analysis can be successfully used to detect the correct number of chromosomes and is therefore suitable as a diagnostic method for numeric chromosomal aberrations. Also it can provide partial information on karyotype of a tested sample when cytogenetic analysis is not possible because of lack of viable cells or when only a small amount of template DNA is available.
P0295. deletions and duplications of distal 15q: low/tall stature 
and speech abnormalities
F. Cavallin1, M. Arra1, G. Gregato1, S. Gimelli1, T. Pramparo1, S. Giglio2, G. 
Fioretti3, A. Salvatoni4, V. Calcaterra5, D. Larizza5, F. Stanzial6, F. Castellan6, A. 
Hoeller7, G. Arrigo8, P. Maraschio1, O. Zuffardi1;  
1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Pavia, Italy, 2Genetica Medica, Osped -
ale Meyer, Firenze, Italy, 3Ospedale Cardarelli, Napoli, Italy, 4Clinica Pediatrica, 
Varese, Italy, 5Clinica Pediatrica, Pavia, Italy, 6Genetica Medica, Bolzano, Italy, 
7Citogenetica, Bolzano, Italy, 8Citogenetica, Ospedale San Raffaele, Milano, 
Italy.
We deﬁned at BAC level through array-CGH six cases with different 
distal 15q deletions/duplications.Age ranges 18-38 years but a 8-years-old girl. Cases 1-5 have a 2.2-4.8 Mb deletion secondary to a ring. All have mild mental retardation, speech delay, articulation difﬁculties, obesity, stature <3rd centile. Case 6 is tetrasomic for the distal 4.5 Mb due to an invdup analphoid marker. She has a borderline intelligence but suffers from severe dysarthria (inability to pronounce some consonants and difﬁcult-to-understand 
speech), stature >97th centile.Both low and tall stature are reported in distal 15q imbalances and attributed to dosage effect of the IGF1R gene. Missense and non-sense IGF1R mutations result in intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation. In cases 1, 2, 5 IGF1R was included in the deletion whereas in cases 3, 4 the deletion breakpoint was at 500 kb from the IGF1R 3’ where a regulator of IGF1R expression might be located thus explaining the low stature of cases 3, 4. Case 6 marker contains two dosages of IGF1R. These cases suggest that IGF1R is dosage sensitive and that the ﬁnal stature is strongly inﬂuenced by haploinsufﬁciency or tetrasomy for this gene. Most distal trisomy 15q cases are reported with overgrowth further supporting the hypothesis. All the subjects suffer from speech-articulation disorders. This was especially evident in case 6 because of her almost normal intelligence. Although an assessment of their verbal performance is in progress, we hypothesize that a dosage-sensitive gene, responsible for speech disorders, is located in the very distal 
15q.
P0296. The evaluation of genotoxic potential of Tc-99m O4- in 
lymphocyte culture of patients with thyroid disease
M. İkbal1, M. Yildirim2, B. Seven2, M. Keles3, H. Dogan1, E. Varoglu2;  
1Ataturk University, Medical Faculty, Dept of Medical Genetics, Erzurum, Tur -
key, 2Ataturk University, Medical Faculty, Dept of Nuclear Medicine, Erzurum, 
Turkey, 3Ataturk University, Medical Faculty, Dept of Internal Medicine, Er -
zurum, Turkey.
The genotoxicity study of Technetium-99m pertechnetat (Tc-99m 
O4-) was carried out on human lymphocyte chromosomes using 
chromosomal aberrations (CA) and micronucleus (MN). Exposure to ionizing radiation may result in DNA damage giving rise to chromosome alterations and complex chromosome rearrangements.
 Cytogenetic 
tests play an important role in the detection of biological effects of low doses of radiation in patients exposed to ionizing radiation. CA and MN were measured before, 1 hour and one month after Tc-99m O
4- 
administration. A statistically signiﬁcant increase was observed in the SCE and MN frequencies 1 hour after Tc-99m O
4- administration could 
be described. It has been obtained any signiﬁcant difference in CA and MN frequencies one month after Tc-99m O
4- administration. The 
results of the study suggest that Tc-99m O4- might moderate genotoxic 
potential.
P0297. Balanced chromosomal rearrangements in couples with 
reproductive failure
V. Belengeanu1, S. Farcaş1, K. Rozsnyai1, C. Popa1, C. Gug1, E. Bernad2, M. 
Craina2, I. Cioată2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy , 
Timişoara, Romania, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, Timişoara, Romania.
Balanced chromosomal rearrangements are known to be a risk factor for both recurrent pregnancy loss and infertility, not only by predisposing to meiotic malsegregation of chromosomes and imbalanced gamete formation, but the abnormal meiotic conﬁgurations arisen by homologous pairing of translocation chromosomes may also 
disrupt gametogenesis, mostly in males.We carried out cytogenetic analysis in 130 couples referred for recurrent spontaneous abortions and 40 infertile couples. Chromosome examinations were performed on cultured peripheral blood lymphocytes, using GTG-banding. In the group with repeated miscarriages we detected a simple translocation t(4;12) in a woman, two reciprocal translocations: t(2;11) in a woman and t(4;16) in a man; an insertional translocation involving chromosome 3 in a female. We identiﬁed three carriers of a robertsonian translocation (two women and a man), three pericentric invertions of chromosome nine (two in the female and one in the male partner, respectively) and a paracentric inversion of chromosome 15 in a woman. In the group referred for infertility we found four carriers of a balanced chromosomal rearrangement: a t(4;X), a t(7;14) in mosaicism and a pericentric inversion of chromosome 10 in the female partners and a pericentric 
inversion of chromosome 9 in a male.In our study the overall frequency of balanced chromosomal rearrangements was 7.6 % among the couples with recurrent abortions, affecting the female partner in 5.3 % of the cases. The high proportion of female carriers in the infertile group suggests that balanced structural anomalies would frequently lead to impairment of 
gametogenesis in females as well.
P0298. A Greig Syndrome patient with 46,XY,t(7;10)(p13;q11.2) 
karyotype
Z. Yilmaz1, M. Gokdemir2, I. Ocak3, M. Derbent4, F. I. Sahin1;  
1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, An-
kara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pediatrics, 
Konya, Turkey, 3Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Radiol -
ogy, Konya, Turkey, 4Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of 
Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey.
A nine month-old male patient, the second child of a non-consanguineous couple was referred to our laboratory for cytogenetic Cytogenetics144
analysis because of polysyndactyly of hands and feet and minor 
dismorphic facial ﬁndings. Chromosome analysis results revealed that the patient had an apparently balanced translocation involving the short arm of chromosome 7 and the long arm of chromosome 10. The karyotype was reported as 46,XY,t(7;10)(p13;q11.2). The parents’ karyotypes were found to be normal. As the 7p13 region contains the GLI3 gene, the patient was reevaluated for GLI3 gene associated phenotypes. Differential diagnosis was made relying on the absence 
of corpus callosum agenesis and normal neuromotor development.
P0299. Detection of t(13q;14q) in a man with primary infertility
O. Ozalp1, Z. Yilmaz1, E. B. Kilicdag2, F. I. Sahin1;  
1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, An-
kara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Adana, Turkey.
Robertsonian translocations are one of the balanced structural chromosome abnormalities in infertile men. They present usually without an abnormal phenotype for the carrier. In men, they may result in abnormal sperm production. Both morphological and numerical abnormalities in sperm have been reported in t(13q;14q) carriers. A 34 year old men with primary infertility due to azoospermia was referred to our department for cytogenetic and Y chromosome microdeletion analysis. We detected the karyotype as 46, XY, t(13;14)(q10;q10). Y chromosome microdeletion was not detected in the screened regions. Pathological examination of testis biopsy specimens revealed incomplete spermatogenesis. t(13q;14q) has been reported to be together with abnormal spermatogenesis. Sperm production is affected by chromosomal pairing in meiosis and the sex vesicle affects the sperm morphology. The patient was informed about the condition 
during genetic counselling.
P0300. Molecular Cytogenetic Analysis of inv 
dup(15)Chromosomes Observed in Two Patients with Different 
Clinical Manifestations
N. A. Helmy, A. M. Mohamed, A. K. Kamel, S. I. Ismail, M. O. El Ruby, M. I. 
Shehab;  
National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
Supernumerary marker chromosomes (SMCs) of chromosome 15, 
designated “SMC(15)s,” are the most common SMC in humans, accounting for as much as 50% of all those observed. In this study we report two cases with de novo large SMC(15) (inv dup 15 including PWACR), both cases were referred for delayed physical and mental milestones but had different phenotypic manifestations. Our aim is to clarify the genotype-phenotype correlations. Conventional cytogenetic analysis of their peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed the presence of SMC in all cells (47,XY,+mar). FISH analysis using whole chromosome paint 15 showed that SMCs were derived from chromosome 15, Using centromeric 15 and SNRPN speciﬁc locus probes in 15q11-13 showed that the marker in both of them had two copies of chromosome 15 centromere and two copies of SNRPN locus. So the marker could be described as idic(15)(pter,q13). Both cases were males of non consanguineous marriage, clinically they exhibited microcephaly, profound mental retardation, convulsions, and behavioural changes, and they showed no clinical manifestations of Prader-Willi or Angelman syndromes. Although both cases had similar markers, one case showed no dysmorphic features, while the other had marked craniofacial anomalies and neurological manifestations. This clinical discrepancy might be due to different breakpoints involved.
P0301. Repeated spontaneous abortions due to balanced 
reciprocal translocation, 46,XX ,t(6;15)(q23;qter) - Pathogenesis 
of duplication/deletion of chromosome 6q : A case report and 
brief review
D. S. Krishna Murthy , M. Susan, T. Faisal, M. Naveed;  
Canadian Specialist Hospital, Dubai, United Arab Emirates.
Pregnancy loss, particularly early miscarriage, is a common problem 
that affects many women and their partners. Most spontaneous miscarriages are caused by an abnormal karyotype of the embryo. At least 50% of all ﬁrst-trimester SABs are cytogenetically abnormal. Many couples are anxious to understand why miscarriage has occurred and are hesitant to pursue another pregnancy until they understand more about the cause of their loss. Cytogenetic evaluation of the couple often helps to alleviate concerns about recurrence risk in future pregnancies. In many cases, monitoring of future pregnancies can lead to the birth of a healthy baby. Reciprocal translocation in one of the partners is one of the most frequently observed structural chromosomal abnormalities 
as one of the major causes for repeated fetal loss.A young healthy couple (Syrian) with history of 3 ﬁrst trimester abortions was investigated. Karyotype of the husband showed normal 46, XY. A balanced reciprocal translocation, 46, XX, (6;15) (q23;qter) was observed in the spouse. Family history revealed several repeated abortions (7 times) in her two elder sisters and two abortions in her mother, and history of a living male child among close relatives, with mental retardation suggesting familial translocation. Translocations involving chromosome 6q and 15 are very rare. Prenatal diagnosis and PGD options were explained to the couple. The pathogenesis of trisomy 6q and monosomy 6q resulting meiotic segregation of parental 
balanced translocation will be presented.
P0302. Partial trisomy 11q with a rare paternal inheritance
E. Bora1, O. Giray1, A. Ulgenalp1, T. Bui2, D. Ercal1;  
1Dokuz Eylul University, Izmir, Turkey, 2Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Swe -
den.
An eight year-old male was refered to our department with the complaints of mental retardation, inability to walk and speak. He was the second child of the non-consanguineous parents and having a 16 years old healthy brother. His examination revealed low frontal hairline, anteverted prominent ears, arched eyebrows, epichantus, thick alae nasi, beaked nose, prominent nasal bridge, cripthorchidism, narrow feet and wide spaced 1st - 2nd toes, pes planus and equinovalgus deformity. He had severe mental and motor retardation and hardly walk only when supported in ante-ﬂex position, and he has stereotypic upper extremity movements. The cytogenetic evaluation of the case and the parents revealed unusual rearrengements which were conﬁrmed with FISH. His karyotipe was 46,XY,-3,+der(3) dir ins(3)(3;11)(p13;q23-q24). The karyotype of the mother was normal and the father has 46,XY,ins(3)(3;11)(p13;q23-q24) chromosomal constitution. As he was a rare case of the medical literature with paternally inherited insertional translocation, his phenotypic features and cytogenetic ﬁndings are 
presented.
P0303. Mining novel oncogene rearrangements in leukemia-
lymphoma cell lines
R. A. F. MacLeod, S. Nagel, D. Anders, M. Kaufmann, H. G. Drexler;  
DSMZ, Braunschweig, Germany.
Many oncogenes have been ascertained by molecular analysis of chromosome translocations recurring in patients with speciﬁc neoplasms, mainly leukemia-lymphoma (L/L) but only rarely in derived cell lines. The DSMZ has collected well characterized cell lines established from L/L patients, subjecting these to cytogenetic breakpoint analysis using tile-path clones, supported by gene-expression analysis. In addition to “standard” translocations, such as t(9;22)(q34;q11) in chronic myeloid leukaemia, several novel rearrangements juxtaposing known with unknown or rare oncogenes have been found. These include: t(6;7)(q25;q36) with HLXB9/MYB in acute myeloid leukaemia; t(14;17)(q21;q32) with HOXB5/IGH, t(3;7)(q27;q32) with FRA7H/BCL6, inv(3)(q25q27) with MBNL1/BCL6, t(8;9)(q24;p15) with PAX5/MYC, and t(9;14) with PAX5/VRK1 in B-cell lymphoma; and t(5;14)(q35;q32) with BCL11B/NKX2-5 in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Apart from t(8;9), none of these translocations has been described previously. Interestingly, most breakpoints coincide with highly conserved, non-coding DNA sequences associated with transcriptional regulators which may be disrupted by the associated translocations. Several independent lines of evidence suggest that the same rearrangements occur in vivo. First, all changes are either cryptic or documented at early passage; second, all novel oncogenes have close homologs involved in other tumor types; and ﬁnally, the ﬁrst of these rearrangements discovered - t(5;14), has now been detected clinically. Thus, in addition to illuminating novel aspects of tumor biology, molecular cytogenetic analysis of L/L cell lines may inform 
diagnostic analysis.Cytogenetics145
P0304. Differential replication of the Y chromosome: study of 
different regions by FISH.
S. Dubé1,2, R. Fetni3, N. Lemieux1,2;  
1Département de pathologie et de biologie cellulaire de l'Université de Montréal, 
Montréal, PQ, Canada, 2Département de pathologie et Centre de recherche de 
l'Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montréal, PQ, Canada, 3Département de pathologie de 
l'Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montréal, PQ, Canada.
Recent studies have shown that replication timing reﬂects gene 
expression. A gene replicated early in S phase will be expressed in the cell, whereas a gene replicating late will not be expressed. Also, actively expressed genes seem to have a loose chromatin structure as opposed to inactive genes which show a more condensed chromatin organization. To date, few loci have been studied according to these two aspects. We hypothesize that a correlation between replication timing and chromatin condensation exists. The ﬁrst objective of this study is to determine the replication timing of different regions of the Y chromosome. To reach this goal, we are using a FISH replication assay and bacterial artiﬁcial chromosome (BAC) probes covering the Y chromosome. This variant FISH technique can determine the replication time of a DNA sequence in interphase nuclei of unsynchronized normal lymphocytes. We found a majority of late replicated BAC sequences and only a small proportion of BACs showing early replication timing. It seems that late replicated sequences contain either only one ubiquitously expressed gene, genes exclusively expressed in testis, or no gene. Instead, early replicated BACs include more than one ubiquitously expressed gene, and the presence of two adjacent ubiquitously expressed genes seems to deﬁne an early replication time zone. With this project, we want to establish the existence of replication domains and correlate these data with chromatin structure and DNA 
rearrangements.  Supported by RMGA-FRSQ and the Fondation de 
l’Hôpital Sainte-Justine.
P0305. Value of karyotype in the exploration of couples with 
recurrent spontaneous abortions
I. El Kamel1, O. Kacem1, N. Bouayed Abdelmoula2, M. Zribi1, R. Smiti1, F. Zhi -
oua3, A. Amouri1;  
1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Pasteur Institute, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Faculty of Medicine, 
Sfax, Tunisia, 3Service of Gynecology, Aziza Othmana Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
Recurrent spontaneous abortion ( RSA ) is deﬁned as the occurrence of two or more consecutive foetal losses. It represent 0,94 % of all pregnancies and 9,78 % of spontaneous abortions. At the present time, cytogenetic analysis has been gained an important place in the 
etiological screening of RSA.In this study, we report the cytogenetic ﬁndings of 39 couples with the history of ﬁrst trimester repeated miscarriage (2 to 6). From May 2002 until December 2004, karyotype of 78 subjects has been performed in our Pasteur Institute's Cytogenetic Laboratory. The frequency of chromosomal abnormalities was found to be 7,6 %, i.e.6/78 individuals, equally divided into autosomal structural rearrangements (reciprocal translocation, inversion ) and sex chromosomal mosaicism ( Turner's syndrome, Klinefelter's syndrome ). No correlation between the distribution of the chromosome abnormalities and the number of 
abortions was observed.In conclusion, we insist on the advantage of systematically performing a karyotype in the case of RSA, consisting on the detection of chromosomal abnormalities. Therefore, genetic counselling should be offered to these couples and investigations conducted on their 
extended families.
P0306. De novo ring chromosome 7 with LMMC
A. A. Amouri1, I. El Kamel1, N. Bouayed Abdelmoula1, O. Kacem1, L. Aissaoui2, 
M. Zribi3, R. Smiti1, F. Telmoudi1, B. Meddeb2;  
1Cytogenetic Laboratory, PasteurInstitute, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Hematology Service, 
Aziza Othmana Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Cytogenetic Laboratory, Pasteur Insti -
tute, Tunis, Tunisia.
Ring chromosome 7 is an unusual chromosome anomaly.Here we describe a 5 year old patient with ring chromosome 7 who was referred for aplastic anemia. Subsquent cytogenetic techniques demonstrated a monosomy 7 with trisomy 8 in cultured bone marrow cells, while the lymphocyte culture showed 3 kinds of cells: a cell line with large ring chromosome replacing one of the normal chromosomes 7 resulting in partial monosomy in the majority of cells, 80% percent of the analysed cells showed a ring chromosome composed of both the long and the short arms , r(7) (p22q36). In the remaining metaphases, we found a double ring chromosome 7, a monosomy 7, and two normal cells with 2 chromosomes 7. The girl had a developmental 
delay (growth retardation) and skin lesions.Karyotype of the parents were normal conﬁrming de novo origin of the 
ring chromosome formation.To our khnowlege, these uncommun cytogenetic abnormality have not 
been previously reported with LMMC.
P0307. Importance of cytogenetic investigation of 165 severely 
infertile men candidates for intracytoplasmic sperm injection 
(ICSI)
O. Kacem1, I. El Kamel1, N. Bouayed Abdelmoula2, A. Zhioua3, M. Zribi1, R. 
Smiti1, F. Telmoudi1, F. Zhioua4, A. Amouri1;  
1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Pasteur Institute, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Faculty of Medicine, 
Sfax, Tunisia, 3PMA Unity, Aziza Othmana Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 4Service of 
Gynecology, Aziza Othmana Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
Cytogenetic alterations represent a major cause of severe spermatogenic impairment leading to male infertility. The incidence of chromosomal abnormalities was estimated between 7 and 14%. The risk of transmission of chromosomal diseases by ICSI is therefore very 
high.We report here the results of cytogenetic analysis of 165 infertile men with severe oligospermia, oligoastheno or oligoasthenotératospermia and azoospermia referred to our laboratory of Cytogenetics of the Pasteur Institute of Tunis from April 2002 to Decembre 2004. Chromosomal analysis was performed from peripheral blood lymphocytes cultures using RHG and ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and and karyotyping done using the Image Analyzer.In 20 (12%) cases, chromosomal abnormalities was found. Whereas the 47,XXY chromosome complement was the commonest, the following abnormal karyotypes were also found: 2 XX men, a deletion of the long arm of the Y chromosome, chromosomal translocations found in 5 cases (Robertsoniennes translocations in 4 cases and a balanced 
reciprocal translocation in the last) and a chromosomal inversion.All men with chromosomal abnormality were referred for genetic 
counseling.These results show that cytogenetic screening and counselling are highly recommanded in infertile males before referring to assisted reproductive techniques (ART) to avoid transmission, persistence, or 
even an increase of genetic defects in future generations.
P0308. Should chromosome breakage studies be performed in 
all patients referred for aplasic anemia?
F. Telmoudi1, I. El Kamel1, F. Mallouli2, T. Ben Othman2, S. Hdiji3, S. Ladab2, O. 
Kacem1, M. Zribi1, R. Smiti1, M. Elloumi4, A. Amouri1;  
1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Pasteur Institute, Tunis, Tunisia, 2CNGMO, Tunis, 
Tunisia, 3Hematology Service, Hedi Chaker Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia, 4Hematol -
ogy Service, Hedi Caker Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia.
Aplastic anemia (AA) is referred to situations in which bone marrow fails to generate blood elements. This entity is composed of several different diseases and syndromes such as Fanconi anemia (FA).Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare autosomal recessive disease characterized by congenital abnormalities, progressive bone marrow failure and cancer susceptibility. The lymphocytes and ﬁbroblasts of FA patients show increased sensitivity to alkylating agents such as mitomycin C (MMC) and Diepoxybutane (DEB), generating increased 
chromosome breakage.In this study we have investigated cytogenetically 43 patients referred for AA. Mitomycin C with 2 differentconcentrations (50, 80 ng/ml) and/or DEB have been applied to the 
lymphocytes of the patients and normal controls.According to the criteria of MMC (and /or DEB) sensitivity only 7 cases were classiﬁed as FA patients.All these cases showed the pattern of breakage characteristic for FA ( 
>70% of aberrant cells).The diagnosis of Fanconi anemia being of importance for genetic counseling and early therapeutic intervention in patients, we conclude that chromosomal breakage studies should be performed in aplastic anemia especially if the child also present skin pigmentation 
abnormalities, growth retardation, microcephaly or dysmorphism.Cytogenetics146
So, the diagnosis of FA can be made unequivocally by combining 
both the clinical data and the cytogenetic evaluation of chromosomal 
breakage induced by DEB or MMC.
P0309. Cryptic Chromosomal Abnormalities in Children with 
Mental Retardation Using Subtelomeric FISH 
O. Cogulu1, C. Gunduz2, E. Karaca1, H. Onay1, C. Ozkinay3, F. Ozkinay1;  
1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Bornova-Izmir, 
Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, 
Bornova-Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of 
Medical Genetics, Bornova-Izmir, Turkey.
Final diagnosis in mental retardation (MR) could be reached in approximately one third of all cases, and no diagnosis is achieved in the rest of the patients, which is followed by repeated laboratory tests and a long time exhausting both parents and the patients. Recent studies have established that chromosomal abnormalities comprise 30-40 % of moderate to severe MR; and nearly 30 % of mild MR. Subtelomeric rearrangements account for a signiﬁcant proportion (2.2-23%) of cases with undiagnosed MR because of high concentration of genes in this region. The aim of this study is to screen a selected group of children with idiopathic MR for subtelomeric abnormalities 
using FISH.A total of 30 children aged 3-16 years with idiopathic MR and normal karyotypes were included in this study. The children whose parents had consanguineous marriages were excluded from the study. All cases were evaluated using the scoring system published by de Vries et al. Terminal deletion of chromosome 9p in a case was detected by FISH (3.3 %). Higher resolution G-banding showed the same abnormality 
as well.In conclusion the frequency of subtelomeric abnormalities in our study group was lower than the frequencies reported in other studies. Higher incidence of consanguineous marriages resulting higher frequencies of mutant allels for autosomal recessive disorders may be the reason for this result. The scoring criterions were not found to be convenient to select the patients for subtelomeric FISH. High-resolution G-banded analysis in those cases and more effective selection criterions for FISH 
are suggested.
P0310. Ambiguous ISCN 1995 nomenclature causes problems 
with karyotypes - a CyDAS based analysis
B. Hiller1, H. Rieder2,1;  
1Philipps-Universität Marburg, Institut für Klinische Genetik, Marburg, Germany , 
2Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Institut für Humangenetik und Anthro -
pologie, Düsseldorf, Germany.
Thorough analysis of grammar, syntax and meaning of ISCN elements and their combinations was required during development of a software system for the analysis of ISCN data. Though ISCN 1995 allegedly was developed with considering computerized analysis, some inconsistencies and features exist which lead the user of ISCN to 
errors.Designating bands involved in rearrangements is optional and bands are included in an extra pair of brackets separated from their chromosomes. Thus chromosomes and bands may be put into non-
consistent positions, causing hardly detectable errors.The use and positioning of multiplicators is purely chaotic, sometimes they precede the aberration, sometimes they follow the aberration with a multiplication sign inbetween, sometimes the aberration is to be shown twice or their duly use remains unclear.The short nomenclature is often regarded as the ideal solution, but it is severely incomplete from a mathematical point of view. All its operators (the symbols describing aberrations) actually expect non-derivative chromosomes as input, and short nomenclature boldly fails as soon as an aberration spans a junction in a derivative chromosome. The long nomenclature still copes with most of such rearrangements and its use 
ought to be encouraged.The description of an involvement of a centromeric fragment in a rearrangement is totally missing in the ISCN, e.g. duplication of 
pericentric regions or insertion of a centromeric fragment.In summary, the project caused a new view on the nomenclature of cytogenetic ﬁndings which may lead to an improved ISCN.P0311. Cytogenetics Results in 151 Iranian Patients with Mental 
Retardation
F. Behjati1, K. Kahrizi1, Y. Shafeghati1, P. C. Patsalis2, S. Ghasemi Firouz -
abadi1, R. Karimi- Nejad3, I. Bagherizadeh1, S. Abedini1, S. Esmaeeli Nieh1, Z. 
Zahedi1, S. Tootian4, R. Vazifehmand1, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2The Cyprus Institute of Neurology 
and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Karimi-Nejad / Najmabadi Pathology &Genet -
ics Centar, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Iranian Blood Transfusion Center, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mental Retardation(MR) has heterogenous aetiology, mostly with genetic causes. 7-8 percent of all MR patients and 50-60 percent of severe type have chromosome abnormalities. 151 MR patients were referred to Genetic Research Center for cytogenetics investigation. Standard Cytogenetics techniques using high resolution and GTG banding was carried out on all patients. The overall chromosome abnormality rate was 15 percent. The chromosome abnormality rate other than trisomy 21 was 6 percent. The abnormalities include a balanced reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 4 and 10, maternally inherited; an abnormal Yp; add(9)(p34); del(18)(p11); inv(1)(p33p35) and partial deletion of 10p. The signiﬁcance of these chromosomal ﬁndings in 
mental retardation aetiology will be presented.
P0312. Chromosome instability in children with thyroid 
pathology born to irradiated parents due to Chernobyl accident
M. A. Pilinskaya, S. S. Dibskiy, Y. V. Shemetun, Y. B. Dibskaya;  
Research Centre of Radiation Medicine, Kyiv, Ukraine.
We examined two groups of children with and without thyroid pathology born to parents irradiated by iodine owing to the Chernobyl accident who lived in the territory of Ukraine with high level of food contamination by Cs. Chromosome aberrations in peripheral blood lymphocytes were studied after 48 and 144 hours of culture by conventional preparation and G-banding. With short-term cultivation and conventional cytogenetics the means did not differ signiﬁcantly between the groups. In both groups simple aberrations mainly of chromatid type were dominant. Mean-group frequencies of unstable exchanges (dicentrics and centric rings) corresponded to their age norm, but mean-group frequencies of stable chromosome aberrations (abnormal monocentrics) were signiﬁcantly elevated above the spontaneous level. G-banding cytogenetics in short-term cultures increased the detection of chromosome aberrations (terminal and interstitial deletions and translocations) especially in children with thyroid pathology. The increased frequency of stable aberrations can be considered as a bioindicator of accumulated internal irradiation as well as a biomarker of transmissible chromosome instability. The latter have been conﬁrmed in long-termed cultures from children with chronic thyroiditis, in which signiﬁcantly increased levels of both chromatid (single fragments) and chromosome (abnormal monocentrics) aberrations have been established. We assume that delayed cytogenetic effects expressed in children born to irradiated parents under short-term cultivation and G-banding cytogenetics as well as under long-term cultivation and conventional cytogenetics may be one of the factors which promote the development of thyroid pathology.
P0313. Case Report: A child with Rubinstein-Teybi phenotype 
and partial deletion of short arm of chromosome 10
S. Ghasemi Firouzabadi1, F. Behjati1, Y. Shafeghati1, I. Bagherizadeh1, H. 
Najmabadi2;  
1Genetics Research Center,University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci -
ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetics Research Center, University 
of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
A seven year old boy with Rubinstein- Taybi features was referred to Genetics Research Center for Cytogenetics investigation. The clinical features included CHD, downslanting palpebral features, protruding tongue, broad thumbs and toes and moderate mental retardation. Standard Cytogenetics techniques using high resolution and GTG banding was carried out. The karyotype was abnormal showing a partial deletion of short arm of one chromosome 10 at p11.2-p13. Both parents had normal karyotypes. As about only 10 percent of Rubinstein- Taybi cases demonstrate deletion of 16p13.3, this chromosome anomaly could introduce a new candidate loci for this condition. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst reported case .Cytogenetics147
P0314. Chromosomal rearrangements in Armenian registry of 
chromosomal abnormalities
S. Midyan , L. Nazaryan, T. Sarkisyan;  
Center of Medical Genetics of NAS of Armenia, Yerevan, Armenia.
A total of 626 cases were investigated for suggested chromosomal 
abnormalities.We have studied a spectrum and clinical data of chromosomal rearrangements (ChR) detected by GTG-banding and FISH methods among couples with reproductive failures (204 individuals) and patients with malformations, mental and motor 
retardation, amenorea, hypogenitalism (422 children).In the group with reproductive failure carriers with balanced chromosome rearrrangements were found in 12 cases (6%). These chromosome aberrations include: 2 Robertsonian translocations, including t(13/14), t(14/21), 4 reciprocal translocations and a case of complex chromosomal rearrangement 46,XX,der(1;2)(p21;p23), inv(9)(p13;q13), 2 cases with inv(9)(p13;q13). Apart from the balanced aberrations, 2 cases with del(9)(p13;q13) without any phenotype abnormalities were found. The translocation 46,XY,t(4;9)(q26;p23)mat has been resulted in unbalanced translocation in the third generation with partial trisomy of the region 4q26-4qter.Among children with birth defects karyotype abnormalities were found in 73 cases where 11 of them are presented with unbalanced ChR.Unbalance of autosomes was deﬁned in 42 cases with Down syndrome of which 39 cases were represented with regular trisomy of 21, and 3 cases of the syndrome was due to translocation t(14/21)mat, combination with inv(9)(p13;q13)pat and full double aneuploidy 48,XY,+21,+mar. Using FISH analysis it has been shown that this marker was excluded to be 13/21 and Y chromosomes. A rare form of 49,XXXXY have been observed in unbalances of gonosomes. The other structural chromosomal aberrations include: 47,XY,+i(18p); 46,X i(Xq); 46,XY,t(5;13)(q23;q32); 46,XX,t(9;11)(p24;q12); 46,XX,del(20q); 46,XY,inv(6)(p21.1;q21); 46,XY,inv(9)(p13;q13)pat.Cytogenetic and clinical data will be presented and problems of genetic 
counseling for families will be discussed.
P0315. Atypical Down syndrome phenotype in a girl with 
translocation trisomy 21
B. Tüysüz1, J. Caferler2, H. Özön2, A. Yavuz1, B. Bağlama1;  
1İstanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Genetics 
Centre, Deutsches Krankenhaus, İstanbul, Turkey.
We described a 10 year- old girl with a de novo 21;21 translocation trisomy 21 and an atypical phenotype for Down syndrome. Clinical ﬁndings included microcephaly, small stature, coarse facies, epicanthus, hypertelorism, broad nasal bridge, low set ear, pectus excavatus, lumbal scoliosis, severe developmental delay, seizures, and hypertonia. Chromosome analysis from blood lymphocyte revealed 46,XX, t(21;21),+21. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis conﬁrmed the trisomy 21 translocation. Chromosome and FISH analyses were performed on skin ﬁbroblasts. These studies revealed mosaicism for a translocation trisomy 21 cell line (53%) as well as a second cell line consisting of one normal chromosome 21 and a ring chromosome 21 derived from translocation 21q21q (33%) and a third line consisting of monosomy 21 (14%). We considered that our patient which was an atypical Down syndrome phenotype originated from chromosomal mosaicism of the skin and the other tissues that 
were not available for analysis.
P0316. The Lithuanian collection of 224 Turner syndrome patients.
L. Salomskiene, I. Andriuskeviciute, L. Jurkeniene, A. Sinkus;  
Kaunas University of Medicine, Kaunas, Lithuania.
The collection was piled up during 30 years and contains 224 karyotypes. One half of the patients (116) had X monosomy 45,X. Chromosome mosaic 46,XX/45,X was established for 29 patients (13,0%). The commonest structural aberration was i(Xq), established for 42 patients (18,7%). For 16 patients it was the unique clone, for others different mosaic variations were found. Ring X chromosome was found for 19 patients (9,5%) and all of the patients had another cell clone, usually monosomic. Mosaic 46,XY/45,X was found for 8 patients (3,5%), in three of them another chromosome anomalies were established. The biggest established number of cell clones in mosaics was four: 45,X/46,X,r(X)/46,X,i(Xq)/47,X,i(Xq),i(Xq). Two monosomic patients were identical twins. The more often patients for karyotype analysis were sent by endocrinologists (67.1%) and gynecologists (16.2%). The oldest patient was 52 years old, for six 
patients monosomy-X was suspected by neonatologist.
P0317. A rare variant translocation t(1;22;9)(p32;q11;q34) in a 
patient with chronic myeloid leukemia
H. Mkrtchyan, S. Ghazaryan, R. Arutyunyan;  
Yerevan State University, Yerevan, Armenia.
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is genetically characterized by the presence of the reciprocal translocation t(9;22)(q34;q11) in 95% of cases, resulting in a BCR/ABL gene fusion. About 5% of cases of CML 
show cytogenetic variants of this aberration.In this study we report on a patient with CML with a rare complex rearrangement t(1;22;9)(p32;q11;q34) with BCR/ABL gene fusion on der(22). The male patient is 27 year old. His complete blood count showed a trombocytosis, a hemoglobin level of 97g/l, a white blood cell count of 342x109/l, myelocytes 102,6x109/l, bands count of 85,5x109/l, metamyelocytes count of 44,46x109 /l, eosinophiles count of 6,84x109/l, lymphocytes 6,84 x109 /l, basophiles count of 10,26 x109/l, polymorphs count of 68,4x109/l, blasts count of 17,1x109/l. 
Splenomegaly was also detected.Cytogenetic studies were performed on 24h unstimulated cultures of bone marrow cells using standard cytogenetic protocol. Karyotypes were analyzed according to International System for Human Cytogenetic Nomenclature. Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) was done according to standard protocol using probes WCP (Whole 
Chromosome Painting) 1, 9, 22 and M-BCR/ABL.Conventional cytogenetic investigation detected derivative 22 and 1 chromosomes, while chromosome 9 was apparently normal. Application of WCP 1, 9, 22 permitted us to identify translocation between chromosome 1 and 22. After using M-BCR/ABL probe was found chimerical gene BCR/ABL on derivative 22 in 100% cells.According to previous literature, despite their genetically complex nature, variant Ph chromosome rearrangements do not confer any speciﬁc phenotypic or prognostic impact as compared to CML with a 
standard Ph chromosome.
P0318. Chromosomal investigation of a case initially diagnosed 
as Burn-McKeown syndrome
R. Kariminejad, V. Hadavi, F. Afroozan, T. Delaviz, M. H. Kariminejad;  
Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Burn-McKeown Syndrome is a rare genetic disorder. Burn et al. (1992) reported ﬁve children who presented with bilateral choanal atresia and a spectrum of additional malformations including cardiac defects, deafness, defects of the external ear, eyes and eyelids, and a characteristic dysmorphic appearance. Our patient is a boy, aged 1 year 20 days, born after an uneventful term pregnancy. Positive ﬁndings in his physical exam are membranous choanal atresia, stenosis, hypotonia, chest deformity, short nose, open mouth, prominent forehead, mild low set ears, downward palpebral ﬁssures, high and narrow palate, dental delay, low weight. He had growth and developmental retardation. The family pedigree of this child shows that his parents are distantly related with, no other similar family history.In our lab we performed chromosomal analysis on standard PHA blood cultures. GTG banding was applied to air dried slides. The karyotype, 46XY,r(18) showed the presence of a ring chromosome. Interpretation 
of the banding pattern showed possible breakpoints in p14 and p23.Although autosomal recessive inheritance had been suggested, other studies (2003) raised the possibility of X-linked inheritance, because all reported patients, except for a female with a similar ring chromosome, have been male. The presence of the ring chromosome 18 in our case, and one of the initially reported cases suggests the possibility of a gene in the deleted region that could produce a phenotype similar to Burn-McKeown syndrome. Further analysis including FISH and CGH 
seems to be warranted and are being performed.
P0319. A retrospective review of cases with Pericentric inversion Y
A. Moshtagh , R. Kariminejad, M. Zanganeh, F. Farhan, M. H. Kariminejad;  
Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
In the past 3 years, 31 cases of pericentric inversion of chromosome Cytogenetics148
Y have been identiﬁed in the males being referred for various reasons 
to our center. In an attempt to recognize or help clarify the signiﬁcance of the inverted Y chromosome, these cases have been categorized according to available clinical data. All chromosomal studies are done on GTG banded metaphase spreads prepared following culture, harvest, spreading and trypsin banding. In all cases at least 5 spreads are analyzed, 10 spreads screened and 5 spreads scored. In the cases, where inversion Y was suspected, C-banding was done for conﬁrmation.4 cases were detected in amniotic ﬂuid samples showing male fetuses with pericentric inversions of Y chromosomes. In all these 4 cases, the fathers were also studied and showed to have the same inversion Y. Four other cases were male aged 1 to5 years with congenital anomalies, whose fathers were also examined and found to have the same chromosome Y.Two cases had been referred for check up and without prior 
complaint.The remaining 13 cases had been studied for history of abortions in their spouses and/or inviability of offspring. The above ﬁndings would appear to conﬁrm that apart from a possible complication that the inverted chromosome Y has in crossing over with the pseudoautosomal region of the chromosome X, it is associated with no further speciﬁc clinical signiﬁcance and occurs with similar frequencies within the 
various referral groups.
P0320. Down syndrome due to familial reciprocal translocation
G. Yesil, B. Bağlama, U. Yanar, B. Tuysuz;  
Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey.
A two-year-old boy had typical Down syndrome clinical ﬁndings and developmental delay. The patient was born to a 24-year-old mother and a 25-year- old man,and he is the ﬁrst child of the family. His karyotyping showed 47,XY,t(2;21)(q23;q11.2),+21. To conﬁrm the translocation; ﬂourecent in situ hybridization (FISH) with a 21q22 spesiﬁc probe was used and observed signals on both normal 21 chromosome and the der. We performed the chromosomal analysis of the parents. Maternal chromosomal analysis was normal but the father’s chromosomal analysis revealed a balanced translocation, 46,XY, t(2;21)(q23;q11.2). Down syndrome had occurred as a result of an interchange trisomy following 3:1 malsegregation of the 2;21 balanced reciprocal translocation of the father. Down syndrome due to familial interchange reciprocal translocation is so rare, there is only 24 
cases were published.
P0321. DiGeorge/Velo-cardio-facial syndrome detected by FISH
M. Zanganeh , R. Kariminejad, N. Miraftabi, T. Delaviz, M. H. Kariminejad;  
Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
We are reporting a case of DiGeorge/Velo-cardio-facial microdeletion contiguous syndrome detected by use of Cytocell DiGeorge/VCFS TUPLE1 probe. The proband is a 2 year old female, second child of unrelated couple with a 7 year old healthy brother. The only positive ﬁndings are nasal regurgitation and cleft soft palate, cleft upper lip and 
nasal speech.PHA stimulated lymphocytes from peripheral blood were cultured . Following harvest, some slides were studied routinely, using GTG banding techniques, and two slides were prepared using standard 
protocols provided by cytocell probe kit.The diagnostic probe is designed for the q11.2 region of chromosome 22 and the telomeric region as an internal control. The presence of the probe on only one of the chromosomes 22 was compatible with a microdeletion in q11.2 band region, diagnostic for DiGeorge/Velo-cardio-facial syndrome. In analysis on standard karyotype a microdeletion of long arm of chromosome 22 was suspected in 550 
and above band resolution, but was not conclusive.CONCLUSION: Detection of microdeletion such as 22q11.2 band region can be suspected in routine cytogenetic analysis, but requires advanced molecular cytogenetic techniques for conﬁrmation.
P0322. Cytogenetics ﬁndings in Iranian patients with repeated 
fetal loss
M. H. Kariminejad, H. Karimi, M. Rahimi, A. Moshtagh, M. Zanganeh, H. Miri, 
M. Soleimani, S. Razavi, R. Kariminejad;  Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Most series studies of couples with two or more fetal loss or stillbirths show 5-6% chromosomal aberrations. In an attempt to compare the data in our center with other centers, we did a retrospective study of the results of 1622 karyotypes of couples referred between 1997-2002 for two or more of the following, abortions, IUFDS, stillbirths, and perinatal death of offspring. Karyoptypes of these couples were prepared after routine culture, harvest, spreading, and GTG banding techniques. In some cases C-banding and NOR analyses were also performed. 10-15 spreads were screened and 5-10 spreads were analyzed routinely under the microscope, and in cases of mosaicism up to 100 spreads were counted. Five microphotographs were taken and two karyotypes were done per case. The indications of referral were 898(57%) individuals for two or more abortions, 169 (6%) with IUFD, 166(16.3%) with perinatal death of children, 356(18%) with at least one abortion and another cause, and 33 (1%) with IUFD and dead child. The results indicate that chromosomal aberrations in couples with two or more abortions, abortion with other problems, dead-child, IUFD, IUFD with dead-child were 5.5%, 4.5%, 8%, 3%, 3%, respectively. Overall, 5.3% had chromosomal aberration, 72% of which were translocations, 17% inversions and 11% numerical translocation abnormalities. Balanced reciprocal translocations were the most frequent, while 10% had Robertsonian translocations. The results of this study are comparable with results from other centers and emphasize the necessity of chromosomal study in couple with history of fetal loss or death of non syndromic offspring.
P0323. Subtelomeric rearrangements detected in patients 
with idiopathic mental retardation: Results and a comparison 
between telomere Multi FISH probes and Multiplex Ligation-
Dependent Probe Ampliﬁcation(MLPA).
M. Palomares1, A. Delicado1, P. Lapunzina1, A. Martínez-Bermejo2, J. Arcas2, 
D. Arjona3, I. López Pajares1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 
2Department of Neuropediatrics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 
3Department of Research, Sequencing Unit., Hospital Universitario La Paz, 
Madrid, Spain.
Screening of subtelomeres with both telomere Multi FISH probes 
(Cytocell®) and MLPA (MRC-Holland ® ) was performed in 40 patients 
with idiopathic mental retardation, dysmorphism and/or congenital 
malformations.
FISH with multiple subtelomeric probes detected 5 patients (12,5%) with a subtelomeric aberration (Table I). In addition, 2 patients were found to carry a polymorphism in 2qter region. All of them were later conﬁrmed by using complementary methods (speciﬁc telomere FISH probes and microsatellite analysis) and the origin of the restructuration 
was established.
Patient FISH resultsMLPA 
results  
Loss 
GainParents
146, XY. ish der (2) t (2;10) 
(q37.3;q26.3) monosomy 2q/ 
trisomy 10q2q 10qPaternal 
t(2;10)
246, XY. ish del (2) (q37.3) 
monosomy 2q2q de novo
346, XX. ish der (1) t (1;22) 
(p36.3;q13.3) monosomy 1p/ 
trisomy 22q1p 22q de novo
446, XX. ish del (9) (q34.3) 
monosomy9q9q de novo
546, XY. ish der (15) t 
(15;17)(q26.3;p13) mono -
somy 15q/ trisomy17punde -
tected 
17punknownCytogenetics149
The diagnostic capacity of MLPA (salsa PO36) to detect subtelomeric 
chromosomal abnormalities was tested by screening the same patients previously studied by FISH. MLPA found the same subtelomeric abnormalities in all cases except from patient 5, in which a 15qter deletion was misdiagnosed. Furthermore polymorphisms in 10qter were detected in 3 patients and conﬁrmed afterwards.MLPA is revealed as a cheaper, less time consuming technique than the previously reported methods for telomere screening. It could be a reliable technique to detect submicroscopic telomeric copy number changes, rendering it suitable for routine diagnostic screening in mentally retarded patients. Nevertheless, all chromosomal aberration detected should preferably be conﬁrmed by independent methods.In order to provide additional cases to the literature on subtelomeric abnormalities and their genotype-phenotype correlations, we present a summary with the main clinical features of patients in which a 
chromosomal abnormality was detected.
P0324. Deletion of distal Xp in a male newborn
K. Oplestilova1, M. Bradova1, D. Stejskal2, R. Kejkulova2, Z. Zemanova3;  
1Istitute for the Care of Mother and Child, Prague, Czech Republic, 2GENNET 
Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Center of Oncocytogenetics, UKBLD, Gen -
eral Faculty Hospital and 1st Medical Faculty of Charles University , Prague, 
Czech Republic.
We present a case of a correlation between extremly low unconjugated estriol (uE3) and a deletion of distal Xp respectively deletion of the steroid sulfatase (STS) gene. Amniocentesis in 20-year-old woman was performed in the 21-week of gestation. It was based on the positive triple test (repeatedly low maternal serum uE3). In spite of identiﬁed normal karyotype 46,XY deletion of distal Xp was assessed by ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and the same deletion was conﬁrmed in mother. The pregnancy was complicated with polyhydramnion. The male-infant was born in the 32-week of gestation by Caesarean section (1490 g, micropenis, cryptorchismus). Chromosome analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes proved 46,XY,del(X)(p22.3) karyotype, which was veriﬁed by FISH. The infant died after bleeding in central 
nervous system at the age of 43 days.
Supported by grant GACR 301/04/0407.
P0325. Chromosome damage observed in blood samples 
submitted to cell phone radiation
C. L. Campanhol1, V. C. O. Franco1, R. M. Rodrigues1, M. G. Lins2, J. K. R. 
HEINRICH1;  
1CAISM/UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 2CPqD Foundation, Campinas, Brazil.
The impact of the cell phone technology and the increasing number of users all over the world have raised questions regarding cancer and other diseases etiology and time of exposure, cumulative exposure and age-related trends. Many reports specially out from the REFLEX study group (Europe) showed that the cell phone radiation, called non-ionizing radiation (NIR) might affect the DNA double-helix producing breaks and other alterations that cannot be repaired by the cell machinery. The object of this study was to investigate chromosome aberrations in blood samples submitted to NIR. Eight healthy donors were selected and serial blood samples were taken (total of 48 samples). The samples were cultured in a highly monitored setup that was designed for this project. Cells were submitted to an average power (SAR values) of 2W/kg (International Limit), 5W/kg and 10 W/kg in both AMPS and CDMA technologies. At least 200 cells per irradiation, per patient were analyzed. The sham-exposed and the patient controls showed a frequency of ZERO for chromosome aberrations. Both AMPS and CDMA technologies showed increasing frequencies of chromosome aberrations per cell according to SAR levels of 2, 5 or 10 W/kg. Acrocentric chromosomes satellite length alterations were also highly observed. Although the number of alterations was not high per cell we concluded that the radiation was able to produce DNA instability in our samples and that these ﬁndings should be taken into account on radiation public policies management and to establish safe 
limits of human exposure.SUPPORT: FUNTTELP0326. The application of Array Comparative Genomic 
Hybridization in a routine cytogenetic lab: analysis of a familial 
duplication of chromosome 13q.
J. M. N. Hoovers1, I. B. Mathijssen1, A. N. P. M. Mul1, H. Man1, J. L. Ket2, R. C. 
M. Hennekam1,3;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, AMC Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Depart -
ment of Pediatrics, Purmerend, The Netherlands, 3Department of Pediatrics, 
AMC Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
A DNA microarray was used with a resolution of 0.6 Mb for the detailed analysis of a partial duplication of chromosome 13 in a family. Routine cytogenetic analysis (GTG 550 band level) revealed a partial 
duplication of chromosome 13q.Six persons in three generations carry the duplication. They have mild mental retardation, behavioural problems, seizures, hearing loss, strabismus, dental anomalies, hypermobility, juvenile hallux valgus, 
and mild dysmorphic features.In order to deﬁne the boundaries of the duplication and to get possible insight in the phenotype-genotype correlation we constructed a 0.6 Mb genomic microarray, based on the 1 Mb BAC clone set of the Welcome Trust Sanger Institute. Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization showed the duplication to span approximately 21 Mb, ranging from chromosome band 13q21.31 to 13q31.1. The position of the breakpoints was conﬁrmed by routine FISH.The region involved harbors about 40 genes (Human Genome Browser UCSC, release may 2004), and an increased dosage of one or more of these genes may be responsible for the characteristic symptoms in this family members. No obvious candidate genes were found in 
evaluating function and expression patterns.The relative mild presentation of this large duplication may be explained by the relative paucity of genes in the chromosome region involved. The use of small, chromosome speciﬁc microarrays in routine cytogenetics will allow a more reliable genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with chromosome abnormalities, when the number of data 
molecular (cyto)genetic and clinical data increases.
P0327. Analysis of aneuploidy frequency in uncultured and 
cultured cells from workers upon exposure by nuclear-chemical 
industrial factors
V. A. Timoshevsky, S. A. Nazarenko;  
Institute of medical genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Comparative analysis of aneuploidy frequency of the four autosomes (7, 11, 12, and 16) and sex chromosomes in the interphase nuclei of uncultured and cultured lymphocytes (PHA-stimulated) from workers of nuclear-chemical industry (15 individuals) and clinically healthy men (10 individuals) was performed by use of two-color ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization. The total value of numerical aberrations of all six chromosomes was similar in non-stimulated cells of both groups: 1.84±0.73% and 1.96±0.99% in control and exposed groups respectively (P=0.73). At the same time the frequency of sex-chromosomes losses was higher in the test group. In cultured cells numerical chromosomal aberrations were scored after at least one cell division in 
vitro. Frequency of aneuploidy of several chromosomes in 
the cultured cells of exposed workers has increased in comparison with control. Signiﬁcant differences were found in the incidences of hypo- and hyperploidy of chromosome 12, hypoploidy of chromosome 11, and hyperploidy of X-chromosome. Intergroup difference between the total value of numerical aberrations of all the six chromosomes was found, although it was not signiﬁcant: 2.26±0.93% in control, 2.98±1.11% in exposed individuals (P=0.085). Thus, stimulated cells themselves introduce basic contribution in intergroup differences of numerical aberrations. We suggest that the expression of accumulated in vivo premutagenic damages of spindle apparatus takes place during ﬁrst cell division. These anomalies are manifested during cell division 
and result in numerical chromosomal aberrations.Cytogenetics150
P0328. Cytogenetic studies in 196 cases of myelodysplastic 
syndromes
D. Costa1, A. Carrió1, A. Arias1, A. Valera2, M. Rozman3, F. Cobo4, E. Montser -
rat4, B. Nomdedeu4, E. Campo3;  
1Unitat d'Hematopatologia. Servei de Genètica, Hospital Clínic. Barcelona. 
Catalonia, Spain, 2IDIBAPS, Hospital Clínic. Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain, 3Uni-
tat d'Hematopatologia., Hospital Clínic. Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain, 4Servei 
d'Hematologia, Hospital Clínic. Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain.
The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a group of disorders in 
which bone marrow dysfunction is caused by both qualitative and quantitative defects of the hematopoietic cells. From January 1997 to December 2001, 196 cytogenetic studies on bone marrow cells from MDS were performed in our centre. Based on the WHO classiﬁcation the cases were distributed as follows: 5 (2.5%) Refractory anemias (RA), 14 (7%) Refractory anemias with ringed sideroblasts (RARS), 82 (42%) Refractory cytopenias with multilineage dysplasia (RCMD), 50 (25.5%) Refractory anemias with excess blasts (RAEB), 5 (2.5%) 5q- syndromes, 37 (19%) Chronic myelomonocytic leukemias (CMML), and 3 (1.5%) unclassiﬁable. A cytogenetic result was provided in 189 (96%) cases. Ninety six cases (51%) showed an abnormal karyotype, with a single chromosomal anomaly in 60 (63%)cases, two anomalies in 11 (11%) cases and a complex karyotype in 25 (26%)cases. The chromosomal anomalies more frequently found were: del(5q), trisomy 8, monosomy 7, del(7q), del(11q), del(20q), trisomy 21 and loss of Y. The MDS subtypes with a higher frequency of chromosomal abnormalities were RAEB (71%), RCMD (46%) and CMML (34%). The cytogenetic abnormalities deﬁning a poor prognosis (based on the IPSS cytogenetic classiﬁcation) were found more frequently in the RAEB (37%) and RCMD (14%) subtypes, being complex karyotypes in the vast majority of cases. Cytogenetic studies are an useful tool in the 
diagnosis, prognosis and follow- up of patients with a MDS.This work has been partially supported by James Huntingford and the grant (V-2003-Redc-07) from the”Instituto de Salud Carlos III”
P0329. The role of ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in 
genetic diagnosis of infertile men
A. Kékesi, E. Erdei, I. Lellei, A. Tóth;  
National Medical Centre, Budapest, Hungary.
Chromosomal abnormalities often lead to infertility. Structural chromosomal disorders are detectable from peripherial blood by karyotyping and metaphase FISH. Carriers of reciprocal translocations have increased risk of a chromosomally unbalanced offspring. Using FISH with speciﬁc DNA probes we can determine the chromosomal segregation pattern of the translocated chromosomes in spermatozoa. In the other investigated group there are XX sex-reversed males, where the testicular differentiation can occur in the absence of the Y 
chromosome.Results: We investigated the segregation pattern of the translocated chromosomes in two human male carriers of a reciprocal translocation. One of them had Y-3 translocation: t(Y;3)(q12;p21). The rate of genetically normal and balanced sperms in ejaculate were only 31%, while the rate of abnormal ones were 69%. The other patient had 1-17 translocation: t(1;17)(p17;q11). The segregation result showed that the genetically normal and balanced spermatozoa were 53.7%. We evaluated 3 XX sex-reversed patients by FISH analysis for SRY gene speciﬁc and X chromosome speciﬁc DNA probes. We detected SRY gene in each cases on the X chromosome which caused the male 
phenotype.Conclusion: FISH is an informative technique for assessing the percentage of abnormal sperms in translocation carriers. These results ensure more accurate genetic counseling for patients in assisted reproduction centres. The testis determining factor (SRY) is localised on the X chromosome in our XX sex-reversed patients, but genes responsible for spermatogenesis are missing. In these cases there are not gametes even in the testis for fertilization, so donor insemination is 
the only way having children.
P0330. The ﬁrst reported case of duplication/deletion mosaicism 
of the 7q(21.1->31.3) region
C. Morales1,2, I. Madrigal1,3, T. Esqué4, E. Margarit1,3, A. Soler1,3, A. Sánchez1,3;  
1Servei de Genètica, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Fundació Clínic, Bar -
celona, Spain, 3IDIBAPS (Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer), Barcelona, Spain, 4Servei de Neonatologia, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, 
Spain.
Mosaicism for structural aberrations is a rare event and the coexistence of a cell line with duplication and another with deletion of the same chromosome segment is even more infrequent. We report on a newborn male with a mosaicism 46, XY, dup(7q) / 46, XY, del(7q) in lymphocytes. The patient is trisomic for region 7q21.1 to 7q31.3 in 90% of analysed metaphases and monosomic for the same region in 10% of metaphases. He is the ﬁrst child of a 31-years-old mother and was delivered during 32nd week of gestation by Caesarean section because of oligohydramnios and foetal tachycardia. The parents were unrelated and have normal phenotypes and karyotypes. The newborn presented pneumothorax and the main dismorphic features were: microretrognathia, low and displastic ears, short neck, small mouth, cutaneous syndactyly on 2nd and 3rd toes, hip dislocation and long ﬁngers with metacarpo-falangeal and interfalangeal articulations hyperextensibility. No other anomalies were observed. Due to the absence of a normal cell line, we propose that the mosaic is the result of an abnormal chromosome recombination in a very early embrionary mitotic division. Child clinical features and survival may be due to the high proportion of trisomic cells versus monosomic, and were compared with published cases of partial trisomy 7q and partial monosomy 7q. To our knowledge, no other patient showing mosaicism 
dup(7q)/del(7q) has been reported.
P0331. FRA18C, a new fragile site, possibly associated with in 
vivo chromosome breakage
K. Debacker1, B. Winnepenninckx1, J. Wauters1, D. Fitzpatrick2, F. Kooy1;  
1Center of Medical Genetics, Wilrijk, Belgium, 2MRC - unit of Medical Genetics, 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
We are studying a patient with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) characterized by overgrowth, loss of IGF2 imprinting and an 18q22.1 truncation. Interestingly the father of the patient expressed a hitherto 
unknown fragile site, FRA18C, on chromosome 18q22.1.FISH experiments on metaphase spreads of the patient showed hybridization of an 18q subtelomeric probe only to the intact chromosome 18, indicating that the deletion in the proband is a pure terminal truncation. No abnormalities could be detected when the same FISH experiment was performed on metaphase spreads of the father, excluding the possibility that the de novo deletion in the proband is due to a balanced translocation or other chromosomal rearrangement. We cloned the chromosomal breakpoint and showed that the truncation was stabilized in vivo by the addition of repetitive telomeric sequence (TTAGGG).The breakpoint region contained a lot of AT rich repeats, a feature of common fragile sites. We found these AT rich repeats to be polymorphic, but no expansion could be detected in the patient or its father. One of these AT rich repeats resembles the consensus sequence of a common fragile site. According to the computer program M-FOLD, this repeat sequence folds into a hairpin structure, another feature of sequences found in common fragile sites. Using the program Twistﬂex, we found evidence for the presence of ﬂexibility islands in the breakpoint region. Together, these data suggest, for the ﬁrst time, that a common fragile 
site may be involved in in vivo chromosome breakage.
P0332. Characterization of a der(18) in a female patient with 
multiple congenital abnormalities using several molecular 
cytogenetic techniques
C. Wouters1, M. Joosten1, B. Beverloo1, A. de Klein1, J. van Kessel-Hilkmann1, 
I. Rayen2, P. Poddighe1;  
1ErasmusMC, Department of Clinical Genetics, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 
2Amphia Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Breda, The Netherlands.
A one-month old girl, born after an uncomplicated pregnancy and 
delivery to healthynon-consanguineous parents, presented with failure to thrive and persistent respiratory insufﬁciency. There were feeding difﬁculties and protein losing diarrhea. Facial dysmorphic features were present, e.g. slight frontal bossing, high arched eyebrows and a ﬂat nasal bridge. Her chest was narrow and asymmetrical. A cardiac murmur was detected, based on pulmonary stenosis. Cardiac hypertrophy was found without a detectable mutation in the 
MyBPC3-gene. At the age of one year the 
girl had developmental age of approximately six months.Cytogenetics151
GTG banding performed at the age of three months revealed a der(18). 
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) showed a partial deletion of the short arm of chromosome 18 and additional chromosomal material was present. The nature of this additional material was elucidated by spectral karyotyping (SKY) to be derived from chromosome 1. Array based comparative genomic hybridization (Array-CGH) was used to determine the size and location of both the deletion in chromosome 18 and the additional material of chromosome 1. The breakpoint in 18 was identiﬁed in p11.2, the additional chromosome 1 material was present from band q42.1 up to qter. A comparison with the literature 
will be presented.
P0333. Increasing complexity of a complex (1 ;4) chromosomal 
rearrangement
M. Prieur1, H. Dessuant2, J. Lapierre1, D. Sanlaville1, A. Tarrico1, A. Munnich1, 
M. Vekemans1, C. Turleau1;  
1Department of Genetics, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire LCL, Paris, France.
Recently several articles have focused on a high degree of unexpected additional complexity observed using array-CGH to characterize breakpoints and to screen for cryptic imbalance in de novo chromosomal rearrangements. Here we report on an apparently four breaks rearrangement observed in a 2 years 8 months old boy presenting with language delay and poor communication. He had no facial dysmorphism excepted bilateral epicanthus and strabismus. A combination of classical cytogenetics and chromosome painting studies using WCP1 and WCP4 showed a rearrangement between chromosome 1 and chromosome 4. The segment distal to 4q28 was translocated to 1p32 ; the 1pter-p33 segment was divided in two parts, the more distal part was translocated onto 4q28 and the proximal one was inserted into 4q26. Parents karyotypes were normal. CGH-arrays was performed to screen for cryptic imbalance. A deletion of about 6 Mb was detected at 4q28.3 between BAC 401i19 and BAC 425j20 corresponding to the observed breakpoint on chromosome 4. This deletion was conﬁrmed using FISH and metaphase-CGH. However the observation of a very dark G band in 4q28 on the der(4) was evocative of a duplication rather than a deletion. This inconsistency between CGH array and banding is puzzling. It could result from a duplication or an ampliﬁcation not detected by the probes used for CGH-array or due to a change in chromatin structure. This suggests that still another type of complexity may be associated with de novo 
chromosomal rearrangements.
P0334. The incidence of acquired karyotypic aberrations in 
childhood ALL is inﬂuenced by presenting age and cell type
D. R. Betts, A. Reid, L. Seppa, F. K. Niggli;  
University Children's Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) represents the most frequent 
malignant disease in childhood and has a peak incidence between the age of two and six. It has been generally accepted that a cytogenetically abnormal clone will be found in 85-90% of all cases. Over a 10-year period we have karyotyped a consecutive series of 394 childhood ALL cases at presentation (aged 16 or under). Among these cases there were 355 with B-cell lineage and 39 of T-cell origin. In all cases a conventional cytogenetic result was obtained and in 364 (92.4%) the presence of an abnormal clone could be demonstrated. The remaining 30 had an apparently normal karyotype, but by employing a range of FISH probes (including TEL/AML, BCR/ABL, and HOX11L2) a further 7 were identiﬁed as having clonal chromosomal changes. Analysis according to age and cell type showed signiﬁcant differences in abnormality rate, 95.5% of B-cell disease showed karyotypic changes, while an abnormal clone was identiﬁed in only 79.5% of T-cell disease (p-value = 0.0003). When age was considered 235/244 (96.3%) of children presenting below the age of 6-years showed a clonal chromosomal change, whereas only 134/149 (89.9%) of children over the age of 6 showed clonal changes (p-value = 0.019). In both age groups T-cell disease constituted one third of the cytogenetically normal cases. Therefore, these results indicate that a true normal karyotype is a rare event in childhood ALL, but it’s likelihood is inﬂuenced by age 
and cell type.P0335. Interstitial deletion of 6q without phenotypic effect.
K. Hansson, K. Szuhai, J. Knijnenburg, A. van Haeringen, J. M. de Pater;  
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Euchromatic interstitial deletions without detectable phenotypic abnormalities are rarely encountered. Identiﬁcation of these variants is 
important for prenatal diagnosis and genetic counselling.A 34-year-old woman with normal intelligence was referred for karyotyping because of recurrent abortions. With the exception of a bicuspid aortic valve without hemodynamic consequences, which is a common minor anomaly in the general population, no dysmorphic features were found on physical examination. Conventional chromosome analysis (GTG-banding) revealed an interstitial deletion in the long arm of chromosome 6. With array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) the size of the deletion was estimated to be between 9.9 and 11.6 Mb and the exact karyotype is 46,XX,del(6)(q22.31q23.1). Her son with developmental delay, behavioural problems and mild dysmorhic features has a normal karyotype and is not a 
carrier of the deleted chromosome 6.
P0336. A de novo  complex chromosome rearrangement (CCR) 
involving chromosome 2, 13, and 14 in a chorionic villus biopsy
C. A. L. Ruivenkamp , M. Hoogenboom, K. Szuhai, J. Knijnenburg, M. Bartel -
ings, E. Bijlsma, W. Kroes;  
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Complex chromosomal rearrangements (CCR) are rare structural chromosome aberrations characterized by three or more breakpoints located on two or more chromosomes. We report on a healthy 43-year-old G3P1 woman who was referred to our hospital for a chorionic villus biopsy at 11 weeks of gestation because of advanced maternal age. Cytogenetic analysis of G-banded chromosomes demonstrated a complex rearrangement involving chromosomes 2, 13 and 14 in all cells of the short-term and long-term cultures. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), using speciﬁc probes for chromosome 2, 13, and 14, conﬁrmed the complexity of the rearrangement and showed that the derivative 13 is composed of 5 distinct segments in the following order: 13q proximal, 2q, 13q, 14q, and 2q. The derivative 2 consists of the short arm of chromosome 2 and the distal part of 14q. The derivative 14 is derived from 14q and 13q. Parental chromosomes were normal. Based on FISH and cytogenetic results the karyotype of the de novo
 
CCR involving 3 chromosomes with 6 breakpoints was written as: 46,XY,der(2)t(2;14)(q1?3;q24),der(13)(13pter->13q1?3::2q?->2q?::13q?->13q?::14q?->14q?::2q2?->2qter),der(14)t(13;14)(q2?2;q2?2). Counseling was offered to the patient and her husband. At 15 weeks of gestation the pregnancy was terminated. Postmortem examination of the fetus revealed a mild facial dysmorphism (tall forehead, short biﬁd nose with anteverted nares, retromicrognathia, low-set ears) and no additional external malformations. Tissue culture of cartilage and cord cells conﬁrmed the CCR. To determine whether the CCR is balanced, we have performed array-CGH (comparative genome hybridization) 
and results will be presented.
P0337. A comparative study on detection efﬁciency of classical 
cytogenetic and Interphase Fluorescence In Situ Hybridisation in 
diagnosis of mosaeic form of X chromosome aneuploidies.
S. M. Mohaddes Ardebili1, J. Mohseni2, S. M. Tabatabaei3;  
1Tabriz University of Medical Sciences,Faculty of Medicine, Medical Genetics 
Unit, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iranian National Center for Education, 
Culture and Research, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Islamic Azad University 
of Tabriz, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Standard cytogenetics technique is of value in detection of chromosomal 
abnormalities. However the detection of chromosomal mosaicism is often difﬁcult due to time constrains and limited number of available metaphase cells. Interphase ﬂuorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) can be utilized to study the number of copies of a speciﬁc chromosome in interphase cells. The technique has valuable application in detection of chromosomal mosaicism since, a minimum of 100 cells can be 
analysed in a limited time.We employed the GTG-banding assay followed by interphase FISH and biotin labelled DXZ1 (Q-Biogene) to enumerate the X chromosome on peripheral blood samples of 88 women demonstrating the clinical features, compatible with X aneuploidies. Thirty-two samples were detected as 45,X and 3 samples as 47, XXX by GTG-Banding method Cytogenetics152
and conﬁrmed by Interphase FISH. Nine Samples were detected 
as suspicious 45,X/46,XX and 2 samples as 45,X/46,XX/47,XXX by conventional cytogenetic studies and were subsequently conﬁrmed by Interphase FISH. Five samples were diagnosed as normal by conventional cytogenetic studies, while 4 samples were shown to be mosaeic 45,X/46,XX and the ﬁfth sample 45,XX/46,XX/47,XXX by interphase FISH analysis. Six samples showed structural aberrations of chromosome X, which were undetectable by Interphase FISH. The remaining 21 samples were revealed to be normal by both cytogenetic 
and FISH analysis.The results indicate that interphase FISH is a useful and reliable tool in detection of mosaeic form of aneuploidies. However the technique has to be used as a parallel to conventional cytogenetic methods, which 
allows detection of structural chromosome abnormalities.
P0338. Familial dic(4;15)(p16;q11.1) associated with severe 
psychomotor retardation
R. Lasan, L. Letica, K. Crkvenac, I. Tonkovic, D. Muzinic, D. Begovic;  
Genetics and Metabolism Division, Pediatrics Department, University Hospital 
Center, Zagreb, Croatia.
Translocation of 15q11 on to autosomes is a relatively common event, 
which has no adverse clinical consequence. We report here a case of familial dic (4;15) associated with a severe phenotypic effect. A female neonate who presented with convulsions and a cardial defect showed a satellited chromosome 4 (46,XX,4ps pat), inherited from her phenotypically normal father. She developed severe psychomotor retardation and epilepsy.The identiﬁcation of autosomal non-acrocentric breakpoints and the acrocentric donor is often difﬁcult. Combined use of conventional and molecular cytogenetics allowed the identiﬁcation of the unbalanced translocation 46,XX,4ps pat.ish+15,dic(4;15)(p16;q11.1)(D15Z1+, D15S10-, SNRPN-, 4p-, D4Z1+). By FISH the satellited chromosome 4 in the proband and her father was positive with centromere 15 and 4, and negative with probe for Prader/Willi Angelman region and telomere 4. Future molecular characterisation is therefore needed in order to determine a small tandem duplication of DNA within the subtelomeric region, which may have been missed in our case. There is evidence that small chromosomal rearrangements involving the terminal bands of chromosomes are an important unrecognised cause of mental 
retardation in inherited rearrangements.
P0339. Two cases of de novo aberrations of 7q
D. Novotna1, M. Davidova1, M. Malikova1, V. Krutilkova1, M. Holzerova2, D. 
Chudoba1, Z. Vlckova1, M. Simandlova1, M. Havlovicova1, P. Goetz1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, University Hospital Motol, Prague, 
Czech Republic, 2Departement of Hemato-Oncology, University Hospital, Olo -
mouc, Czech Republic.
De novo chromosomal aberrations represent a considerable risk to their carriers; even in cases of balanced forms they can result in an 
abnormal phenotype.The ﬁrst patient is a 6.5-year old boy who, in contrast to his twin brother, has ectrodactyly affecting both hands and feet (SHSF). This phenotype can occur as an isolated anomaly or as a component of multisystem syndromes. The 
SHFM1 locus was mapped to chromosome 7, band 
q21.2-22.1 and SHSF has often been described in patients with deletion or duplication of 7q. In our patient we detected a de novo
 
paracentric inversion 46,XY,inv(7)(q21.2q36). His brother’s karyotype is normal. The mother was found to be a low frequency mosaic for 
trisomy X.The second case is a 2-year old girl with lip-palate-maxilla cleft, facial dysmorphology and mild-to-moderate PMR. Considering that the karyotype contains two de novo chromosomal aberrations 46,XX,t(1;1
1)(p31.1;q21),del(7)(q31.3q34), the girl is relatively mildly af fected.
P0340. Chromosome anomalies in infertile males
J. Kristesashvili, N. Kopaliani, N. Shervashidze, T. Gagnidze, M. Chipashvili;  
Zhordania Institute of Human Reproduction, Tbilisi, Georgia.
716 infertile men were studied with different types of spermatogenesis disorders for determing type and frequency of chromosome anomalies. In all patients sperm analyses and cytogenetic investigations were provided. From the total number 416 men was diagnosed as an azoospermic and 300 as an oligozoospermic. In the azoospermia group (416 males) chromosomal anomalies was found in 90 patients. More frequent was sex chromosome anomalies (78 patient -86,7%), structure of chromosomal anomalies was following: 47,XXY- in 64 patients (71,1%), 46,XY/47,XXY- in 8 patients (8,9%), 46,XX/47,XXY- in 1 patient (1,1%), 47,XYY- in 1 patient (1,1%), 46,XY/47,XYY- in 1 patient (1,1%) and 45,X/46,XY- in 1 patient (1,1%). Y chromosome macrodeletions was detected in 4 patients (4,4%), 46,X,delY(q11). Autosomal translocations was found in 3 patients (3,3%). In 2 case 
(0,5%) kariotype was 46,XX .In oligozoospermia group (300 males) chromosomal anomalies was detected only in group of patients with severe oligozoospermia (159 patient-53%). In 10 cases (6,3%) chromosomal disorders were found. In 7 cases (4,4%) sex chromosome abnormalities was shown with the following kariotypes: 47,XXY- (1), 47,XYY- (1 ), 46,XY/47,XXY- ( 4 ) and 45,X/46,XY- ( 1). In 3 cases (1,9%) autosomal translocations was 
detected.The FISH method detects SRY gene translocation on X chromosome 
in the patients with the kariotype 46,XX.Cytogenetic investigation considered as very important to detect the cause of infertility. It is also recommended to perform IVF, ICSI, TESA techniques with the use of preimplantation prenatal diagnostics in the 
families of infertile men with chromosome anomalies.
P0341. Molecular analysis of Y-chromosome in XX-males
V. B. Chernykh, A. L. Chuhrova, N. N. Vasserman, M. E. Karmanov, V. P. 
Fedotov, L. F. Kurilo, A. V. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sci -
ences, Moscow, Russian Federation.
XX-male syndrome is rare sex determination abnormality characterized 
by bilateral testes development in absence of a cytogenetically identiﬁable Y chromosome.To analyze presence of SRY gene and other Y-chromosome loci we investigated cohort of 19 phenotypic men with karyotypes: 46,XX 
(n=15), 45,X/46,XX (n=3) and 45,X (n=1).Molecular analysis was performed on leucocytes DNA by ampliﬁcation of SRY, AMG/AMGL, ZFX/ZFY and seven Yq loci: sY84, sY86, sY615; sY127, sY134; sY254, sY255 in two multyplex PCR. Breakpoint mapping was carried out for SRY-positive patients by analyzing of following STSs: sY2062, sY1248, sY211; sY1240, sY716, sY1241, 
sY1219, and sY1209.We found SRY gene in 15 (79%) of 19 patients, whereas AMGL and Yq loci were absent in all cases. SRY gene was found in all three 45,X/46,XX males and one of two 46,XX males with incomplete masculinisation. Breakpoints localized near proximal to interval 1A1B (class 1 of (Y+)XX males) were revealed in 3 patients including 45,X male. Yp fragments containing intervals I-II (class 2) and I-III (class 3) were found in four and eight SRY-positive men, respectively. It is signiﬁcant that sY1219 and sY1209 were disclosed in all of class 3 (Y+)XX males. It may be explained by Yp paracentric inversion. Obtained data conﬁrmed that about 80% XX-males are SRY-positive, as well as the size of Yp fragment was not correlating with the degree of masculinisation. Class 3 represents the most common form of SRY-positive XX males resulting from Xp-Yp translocation. Yp inversion predisposes to abnormal X-Y interchange.
P0342. Sperm segregation analysis of 4 rare Robertsonian 
translocations
F. Pellestor1, K. Moradkhani1, J. Puechberty2, G. Lefort2, T. Anahory3, S. Hama -
mah3, P. Sarda2;  
1CNRS UPR 1142, Montpellier, France, 2Departement of Cytogenetics, Arnaud 
de Villeneuve Hospital, Montpellier, France, 3Department of Biology of Repro -
duction B, Arnaud de Villeneuve Hospital, Montpellier, France.
Analysis of chromosomal segregation in sperm of Robertsonian translocation carriers is of great interest for understanding the mechanisms of translocation transmission and for assessing the risk of conceiving chromosomally abnormal children. To date, most of the sperm segregation studies of Robertsonian translocations have been performed on the most common rearrangements : t(13 ;14) and t(14 ;21). In the present study, meiotic segregation has been analysed in sperm from 4 males heterozygous for rare Robertsonian translocations, 
i.e. t(13 ;15), t(13 ;22), t(14 ;22) and t(15 ;21).After decondensation, sperm was analysed by dual color FISH, using Cytogenetics153
either locus-speciﬁc probes, or whole chromosome painting probes. 
A mean of 6,000 sperm nuclei was scored per patient (ranging from 4,300 to 9,000). The frequency of normal and balanced spermatozoa ranged from 86% to 91%. The incidence of unbalanced complements resulting from adjacent segregation accounted for 9% to 13.5%. When compared, both locus-speciﬁc probes and whole chromosome painting probes gave similar results for segregation patterns, demonstrating the efﬁciency of the 2 procedures for sperm study in Robertsonian 
translocation carriers.This study shows that rare Robertsonian translocations display segregation patterns identical to the common Robertsonian translocations previously analysed. These data support the existence of similar meiotic behaviour for all the nonhomologous Robertsonian 
translocations.This study was supported by a french reseach project PHRC (N°7732) from the C.H.U. of Montpellier.
P0343. De novo 2q3 deletion in female patient presenting with 
syndromic cleft palate
I. Giurgea1, L. Druart2, J. Steffann1, M. Jambou1, J. Bonnefont1, A. Munnich1, J. 
Amiel1, M. Prieur1;  
1Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire LCL, Paris, France.
We report a 3-month-old female patient presenting a de novo interstitial deletion of the long arm of chromosome 2 [46,XX,del(2)(q32.2q34)] identiﬁed on a 400 band chromosomal analysis. The antenatal ultrasonography revealed intrauterine growth retardation and oligoamnios at 19 and 36 weeks of gestation respectively. The child was born at 39 weeks of gestation (birth weight 2,865 g, crown-heel length 47.5 cm, head circumference 33 cm). She presented with a weak cry, failure to thrive, severe hypotonia, and psychomotor delay. The facial features associated down-slanting palpebral ﬁssures, hypertelorism, sloping forehead, poorly folded helices, low-set and posteriorly rotated ears, large nose, cleft palate and micrognathia. Cardiac ultrasonography revealed aortic root dilatation. Cranial ultrasonography showed a short corpus callosum without other morphological abnormalities. Abdominal ultrasonography and skeletal radiography were normal. Parents’ karyotype was normal. Molecular analysis showed that the deletion occurred on the paternal allele, and was ﬂanked by the D2S364 and D2S147 markers, deﬁning a 23-Mb region containing at least 70 genes. The SATB2 gene, ﬂanked by the 
deleted D2S318 and D2S311 markers, has already been implicated in isolated cleft palate. The 
COL3A1 and COL5A2 genes, encoding type-
III procollagen and alpha2 chains of the type-V collagen respectively, are also located in this region. The 
COL3A1 gene is involved in vascular 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (type-IV) with a risk of arterial dissection. The involvement of 
COL5A2 in classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is still 
controversial. Interstitial deletions of the middle portion of chromosome 2q are rare; clinical and molecular characterisation may allow to draw 
some genotype-phenotype correlations.
P0344. Subtle subtelomeric rearrangements in children with 
developmental delay
I. Petkovic , I. Barisic;  
University Children's Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
The prevalence of mental retardation (MR) is 1-2% in general population, and has serious implications for the affected individual, the family and society. In course of diagnostic management of the patient special attention is paid to genetic investigations. Chromosomal aberration is the most common cause of mental retardation and present in 4-28% of affected individuals. The traditional cytogenetics is however unable to detect genomic abnormalities smaller than 5-10Mb. These small submicroscopic changes of genetic material can be detected by molecular cytogenetic methods. In this study we performed the screening for subtelomeric chromosome rearrangemets with multicolour FISH assay in order to determine the frequency of aberrations in our group of children with developmental disabilities. This investigation included 31 child with developmental delay, dysmorphic features and / or congenital anomalies, and normal karyotype. The analysis was performed using slides obtained by short-term culture of peripheral blood lymphocytes and multicolour FISH probe panel ToTelVysion (Vysis). Aberrations of subtelomers were detected in 2 (6.4%) of patients. Our results point out the usefulness of FISH method for screening subtelomeric regions and present additional evidence that subtle subtelomeric aberrations have important role in the aetiology of mental retardation. Ministry of Science Croatia supported 
this work (TP-01/072-01).
P0345. Delineation of a 5q35 microdeletion in congenital heart 
disease: haploinsufﬁciency of NKX2-5 can cause Ebstein 
anomaly
L. A. Larsen1, M. Bækvad-Hansen1, A. Delicado2, V. Kalscheuer3, N. Tomm -
erup1, Z. Tümer1;  
1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of 
Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital Universitario La Paz, 
Madrid, Spain, 3Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
Congenital heart diseases (CHD) represent the most common group 
of inborn malformations, with an incidence of almost 1%. One of the genes associated with CHD is the 
NKX2-5 gene, which encodes a 
cardiac homeobox transcription factor. Mutations of NKX2-5, which 
is located at 5q35.1 have been identiﬁed in a subset of familial and sporadic cases of atrioventricular (AV) conduction block associated with a spectrum of structural heart defects, including atrial septal defect (ASD) and tetratology of Fallot. Functional studies of 
NKX2-
5 mutations have indicated that haploinsufﬁciency determines the AV conduction block and ASD phenotypes. However, some studies suggest dominant negative effects and it has not been possible to correlate other 
NKX2-5 phenotypes with a speciﬁc mechanism of the 
mutation due to a small sample size.Here, we present delineation of a microdeletion in a patient with AV conduction block, ASD and tricuspid valve malformation (Ebstein anomaly) in addition to microcephaly, scoliosis and pectoral hypoplasia. FISH mapping of an apparently balanced inversion, 46, XY, inv(5)(q13q35) de novo, revealed a 2.2 megabase deletion 
at the distal inversion breakpoint. This region contains 17 RefSeq genes, including 
NKX2-5. This case gives therefore strong evidence 
for haploinsufﬁciency of NKX2-5 as the cause of Ebstein anomaly. 
Microdeletions in the terminal part of 5q are rare and only 12 cases have been published so far. A genotype-phenotype comparison with 
previous cases will be presented.
P0346. Cytogenetic Findings in Chorionic Villi of Spontaneous 
Miscarriages
S. S. Cirkovic, M. Djurisic, T. Lalic, D. Radivojevic, M. Miskovic, M. Guc-Sce -
kic, Z. Puzigaca;  
Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia and Monte -
negro.
A proportion of spontaneous miscarriages are caused by chromosomal abnormalities. The aim of this retrospective study was to evaluate the contribution of chromosomal abnormalities in spontaneous abortions at 6 -13 weeks of gestation. We report cytogenetic ﬁndings seen in chorionic villi samples of 42 miscarriages from August 2001 to May 2004 in Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia ,,Dr Vukan 
Cupic“.Cytogenetic analysis was performed using direct method for chorionic villi chromosome preparation, and chromosomes were identiﬁed by standard banding techniques. According to the sonographic ﬁndings, these spontaneous abortions were characterized as blighted ovum 
and missed abortion.Chromosome analyses of GTG banded metaphases showed normal karyotype in 18 cases (42,86%). Abnormal karyotypes were found in 24 cases (57,14%). 22 abortions had numerical aberrations: 13 were autosomal trisomies, one was autosomal monosomy, 3 were Turner syndromes (45,X), one was Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY) and 4 were polyploidies (triploidy (69) and ,,near“ diploidy (46±)). Among autosomal trisomies, extra chromosomes 4, 6, 13, 16, 20 and 22 were present. In three abortions structural chromosome abnormalities were found: one 
unbalanced t(10;18)(p13;q23) translocation and one deletion 18q21.In our sample of spontaneous abortions, there were 11 blighted ovum abortions and 31 missed. The highest frequency of abnormal karyotypes was found in the casses of missed abortions. Cytogenetic investigations of spontaneous abortions provide valid informations as to the cause of abortion and contribute to prenatal diagnosis in 
subsequent pregnancies.Cytogenetics154
P0347. A complex chromosomal rearrangement involving 
chromosomes 10, 11 and 12: Cytogenetic, Microarray and 
Clinical characterisation.
S. Edwards1, A. Male2, R. Palmer1, R. Wang1, K. Woodward2, R. Ekong2, C. 
Langford3, B. Gibbons1, M. Bitner2;  
1NE London Regional Cytogenetics Laboratory, Great Ormond Street Hospital, 
London, United Kingdom, 2Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Institute of Child 
Health, London, United Kingdom, 3The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cam -
bridge, United Kingdom.
A report of a de novo, complex chromosomal rearrangement involving 
three chromosomes with four breakpoints. The karyotype was 
established by GTG banding, and WCP: 46,XY,t(10;12;11)(10qter-10p11.2::12q12-12qter;10pter-10p11.2::12q12-cen12-12p12::11p14-11pter;11qter-11p14::12p12-12pter). A chromosome translocation was ﬁrst diagnosed at amniocentesis for increased serum biochemistry tests and mild Intra Uterine Growth Retardation. This was reported as an apparently balanced t(10;12)t(p11.2;q12) and the family were given a 5% risk of signiﬁcant physical or intellectual problems. During the neonatal period the patient presented with hypothermia and hypoglycaemia. Weight and head circumference were on the 3
rd centile. 
Repeat karyotype revealed that the chromosomal rearrangement was more complex than initially thought, involving a third chromosome, chromosome 11. As the patient got older it was evident that he had severe developmental delay, hypotonia with ﬁne and gross motor coordination problems, short stature, severe visual impairment and sleep disturbance. Moderate facial dysmorphisms were also present (prominent nasal bridge, upslanting palpebral ﬁssures, bushy eyebrows, widely spaced teeth). In addition, the patient had bilateral sacral pits, ﬂat feet and a small penis. MRI showed hypoplastic optic nerves with a small optic chiasm. There were no other midline abnormalities.Initial microarray studies have been initiated and are currently being validated by FISH to determine whether the rearrangement really is 
balanced. Data will be presented.
P0348. Microduplication 22q11.2 syndrome : a cause of cognitive 
and behavioural problems - report of 3 familial cases
W. Courtens1, I. Schramme2, S. Scheers1, R. van Luijk1, W. Wuyts1, J. Wauters1;  
1University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Centre for Developmental 
Disorders, Antwerp, Belgium.
Microduplications of the 22q11.2 region have only recently been observed examining interphase cells by FISH with TUPLE1 in patients referred for DG/VCFS (Ensenauer et al., 2003): they found a duplication in 1.5% of unrelated patients. To verify this ﬁnding a prospective study on 200 cases referred for DG/VCFS was performed, in which one patient (0.5%) with three copies of TUPLE1 was found. Since then a few patients with microduplication 22q11.2 were described, showing variable clinical phenotype ranging from mild learning disability to the presence of severe congenital malformations, or some overlapping 
features with DG/VCFS.We report on a 8-year-old boy who was sent to us because of psychomotor retardation and behavioural problems. The parents were non-consanguineous. There was a family history of mental retardation (both parents had special education) and the father also had behavioural problems comparable to his son. There was no family history of cardiopathy. The standard karyotype of the patient was normal 46,XY as well as fragile X syndrome screening. FISH analyses 22q11.2 were performed and showed the presence of three signals for TUPLE1 probe in all interphase nuclei. FISH 22q11.2 analysis in the father and in one other brother disclosed the same microduplication. Complementary investigations showed that the patient had, in addition to his developmental delay and behavioural problems, asymmetric perceptive hearing loss and a small right kidney.We’ll discuss the clinical phenotype of these patients and compare it 
with literature data.
P0349. Molecular cytogenetic characterization of the mouse cell 
line WMP2 by spectral karyotyping (SKY) and multicolor banding 
(mcb) applying murine probes
H. Starke1, C. Karst1, V. Trifonov1,2, U. Claussen1, K. Mrasek1, S. Michel1, P. 
Avner3, T. Liehr1;  
1Institut für Humangenetik und Anthropologie, Jena, Germany, 2Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Unité de Génétique 
Moléculaire Murine, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
The Moloney murine leukemia virus-transformed suspension cell 
line WMP2 is derived from wild mice (Mus musculus) of the WMP/WMP strain. These mice carry nine pairs of metacentric Robertsonian translocation chromosomes. As the chromosomes of the wild-type mouse are all acrocentric, metaphase spreads of the WMP2 cells seam to be highly suited for physical gene mapping. Here we studied the WMP2 line using spectral karyotyping (SKY) combined with new established mouse speciﬁc multicolor banding (mcb) probes for the chromosomes X, 3, 4, 6 and 18. SKY revealed that the WMP2 cell line developed further four derivative chromosomes. After application of mcb ﬁve previously unrecognizable intrachromosomal rearrangements with 9 breakpoints were detected for the studied chromosomes: a translocation-chromosome including parts of the X-chromosome could now be described as der(9)t(9;X)(?;C); mcb 4 revealed in the dic(4;6) a deletion and an inversion in those two chromosomes; mcb 18 proved the presence of two dic(7;18) and a dic(8;8)t(8;8;18) and of two different variants of the dic(7;18). Supported in parts by the the DFG (436 RUS 17/49/02 and 436 RUS 17/135/03), the INTAS (2143), and the Deutsche Krebshilfe (70-3125-Li1). The cell line WMP2 was kindly provided by Dr. M. Rocchi (Bari, Italy) and Dr. H. Hameister 
(Ulm, Germany).
P0350. 2q Deletion: an unusual association of classic phenotype 
(Albright Hereditary Osteodystrophy 3) with hypothyroidism, 
epilepsy and multiple bone fractures
S. Belli1, F. Soli1, B. Pirola2, O. Zuffardi3;  
1Genetic Counselling Centre, Trento, Italy, 2Citogenetica Diagnostica e Ricerca 
H.S. Raffaele Milano, Milano, Italy, 3Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
Albright Hereditary Osteodystrophy 3 (AHO3) is a rare condition characterized by: short stature, stocky build, round face, mental retardation, brachymetaphalangia and eczema, associated with a deletion of chromosome 2q (2q37.3-qter). In this condition, soft tissue ossiﬁcation and obesity are absent and there are no abnormalities in parathyroid hormone and Gs-alpha levels, unlike AHO1 and AHO2.We describe a case of a 37 years old woman with mental retardation, obesity (76 kg), normal stature (162 cm), slight dysmorphisms (roundish face, frontal bossing, detached earlobes, big and globose tipped nose with short pinnae, smooth philtrum, thin lips, short neck), hand and foot abnormalities, brachydactyly type E, hypothyroidism, epilepsy (normal 
EEG), and cutaneous eczema.She has had 7 fractures, up to the age of 20 years (2 at wrist, 2 at ankle, left elbow, 2 at tibia and left perone) without major trauma, and epyphisite at right knee at 9 years. Calcemia, calciuria, RMN and cerebral TAC are normal.Cytogenetic analysis showed a normal female karyotype, while subtelomeric probes revealed a deletion of the long arm of chromosome 2 (breakpoints under study). The karyotype was: 46,XX.
ish del(2)(qter)(2qtel-).This evidence underlines the importance of the terminal region of chromosome 2 in the determining the AHO3 phenotype. The symptoms present in our patient could be explained by a breakpoint different to 
that described in the literature.
P0351. Recurrent 22q13.3 cryptic deletion in two brothers 
with clinical signs resembling the Clark-Baraitser syndrome 
phenotype.
E. Tabolacci1, M. Zollino1, R. Lecce1, F. Gurrieri1, V. Leuzzi2, J. M. Opitz3, G. 
Neri1;  
1Istituto di Genetica Medica Università Cattolica Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy , 
2Istituto di Neuropsichiatria Infantile Università, Roma, Italy, 3Division of Medical 
Genetics University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States.
A preliminary diagnosis of Clark-Baraitser syndrome was performed in two brothers affected with a multiple congenital anomalies/mental retardation (MCA/MR) syndrome, born to healthy parents. They presented with moderate to severe MR, a psychotic personality, obesity, macrocephaly, a characteristic face with square forehead, prominent supraorbital ridges, bulbous tip of nose, short philtrum, gap between upper central incisors, large and coarse ears. Genitalia were normal. They also presented with big hands and feet and advanced bone age. One of them was excessively tall. On brain MRI, lateral ventricular dilatation with cortical and cerebellar vermis hypoplasia Cytogenetics155
was diagnosed. Chromosomes were apparently normal male. Although 
clinical signs were well consistent with the Clark-Baraitser syndrome phenotype, a search for subtelomeric cryptic rearrangements was performed by FISH, according to a general diagnostic policy in familial mental retardation. An isolated 22q13.3 cryptic deletion, spanning about 3.5 Mb, as established by additional FISH analyses, was diagnosed in both patients. Parents had normal 22q telomeres on 200 metaphases. Relevant considerations are the following: 1) a cryptic 22q13.3 deletion should be checked in patients with Clark-Baraitser syndrome phenotype; 2) the 22q13.3 deletion syndrome is distinctively associated with overgrowth and macrocephaly; 3) gonadal mosaicism is to be considered in genetic counselling of microdeletion 
syndromes.
P0352. Effect of F cells in the protection of cultured lymphocytes 
against DEB-induced chromosome breakage. The inﬂuence of 
GST activity and individual GSTT1  and GSTT1  genotypes
B. Porto1, C. Sousa2, J. Gaspar3, J. Rueff3, F. Carvalho2, I. Malheiro1;  
1Instituto Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Porto, Portugal, 2REQUI -
MTE, Departamento de Toxicologia, Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade do 
Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Departamento de Genética, Faculdade de Ciências 
Médicas, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.
Red blood cells (RBC) from normal adult individuals can protect cultured 
lymphocytes against chromosomal breakage induced by diepoxybutane (DEB), and the role of the polymorphic enzyme glutathione S-transferase T1 (GSTT1) (expressed in RBC) in the protective effect was already described. In the present work, we studied the inﬂuence of RBC extracted from umbilical cord blood of neonates (F cells) on the frequency of DEB-induced chromosome breakage in lymphocyte cultures from normal individuals. Simultaneously, we determined the total GST and catalase activities of RBC from controls and neonates, and individual 
GSTT1 and GSTM1 genotypes. Seven control RBC and 
six neonate F cell samples were used in the study. Phytohemagglutinin (PHA) stimulated lymphocyte cultures were incubated in the presence or absence of DEB (0.1µg/ml), with addition of autologous RBC or F cells. The obtained results showed that, although both types of RBC protected cultured lymphocytes from normal individuals against chromosome breakage induced by DEB, the effect elicited by F cells was signiﬁcantly higher, although variability in the protective effect among individuals was observed. It was also observed that the higher protective potency by F cells can be correlated with an increase in the total GST activity but not with catalase activity; concerning the individual variability in the protective effect, the correlation with 
GSTT1  
and GSTM1  genotypes was demonstrated.
P0353. Untreated growth hormone deﬁciency with extreme short 
stature, cleft lip-palate and mental retardation in a 26-year old 
man with a de novo unbalanced translocation t(1;12)(q24;q24).
P. Callier1, L. Faivre2, N. Marle1, C. Thauvin-Robinet2, A. Mosca1, A. Danino3, 
G. Malka3, F. Huet2, F. Mugneret1;  
1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Dijon, France, 2Génétique médicale, Dijon, 
France, 3Chirurgie maxillofaciale, Dijon, France.
We report on a 26-year-old patient presenting with extreme short stature (height 76 cm, weight 6.5 kg, OFC 42.5 cm) with short hands, facial dysmorphism with hypertelorism, beaked nose, cleft lip-palate and severe mental retardation. He was the unique child of non consanguineous parents. Measurements at birth were 43 cm for length and 2100 g for weight. He had severe feeding difﬁculties requiring enteral nutrition until the age of 3 years. Endocrine studies for severe growth retardation revealed severe growth hormone deﬁciency, but the child was untreated because of associated mental retardation. At 26 years of age, he could not walk or speak and had no puberty. Reinvestigations showed combined pituitary hormone deﬁciency, spondylo-epi-metaphyseal dysplasia with severe osteoporosis, enlarged aorta when indexed to the patient’s size and normal cerebral MRI with apparently normal pituitary development. Conventional cytogenetic analysis revealed an apparently balanced de novo translocation t(1;12)(q24;q24). High resolution karyotype showed a 1q24-q25 deletion and comparative genomic hybridisation studies conﬁrmed the 1q interstitial deletion. FISH studies of the both breakpoints using PACs and BACs permitted to further characterise the 1q interstitial deletion (1q24.2 to 1q25.2) and also revealed a 12q24.31 interstitial microdeletion. This observation is of interest for two reasons. First, these deletions could be a clue in the search of a gene responsible for growth hormone deﬁciency/midline defects. Second, it shows the importance of molecular cytogenetics in the study of de novo apparently balanced translocation with abnormal 
phenotype.
P0354. The 9p+ variant is an ampliﬁcation of a repeat mapping 
within 9p21, and not a simple 9p11.2-p13.1 duplication.
R. Lecce1, M. Murdolo1, G. Gelli2, L. Coppola2, C. Steindl1, I. Mancuso1, G. 
Marangi1, G. Neri1, M. Zollino1;  
1Istituto di Genetica Medica Università Cattolica Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy , 
2Clinica Sant'Anna, Roma, Italy.
Among polymorphisms of chromosome 9, additional C-Band negative 
material on the proximal 9p have been rarely reported . They were described as duplications of 9p11.2-p13.1.We report on three unrelated subjects with a chromosome expansion involving the proximal euchromatic region of chromosome 9p: a female, referred because of POF, subsequently ascribed to a premutation of the FMR-1 gene, and two adult, healthy males, who were referred after a prenatal diagnosis of 9p+ in the fetus. An unusual chromosome 9, with an additional homogeneously staining segment on the proximal 
9p, was detected by conventional cytogenetics.The additional region was R- and C-negative. Molecular cytogenetics was then performed by using a total of 5 molecular probes spanning the 9p11.1p13.1 region. We found that the euchromatic 9p+ polymorphism is caused by a great ampliﬁcation (and not by a simple duplication) of an about 1.5 Mb repeat mapping within 9p12. This repeat is identiﬁed by BACs RP11-15E1, proximally, and RP11-402N8, distally, with a ratio RP11-15E1:RP11-402N8 of 2:1. The copy number of the repeat varied between 7 and 14 in individual cases. Based on these observations, we conclude that the 9p+ variant is a 9p12 ampliﬁcation, and not a 9p11.2-p13.1 duplication, as suggested. This heteromorphism is not associated with clinical abnormalities. Important insights are achieved for the prenatal diagnosis of either a 9p+ variant, or a benign 9p-
derived extra small chromosome.
P0355. Genetic counselling in Tunisian patients with 
reproduction failure having balanced chromosome structural 
abnormalities
N. B. Abdelmoula1, O. Kacem2, I. El Kemel2, B. Gargouri1, F. Zhiwa3, A. 
Amouri2;  
1Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Institut Pasteur, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Depart -
ment of gynecology Aziza Othmana, Tunis, Tunisia.
Carriers of balanced chromosome structural abnormalities are usually ascertained because infertility, recurrent miscarriages, failure of assisted reproductive technologies (ART), or offspring with unbalanced 
karyotype and multiple congenital defects.Here we report 13 balanced chromosome structural abnormalities ascertained by cytogenetic analysis of 43 couples and 180 infertile 
men:
inv(9)(p12q12) in two men among couples with miscarriagesinv(10(p15q21) in a woman with ART failure because absence of 
cleavageReciprocal translocation in two cases: t(7;15)(p22q25) and t(1;4)(q34;q26) in 2 women with respectively 5 and 3 spontaneous 
abortionsinv(12)(p12p12) in a man of a couple with early abortions after ART.
For the 180 patients with male infertility, we found 4 robertsonian 
translocations and 3 reciprocal translocations:t(13;14) was found in two men with severe oligozoospermia and one 
azoospermic man
t(14;21) was detected in an oligospermic manReciprocal translocations were found in 2 azoospermic man [t(10;13)(q21;q22) and t(16;22)(p11;p11)] and one oligospermic man: 
t(4;9)(p15.3;p21).In these cases, the central concept in genetic counselling is the estimation of the probability of unbalanced progeny at birth and other unfavourable pregnancy outcomes. More ever, the prognosis of success of ART is also an important concern because poor embryo development, which may be a result of high segregation abnormalities, may negatively affect the outcome of ART.Cytogenetics156
Estimates of unbalanced progeny at birth and the probability of 
poor embryo development are made on basis of theoretical and empiric meiotic segregation patterns but these risk estimates varied considerably from translocation to translocation and studies are often 
limited.
P0356. Diagnosis of subtelomeric imbalance using MLPA
K. Mann, J. W. Ahn, A. Hallam, C. Mackie Ogilvie;  
Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital Trust, London, United Kingdom.
Subtelomeric imbalance is an important cause of idiopathic moderate/severe mental retardation. Established diagnostic procedures for detection of subtelomeric imbalance use multiprobe ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), which is labour-intensive and expensive, and therefore only applied for a subset of patients. In contrast, multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA) can be used to detect 
aberrant copy number at up to 50 loci in a single reaction.A validation study of 271 cytogenetically normal and abnormal samples was carried out using commercial MLPA kits (MRC-Holland). Strategies for data analysis and interpretation were assessed with respect to false negative and positive rates. All known abnormalities were detected. A total of 23 samples with apparently terminal deletions on G-banded chromosome analysis were tested using MLPA; in three cases (13%) duplication of material from a different chromosome was identiﬁed, conﬁrmed by FISH analysis as present on the abnormal chromosome. In 1 of the 23 cases the deletion was found to be interstitial, the MLPA probe being present in normal copy number. In addition, three cases were tested where G-banded chromosome analysis had found a derivative chromosome containing material of unknown origin. In all three cases the unknown material was identiﬁed; these results were conﬁrmed using single FISH probes.MLPA has now superseded FISH-based subtelomere screening in our laboratory. All positive results are followed up using single-probe FISH. As a consequence we are expanding our test population and have reduced reporting times. Service strategy and results will be 
discussed.
P0357. Incidence of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome in a selected 
population
L. M. Pires1, A. Cabral2, E. Matoso1, A. Jardim1, L. Simões1, S. Sousa3, L. Ra -
mos2, A. Crisóstomo4, C. Pediátrica3, D. Prenatal5, J. Saraiva2, I. M. Carreira1;  
1Serviço de Citogenética, Faculdade de Medicina, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Serviço 
de Genética Médica, Centro Hospitalar de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3Hos-
pital Pediátrico, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Hospital de São André, Leiria, Portugal, 
5Maternidade Bissaya Barreto, Coimbra, Portugal.
Almost all cases of DiGeorge syndrome or velo-cardio-facial syndrome result from a common deletion of chromosome 22q11.2. These individuals have a wide range of anomalies such as: congenital heart disease, particularly conotruncal malformations that are associated with 29% of deletions, palate abnormalities, hypocalcemia, immune deﬁciency, learning difﬁculties and characteristic facial features.This syndrome may be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. About 93% 
of patients have a de novo  deletion and 7% have an inherited deletion.
Our goals were to assess the frequency of the deletion in a selected population of individuals with speciﬁc clinical features, mainly congenital heart defects, and the incidence of a familial transmission. A total of 325 individuals (251 infantile, 40 parents and 34 pregnancies) were evaluated by FISH (ﬂuorescence in situ hybridisation ) using speciﬁc 
DNA probes (N25 Vysis and TUPLE1 Qbiogene). Twenty of the 285 probands were identiﬁed with the deletion. Facial features are present in all of these cases and congenital heart defects are present in 85%, of these, 65% have a conotruncal defect. Three individuals with the deletion did not have any cardiac defect, only showing immune deﬁciency and hypocalcemia. This supports the need to be aware of less frequent features such as hypocalcemia. In our population 100% 
of the deletions diagnosed were de novo .
P0358. Rho gene expression regulates chondrocytic 
differentiation of mesenchymal precursor cells: a mechanism of 
TGF-beta/BMP2 in cartilage formation
H. Hao, P. H. Wooley;  
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, United States.
Mesenchymal precursor cells (MPC), an alternative source to provide pluripotent precursors, have been recognized to give rise to osteocytes, chondrocytes, endothelial, adipose, and muscle cells. The previously reported results indicate that MPC chondrogenesis depends on both TGF-beta 3 and BMP2 signals. The in vitro data have shown that chondrocytic-like cells can be directly derived from ﬁbroblast-like MPC after TGF-β3 and BMP2 treatment. However, during the chondrocytic differentiation, the mechanism of these growth factors regulates MPC morphological and genetic changes remains to be elicited. The TGF- β3/BMP2 regulated MPC genes that initiate and govern ﬁnal cell phenotype remain unknown. To gain molecular understanding of MPC chondrogenesis, gene expression proﬁles of MPC treated with or without TGF- β3 and BMP2 were analyzed using cDNA microarray representing 11000 mRNAs from the human fetal liver isolated SH2/SH3/CD29/CD140+ cells (CD34/CD117-). The signiﬁcant alterations in RhoA and RhoA-Rho kinase (RAK) gene expression levels were conﬁrmed using RT-PCR. Genes that differently expressed in collage II/ proteoglycan positive cells were identiﬁed. Compared with non-TGF- β3 or BMP2 treated cells, both RhoA and RAK genes were up-regulated respectively (4 to 7 times respectively). We also found that both collagen II and proteoglycan gene expressions increase following Rho/RAK expression. The up-regulated RAK signal transduction related genes such as DOCK180 and Rac were also detected. Inhibition of the RhoA and RAK mRNA expression with anti-RhoA/RAK antisenses signiﬁcantly suppresses the MPC chondrogenesis. This data suggest that the RhoA/RAK signaling pathway is critical for MPC differentiation, 
which will require further functional testing.
P0359. Screening for cytogenetic and molecular chromosome 
rearrangements in children with conotruncal heart defects and 
supravalvular aortic stenosis
B. Gargouri1, N. B. Abdelmoula1, I. T. Sahnoun2, A. Amouri3, T. Rebai1;  
1Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Department of Cardiology, Sfax, Tunisia, 
3Institut Pasteur, Tunis, Tunisia.
Conotruncal heart defects and supravalvular aortic stenosis are the most cardiovascular malformations that have been associated with chromosomal microdeletions 22q11.2 and 7q11.2 respectively.To estimate frequency and investigate clinical features of these microdeletions in unselected patients with heart conotruncal defects and supravalvular aortic stenosis, a total of 35 patients originate from the south of Tunisia are evaluated prospectively by cytogenetic and 
molecular studies.The clinical analysis was performed according to a speciﬁc clinical protocol for the diagnosis of congenital cardiovascular malformations. All patients harbouring truncus arteriosus, interrupted aortic arch, tetralogy of fallot with or without pulmonary valve atresia, tetralogy of fallot with absent pulmonary valve, ventricular septal defect with malalignement of the conal septum and supravalvular aortic stenosis, were included in our study.Cytogenetical analysis with RHG and GTG banding was used to detect chromosome rearrangements. All patients have normal karyotype 46,XX or 46,XY.Molecular analyses were undertaken by ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization using three probes: LSI Digeorge N25 (D22S75) region probe N25/ARSA, LSI Digeorge/VCFS region probe TUPLE1/ARSA and LSI Williams syndrome (elastin gene) region probe D7S486/D7S522. Results will be discussed and compared with those of other studies performed in the north and the centre of Tunisia.
P0360. Can the ampliﬁcation of MSRV pol sequence be a marker 
of multiple sclerosis?
M. Zawada1, I. Liwen1, M. Pernak1, D. Januszkiewicz-Lewandowska1,2, K. No -
wicka1, J. Rembowska1, H. Hertmanowska3, M. Wender4, J. Nowak1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 
2University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 3Department of Neurology, 
State Hospital, Poznań, Poland, 4Neuroimmunological Unit, Medical Research 
Center, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is one of the most frequent disorders of central nervous system characterized by demyelination foci in the brain and spinal cord. Pathogenesis of MS is poorly understood. Among etiologic 
factors some viruses are suggested to play important role.The aim of our studies was the assessment of MSRV pol sequence copy number in MS patients compared to control individuals. Analysis was Cytogenetics157
performed on interphase nuclei and chromatin ﬁbers from peripheral 
blood cells of 56 patients with MS, 8 patients with myasthenia and 20 
healthy individuals.For analysis of MSRV pol sequence copy number in the examined material the FISH with biotinylated PCR product was used. Detection of MSRV pol probe was carried out by reaction with avidin-ﬂuorescein and biotinylated anti-avidin. MSRV pol sequences were found in all examined persons. However, the copy number of MSRV pol sequence was signiﬁcantly greater in MS patients than in myasthenia and normal individuals. In addition, the MSRV pol sequence exists as tandem repeats on various chromatin ﬁbers. The increased number of MSRV pol sequence has been found on chromatin ﬁbers of MS patients as compared to myasthenia and healthy controls. This ﬁnding suggests that MSRV may play some role in pathogenesis of MS.Grant of State Committee for Scientiﬁc Research No 2 PO5A 139 28.
P0361. Trisomy 4 p syndrome: clinical similarities with de Lange 
syndrome
G. Ceylaner1, S. Ceylaner1, N. Danisman2, L. Mollamahmutoglu3;  
1Zekai Tahir Burak Women's Health and Education Hospital, Department of 
Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Zekai Tahir Burak Women's Health and Education 
Hospital, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey, 3Zekai 
Tahir Burak Women's Health and Education Hospital, Department of Obstetrics 
ang Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey.
Trisomy 4p is a rare type of chromosomal disorder. Most of reported 
cases were originated from parental chromosomal rearrangements. Some of reported cases discussed as the similarities between this syndrome and Cornelia de Lange syndrome. Some of the authors claimed that there is a chromosomal locus related with de Lange syndrome while the others did not support this theory. We are here 
reporting a new case with partial trisomy 4p.27 years old pregnant woman referred to our hospital as increased risk in triple screening test and history of a terminated pregnancy due to neural tube defect. Ultrasonographic examination was normal. Amniocentesis was offered and was performed due to triple test ﬁndings. Karyotype of the fetus was revealed an additional chromosomal material on chromosome 3. Chromosome analysis of parents presented maternal reciprocal balanced translocation 46,XX,t(3;4)(p26;p13) and fetus was diagnosed as partial trisomy of short arm of chromosome 4. Pregnancy was terminated. It was a male fetus with microcephaly, ﬂat face, depressed nose with wide nasal bridge, synophrys and prominent heels. Facial features resembled de Lange syndrome but extremity ﬁndings and other features of de Lange 
syndrome were not present.While there are some similarities between these two syndromes, clinical differences are also present. Report of Fryns on two cases with partial trisomy 4p followed till 18 and 24 showed more clear differences of this syndrome than same aged cases with de Lange syndrome. We also conclude like Fryns that this locus does not have any relationship 
with de Lange syndrome.
P0362. Subtelomeric cryptic rearrangement: further case of 
deletion 4p16.3
M. Della Monica1, D. Giardino2, P. Finelli2, F. Lonardo1, E. Valtorta2, G. Scara -
no1;  
1Medical Genetics Unit, General Hospital "Gaetano Rummo" Benevento, Italy , 
2Lab. Citogenetica Medica e Genetica Molecolare, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico 
Italiano Milano, Italy.
The propositus, the ﬁrst child of unrelated parents, was referred to us because of delay of psycomotor development and growth.. Maternal age at delivery was 35 years; paternal age 38. They had the second healthy daughter. The family and history was unremarkable. During the pregnancy UltraScan revealed IUGR .The baby was born at 37 weeks with Cesarean section, birth weight 1750 g (<5th centile), lenght 42 cm (<5th percentile) and head circumpherence 29.6 cm (<5th percentile), APGAR score 8 and 9 at the ﬁrst and ﬁfth minutes respectively. At 25 months-old age showed weight 5350 g (<5th centile), height 71.5 cm (<5th centile), head circumpherence (OFC) 42.6 cm (<5th centile), triangular facies, sparse hair, large forehead, up-slanting palpebral ﬁssures, hypertelorism, hypoplastic bulbous nose with rounded tip, short and protruding ears, thin lips, mild retrognatia , short ﬁngers and 
asymmetric legs, hypotonia.Laboratory test (thiroid, immunoglobulines, celiac disease) were normal. Also metabolic analysys (aminoacidemia and aminoaciduria, urine organic acids ) were not signiﬁcant.
Karyotype standard showed normal female set: 46, XX
Abdomen ultrasound, ECG, EEG and cerebral MRI were normal.The subtelomeric rearrangements by FISH analysys showed deletion 
of the band 4p16.3:ish del(4)(p16.3) (LSI WHS-). Another studies are in progress to deﬁne breakpoints and molecular size of deletion. Deletion band 4p16.3 cause Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) and Pitt Rogers Danks syndrome. 
Our case is further contribution to correlation genotype-phenotype.
P0363. Modeling of human minisatellite MS32 somatic instability 
in mouse embryonal teratocarcinoma cell line F9
N. A. Slominska1, I. Soutchkova1, E. L. Patkin1, U. Rannug2;  
1Institute of Experimental Medicine RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden.
In order to elucidate mechanisms of hypervariable human minisatellite MS32 somatic instability, we transfected F9 cells with construct pcDNA3.1/MS32 containing 45 repeated units (29b.p. per unit) of MS32. F9 cells were transfected with the help of ExGene500 and selected on resistant to geneticine. Transfection by pcDNA3.1/CAT was the positive control. There were obtained only 2 MS32- positive clones due to different transfection approaches (various time of transfection, DNA/ExGene 500 ratio; by linear and ring vectors). The efﬁciency of transfection was about tenfold less when compared with the positive control. However cells losing resistance to geneticine during selection contained MS32 as revealed by PCR. Thus inefﬁcient transfection could be a consequence of abnormal expression of geneticin resistance gene in transfected cells. It is necessary to note, that FISH has not revealed sequences homologous to MS32 in F9 cells. However, computer analysis has shown an occurrence of sites with different degree of homology to MS32 in mouse genome. Maximal homology was revealed in interstitial regions of chromosome 11 (67%, P 0,01) and telomeric regions of chromosome 15 (63%, P 0,01). The MS32 propensity to be unstable could lead to structural rearrangements during or after integration event. Therefore nonrandom integration of pcDNA3.1/MS32 into silent areas of mouse chromosomal DNA can not be excluded as a result of recombination of host and foreign DNA repetitive sequences in such areas. Further molecular and cytogenetic analysis of obtained clones will enable an understanding possible reasons and mechanisms of somatic instability of human DNA 
repetitive sequences.
P0364. Precise determination of chromosome material and 
breakpoints in the patient with partial trisomy of short arm of 
chromosome 8 by CGH
A. D. Cheremnykh, I. N. Lebedev, S. A. Nazarenko, L. P. Nazarenko, O. V. 
Napalkova, E. A. Sazhenova;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
We report a patient a 13-year-old girl with dysmorphic features: mental 
and growth retardation, muscular hypotonia, hirsutism, brachycephaly, antimongoloid slant of eyes, synophrys, long curly eyelashes, short nose with anteverted nostrils, prominent philtrum, thin upper lip, downturned angles of mouth, short neck, keeled chest, small hands and feet with short ﬁngers, clinodactyly of ﬁfth ﬁngers. Cytogenetic analysis with GTG of proband revealed gain of chromosome material on terminal part of 9p. Chromosomal in situ supression (CISS) with DNA probe from a speciﬁc microdissected chromosome 9 conﬁrmed a presence of additional chromosome material on the short arm of one homologue of chromosomes 9. Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) was applied for identiﬁcation of additional chromosome material and determination of breakpoint region. CGH-analysis of proband DNA revealed gain of chromosome material of the region 8pter→p21.3. Thus, the karyotype of patient was described as 46,XX,der(9)t(8;9)(p21.3;pter). This is a ﬁrst case of CGH application in clinical cytogenetics for determination of breakpoints region and additional chromosomal 
material in patient with partial trisomy in Russian Federation.Cytogenetics158
P0365. A cytogenetic analysis of chromosome complement of 
spermatozoa from patient 45,Xr(Y)/45,X injected into mouse 
oocytes
I. Fedorova1, T. Kuznetzova1, J. Van Der Elst2, M. Dhont2;  
1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion, 2Infertility Centre, Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University 
Hospital of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium.
Structural rearrangements of Y-chromosome are common in infertile 
men. Carriers of such anomaly have an increased risk of spontaneous abortion and newborns with genetic abnormalities. To assess frequency and type of chromosome aberrations in spermatozoa from patient 45,Xr(Y)/45,X with severe oligoastenoteratozoospermia heterologous ICSI fertilisation between mouse oocytes and human spermatozoa was applied. The spermatozoa from fresh or cryopreserved-thawed samples were used. Totaly 91 suitable metaphase plates of human sperm chromosomes were received. Ratio of X- to Y-bearing spermatozoa was not signiﬁcantly different from the expected 1:1 (χ
2 test, P>0.05). 
Frequency of spermatozoa with abnormal chromosome complements was higher in patient 45,Xr(Y)/45,X compared to 108 spermatozoa with normal head from men with normal sperm parameters - control group (68,25% and 23,15%, respectively) (φ-Fisher test, P>0.05). Compared to control group in spermatozoa of patient 45,Xr(Y)/45,X there was increased frequency of diploidy (4,71% vs. 0%), hyperploidy of gonosomes (11,64% vs. 1,85%), hypoploidy (48,24% vs. 12,04%) and frequency of structural aberrations (29,41% vs. 6,48%). There was no any interchromosomal effect and frequency of hyperploidy of autosomes did not differ from the same one of the control group (5,88% and 5,55% respectively). Our data suggest that cytogenetic analysis of spermatozoa from the carrier of structural reorganisation of chromosome can provide more information about proportion of normal 
and abnormal spermatozoa that will be useful for genetic counselling.
P0366. Autistic phenotype associated with a 15q11-q13 maternal 
triplication
S. Mougou-Zrelli1, D. Sanlaville1, S. Lyonnet1, M. Prieur1, C. Estrade1, M. Le 
Lorc'h1, D. Genevieve1, M. Waill1, C. Ozilou1, M. Mattei2, M. Vekemans1, T. Attié-
Bitach1, S. Romana1, C. Turleau1;  
1Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2INSERM U491, Marseille, 
France.
Here we report on a 4 years old boy with mild developmental delay, autistic behaviour and a chromosome rearrangement involving the 15q proximal region. A series of 8 BACs was used to characterise this rearrangement at the molecular level. A triplication was found. The triplicated segment was larger than the typical PWS/AS deleted region. The proximal breakpoint is located within BAC RP11-810K23, immediately proximal to BP1. The distal breakpoint is localised between BAC RP11-382B18 and RP11-758N13, located on each side from BP5. The middle segment was inverted compared to the distal and proximal segments. Molecular analyses showed that the rearrangement was of 
maternal origin.Maternally derived triplication of the imprinted chromosome 15q11-q13 region have been reported previously in association with autistic spectrum disorders, cognitive deﬁcits and seizures at least in ten patients. Three paternally derived triplications were also reported with a milder phenotype. Our observation conﬁrms that 15q proximal triplication are most often of maternal origin. This rearrangement shares with SMC(15) a breakpoint located more distally than PWS/AS deletion breakpoint. Presumably, a common mechanism is involved in all cases of 15q proximal triplication since the middle segment is 
inverted in all cases studied at the molecular level.
P0367. FISH studies with tiling path clones applied to two 
chromosome 7 rearrangements.
V. Maloney1, J. A. Crolla1,2, J. C. Barber1,2, T. Homfray3;  
1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 2Wessex 
Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 3Clinical Genetics, 
St Georges Hospital Med School, London, United Kingdom.
We report two patients with abnormal phenotypes in which conventional cytogenetics had shown de novo chromosome 7 rearrangements. 
FISH studies using tiling path clones http://www.ensembl.org/Homo_
sapiens/cytoveiw)were undertaken to further reﬁne the nature and structure of the abnormalities. The ﬁrst patient, a two month old female, was initially referred with dysmorphic features, short palpebral ﬁssures, overlapping ﬁngers, a history of poor feeding and possible Williams or Greig syndrome. Chromosome analysis showed an apparently balanced pericentric inversion involving bands 7p13 and 7q11.23. FISH revealed that the 7q11.23 breakpoint had split the BAC RP11-575M4, and may possibly have disrupted the gene 
AUTS2. The short arm breakpoint is 
between the BACs RP11-21H20 and RP-815D20 in 7p12.3. Further studies are required to determine whether the breakpoint involving 
AUTS2 or the short arm breakpoint accounts for this patient’s abnormal phenotype. The second patient, a seven year old male, presented with mild to moderate learning difﬁculties, arrested hydrocephalus, short stature and a small head. Conventional cytogenetics reported an insertion of 7q31->7q34 into 7p14 and also suggested that a small deletion had occurred at the 7q31 breakpoint. FISH studies conﬁrmed and reﬁned the size and position of the 7q31 deletion and revealed a second cryptic deletion ~1.5Mb distal to the revised breakpoint at 7q35. These deletions or the breakpoints therefore may account for this patient’s abnormal phenotype and studies are ongoing to determine 
the number and nature of the genes involved.
P0368. A familial translocation associated with complex partial 
epilepsy with a breakpoint within the Miller-Dieker syndrome 
deletion region on 17p13.3
S. Cingoz1,2, I. Bache1, C. B. van der Hagen3, C. Hansen1, B. Baklan4, Z. Tu -
mer1, N. Tommerup1;  
1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of 
Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, The Panum Institute, Universtiy of Copen -
hagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, 
Dokuz Eylul University Medical School, Izmir, Turkey, 3Department of Medical 
Genetics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4Department of Neurology, 
Dokuz Eylul University Medical School, Izmir, Turkey.
Miller-Dieker lissencephaly syndrome (MDS) is a microdeletion syndrome with facial dysmorphism, microcephaly, mental defect, seizures, spastic diplegia/spastic gait, decerebrate posturing and lissencephaly (smooth brain) with thickened cortex caused by a cortical migration defect. The 17p13.3 deletions associated with the MDS phenotype consistently include 8 known genes, from ABR at the telomeric end to SERPINF1 at the centromeric end. This region includes the LIS1 gene, point mutations or intragenic deletions of which are associated with isolated lissencephaly. Other anomalies of MDS appear to be the consequence of deletion of additional genes in this region. We have identiﬁed a mother and daughter with complex partial epilepsy, both of whom carries a balanced reciprocal translocation t(2;17)(q12.1;p13.3). By FISH mapping we localized the 2q breakpoint within the BAC clone RP11-98m17, a region without any known genes. In contrast, the 17p13.3 breakpoint mapped within the MDS region just distal to the 14-3-3-epsilon gene (YWHAE). Patients with deletions including CRK and YWHAE have more severe lissencephaly, suggesting that deletion of one or both of these genes may augment the lissencephaly phenotype (Cardoso et al. 2003). Our ﬁnding support that YWHAE or nearby genes may also be involved in the epilepsy in the present family, and thus, with the epilepsy frequently seen in 
MDS.
P0369. A chromosome 10 inversion, inv(10)(q11.22;q21.1), 
associated with mental retardation and autism
M. Entesarian1, B. Carlsson1, E. Stattin2, I. Golovleva3, N. Dahl1;  
1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 
2Department of Pediatrics, Umea University Hospital, Umea, Sweden, 3Depart -
ment of Clinical Genetics, Umea University Hospital, Umea, Sweden.
Neuropsychiatric disorders in childhood including mental retardation and autism may be caused by genetic factors. Different strategies can be undertaken for the identiﬁcation of these genetic factors. One approach is based on a detailed mapping of chromosomal rearrangements associated with speciﬁc phenotypes. Candidate genes may subsequently be identiﬁed from breakpoint regions. We have identiﬁed four unrelated individuals with a paracentric inversion on 10q by conventional high resolution karyotyping. Patient I has attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder. Patient II has a mild mental retardation, autistic features and a congenital heart defect. Patient III has speech impairments, mild mental retardation and enlarged hands Cytogenetics159
and feet. Patient IV has a mild mental retardation. Fluorescence in situ  
hybridization (FISH) with chromosome 10 derived BACs in patient I 
and II conﬁned the chromosome 10 inversion breakpoints to q11.22 and q21.1. The inverted segment is approximately 10 Mb. We suggest that the phenotype in these individuals is caused by the inversion. We hypothesize that the normal function for one or several genes in, or adjacent to, the inverted region is altered. Further experiments are in progress for the characterization of the breakpoints and, to identify 
candidate genes.
P0370. Submicroscopic 1p distal duplication, and monosomy for 
the short arm of chromosome 18 due to a paternal apparently 
reciprocal, balanced, translocation
L. Giunti , S. Guarducci, U. Ricci, E. Andreucci, S. Stagi, I. Sani, M. Levi, L. 
Carosi, J. Barp, G. Harmelin, E. Lapi, M. Giovannucci Uzielli;  
University of Florence, Dep of Paediatrics, Genetics, Children's Hospital 
A.Meyer, Florence, Italy.
We report the study of a patient who carries an unbalanced segregant 
from a paternal, reciprocal, balanced translocation involving the whole short arm of chromosome 18, and a submicroscopic region at 1p36.3 band . A ﬁve-month-old female was referred for a genetic evaluation, due to pre- and post-natal failure to thrive, global mild psychomotor 
delay and multiple dysmorphisms.Preliminary cytogenetic analysis showed, in the proband, an apparent 
"pure" whole 18p deletion.Analysis of the parental chromosomes showed the father to carry an apparently balanced t(1;18)(p36.3;18p11.2). FISH with several probes, and MLPA technique allowed to identify the reciprocal translocation, with submicroscopic distal 1p duplication, and the whole 18p deletion, in the proband. The phenotype/karyotype correlation is the result of the overlapping of both 1 and 8 chromosomes rearrangements. Chromosome 1p duplications are rare: in the literature, few cases were reported of isolated 1p duplication, most of which were proximal or interstitial duplications, while the distal 1p36.3 duplication is exceptional. This study demonstrates the utility of subtelomeric speciﬁc FISH probes and MLPA methods, for detecting cryptic subtelomeric rearrangements in subjects with unusual clinical phenotype, without rearrangements at the routine cytogenetic studies, or with a clinical spectrum non-ﬁtting with the identiﬁed chromosome abnormality.
P0371. Understanding infertility and missed abortion genetically: 
Experience on Indian population
N. N. Kadam , B. B. Ganguly;  
MGM Centre for Genetic Research and Diagnosis, Navi Mumbai, India.
Chromosomal analysis was conducted on 2000 couples having infertility, recurrent pregnancy loss, repeated stillbirth or neonatal expiry, as an ultimate option, since the reason was unknown after investigation of almost all relevant parameters. Classical abnormalities were detected by conventional banding techniques as the sole reason in 6% of the cases in their genome. Variant abnormalities were much higher, over 20%. The abnormalities, including balanced translocation, inversion, deletion, duplication, etc. were observed transmitted to next generation with multiple congenital defects leading to still birth or neonatal death. Chromosomal study in abortus gives some causal information about repeated failure of reproductive outcome. In many instances, abnormalities present in men are causing primary infertility. Moreover, transmission of such constitutional aberrations results into very severe clinical expression due to recombination and leads to early onset of malignancy. These aberrations have no cure. Therefore, a chromosome study would be much more cost-effective, not only for the 
parents but also for the whole family and future generations to come.
P0372. Three unbalanced offspring from translocation carrier 
family
G. Kalnberza, Z. Krumina, I. Grivina, R. Kamerade, I. Teilane;  
Latvian State Medical Genetics centre, Riga, Latvia.
We describe a familial reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 4p and 10q. Two family members (a father and one daughter) carried a balanced t(4;10)(p15.1; q 26.3) and three family members (two daughters and son) inherited a partial monosomy 10q 26.3 →qter and partial trisomy 4p 15.1 →pter and showed an unbalanced karyotype 
der(10) t (4;10)( p15.1; q26.3).The ﬁrst pregnancy in the family ended at 28 weeks of gestation with still-born child with malformations. Two sisters from the second and the third pregnancy are modarate mentale retarded with dismorphic features, speech delay, short stature. The sister from fourth pregnancy is phenotypical healthy. The boy from ﬁfth pregnancy is sever mentaly retarded without speech, short stature, dysmorphic features, 
cryptorchisms.
P0373. Mosaic karyotype 45,X/46,X,idic(Y)(qter→p11 ::p11→qter) 
found in an ambiguous genitalia and short stature carrier.
A. Lungeanu1, A. Arghir2, N. Dumitriu3, K. Miller4;  
1"Victor Babes" National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2"Victor Babes"National 
Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 3"M.S.Curie" Emergency Children Hospital, Bu -
charest, Romania, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover, Germany.
The carrier, a 11.6 years old child was referred for cytogenetic 
investigation because of her ambiguous genitalia (a small phallus with hypertrophy of labia majora), short stature for her age, and abnormal 
body proportion (short extremities, big muscles).At birth, she had normal weight and length, but obvious genital ambiguity. She suffered a clitoroplasty at the age of 3, and received 
Naposim at age of 7- 8 years.Karyotype was established in peripheral blood lymphocytes by GTG, and CBG-banding. There were found two cell lines : ﬁrst, with 45 chromosomes in 90% of cells, and the second one, with 46 chromosomes in a frequence of 10%. GTG-banded karyotypes revealed monosomy X in hypodiploid cells, and a isodic(Y)( qter→p11::p11→qter ) in pseudodiploid cells. The Y origin of isodicentric was conﬁrmed by CBG-banding and FISH using SRY probe.Both parents, revealed normal karyotypes in their peripheral blood. This strongly suggests that the errore occurred during gametogenesis before spermatid stage, or during the ﬁrst division after fertilization. Furthermore, the low percentage of cells carring the idic(Y) may be due to the fact that, both centromeres are functional. The breakpoint on both chromatids seems to be subtelomeric on p arm, because Y euchromatin including SRY was present and active, judging her 
ambiguous genitalia.The intraabdominal dysgenetic testis on the right part, and a ﬁbrous structure on the left one was removed surgically. She had a very small 
uterus.Monolayer tissue cultures were established from the surgically removed 
testis, and cytogenetycal investigations are ongoing.
P0374. Uncommon variants of Turner syndrome detected before 
puberty
A. Stana1,2, M. Bari1, A. Arghir3, A. Lungeanu3;  
1"Filantropia" Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 2"Titu Maiorescu" Universi -
ty, Bucharest, Romania, 3"Victor Babes" National Institute, Bucharest, Romania.
Two ten years old girls was referred for cytogenetic examination 
because of their featuresof Turner syndrome. One of them had also an additional autistic 
disorder with moderate
mental retardation.Chromosome studies on peripheral blood lymphocyte cultures, by conventional banding techniques, showed that they differ of classical Turner syndrome.In the ﬁrst case, after G- and C- banding, we ﬁnd a mosaic karyotype 45,X/46,XY withchromosome Y detected in 50% of cells. C-staining method revealed 
a large C- band sizeon two third of Yq arm, without ectopic C- heterochromatin in any autosomes. It is known that, only a proportion of subjects mosaic for Y material exhibit features of Turner syndrome, even in the presence of SRY gene. In the near future, our case must be investigated both for the presence of SRY gene, and for the evolution of her external 
genitalia.The second case exhibit a 45,iXq karyotype. A structural abnormality such iso Xq is quite common, but the additional autistic disorder is unusual in Turner girls. However, different chromosomal disorders account for less than 5% of all cases of autism, which supports the hypothesis that the autistic disorder may develop as a consequence of a chromosomal abnormality.Cytogenetics160
P0375. Two patients of terminal 6q25 deletion
M. Pöyhönen1, P. Isohanni2, C. Tengström3, R. Salonen1;  
1Dept of Medical Genetics, Väestöliitto, Family Federation of Finland, Helsinki, 
Finland, 2Dept of Pediatric Neurology, Hospital for Children and Adolescents, 
Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Rinnekoti Foundation, Espoo, 
Finland.
Terminal deletions at 6q25 are rare and about 30 cases have been 
reported. We report two additional patients with 6q25-qter deletions.Patient 1
 was admitted to hospital because of status epilepticus at 
the age of 4 months. Brain MRI revealed hydrocephalus due to cerebral aqueductal stenosis. At 3 years of age he was moderately mentally retarded. His facial features were distinct with epicanthic folds, strabismus, nose with broad tip, long philtrum, thin upper lip, high and narrow palate, down-turned corners of the mouth, and large ears. Additional anomalies included microcephaly, fetal ﬁnger pads, hypermobility of the ankle joints, hypotonia, epilepsy and abnormal EEG. The chromosomes (400 bands) detected a terminal deletion of 
chromosome 6 at q25. Parental karyotypes were normal.Patient 2
 was ﬂoppy as a newborn and cranial ultrasound revealed large 
lateral ventricles. At the age of 18 months she needed hospitalisation because of seizures. At the age of 20 years she was moderately mentally retarded and the parents reported personality problems such as aggressiveness, stubborn temperament and tendency to withdraw. The face appeared long and slightly asymmetric. She also had epicanthus, strabismus, abnormal retinal pigmentation, nose with broad tip, down-turned corners of the mouth, high and narrow palate, and large ears. Additional anomalies included microcephaly, pectus excavatum, a deep sacral dimple, tapering ﬁngers, bilateral hallux valgus, epilepsy and abnormal EEG. Chromosome studies (>550 bands) and FISH techniques detected terminal 6q25.3-qter deletion. 
Parental karyotypes were normal.This report supports the existence of a terminal 6q deletion 
syndrome.
P0376. Rare proximal interstitial deletion of chromosome 4q in a 
girl with severe mental and growth retardation.
R. Genesio, F. Fabbrini, P. Tedeschi, M. Ferrara, D. Melis, G. Sebastio, A. 
Conti, L. Nitsch ;  
University Federico II, Napoli, Italy.
Proximal interstitial deletions in the long arm of chromosome 4 have been reported in about 20 patients. Even though deletions show variable extensions spanning from 4q12 to 4q27, they all share the region q21-q22 causing similar phenotypes which include: short stature, cranio-facial abnormalities, limb, skeletal and cardiac anomalies, seizures, hypotonia, developmental delay and mental retardation. Here, we report a new case of a girl carrying a small 4q deletion including the 4q21 band. The abnormal chromosome 4 was characterised by G-banding and molecular cytogenetic methods including comparative genomic hybridisation and two-colour ﬂuorescent in situ hybridisation with band-speciﬁc probes. The girl presented with short stature, severe mental retardation, normal head circumference, brachydactyly, frontal bossing, deep-set eyes, anteverted nostrils, thin upper lip, corpus callosum hypoplasia, anomalies of the heart inter-ventricular septum and fasting hypoglycaemia. Even though her deletion was one of the smallest described so far, she shared more than 15 typical signs of the 4q21-q22 deletion syndrome with other patients carrying larger deletions. It is conceivable that genes in the 4q21 band be responsible 
for most of the features of the 4q21-q22 deletion syndrome.
P0377. X;Y translocation associated with dyschondrosteosis
E. Kocarek1, A. Baxova2, J. Zeman2, P. Kajanova2, M. Krkavcova2, M. Panek1, 
J. Hrabakova1, P. Goetz1;  
1Charles University 2nd Medical School, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Charles 
University 1st Medical School, Prague, Czech Republic.
We report a case of a 24-years old female with dyschondrosteosis. The basic cytogenetic examination (G-banding) found an abnormal karyotype with derivative chromosome X [46, X der(X)] resulting from X;Y translocation. The C-banding of the abnormal chromosome indicated presence of Yq heterochromatine region on the terminal part. Translocation breakpoints were located on p-arms of both 
chromosomes.FISH analysis was carried out with locus speciﬁc (Kallman, SRY and XY-subtelomeric loci), X-centromeric and Y-heterochromatine probes. It conﬁrmed the cytogenetic result and determined possible breakpoints on chromosomes Xp22 and Yp11. Xp- and Yp-subtelomeric (DXYS129) and SRY regions were not identiﬁed on the derivative chromosome. Our results indicate that the translocation is associated with the deletion of XpYp-pseudoautosomal and SRY regions. This loss of chromosomal segments could explain the phenotype of the patient. We suppose that dyschondrosteosis probably resulted from haploinsufﬁciency of SHOX homeobox gene on the XY pseudoautosomal region. These data conﬁrm conclusions of previous reports.Our molecular cytogenetic studies were supported by research grant from the Internal Grant Agency, Ministry of Health, Czech Republic - IGA NE 6912-4.
P0378. Combined cytogenetic and molecular evaluation of 
infertile men
T. M. Sorokina , E. M. Grishina, L. V. Shileiko, V. B. Chernykh, L. F. Kurilo;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Genetic factors are one of common cause male infertility. To evaluate the frequencies of genetic abnormalities in different sperm diagnoses we examined cohort of 605 Russian infertile men. Sperm analysis that performed according WHO recommendations (1999) revealed: azoospermia in 36%, oligoasthenoteratozoospermia (OAT) in 35%, asthenozoospermia in 14%, teratozoospermia in 7%, normozoospermia in 8% patients. Cytogenetic analysis was carried out on blood lymphocyte metaphases by standard method with G-staining. Detection of Y-chromosome microdeletions was performed according to Laboratory guideline Simoni et al. (1999). Genetic abnormalities were found in 44 (20%) azoospermic men: in 26 (59%) - Kleinfelter syndrome, in 4 (9%) - structure chromosome aberrations, in 5 (11%) - XX-males (de la Chapelle syndrome), in 9 (21%) - AZF deletions. In patients with OAT genetic abnormalities were revealed in 8% cases (17 men). At this structure chromosome aberrations (8 cases) are most common (47%). Kleinfelter syndrome was mentioned in 4 men (24%), one XX-male (6%), Y-microdeletions were found in four men (23%). In asthenozoospemic men genetic abnormalities disclosed in 5 cases (6%): structure chromosome aberrations - 4 (11%), one patient with karyotype 47,XYY. Of 40 teratozoospermic men in 2 (5%) cases were revealed structure chromosome aberrations. Between normozoospermic patients one men (0.5%) had balanced chromosome translocation 46,XY,t(Y;14)(q12;p12).
P0379. Satellite association and Ag-NOR staining in 
lymphocytes from patients with Fanconi Anemia
I. Malheiro , B. Porto;  
Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar (ICBAS), Porto, Portugal.
Satellite associations (SA) and silver stained nucleolus organizing 
regions (Ag+NORs) of acrocentric chromosomes in metaphases obtained from lymphocytes of patients with Fanconi Anemia (FA) were studied. Peripheral blood samples from seven patients with FA, six patients with anemia other than FA (non FA) and six normal healthy individuals (controls) were used in this study. Phytohemagglutinin (PHA) stimulated peripheral blood cultures were performed, and satellite associations and Ag-NOR staining were determined at day 3 of culture. Our results showed that the frequency of cells with satellite associations, and the number of acrocentric chromosomes involved in association per cell were signiﬁcantly decreased in patients with FA compared with controls and non FA. Moreover, a signiﬁcant lower percentage of Ag-NOR positive acrocentric chromosomes was seen in FA patients. No signiﬁcant differences were observed between non FA and controls, both in the frequency of cells with satellite associations and the number of acrocentric chromosomes involved in association per cell. This results may suggest that FA patients have a signiﬁcant decrease in nucleolar organizer activity and that this cytogenetic pattern distinguishes FA patients from patients with other types of anemia, which may be considered an additional feature to be used in the cytogenetic diagnosis of FA patients.Cytogenetics161
P0380. Molecular characterization of an inversion duplication of 
the long arm of chromosome 4
M. de Blois1, A. Goldenberg2, I. Desguerre3, J. Chassevent4, D. Sanlaville1, M. 
Vekemans1, S. Romana1, M. Le Lorc'h1;  
1Cytogenetics laboratory, Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2De-
partment of medical genetics, Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 
3Department of neuro pediatrics ,Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, 
France, 4Pediatrics department, Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal de Poissy , 
Poissy, France.
Here we report on a 7 years old boy, ﬁrst child of healthy non 
consanguineous parents, with psychomotor developmental delay, dysmorphic features and neurobehavioral problems. Facial dysmorphism is characterized by a long face, macrocephaly, a broad nasal bridge, narrow palpebral ﬁssures, a very little mouth and little squared ears. The hands are short. Behaviour is characterized by an extreme aggressiveness. Clinical follw up showed sinusal bradycardy and persistence of behavioural problems. Cytogenetic analysis showed an abnormal long chromosome 4q. Parental caryotypes were normal. To characterize this de novo chromosome rearrangement at the molecular level, FISH studies were performed. The subtelomeric probeRP11-173M11 located on 4q35.2 was deleted whereas probe RP11-294M24 and RP11-90E13, located respectively on 4q34 and 4q33 showed an inverted duplication of this region. A series of 15 BACs were used to characterize the size of the terminal deletion (9.2 Mb, from the BAC clone RP11-783P19 located on 4q34.3 to 4qter) and the extent of the inverted duplicated segment (11Mb, from the BAC clones RP11-243F3 located on 4q33 to RP11-783P19 located on 4q34.3). the mechanism of this rearrangement and the behavioural 
disorders are discussed
P0381. Peculiarities of pericentromeric heterochromatin 
replication pattern of chromosomes 1, 9, 16 in embryonic and 
extraembryonic tissues of human fetuses
A. V. Vorobyeva1, A. A. Pendina2, T. V. Kuznetzova2, V. S. Baranov2;  
1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott's 
Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion.
The investigation of DNA replication is an awarding approach for analysis of chromosome functional organization. Replication time (S) is strongly correlated with chromatin transcriptional activity. Therefore the analysis of replication pattern of heterochromatin regions in metaphase chromosomes from embryonic and extraembryonic tissues at different stages of embryonic development allows indirect estimation of heterochromatin role in differentiation of embryonic cells and chorionic villi. The technique of immunoﬂuorescent detection of BrdU with monoclonal anti-BrdU antibody was applied for analysis of replication pattern in metaphase chromosomes of chorionic villi cells as well as of tissues fragments from 8 human embryos at 5 and 13 weeks of gestationt. The number of G-bands, replicating simultaneously with heterochromatin regions of 1q12, 9q12 and 16q11.2 in cytotrophoblast cells gradually decrease in all samples from 5 to13 week. A high level of asynchronous replication (22% - 55%) of homologues regions (1q12, 9q12, 16q11.2) in both embryonic and extraembryonic tissues was revealed. Time changes in the replication pattern of relevant heterochromatin regions most probably reﬂect some unknown peculiarities of their functional activities in embryonic and extraembryonic tissues at different stages of embryonic development.
P0382. Gene regulation in coronary atherosclerotic plaques 
from patients with stable angina pectoris and acute coronary 
syndromes via nuclear remodeling
M. L. Rossi1, N. Marziliano2, P. Merlini3, P. Presbitero1, E. Arbustini2, D. Ardis -
sino4;  
1Istituto Clinico Humanitas, Rozzano, Milan, Italy, 2IRCCS Policlinico San Mat -
teo, Pavia, Italy, 3Ospedale Niguarda, Milan, Italy, 4Ospedale Maggiore, Parma, 
Italy.
Introduction . Thrombus formation over a ruptured atherosclerotic 
plaque in a coronary artery is the key event leading to myocardial infarction and unstable angina. Tissue factor (F3) has been found more abundant in coronary atherosclerotic plaques from patients with ACS with respect to those experiencing SA thus suggesting that its content may determine different thrombotic response to plaque rupture in human coronary arteries. We aimed evaluating whether there is a phenotypic commitment of tissue factor expressing cells within the atheroma and whether a nuclear involvement of chromosome domains 
occurs.Material and Methods. Different cell types were grown out from explanted ACS and SA plaques. Total mRNA was extracted and Real Time PCR was performed to assess the expression pattern of Tissue Factor (Chromosome 1p22-p21) and its inhibitor WISP3 (Chromosome 6q22-q23). In situ RT-PCR followed by FISH analysis 
with chromosome painting were performed on ﬁxed cells to asses the relationship between the F3 expression and chromosomal positioning 
within the nucleus.
Results. We found that vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) were the major source of intra-atheroma F3. Moreover, tissue factor from ACS VSMCs was 68 times more expressed than in SA plaques (p<0.01). FISH analysis revealed two distinct mutually exclusive arm domains for both Chromosome 1 and 6 being the two clustered together in ACS and apart in the SA plaques. The expression of F3 was enhanced when the two chromosomes were closer to the nuclear periphery. Thus we demonstrated a cell-speciﬁc orchestration of gene activity in SA and ACS via nuclear remodelling.
P0383. Balanced translocation breakpoint mapping with BAC-
FISH in patients with normal phenotypes.
J. Baptista1, N. P. Carter2, K. Porter2, E. Prigmore2, R. Curley2, P. A. Jacobs1, J. 
A. Crolla1;  
1Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 2The Well -
come Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Imbalances or disruptions of genes at chromosome breakpoints have been found in recent studies to be the underlying cause of the association in some patients between a clinically abnormal phenotype and an apparently balanced de novo reciprocal translocation (Gribble 
et al J Med Genet 42:8-16 2005). Our hypothesis that translocation breakpoints in normal individuals would neither disrupt genes nor have imbalances was tested by analysing the breakpoints in 13 phenotypically normal individuals incidentally ascertained with familial balanced reciprocal translocations. The breakpoints were reﬁned by ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using tiling path BACs to identify breakpoint-spanning clones. Array CGH (1 Mb) was also performed to identify imbalances not directly involved in the breakpoints. No breakpoint associated imbalances were identiﬁed in any of the 13 cases, but in the majority, Ensembl mapping data suggested that the breakpoints might disrupt a gene at one or both breakpoints. In two cases, breakpoints which clearly disrupt pathogenic genes were identiﬁed, i.e. the genes were physically larger than the BACs which were split by the breakpoints. By array CGH, one of the patients had a de novo deletion in a chromosome not involved in 
the structural rearrangement. Further detailed FISH studies showed one translocation to be non-reciprocal. This study conﬁrms that patients with a normal phenotype and apparently balanced reciprocal translocations do not have FISH detectable breakpoint-associated imbalances, but may have genes disrupted and possibly inactivated 
by a breakpoint(s).
P0384. De novo rearrangements in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome: 
characterization, parental origin and parental 4p16.3 inversion 
polimorphism.
M. Murdolo1, I. Mancuso1, O. Zuffardi2, R. Lecce1, G. Marangi1, D. Orteschi1, G. 
Neri1, M. Zollino1;  
1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy , 
2Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Università degli Studi di Pavia, Pavia, 
Italy.
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a contiguous gene syndrome caused by partial 4p deletion, with genomic rearrangements 
representing a de novo event in most cases.
We analysed a total of 59 WHS patients. Genetic analyses included: a) conventional and molecular cytogenetics (4p-speciﬁc probes and all telomeres; c) microsatellite segragation analysis; d) multiple colour FISH for the 4p16.3 inverted polymorphism in parents. We observed that: a) the basic genomic rearrangements were de novo events in 54 
out of 59 patients (91.5%); b) they were isolated deletions in 43/54 patients (80%); unbalanced translocations in 7 (13%), consisting of Cytogenetics162
t(4p;8p) (5 cases), t(4p;11p) (one case), t(4p;7p) (one case); dup/del in 
3 (5.5%); double intrachomosomal rearrangement in one (1.5%).
A total of 27 families were simultaneously tested for type of rearrangement, parental origin and parental 4p16.3 inversion polymorphism. We found that:1) Rearrangements were paternal in origin in 22 out of 27 cases (80%). Nearly the totality of them were isolated deletions (21/22), with the only exception of a dup/del rearrangement. The 4p16.3 inversion 
polymorphism was absent in both parents in each case.2) Rearrangements were maternal in origin in the remaining 5 cases (20%). They all were unbalanced translocations: t(4p;8p) (4 cases) 
and t(4p;7p) (one case).A maternal 4p16.3 inverted polymorphism was detected in 3 out of 4 WHS associated t(4p;8p) translocations, it was absent in one case of 
t(4p;8p) and in the case of t(4p;7p).
Relevant considerations are discussed.
P0385. Sperm chromosomal aneuploidies in 421 severely 
oligozoospermic men with and without constitutional genetic 
alterations who are candidates for intracytoplasmic sperm 
injection
C. Foresta, M. Ferigo, M. Menegazzo, D. Fortini, A. Ferlin;  
Department of Histology, Microbiology, and Medical Biotechnologies, Padova, 
Italy.
Concerns have been raised regarding the potential of intracytoplasmic 
sperm injection (ICSI) to facilitate the transmission of genetic diseases. Sperm of severely infertile men might carry genetic alterations either because a constitutional abnormality is present or because only sperm are altered as a result of mitotic or meiotic errors due to impaired spermatogenesis. We studied 421 severely oligozoospermic men (sperm count below 5 mil/mL) for sperm sex chromosome aneuploidies by means of FISH. They included: 7 patients with complete (47,XXY) and 3 with mosaic (47,XXY/46,XY) Klinefelter’s syndrome, 4 with reciprocal or Robertsonian translocations, 11 with Yq microdeletions, and 9 with CFTR mutations. Patients with complete Klinefelter’s syndrome had a signiﬁcantly lower percentage of normal Y-bearing sperm and an higher percentage of XX- and XY-disomies (6.1
+1.0% and 13.3 +2.2% 
respectively, p<0.001). Patients with Y chromosome microdeletions had a signiﬁcantly lower percentage of normal Y-bearing spermatozoa, and an increase in nullisomic sperm and XY-disomy (10.4
+1.5% and 
4.1+1.2%, respectively, p<0.001). Subjects with CFTR gene mutations 
showed no alterations, conﬁrming that spermatogenesis proceeds regularly in these patients. No signiﬁcant difference was found in men with mosaic Klinefelter’s syndrome or translocations due to the low number of subjects. The analysis in idiopathic patients revealed an increased percentage of genetically abnormal sperm with a signiﬁcant increase in XX-, YY-, and XY-disomies (0.6
+0.8%, 0.6 +0.8%, and 
1.4+1.8, respectively, p<0.001). Our ﬁndings may explain the higher 
prevalence of congenital anomalies in children conceived by ICSI and 
in particular in children conceived to oligozoospermic men.
P0386. Localization of chromosomes 13, 16, 18, 21, 22, X and Y 
in nuclei of human preimplantation embryos
J. Diblík1, M. Macek Sr.1, C. Magli2, R. Krejčí3, L. Gianaroli2;  
1Center of Reproductive Genetics, Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 
Charles University - 2nd School of Medicine, University Hospital Motol, Prague, 
Czech Republic, 2S.I.S.Me.R., Bologna, Italy, 3Department of Genetics and 
Microbiology, Charles University – Faculty of Science, Prague, Czech Republic.
The aim of the study was to ﬁnd a possible correlation between chromosomal constitution of blastomeres from preimplantation embryos and nuclear localization of chromosomes with regard to the known peripheral localization of chromosome 18 and inactive X in female somatic cells. Screening for aneuploidy of chromosomes 13, 16, 18, 21, 22, X and Y was performed in 98 blastomeres from human embryos in 22 IVF cycles. Vysis Multivision PB and CEP X + CEP Y Alpha probes were used. Relative distances from the center and the edge of nucleus of 1173 FISH signals were exactly measured in digitized microscope images. We compared localization of signals of all analyzed chromosomes from euploid and aneuploid (all types of aneuploidy of studied chromosomes) blastomeres by homogeneity tests in contingence tables. The actual signal localizations were compared with a theoretical model describing a random distribution of signals in the 3-dimensional nucleus by chi-square goodness-of-ﬁt test. Localization of chromosome 18 in all (euploid + aneuploid) cells was signiﬁcantly (P=0,001) different from the theoretical model with shift to the periphery. A signiﬁcant (P=0,007) shift to periphery was also found for chromosome 18 in aneuploid compared to euploid blastomeres. Such shift was not found for other chromosomes including 18 in euploid and X in XX blastomeres. These ﬁndings indicate that aneuploidy might alter gene activity of other chromosomes by the shift to nuclear periphery. We have not found X inactivation accompanied 
by peripheral localization of X chromosome in XX blastomeres.Supported by grants: Copernicus-2 ICA-2-CT-2000-100012, IGA-
MZCR NR/7962-3
P0387. Quantitative ﬂuorescence PCR examination of parental 
and meiotic origin of trisomy 21 in Ukraine, Russia and Central 
Europe
M. Zámečníková1, M. Broučková1, M. Libik1, A. Krebsová2, K. Sperling2, S. 
Vorsanova3, S. Kutsev4, T. Zerova5, S. Arbuzova6, M. Petersen7, M. Macek Sr.1;  
1Center of Reproductive Genetics, Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 
Charles University - 2nd School of Medicine, University Hospital Motol, Prague, 
Czech Republic, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Charité, Universitaetsmedizin, 
Berlin, Germany, 3Molecular Cytogenetic Laboratory, Institute of Pediatrics and 
Children Surgery, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Centre of 
Clinical Morphology and Genetics, Rostov State Medical University , Ministry of 
Health, Rostov, Russian Federation, 5Genetic Department of Institute of Medi -
cal Improvement, Kiev, Ukraine, 6Interregional Medico-Genetics Centre, Cen -
tral Hospital Clinic No.1, Donetsk, Ukraine, 7Institute of Child Health, Athens, 
Greece.
We have studied parental and meiotic origin of free trisomy 21 in 102 nuclear families from different regions of Ukraine, Russia and Central Europe using quantitative ﬂuorescence PCR on ABI Prism 310 by 8 STR markers. The aim of the study was to ﬁnd out possible impact of different lifestyle, load of exogenous noxious agents including radiation from Chernobyl accident. The proportion of maternal non-disjunction was 77.3% in Germany, 93.8% in Ukraine and 92.3% in Russia, whereas the paternal origin was disclosed in 13.6%, 6.2% and 7.7% respectively. In different regions of Eastern Europe the prevalence of meiosis I errors was 84.4% of maternal origin, 3.1% of paternal in Ukraine and 77.1% of maternal origin, 2.9% of paternal origin in Russia. The disorders in meiosis II occurred in 9.4% or 14.3% of maternal and 3.1% or 5.7 of paternal non-disjunction in Ukraine and Russia respectively.Our ﬁndings are consistent with published data and the differences are not statistically signiﬁcant as followed from homogeneity test in 
contingence tables and chi-quadrate test.If these observations are conﬁrmed by further analyses of 150 Russian and Ukraine nuclear families with trisomy 21, it would suggest, that different life style, noxious exogenous factors load and Chernobyl radiation exposure have no impact on proportions of parental and meiotic origin of trisomy 21. It might be due to the negative selection of 
trisomic embryos in the early phase of their embryonal development.Supported by Copernicus 2 ICA 2 CT 2000 100012 and IGA MZ CR 
NR/7962-3 grants.
P0388. Variant translocations and the forms of BCR/abl 
rearrangement in chronic myeloid leukemia
V. A. Djordjevic1, J. Jovanovic1, B. Todoric2, Z. Magic2, K. Krtolica3, D. Bos -
kovic1;  
1Clinical center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, 2Military Medical 
Academy, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, 3''Vinča'', Institute of Nuclear Sci -
ences, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro.
The Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome arises from a reciprocal translocation, with 
c-abl oncogene from 9q34 fused to the breakpoint 
cluster region ( BCR) locus on chromosome 22q11. In 5-10% of patients 
with CML, Ph chromosome originates from other rearragements differentnfrom classical t(9;22)(q34;q11). A simple Ph-producing translocation involves chromosome 22 and other chromosomes than 9, while a complex variant translocation involves three or more chromosomes. In almost all cases with ''variant'' Ph chromosome, the 
BCR/abl rearrangement can be detected at the molecular level or by 
in situ  hybridization.
In this study, variant translocation in 19 patients with newly diagnosed Cytogenetics163
CML, was presented. Cytogeneric analysis was performed on bone 
marrow cells after direct preparation, according to modiﬁed method of HG-banding. Two (2/19) patients had simple variant Ph-producing translocations, and other (17/19) patients had complex variant 
translocations.Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for detection of the expresion of 
BCR/abl  sequence in eight CML patients 
was performed. BCR/abl  rearrangement was found to be expressed 
in b3a2 form in six (6/8) patients, but in b2a2 form in one (1/8) patient. Using RT-PCR analysis in one (1/8) CML patient with simple variant translocation, we found that 
BCR/abl  rearrangement was not 
expressed.Results of cytogenetic and molecular investigations in cases of ''variant'' Ph chromosome CML reviewed in this study cleary indicate that variant translocations of chromosomes 9 and 22 are great research challenge, especially in case of rearrangement forms of 
BCR/abl hibrid 
gen that can be different from each other and different from speciﬁc 
rearragements (b2a2, b3a2) for CML.
P0389. Cytogenetic Abnormalities in the Lymphocytes of Iranian 
Breast Cancer Patients
r. mirfakhraie1, g. javadi1, p. mehdipour2;  
1Azad University of Tehran, Science & Research Campus, Tehran, Islamic Re -
public of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran.
Breast cancer is the most common malignancy among women. Several factors are involved in initiation and development of breast carcinoma, but epidemiologic evidence point to two areas: Environment and Genetics. Cytogenetic studies in breast have revealed chromosomal alterations in tumor cells. Most breast tumor cytogenetics studies thus far reveal complex chromosomal alterations, and hence it has not been possible yet to associate breast cancer with speciﬁc chromosome aberrations, although some speciﬁc anomalies are beginning to emerge. Blood cultures from breast cancer patients also have revealed chromosomal changes which are similar to those of tumor cells. Such similarities may be very interesting, since it indicates that factors causing alterations in tumor cells may also operate in human lymphocytes. In the present study we have observed such 
similarities.
P0390. Cytogenetic Analysis of Reproduction Problems
O. Pidgorna , T. Pokanevych, O. Timchenko;  
Institute of Hygiene and Medical Ecology, Kiev, Ukraine.
We investigated 501 married couples with reproductive disorders of different origins. Cytogenetic diagnostics was performed on preparations of metaphase and prometaphase chromosomes (G and C banding). We analyzed 24 thousand of metaphase plates and 2 
thousand of prometaphase plates.These results were systemized according to the etiology of reproductive loses. Abnormalities and chromosome variants occur in all groups of men and women with primary infertility. It was detected that women with primary infertility have more high frequency of chromosome abnormalities then women with secondary infertility and spontaneous abortions of different etiology (7,2±2,5 % against 2,2±0,9 %, p<0,05). It was found that 23,8 % of men has variants of chromosome in group of primary infertility, and only 7,1 % - women (p<0,001). Men with the primary infertility have more higher inversion-frequency of heterochromatic region of chromosome 9 then women of the same group (8,7 % against 1,6 %, p<0,05). Chromosome variants of kariotype were found among women with spontaneous miscarriages and primary infertility in anamnesis and equal 20,0±4,0 %, 7,1±2,3 % correspondingly (p<0,05). Among men and women with secondary infertility and spontaneous miscarriages of different genesis 29,4 % of kariotype disorders were met within men and 19,7 % - women.The 
results have been used for choosing infertility treatment tactics.
P0391. Accuracy of array-based CGH in genome-wide detection 
of submicroscopic chromosome aberrations: comparison with 
conventional CGH
E. Klopocki1, H. Tönnies2, F. Erdogan3, F. Trotier1, H. Neitzel2, K. Sperling2, H. 
Ropers3, S. Mundlos1, R. Ullmann3;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Charite Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Department of Human Genetics, Charite Universitaetsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Max Planck Institute of Molecular Genetics, Berlin, 
Germany.
Genome imbalances are a major cause of developmental delay and congenital anomalies. Cytogenetic techniques for the study of genomic diseases include karyotyping and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH). Novel high resolution whole-genome technologies such as array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) have recently been developed. Array-CGH signiﬁcantly improves the detection rate of submicroscopic chromosomal abnormalities. Using a tiling resolution array consisting of 14.000 BAC clones covering the entire human genome, we studied 15 patients with chromosomal abnormalities including unbalanced translocations, deletions and duplications. All patients have previously been analysed by other cytogenetic techniques like conventional CGH and/or FISH. Overall, good concordance was shown between array-based CGH and conventional CGH. The regions of copy number change were correctly identiﬁed by array-CGH in a one-step experiment. The higher resolution of array-CGH allows us to more precisely deﬁne the size of the deletion or duplication. In addition tiling resolution arrays enable us to assign breakpoints within single BAC clones. This method is therefore becoming a powerful tool for the rapid and accurate detection of genetic disorders associated with genomic copy number abnormalities. Array-CGH in combination with conventional cytogenetics will signiﬁcantly 
improve clinical genetic diagnosis.
P0392. Detection of submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances 
in patients with learning disability and dysmorphic features by 
array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH)
C. J. Shaw-Smith1, L. Rickman1, S. Gribble2, E. Prigmore2, S. Cumming3, L. 
Willatt3, K. Porter2, R. Curley2, C. Dunn3, H. V. Firth1, L. Wilson4, M. Bobrow1, N. 
P. Carter2;  
1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust 
Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Department of Cytogenetics, 
Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Great Ormond Street 
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
The underlying causes of learning disability and dysmorphic features in many patients remain unidentiﬁed despite extensive investigation. Routine karyotype analysis is not sensitive enough to detect subtle chromosome rearrangements (less than 5 Mb). We previously investigated the presence of subtle DNA copy number changes in patients with learning disability and dysmorphism by array-CGH, employing a DNA microarray constructed from large insert clones spaced at approximately 1 Mb intervals across the genome (Shaw-Smith et al, J Med Genet, (2004) 41:241-8). We have now studied a total of 100 patients and identiﬁed 23 copy number changes in 22 patients (one patient had two large imbalances on different autosomes). All of these imbalances have occurred in distinct genomic regions; none of them was detected by routine karyotype analysis. Nine of the copy number changes were de novo occurrences, whereas ﬁve were shown to have been inherited from phenotypically normal parents. Studies are in progress to determine the origin of the remaining nine imbalances. Five of the imbalances involved a single clone from the 1 Mb array; all of the remainder involved two or more consecutive clones. One patient with the phenotype of atrioventricular septal defect and behavioural difﬁculties was found to have a de novo deletion at 8p23.1. This deletion narrows the critical region for behavioural difﬁculties at chromosome 8p23.1. On the basis of these results, we anticipate that array-CGH will become a routine method of genome-wide screening for unbalanced rearrangements in patients with learning disability .
P0393. Evolution of the cytogenetic techniques: follow up of a 
case through out 20 years
M. Rodriguez de Alba1, R. Sanz2, A. Bustamante-Aragonés1, D. Diego-Alva -
rez1, F. Infantes1, I. Lorda-Sanchez1, C. Ayuso1, C. Ramos1;  
1Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Complejo Hospitalario Donostia, San 
Sebastian, Spain.
In 1984 a couple was refered to our unit due to recurrent miscarriages. A cytogenetic study was performed and the karyotypes obtained were 46,XY and 46 XX, t(14;21)+mar. The female parents were then studied and it was found out that both the translocation and the marker chromosome were inherited from the father and previously Cytogenetics164
from the grandparent . Since the FISH technique was not available it 
was suposed that the marker chromosome was derivative from the 
robertsonian translocation.
In 1985 the woman got pregnant and underwent a prenatal diagnosis (PD) resulting in a carrier female of both the translocation and the marker chromosome. The follow up after birth revealed a normal development. Afterwards she had two consecutive misgarriages and in 1987 she underwent a new PD where the karyotype obtained was 47, XX, + mar. At birth it was noticed vesicoureteral reﬂux and mild microcephaly, so a new cytogenetic study was performed revealing a 47,XX,+mar/48,XX,+mar,+mar2 karyotype.At eleven years old learning diﬁculties were observed, with no major developmental delay. The FISH analysis showed that the origing of the 
family marker was chromosome 15.The result from FISH analysis of the secondary marker was D1Z7/D5Z2/D19Z3+ and D1Z5-. After a review of the literature we have decided to perform the analysis of chromosomes 5 and 19 with the QF-PCR in other to ascertain the parental origin of this chromosomes and dicard a parental disomy. This study is actually being performed.
P0394. Molecular cytogenetic characterisation of terminal 
chromosome 2q37 deletion in patients recruited through the 
A.C.L.F. telomere network.
M. Doco-Fenzy1, N. Leporrier2, L. Taine3, M. Holder4, A. Schneider1, N. Bed -
nareck1, P. Sabouraud1, M. Mozelle1, M. Khoury5, B. Delobel6, J. Motte1, M. 
Goossens7, D. Lacombe3, S. Briault8, D. Gaillard1;  
1CHU , UFR medecine, Reims, France, 2CHU, Caen, France, 3CHU, Bor -
deaux, France, 4CHU, Lille, France, 5CHG, Laon, France, 6Hopital St Antoine, 
Lille, France, 7Hopital Henri-Mondor AP-HP, Créteil, France, 8INSERM, Tours, 
France.
Studies have ascertained associations between autism or Albright 
hereditary osteodystrophy-like phenotype and terminal 2q deletion with the breakpoint within 2q37.3. Furthermore subtelomeric 2q37.3 deletions are often detected with FISH subtelomeric screening and most of those 2qtel deletions are considered polymorphisms as they are also observed in the parents. However some of them are de novo terminal deletions associated with an abnormal phenotype. We collected 14 observations from 10 new families through the A.C.L.F. (French Speeking Cytogenetician Association ) telomere network, in order to better characterise the different length of the 2q37 deletions observed. We analysed for each patient and his parents when available, the size of the deletion by molecular cytogenetic and molecular biology with STS markers. The size of the deleted segment was determined by mapping the region with speciﬁc BAC and PAC clones from 2q36 breakpoint to the subtelomeric 2q end, and with different polymorphic 
markers from D2S125 to D2S2585.The children were aged from 18 months to 14 years. They were all investigated for developmental delay. They had all facial dysmorphic features but looked different from each other. At least 4 of them presented multiple malformations including, cardiac malformation, coloboma, syndactyly, brachydactyly , cryptorchydy, ano-rectal malformation, or cleft palate . None of them were referred for Albright osteodystrophy-like phenotype, and one had autistic behaviour.We present the clinical, chromosomal and molecular cytogenetic and genetic ﬁndings of the affected children and their parents investigated, comparing our results with the literature data. (Study supported by the CHU-Reims-AOL 2003).
P0395. Trisomy 15 mosaicism associated with a familial 
reciprocal translocation t(1;15).
B. Buldrini1, P. Prontera1, V. Aiello1, R. Grupioni1, A. Bonfatti1, G. Venti2, A. Fer -
lini1, A. Sensi1, E. Calzolari1, E. Donti2;  
1Genetica Medica, Università degli Studi di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy , 2Genetica 
Medica, Università degli Studi di Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
We describe a 4 years old female with severe global mental retardation (< 1°centile, Grifﬁths scale), myoclonic epilepsy, proximal hypotonia, microcephaly (<<3° centile), kyphosis, cutaneous syndactyly between 
2nd and 3rd ﬁnger of left foot, hands stereotypy and minor facial 
dysmorphisms.A second trimester amniocentesis, performed elsewhere, had disclosed a reciprocal translocation 46, XX; t(1;15)(q12;p11)mat. The balanced reciprocal translocation was found in the healthy mother, in a healthy aunt and in grandmother, but also in the 5-years-old cousin, who showed overlapping phenotypical features (severe mental retardation, epilepsy, microcephaly, hypotonia and minor facial dysmorphisms).We performed the constitutional karyotype at high resolution, adding WCP1 and 15, FISH screening for subtelomeric rearrangements, STS analysis to exclude UPD for chromosome 15 and an extensive work up for mosaicism. The results allowed identifying a 2% trisomy 15 mosaicism in peripheral blood: mos47,XX, t(1;15)(q12;p11)mat +15/46,XX; t(1;15)(q12;p11)mat. The cytogenetic polymorphisms of the supernumerary chromosomes 15 exclude with conﬁdence an in vitro mitotic error.Unfortunately, the proband’s cousin was suddenly dead.Fryns reported a 2-3% additive risk for congenital abnormalities and mental retardation in the heterozygous children of healthy translocation carriers. This risk may be overestimated, however many mechanisms can be put forward to explain an increased risk: upd, position effect, cryptic unbalanced defect and postzygotic loss of a supernumerary chromosome, with only partial rescuing from a tertiary trisomy resulting in trisomy mosaicism.We discuss this latter, in particular for translocations with high probability of 1:3 segregation, as expected from pachytene conﬁguration.
P0396. De novo mosaic 46, XX, dup (11)(q13q25)/46,XX in a 
patient with trigonocephaly
Z. N. Al-Hassnan, M. Faden, M. Al-Owain, M. Iqbal;  
King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
The most common form of dup(11q) is associated with 11q/22q translocation, and in almost all reported cases, it is inherited through a carrier parent. Here we report on a 2-year old female with trigonocephaly and multiple congenital anomalies. She was born to ﬁrst cousin parents with unremarkable family history. Pregnancy ended at term with normal birth weight. She was noted to have microcephaly, trigonocephaly, upslanting palpebral ﬁssures, prominent nasal root, thin upper lip, and micrognathia. Echocardiogram revealed VSD and PDA. She also had horseshoe kidneys, congenital dysplasia of the hips, and moderate developmental delay. Blood chromosome analysis revealed two cell lines. Based on 50 cells examined, duplication 11q (q13q25) was observed in 24% of cells and normal 46,XX in the remaining cells. 
Parents chromosome analysis was normal.This case presents several unusual ﬁndings. It is a de novo chromosomal aberration while the vast majority of reported cases with dup(11q) inherited the anomaly through a carrier parent. The mosaicism of this particular karyotyping is another extraordinary ﬁnding. The duplicated region (q13-q25) includes the more commonly reported duplication seen in the unbalanced segregants of t(11;22) carrier. Finally, it is the ﬁrst reported case of trigonocephaly in association with 11q duplication, in contrary to the well-known association of this speciﬁc type of craniosynostosis with the 11q23 deletion syndrome. However, FISH analysis using an MLL (11q23) DNA probe showed only two signals with loss of signal of the proximal MLL gene on the duplicated chromosome while it was present at the distal 11q23.
P0397. Molecular study of miscarriages with unbalanced 
reciprocal translocations.
D. Diego-Alvarez, A. Bustamante-Aragonés, M. Rodriguez de Alba, R. Car -
dero, C. Ayuso, J. Diaz-Recasens, C. Ramos, I. Lorda-Sanchez;  
Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain.
Spontaneous miscarriages occur in approximately 10-15% of clinically recognised pregnancies. Chromosomal anomalies account for at least 50% of ﬁrst trimester miscarriages. Carriers of balanced translocations have an increased risk of having abnormal or unviable products of conception. Conventional karyotyping of abortions presents a high rate of failure. In contrast, molecular studies of DNA (QF-PCR and CGH) provide a useful tool to diagnose numerical chromosome anomalies. We present the molecular approach of two abortions derived from couples in which one partner carried a balanced reciprocal translocation. Case 1 shows complete trisomy 2 due to a 3:1 segregation from a paternal t(2;17)(q32.1; q24.3). Case 2 shows partial monosomy 13q32 > qter and partial trisomy 1q31.2 > qter caused by an adjacent-I segregation of a maternal t(1;13)(q31.2; q32). In both cases, parental karyotypes and DNA were available. Trivalent segregation could be established by analysing STR markers. We propose QF-PCR in addition to CGH as an Cytogenetics165
efﬁcient diagnostic method to improve our knowledge of unbalanced 
offspring in balanced translocation carriers.
P0398. Direct duplication 12p11.21-p13.31 mediated by 
segmental duplications: a new genomic disorder?
M. De Gregori1, G. Gregato1, S. Gimelli1, T. Pramparo1, J. Messa1, R. Giorda2, 
M. Patricelli1, O. Zuffardi1;  
1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Pavia, Italy, 2IRCSS La Nostra Famiglia, 
Bosisio Parini, Italy.
We have identiﬁed an almost 20 Mb direct duplication (dual-colour FISH analysis) of the short arm of chromosome 12 in a child with 
mental retardation and dysmorphic features.The molecular deﬁnition of the breakpoints, performed by array-CGH and FISH analysis, showed that they were within two highly homologous segmental duplications of 49 and 123 kb respectively. Thus this rearrangement is a typical genomic disorder.Pip-maker analysis demonstrated three clusters of homologous segmental duplications located at 3, 9 and 31 Mb respectively from the 12p telomere, constituted by portions with both direct and opposite orientation. Microsatellites analysis demonstrated the paternal origin of the rearrangement. Paternal chromosomes 12 have been inspected for the presence of inversion with the same breakpoint of the duplication, predisposing to the duplication itself but resulted normal. An analysis of the literature to see if this duplication was recurrent revealed several cases of 12p duplication that, at least at the cytogenetic level, were bigger than this one. Similarly, reciprocal deletions are not reported in the literature likely reﬂecting their lethality.This case demonstrates that not only recurrent rearrangements such as deletions involving 7q11.2, 15q11q13, 22q11.2 but also sporadic 
rearrangements may be mediated by low copy repeats.
P0399. Phenotypic variability associated with an unbalanced X/Y 
translocation transmitted through females in a three generation 
family
N. Lavoura1, J. Gonçalves2, E. Matoso1, M. Venâncio3, A. Lopes Dias2, A. Mas -
carenhas1, L. Ramos3, I. Marques Carreira1;  
1Serviço de Citogenética, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, 
Coimbra, Portugal, 2Centro de Genética Humana, Instituto Nacional de Saúde 
Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Serviço de Genética, Centro Hospitalar de 
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
We present the phenotypic variability of an unbalanced X/Y translocation, in a three generation family - grandmother, mother and a two year old male child (propositus). The grandmother has a normal phenotype but short stature, the mother has short stature and mild mental retardation. The propositus has a more severe phenotype with short stature, developmental delay, cryptorchidism and dry skin 
compatible with a contiguous gene-deletion syndrome.Conventional and molecular cytogenetics (FISH) revealed the presence of a derivative X chromosome, shared by the three family members: der(X)t(X;Y)(p22.3;q11.2).ish(WCPY+, DXYS29X-, EsTCdy16c07++, DYZ3-, SRY-).In order to identify the extension of the Y chromosome segment, and the Xp22.3 deletion on the der(X), PCR with speciﬁc primers for Yq11.2 and Xp22.3 was performed. Y chromosome sequences present belong to Y intervals 5 and 6, with the breakpoint occurring between sY89 (absent) and sY98 (present). The deletion on the Xp22.3 covers all the genes from the pseudoauthosomal X region 1 (PARX1) to the X speciﬁc segment until DXS237 marker. The breakpoint in Xp22.3 is between DXS237 (absent) and DXS278 (present), showing that the disease causing genes, 
SHOX , ARSE , VCX-A, and STS are absent.
Most of the propositus clinical features can be explained by the Xp23 partial nulisomy. The propositus doesn’t exhibit icthyosis and we speculate that this could be explained by the activation of an alternative pathway that overcomes the X-linked steroid sulfatase deﬁciency. The phenotypical variability in the two female patients, namely the degree of cognitive impairment, could be related to a non-random X 
chromosome inactivation.P0400. Non-contiguous 8p23 deletions in a case with 
del(8)(p23.1)/psudic(8)(p23.2) mosaicism
R. Ciccone1, T. Mattina2, R. Giorda3, M. Patricelli1, O. Zuffardi1;  
1University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2University of Catania, Catania, Italy, 3IRCSS 
La Nostra Famiglia, Bosisio Parini, Italy.
Mosaicisms with two cell-lines carrying different abnormalities for the same chromosome are quite rare among constitutional chromosome anomalies. In these cases it can be assumed that the zygote would have had a 46 chromosome karyotype but one of the chromosomes was dicentric (for example: qter->p::p->qter or pter->q::q->pter). The presence of two active centromeres on the same chromosome could lead to the formation of anaphase bridge during cell division followed by an asymmetric breakage of the dicentric with the formation of a 
deleted chromosome and an inv dup del chromosome.We report a double 8p anomaly mosaicism del(8)(p23.1)/psudic(8)(p23.2) in a girl with severe mental retardation, dwarﬁsms and corpus callosum agenesis. The dicentric breakpoint does not span any of the duplicons associated with the classical inv dup(8p) (Giglio 
et al, 2001).The rearrangement is of paternal origin and the proposita’s father has the 8p23.1 heterozygous inversion between the two olfactory-receptor gene clusters (REPD and REPP), located respectively at 7 and 12 Mb. The deleted 8p chromosome has two non-contiguous deletions involving the distal 7 Mb and a 3 Mb region located between 9 and 12 Mb from the telomere. These results suggest that the presence of the cryptic paracentric inversion in the paternal 8p chromosome, from which originated the proposita’s dicentric chromosome, gave rise to 
two non-contiguous deletions in an unique breakage event.These data underline the importance of a proper molecular analysis to characterize chromosome anomalies in order to an accurate karyotype-
phenotype correlation.
P0401. Characterization of a de novo  20q13 subtelomeric 
deletion by microarray comparative genomic hybridization in a 
child with learning difﬁculties
F. Bena, S. Dahoun, A. Bottani;  
Division of Medical Genetics, Geneva, Switzerland.
Unbalanced subtelomeric chromosomal rearrangements represent 
a signiﬁcant cause of unexplained mental retardation with or without congenital abnormalities. Development of new molecular cytogenetic techniques has provided a powerful tool for detection of patients with 
subtle chromosome imbalances.We report the case of a 5-year-old girl with learning difﬁculties, hypotonia and strabismus. Delivery occurred by C-section at 34 weeks of gestation because of preeclampsia. Birth measurements were above the 90th percentile, but term was uncertain. Facial phenotype was not dysmorphic. Standard karyotype (resolution 550 bands) was 46,XX. Subtelomeric FISH analysis revealed a submicroscopic 
de 
novo deletion of 20q13. To further characterize the size of the deletion and in order to delineate the critical region involved in the phenotype of the patient, we performed comparative genomic hybridization on DNA microarrays, a technique which allows simultaneous detection and mapping of DNA copy number changes. We used commercially genomic microarray slide (Human Array, Genosystem, France) containing 480 non overlapping BAC/PAC clones spotted in triplicate. By CGH-microarray the deletion was conﬁrmed by three PACs deleted and its size is estimated to be between 0,4 Mb and 2.1 Mb. Despite the extent of this microdeletion 20q13, there does’nt seem to be a clear pattern of phenotypic expression associated with this chromosome anomaly.
P0402. Are chorionic villi a source of stem cell?
P. Spitalieri1, L. Scaldaferri2, A. Filareto1, F. Sangiuolo1, A. Nardone1, G. No -
velli1, M. De Felici2;  
1Dept of Biopathology Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2Dept of Public 
Health Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy.
The aim of this study was to investigate for the presence of stem cell in chorionic villous sampling (CVS), from women subjected to prenatal diagnosis at X-XII week of pregnancy and to the develop an in vitro 
culture system for their maintenance and expansion.Three CVS were analyzed at the time of sampling for Alkaline phosfatase (AP) positivy, while pan-cytokeratin and vimentin were Cytogenetics166
used as markers for epithelial and mesenchimal derived cells.
In freschly collected CVS few clustered AP positive cells were present 
in the apex of some villi.To better characterize AP positive cells and differentiating cells from CVS, we performed primary cell culture up to obtain cell monolayers 
after 15 days of culture.We observed that, after 15 days of culture, AP positive cells were present and expanded exclusively in cells cultured in the presence of 1000 UI of Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF). At this time most of the 
cultured cells were positive for vimentin.Experiments to analyse these AP+ cells for stem cells markers as Oct-4, Nanog and SSEA 1-4 are in progress, both by molecular and 
immunohystochemical studies.Work supported by the Italian Ministry of Health.
P0403. Success of intracytoplasmic sperm injection in infertile 
men with chromosome abnormalities
K. Writzl1, T. Kunej1, B. Zorn2, I. Virant-Klun3, A. Brezigar4, B. Peterlin1;  
1Division of Medical Genetics, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Andrology 
Centre, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3IVF laboratory, UMC Ljubljana, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4Institute for Prenatal and Postnatal Diagnosis, Postojna, 
Slovenia.
Purpose: To assess the success rates of ICSI according to the type of 
male chromosomal abnormalities.
Methods: We analyzed infertile men with chromosomal abnormalities undergoing ICSI: seven men from the Slovene population and 87 men 
from 37 published articles.
Results: Altogether 94 men with chromosomal abnormalities underwent ICSI. In couples with male nonmosaic Klinefelter syndrome 36 children with normal karyotype were born and one 47,XXY fetus was conceived. In 19 couples with male reciprocal translocation eight children were born: four with normal karyotype, three with balanced translocation and one with unbalanced translocation. In 28 couples with male Robertsonian translocation 14 children were born: six with 
normal karyotype and eight with Robertsonian translocation
Conclusions: ICSI is an efﬁcient method for patients with chromosome 
abnormalities, however prenatal diagnosis or preimplantation diagnosis should be offered.
P0404. Mosaic cell line in a dysmorphic child with 
sacrococcygeal teratoma
E. Sukarova-Angelovska , M. Kocova, G. Ilieva;  
Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
Marker chromosomes represent a heterogeneous group of chromosomes which have different expression in phenotype of an affected person. Some of them are silent, and could be transmitted through generations, but some could give a distinct phenotype, depending of the length and the origin of an extra chromosome. Mosaicism, if present, affects different tissues in different percentage.Teratomas, on the other hand, have heterogeneous etiology. Sometimes they represent a part of a syndrome (Currarino syndrome, caused by mutations in HLXB9 gene), but several reports show various cytogenetic ﬁndings in these children -partial trisomy of 13q, 20p, 1q, 19p, 2p; most often as a result of an unbalanced translocation complement. Marker chromosomes are rarely seen as an etiology of 
sacrococcygeal teratomas.We report a newborn with a sacrococcygeal teratoma, heart defect and facial dysmorphism. It was a ﬁrst child of young and unrelated parents. The pregnancy was uneventful; the baby was born premature, with birth weight and length under 3rd percentile. The baby had dysmorphic signs including small face, deep set, small eyes, frontal bossing, saddle nose, hypoplastic allae nasi, short philtrum, V-shaped mouth, and micrognathia. Also the baby presented heart defect, diastasis m. recti abdominis, brachydactylia, transversal crease, hypoplastic nails, digitalized thumb. Sacrococcygeal teratoma was present, surgery conﬁrmed connection of the tumor with the rectum, with a histology of a mature teratoma. Karyogram of the leukocytes showed two cell lines 46,XX/47,XX+mar;(80%/20%). Extra material on this marker chromosome predisposed altered embryogenesis and development of 
teratoma in the child.P0405. Characterization of two Silver-Russell syndrome patients 
with uniparental disomy of chromosome 7
J. Rosell, A. Perez-Granero, M. Caimari, M. Bernues, N. Govea, L. Torres-
Juan, D. Heine-Suñer;  
Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
Silver-Russell syndrome is characterized by intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation, asymmetry of the head and limbs, a small triangular face and other less constant features. A subset of patients (7-10 %) has been described to show maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 7. We have characterized a total of 12 Silver-Russell patients and found 2 of them to be positive for chromosome 7 uniparental disomy. The ﬁrst case was found to be caused by maternal isodisomy except the terminal region of the long arm, that was heterodisomic. In the second case we found the patient to show maternal isodisomy of the whole chromosome. In addition, we observed that in the second patient, the chromosome 7 microsatellites besides manifesting maternal isodisomy, had also a second very faint band corresponding to one of the paternal alleles. Cytogenetic analysis of both patients, their parents and prenatal amniotic ﬂuid could not detect any chomosomal 
abnormalities or mosaicism.
P0406. Clinical - cytogenetic aspects related to mosaicism in the 
variants of Turner syndrome
M. M. Mihaescu1, C. Crista2, I. Zosin3, D. Stoicanescu1, V. Belengeanu1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics - University of Medicine and Pharmacy , Ti-
misoara, Romania, 2Department of Endocrinology - University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 3Department of Endocrinology-University of 
Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Turner Syndrome distinguishes itself among the abnormalities of the 
sexual chromosomes by a large variety of karyotypes and phenotypes. Most of the Turner patients are mosaics. We have investigated 90 patients with feminine morphotype. The growing retard was the most frequent symptom of the Turnerian stigmata, associated with absent or hardly present secondary sexual characters, primary or secondary amenorrhea.For all the observed subjects a genetic consult was performed, followed by a chromosome analyses from lymphocyte cultures. The caryotype was established after the G banding procedure. For each case, there were examined 50 metaphases. Our goal was the cytogenetic diagnosis of the Turner Syndrome, the emphasizing of 
its cytogenetic variants, and the correlation karyotype-phenotype.The non-mosaic karyotypes included cases of 45,X , 46,X,I (Xq), 46,XX,del(Xq), and 46,XXdel Xq-; Xp-, 46,Xr(X) and a normal karyotype 46, XX. Ten mosaicism cases were registered with a cellular line 45,X or 46,XX. Those cases consisted of: 2 cases of numeric abnormalities 45,X/46,XX, the rest being structural abnormalities: 45,X/46,X(r)X [2]; 46,XXdel(X)(q22.3-22.8) (p22.1 - pter)/45,X; 46,XXdel Xq-; Xp-/45,X; 
46,XX/46,XXdelXq-[2];45,X/46,Xi((Xq) [2].The deletions of the regions Xq2.1 and 1.3 were associated with a primary amenorrhea and the terminal deletions Xq , with a secondary amenorrhea, early installed. The phenotypic aspect of the patients with structural X abnormalities varies according to the chromosomal abnormality and not to the clones’ percent in the mosaic conditions. Most of the mosaics with 45,X may be the consequence of a mitotic instability of the chromosomes with a structural abnormality.
P0407. Homozygosity for pericentric inversions of chromosome 
9 in a parent with stillbirth
M. Khaleghian, C. Azimi, M. Toughi;  
Department of Genetics, Cancer Institute, and Department of Medical Genetics, 
Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
An inversion occurs when a single chromosome undergoes two breaks 
and is reconstituted with the segment between the breaks inverted, and are of two types: paracentric and pericentric. An inversion does not usually cause an abnormal phenotype in carriers, because it is a balanced rearrangement. Its medical signiﬁcance is for the progeny; a carrier of either type of inversion is at risk of producing abnormal gametes that may lead to unbalanced offspring. One of the most frequent inversions is inversion chromosome 9. A few cytogeneticists consider inversion of chromosome 9 as a normal variant. However, many reports in the recent literatures link pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 with infertility, recurrent abortions and a number of Cytogenetics167
other abnormal conditions.
Up to now just a few cases of homozygosity of inversion of chromosome 9 have been reported. We report a case of homozygosity pericentric inversions of chromosome 9 in a woman with 28-week stillbirth. Our cytogenetic studies on her both non-consanguineous parents showed that both parents were heterozygote for this inversion with a normal 
phenotypes.
P0408. The high incidence of mosaic forms of numerical 
chromosome abnormalities in spontaneous abortions detected 
by interphase multiplex FISH
S. G. Vorsanova, A. D. Kolotii, I. Y. Iourov, E. A. Kirillova, V. V. Monakhov, A. K. 
Beresheva, E. V. Nesiaeva, Y. B. Yurov;  
Institute of Paediatrics and Children Surgery, Ministry of Health, Moscow Medi -
cal I.M. Setchenov’s Academy, National Centre of Mental Health, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation.
The leading cause of spontaneous pregnancy loss in the ﬁrst trimester 
are numerical chromosomal abnormalities. Interphase multiplex ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (MFISH) is considered as effective technique for accurate determination of numerical chromosome abnormalities in uncultured cells. MFISH using original DNA probes for chromosomes 1, 9, 13, 14, 16, 18, 21, 22, X, Y was applied for investigation of aneuploidy and polyploidy in 259 spontaneous abortions (mean age of gestation: 9.8 weeks). The mean maternal age was 30.3. The frequency of abortions with abnormal karyotypes was 54,8 % (142 specimens). Among them 8 specimens (5.6%) were characterized by multiple chromosome abnormalities. The occurrence of autosomal aneuploidy was 48.5% (65 from 134), X chromosome aneuploidy _ 25.4% (34 from 134), and polyploidy _ 26.1% (35 from 134). The high incidence of specimens with chromosomal mosaicism was detected. Among 142 specimens with chromosome abnormality 64 (45.1%) have mosaic forms of aneuploidy and polyploidy. We conclude MFISH to have high efﬁciency for screening of regular as well as mosaic forms of numerical chromosome abnormalities in spontaneous abortions. Supported by INTAS grant 03-51-4060.
P0409. The gain and loss of chromosomes and somatic 
chromosome pairing in developing human brain.
I. V. Iourov1, V. V. Monakhov1, A. D. Kolotii1, E. A. Demidova1, A. K. Bereshe -
va1, V. S. Kravets1, S. I. Kutsev2, S. G. Vorsanova1, Y. B. Yurov1;  
1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Institute of Pediatrics and 
Children Surgery MH, Moscow, Russian Federation, Rostov State Medical 
University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, 2National Research Center of 
Mental Health, RAMS, Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery MH, Mos -
cow, Russian Federation, Rostov State Medical University, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
Molecular cytogenetic studies supply the pilot evidences for increased 
level of aneuploidy in developing and adult human brain (Yurov et al., 2001;2005). However the real frequency of aneuploidy in the developing brain cells is still unknown. FISH artifacts due to over position of interphase chromosomes and somatic chromosome pairing can lead to “pseudomonosomy” registered by interphase FISH. Therefore, the resolution power of FISH analysis of somatic (diploid) cells is limited. The application of qualitative and quantitative assessment of single signals in interphase nuclei of fetal brain (as described in Iourov et al. 2005) allowed us to establish the incidence monosomy and of somatic chromosome pairing. In the present study we have applied interphase FISH with DNA probes for chromosomes 1, 9, 15, 16, 18, X, and Y for identiﬁcation of aneuploidy with quantitative assessment of FISH signals in 6 fetal human brain samples. No fewer than 3000 interphase nuclei was scored per probe for each sample. We have detected non-speciﬁc aneuploidy incidence of all the chromosome studied. The variation of aneuploidy frequency was in the range 1.3-2.4% for monosomy and 0.3-0.4% for trisomy and rare tetrasomy. The somatic chromosome pairing or over position of FISH signals was detected to take place for all the chromosomes studied and varied in the range 2.9-7.3%. Therefore low-level chromosomal mosaicism as well as somatic chromosome pairing do present in fetal human brain. Supported by INTAS grant 03-51-4060.P0410. FISH Analysis of Subtelomeric Chromosome 
Rearrangements Detected in 108 Malformed Infants and/or with 
psychomotor delay.
L. Rodríguez1, S. Climent2, N. Martínez Guardia3, I. Arroyo4, R. M. Arteaga5, G. 
Rodríguez Criado6, J. Fernández Toral7, F. Lopez-Grondonal1, E. Mansilla1, M. 
L. Martinez-Fernandez1, M. L. Martinez-Frias1,8;  
1Estudio Colaborativo Español de Malformaciones Congénitas del Centro de 
Investigación sobre Anomalías Congénitas, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Min -
isterio de Sanidad y Consumo, Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital General de Ontinyent, 
Valencia, Spain, 3Hospital Severo Ochoa, Madrid, Spain, 4Hospital San Pedro 
de Alcántara, Cáceres, Spain, 5Hospital Marqués de Valcecilla, Cantabria, 
Spain, 6Hospital Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain, 7Hospital Universitario Central 
de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain, 8Departamento de Farmacología, Facultad de Me -
dicina, Universidad Complutense, Madrid, Spain.
Chromosome alterations are usually associated to infants with 
malformations and/or psychomotor delay. Sometimes it has normal karyotype. We observed that high resolution G-band karyotype (550-850 bands) can hide cryptic chromosome alteration not detected but with ﬂuorescence “in situ” hybridization techniques (FISH). Some cryptic chromosome alterations affect subtelomeric region.We started a project aimed to analyze subtelomeric regions in about 300 infants with congenital defects and/or psychomotor delay with normal high resolution (550-850 bands) G-band karyotype (PI020028). We analyzed 108 infants, all with normal high resolution G-band karyotype. We have established two groups: A: 42 newborn with congenital malformations with/or without psychomotor delay. B: 66 dysmorphic children aged 1 to 13 years, with psychomotor delay. We used the subtelomeric FISH probes from Cytocell and Vysis.Among the 108 cases, 10 had a subtelomeric rearrangement [9,26% (4.44-17.03)]. Three rearrangements were found in group A [7,14% (1,47-20,87)] and 7 rearrangements in group B [10,61% (4,26-
21,85)].In 8 cases the chromosome alteration was “de novo” [1p deletion (2 cases), 4p deletion (3 cases), 10p deletion (1 case), 10q deletion (1 case) and a der(18)t(18;19)(1 case)]. In two cases the father was carrier of a balanced chromosome translocation (Table 1).Our results show the importance to perform subtelomeric chromosome rearrangements with FISH in newborn malformed infants and malformed infants with psychomotor delay, even they have a normal high resolution G-band karyotype (550-850 bands), since this could help deﬁning the prognosis of the patient and to give a correct genetic counselling to the family.
Table 1.- Chromosome alterations detected after FISH with subtelo -
meric chromosome probes.
1º Newborn del(1)(p36.22) de novo"
2º newborn der(22)t(12;22)(q24.31;q13.3)pat
3º newborndel (4)(p16.3). ish 4p16.3 (WHSCRx2) de 
novo"
4º No newborn del(4)(p16.3). ish 4p16.3 (WHSCR-) de novo"
5º No newborndel (4)(p16.3). ish 4p16.3 (WHSCRx2) de 
novo"
6º No newborn der(4)t(4;12)(q34;p12.3)pat
7º No newborn del(10)(q26.3) de novo"
8º No newborn del(1)(p36.22). de novo"
9º No newborn der(18)t(18;19)"de novo"
10º No newborn del(10)(p15.3) de novo"
Supported by Grant PI020028 - FIS, Instituto de Salud Carlos III. 
Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo.Cytogenetics168
P0411. Chromosomal transcriptome maps and linkage to 
sequence data
P. F. Ambros1, A. Kowalska1, C. Stock1, E. Bozsakyova1, T. Lörch2, T. Ramsau -
er3, Z. Trajanoski3;  
1CCRI, Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderspital, Vienna, 
Austria, 2MetaSystems, Altlussheim, Germany, 3Institute for Genomics and 
Bioinformatics, Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria.
The enormous potential enabled by current techniques to study 
genome wide gene expression proﬁles, opened new avenues in biological/medical research. Especially in cancer research, insights into the expression proﬁle can provide vital diagnostic and prognostic information. Current micro-array techniques are extremely powerful and may yield direct information on the gene activity of a cell or tissue. However, special equipment and a sophisticated bio informatics program are required to evaluate data and no direct geographical expression proﬁle on the chromosome is provided. The CESH (comparative expressed sequence hybridization) technique on the other hand represents a unique technique to directly assign loci of high/low gene expression to speciﬁc chromosomal loci (Lu et al. 2001). As normal human metaphase spreads are used as target to visualize hybridized cDNAs, we searched for a way to directly link expression- with sequence data. Until today, no direct link from the sequence information to the chromosomal phenotypes exists. Thus, we attempt to ﬁnd a way to directly link the GC-content published in accessible data banks like Ensembl and information obtained by staining chromosomes with base speciﬁc ﬂuorochromes by following the concept of linking clearly deﬁned landmarks on the chromosome (high or low ﬂuorescence intensity with base speciﬁc ﬂuorochromes like chromomycin A3 (CMA) with GC-rich or GC-pure domains in the genomic sequence. So far we were able to demonstrate that the GGCC binding motif correlates well with the (CMA) staining. This correlation allows e.g. a direct link of the expression proﬁle along the chromosomes as obtained by the CESH technique with the sequence information accessible by different data banks. Thus, the use of sequence speciﬁc ﬂuorochromes allows a precise assignment of chromosomal bands to the genomic sequence. So not only the ISCN information will be available but also every chromosomal position can 
be described in Mbp units.
P0412. The role of M-FISH in simultaneous detection of de novo 
marker chromosomes
D. Abazis1, S. Athanatou1, M. Karabela1, M. Tzimina1, C. G. Pangalos2;  
1Dept. of Cytogenetics, Diagnostic Genetic Center, Athens, Greece, 2Dept. of 
Cytogenetics, Diagnostic Genetic Center, Piraeus, Greece.
INTRODUCTION : The identiﬁcation of marker chromosomes and 
the elucidation of their clinical signiﬁcance remains one of the few problems in classical human cytogenetics. This will undoubtedly yield to the application of M-FISH, which allows the simultaneous characterization of all human chromosomes. Because of the variety of marker chromosomes, their different origins and the possibility of imprinting and isodisomic effects, there is a great variation in the clinical outcome. Thus, the characterization of prenataly detected marker chromosomes identiﬁed in prenatal diagnosis is of great interest for 
future medical care.MATERIALS AND METHODS
: Ten cases involving de novo marker 
chromosomes were studied. All of the above cases were initially studied with the standard RHG chromosomal banding technique followed by complementary C-banding and NOR-staining techniques. M-FISH karyotype was performed using the commercially available kit of Metasystems GmbH. The labelled metaphases were visualized through a microscope equipped with appropriate ﬁlters and ISIS 
software (Metasystems GmbH).RESULTS
: In all studied cases we were able to successfully 
identify all marker chromosomes, even the smallest in size. The chromosomal constitutions were the following: +der(10)[1], +der(12)[2], 
+der(15)[1],+der(16)[3], +der(18)[1] and +der(22)[2].
DISCUSSION : The correct identiﬁcation of all ten de novo marker 
chromosomes, in our prenatal cases, validates M-FISH as an invaluable tool for a high degree of accuracy and efﬁciency. Whereas there are several studies of fragments derived from sex chromosomes, the clinical signiﬁcance of markers derived from regions of autosomal chromosomes is less clear. Unfortunately, the outcome for some of these pregnancies was not possible to be traced, thus being unable to evaluate the phenotypic and clinical consequences of each case. Although M-FISH technique is expensive and not widely performed, its systematic application could well offer the information needed to form more precise evaluations regarding the management and counselling 
in de novo marker chromosomes found prenataly. 
P0413. The contribution of apoptosis and aneuploidy 
assessment in sperm after repeated ICSI failure
M. Benkhalifa1, D. Abazis2, S. Athanatou2, P. Clement3, C. Pappa4, G. Kokkali5, 
N. Kanakas6, K. Arvaniti6, M. Pelekanos7, G. Xidias4, M. Tsirigotis7, T. Mantzavi -
nos6, C. Pantos5, C. G. Pangalos2;  
1ATL R&D Laboratory, Voisins le Bretonneux, France, 2Diagnostic Genetic Cen -
ter, Athens, Greece, 3Laboratoire de Biologie Clinique, Le Blanc Mesnil, France, 
4Diagnosis, IVF Center, Athens, Greece, 5Genesis Athinon, Athens, Greece, 
6Euromedica IVF Center, Athens, Greece, 7Akeso IVF Center, Athens, Greece.
The analysis of DNA Fragmentation Index (DFI) by apoptosis using in situ ﬂuorescent TUNEL technique and the assessment of chromosomal nondisjunction by FISH techniques on germ cells, provide valuable information concerning the paternal contribution on fertilization rate, early embryo abnormalities and IVF failures. In order to establish the DFI and the nondisjunction rate, 22 patients with a minimum of two ICSI attempt failures and/or less than 40% of fertilization rate were studied with a total of 29 ejaculates. For apoptosis the kit by Roche was used with the application of positive and negative controls. For nondisjunction assessment, FISH technique was applied for chromosomes 13,18, 21, X and Y. A minimum of 2000 sperm nuclei were examined by two observers for each analysis. The data of our study indicates a variable DFI from one patient to another and from one ejaculate to another concerning the same patient. In 4 patients the DFI was less than 10%, in 7 ranged from 10 to 40%, in 10 was over 40% while 1 case was inconclusive. Concerning the rate of chromosome nondisjunction and DFI, no clear relation was established although 3 patients presented more than 70% of apoptosis, with more than 2% of 
multiple chromosome nondisjunction.
P0414. Array CGH reveals unexpected genomic imbalances in 
fetuses with multiple malformations and normal karyotype
C. Le Caignec1, M. Boceno1, P. Saugier-Veber2, S. Jacquemont1, M. Joubert3, 
A. David1, T. Frebourg2, J. M. Rival1;  
1Medical Genetics Department, Nantes, France, 2Medical Genetics Department, 
Rouen, France, 3Pathology Department, Nantes, France.
Malformations are a major cause of morbidity and mortality in full-term infants. Genomic imbalances are a signiﬁcant component of their aetiology. However, up to one-half of patients with multiple congenital malformations remains unexplained despite thorough clinical examination and laboratory investigations. In the present study, we used a commercially available array CGH, on which all subtelomeric regions, main microdeletion syndromes, and 201 other probes covering the genome, on 49 fetuses selected with three or more signiﬁcant anomalies and normal karyotype to detect submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances. Array CGH identiﬁed 8 genomic rearrangements (16.3%), all conﬁrmed by Quantitative Multiplex PCR of Short ﬂuorescent Fragments method. Subtelomeric and interstitial deletions, submicroscopic duplications, and a complex genomic imbalance were identiﬁed. In 4 de novo cases (15qtel 
deletion, 16q23.1q23.3 deletion, 22q11.2 deletion, and mosaicism for a rearranged chromosome 18), the genomic imbalance identiﬁed was clearly underlying the pathological phenotype. In one case, the relationship between the genotype and phenotype was unclear, since a subtelomeric 6q deletion was detected in a mother and her 2 fetuses bearing multiple malformations. In 3 cases, a subtelomeric 10q duplication, that is likely a genomic polymorphism, was identiﬁed. The detection of 5/49 causative chromosomal imbalances (or 4/49 if the 6qtel deletion is not considered as causative) argues for the relevance of a wide genome screening when the standard chromosome analysis is normal and conﬁrms that array CGH will have a major impact on pre and postnatal diagnosis, as well as providing information for more 
accurate genetic counselling.Prenatal diagnosis169
P0415. Non-invasive fetal RHD and RHCE genotyping from 
maternal plasma in alloimmunized pregnancies
I. Hromadnikova1, K. Vesela1, E. Roznakova2, K. Nekovarova3, P. Calda4;  
12nd Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Blood 
Bank, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Clinic of Obstetrics 
and Gynaecology, General Faculty Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Clinic 
of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, General Faculty Hospital, Prague, Czech Re -
public.
In this prospective study, we assessed the feasibility of fetal RH 
genotyping by analysis of DNA extracted from maternal plasma samples of alloimmunized pregnant women using real- time PCR and primers and probes targeted toward RHD (exon 7 and exon 10) and 
RHCE (exon 2 and exon 5) genes.We analysed anti-D, antiD+C and anti-E alloimmunized pregnant woman at risk of haemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN) at ﬁrst and second trimestr of pregnancy and correlated the results with 
serological analysis of cord blood.Determination of fetal D allele of RHD gene and the C and/or E alleles of RHCE gene from maternal plasma samples is highly accurate and enables implementation into clinical diagnostic algorithm for following pregnancies at risk for HDN. The detection of the negative fetus in the current pregnancy excludes the risk of HDN caused by alloantibodies 
and performance of invasive fetal-blood sampling.This project was supported by 2
nd Medical Faculty, Charles University 
in Prague, no: VZ 111300003.
P0416. A New Class of Chromosomes Lacking Centromere 
Discovered During Prenatal Diagnosis and Characterized via 
Chromosome Microdissection and FISH
F. Mahjoubi1, G. Peters2, A. Daneil2, R. Hill3;  
1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2The New Children Hospital, Sydney, 
Australia, 3CSIRO, Sydney, Australia.
The karyotypes of approximately 0.05% of the human population exhibit a small extra chromosome in addition to the normal 46 chromosomes. As might be expected, the majority of the marker chromosomes have been shown to contain centromeric material, e.g. alpha-satellite DNA (α-satellite DNA). However, a rare class of marker chromosomes that lack detectable α-satellite DNA has been reported. In the present study, we have employed chromosome microdissection technology to characterize a marker chromosome with no detectable α-satellite DNA which otherwise could not be identiﬁed by standard banding 
techniques or FISH.Case Report: A small, mosaic, C-band negative marker chromosome was detected on culture of amniocytes during prenatal diagnosis related to advanced maternal age. Following spontaneous premature labor at 29 weeks gestation, a dysmorphic infant was delivered, with ﬂat nasal bridge, short palpebral ﬁssures, micrognathia, high forehead, 
low-set .The origin of the marker chromosome was subsequently identiﬁed via chromosome microdissection. Through reverse FISH, we found the marker to be an inverted duplication of the region 15q26.1-qter. FISH with alphoid satellite probe was negative, while whole chromosome 15 paint was positive. Both ends of the marker chromosome were positive for the telomeric TTAGGG probe. These data, plus the G-banding pattern, identiﬁed this as an analphoid, inverted duplicated marker 
chromosome, lacking any conventional centromere.We discuss the etiology and clinical effects of this marker chromosome, comparing it to the few other reported cases of “tetrasomy 15q” syndrome. We will also discuss the possible mechanisms that are 
likely responsible for this neocentromere formation.
P0417. Chromosomal anomalies in ﬁrst trimester miscarriages
C. Lundin1, E. Ljunger2, S. Cnattingius3, G. Annerén4;  
1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Lund, Sweden, 2Dept of Women and Child Health, 
Uppsala, Sweden, 3Dept of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Stockholm, 
Sweden, 4Dept of Genetics and Pathology, Unit of Clinical Genetics, Uppsala, 
Sweden.
It is well known that a large proportion of ﬁrst trimester spontaneous abortions are caused by chromosome disorders. In the present study, chromosomal analysis of 259 consecutive ﬁrst trimester miscarriages revealed an abnormal karyotype in approximately 61 % of the cases. Autosomal trisomies were most frequently detected (in 37 % of the karyotyped samples), followed by polyploidies (9 %), and monosomy X (6 %). Cases with an extra sex chromosome constituted approximately 5 % of the karyotyped abortions, with a remarkably high frequency of 47,XXY (3.4 %). It is interesting to note that this is approximately 40 times greater than the prevalence of Klinefelter syndrome. Similar to the case of autosomal trisomies, our data suggests that the majority of conceptions harboring sex chromosome changes do not survive to 
term.Autosomal trisomies, and an extra X-chromosome in males (47,XXY) were associated with an advanced maternal age, whereas monosomy X as well as polyploidy changes seems to be inversely related to the age of the mother.The single most common aberration was trisomy 16, which was found in 14 % of the chromosomally abnormal abortions. We also identiﬁed one miscarriage with a full trisomy 1. This represents the third case of trisomy 1 in a clinically recognized pregnancy. Thus, all human chromosomes have been detected in the trisomic state in material 
from spontaneous abortions.
P0418. Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) for Genetic 
Disorders in Saudi Arabia
A. Hellani1, A. I. Al-Aqeel2;  
1King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 
2Riyadh Military Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Saudi Arabian culture is highly consanguineous, with the ﬁrst cousin 
marriages accounting for 60-70% of all marriages. Given the difﬁculties in management of genetic disorders, preventive measures for the suffering families from autosomal recessive disorders, by offering pre-implantation genetic diagnosis is undertaken. The ﬁrst of these disorders is Sanjad-Sakati Syndrome (SSS) OMIM# 24140, which is characterized by congenital hypoparathyroidism, growth and mental retardation with a unique 12bp deletion. The second is Niemann Pick Disease type B (NPD-B) OMIM# 257200,) (acid sphingomylinase (ASM) deﬁciency) with more than 70 mutations have been reported in (SMPD1) gene, which presents with severe phenotype in Saudi Arabia. Four unique mutations are found in our Saudi families. A family with (W533R) mutation in the (SPMDI) gene suffering from a severe phenotype underwent PGD. The third disorder is Morquio’s disease (MPSIV) OMIM # 253000, with severe classic phenotype with N-acetyl galactosamine-6-sulftase deﬁciency (MPSIV-A). More than 20 different mutations in (GALNS) gene have been reported in (MPSIV-A). A family with three affected siblings with severe classic (MPIV-A) with detected W195C mutation in the (GALNS) gene underwent PGD. In all these three families PGD was undertaken using ﬂuorescent PCR(F-PCR) and/or nested PCR with sequencing on a single cell. A singleton pregnancy ensure after transfer of one heterozygous and one normal embryo and prenatal diagnosis by CVS conﬁrmed a normal pregnancy. This is the ﬁrst report of successful PGD in different genetic disorders in Saudi Arabia.
P0419. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for spinocerebellar 
ataxia type I
A. Girardet1, C. Fernandez1, C. Coubes1, S. Hamamah2, H. Dechaud2, M. 
Claustres1;  
1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, IURC, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, 
France, 2Laboratoire de Biologie de la Reproduction B, CHU Montpellier, Mont -
pellier, France.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder whose classical clinical features include ataxia, dysarthria and bulbar dysfunction. Death usually occurs between 10 and 15 years after the onset of symptoms. The disease is caused by expansion of CAG trinucleotide repeats within the coding region of the SCA1 gene on chromosome 6p22-23. Normal SCA1 alleles range from 6 to 39 CAG while clinical symptoms have been reported in individuals 
carrying 39 to 81 continuous CAG tracts.We report for the ﬁrst time a preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) protocol based upon the co-ampliﬁcation of the CAG repeats together with each of D6S89 and D6S260 microsatellites. These markers are closely linked to the SCA1 locus and have therefore potential diagnostic value through linkage analysis. A family requested PGD for SCA1 as i) the father diplayed characheristic SCA1 features with an expanded allele of 46 CAG repeats and ii) their ﬁrst pregnancy investigated by standard Prenatal diagnosis170
prenatal diagnosis was selectively terminated as the fetus was carrier of 
the paternally transmitted expanded allele. Blood samples were collected from the couple and their unaffected daughter, then duplex single cell protocols for CAG/D6S89, and CAG/D6S260 have been tested on 119 and 121 single lymphocytes, respectively. PCR efﬁciency ranged from 94.9 to 100% and allele drop out (ADO) rates were comprised between 6.2 and 9.9%. The assay we set up is considered to be robust enough to proceed to clinical application, and therefore, a PGD will be performed 
for this family in the forthcoming weeks.
P0420. Psychological and ethical problems of prenatal 
diagnostics
M. Kucerova, A. Sipek, M. Volavkova;  
Inst. for the Care of Mother and Child, Prague 4. 14710, Czech Republic.
Prenatal diagnostics involving problems of fertility is a very sensitive ﬁeld of medical care. Geneticists and other physicians are obliged to respect the feelings of future probable parents. Quite often the solution of problems is not ideal from the medical point of view, but it is the parents who must decide how to solve the situation. Our study 
illustrates some extreme situations of the families and their solutions.Case l: The wife 36 years old is six years older than her husband and 
she refuses prenatal diagnosis, because she is afraid of abortion and 
losing her husband.Case 2: The husband is an adopted child, they would refuse abortion 
in any situation, they refuse amniocentesis.Case 3: The pregnant women had two brothers with hydrocephalus. 
They both died 20 years ago, so it is not possible to do any DNA diagnosis. There is a possibility of X-recessive inheritance. They both refuse possible abortion of fetus 46, XY. They also refused prenatal 
diagnosis, including detailed USG examination.Case 4: The pregnant women is 37 years old. By IVF she had one 
healthy son, who died at age two years of a brain tumor. Now she is pregnant (natural way) and she agrees with amniocentesis and they 
both are optimistic and brave.We shall demonstrate 4 more cases.
Summary: The genetic counselling should be always emphatetic, fully 
informative and non-directive.
P0421. Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of fetal rhesus status by 
molecular analysis of maternal plasma
S. Altmäe1, A. Runina1, M. Kuningas1, T. Kahre2, M. Peters2, A. Ehrenberg2, H. 
Karro2, A. Salumets1,2, A. Metspalu1;  
1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu University Wom -
en’s Clinic, Tartu, Estonia.
Feto-maternal rhesus D (RhD) incompatibility is a serious and potentially life-threatening condition for the growing fetus. The correct determination of fetal RhD status is useful in the treatment of sensitised RhD-negative pregnant women. Traditionally, the fetal rhesus D status determination has been accomplished by invasive prenatal diagnosis (amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling). Recently, the non-invasive prenatal diagnosis using fetal DNA isolated from maternal peripheral blood became available for antenatal determination of fetal 
RHD genotype.The aim of the current study was to develop the non-invasive prenatal diagnosis method for fetal RhD typing using fetal DNA separated from 
maternal plasma.Peripheral blood samples were obtained from 40 pregnant women at 9-40 weeks of gestation. DNA was extracted from maternal plasma and fetal RHD genotyping was performed in parallel using conventional 
PCR and real time PCR (Q-PCR).Fetal RHD genotyping was performed for 18 RhD-negative and 22 RhD-positive pregnant women. Of 18 fetuses with RhD-negative mothers, 6 were identiﬁed as RhD-negative and 12 as RhD-positive. The results of PCR genotyping were compared with newborn’s serology test to determine the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the applied PCR methods. Two fetal samples were misdiagnosed as RhD-negative, while the postpartum serology screening revealed the RhD-positive blood types. The sensitivity and speciﬁcity of PCR typing of fetuses of rhesus negative pregnant women were 85,7% and 100%, respectively.The results of the current study demonstrate that the non-invasive fetal RHD genotyping can be performed rapidly and reliably with the use of fetal DNA obtained from maternal plasma.P0422. Cytogenetic studies of spouses who have experienced 
early miscarriage
J. R. Durkovic ;  
Health centre, Subotica, Serbia and Montenegro.
A miscarriage is often caused by chromosome aberrations. The structural errors in chromosomes found in the parents tested, most frequent of which are translocations, can be directly related to the development of chromosopathy in a fetus. However, there is still not enough evidence that minor structural variants may be a predisposition 
of a disturbed fetal genesis and an early miscarriage.The objective of our study is to deﬁne correlation of minor chromosome structural aberrations in parents and chromosopathy in fetus by analyzing karyotype of a miscarried fetus and karyotype of parents. The analysis was carried out in 186 miscarried fetuses in the ﬁrst trimester in 44 (23,6%) of which chromosome aberration was detected. Karyotype analysis was made in 44 spouses (88 examinees) of whom chromosomepathy was conﬁrmed in the fetal tissue. Chromosome structural aberration was found in 52 examinees (59,0%), two translocations, one inversion, one X chromosome mosaicism and 48 minor structural variants. Among the minor structural aberrations a satellite DNK was noticeable in chromosomes of D and G group, associations of chromosomes, very big or small hetero- chromatin segment of Y chromosome long arm.We have suggested the possible cause-effect relation of heterochromatin polymorphism in parents and chromosome aberration in the fetus of 
such parents.
Key words: chromosome aberration, miscarriage, karyotype
P0423. No HLXB9 mutation in a human sirenomelia associated 
with tracheoesophageal ﬁstula
M. Gerard1, M. Sinico2, F. Encha-Razavi2, C. Touboul3, A. Boutron4, J. Levail -
lant3, B. Gérard5;  
1Medical genetics, CHIC, Creteil, France, 2Fetopathology, CHIC, Creteil, 
France, 3Obstetrics, CHIC, Creteil, France, 4Cell Culture, Kremlin-Bicêtre, 
France, 5Molecular Biology, Bichat-Claude Bernard, France.
Sirenomelia is characterized by fusion of the lower extremities. 
Concordant monozygotic twins has been reported (Roberge, 1966), as recurrence in a family (Rudd, 1990), and a strain of mice, 
srn (Orr, 
1982) Here, we report the ﬁrst genetic study of sirenomelia.One young non-consanguineous couple were referred because of sirenomelia, bilateral renal agenesis and sacral spina biﬁda at 11 weeks ultrasonography. Terminaison of pregnancy (TOP) was done at 14 weeks. Fetal karyotype was 46,XY. Pathology shows a single lower limb, without external genitals, nor anal oriﬁce. Epidermized sacral spina biﬁda, bilateral kidneys agenesis, and absence of bladder was conﬁrmed. A tracheoesophageal atresia was discovered. There was a single umbilical artery. X-rays showed a complete disorganization of 
lumbo-sacral vertebrae, with hemivertebrae in D7.Association of sirenomelia and VATER signs has been described (Duncan et al., 1993; Harika et al., 1995). The association of sirenomelia with tracheoesophageal atresia is frequent (Stocker JT and Heifetz SA, 1987). Pathogenesis is controversial, precocious blood vascular steal was suggested. Another hypothesis is the anomaly of major gene of the formation of mesoderm, explaining both the vertebral defects and tracheoesophageal anomalies. Search for mutations in HLXB9 gene, responsible for the Currarino triad, was ﬁrst tested, without found mutations. Extension of the study will be done, on brachyury gene and receptor of retinoic acid, CYP26A1. An international collaborative 
study is proposed.
P0424. Prenatal diagnosis of mosaicism identiﬁed in amniotic 
ﬂuid cell cultures
F. I. Sahin1, Z. Yilmaz1, A. Uckuyu2, O. Ozalp1, E. Tarim3, F. Yanik4;  
1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, 
Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Obstet -
rics and Gynecology, Konya, Turkey, 3Baskent University Faculty of Medicine 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Adana, Turkey, 4Baskent University 
Faculty of Medicine Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey.
Chromosomal mosaicism is one of the most difﬁcult problems to 
be solved in prenatal diagnosis. Mosaicism involving normal and abnormal karyotypes detected in cultured amniocytes may be a true chromosomal mosaicism or pseudomosaicism. Distinguishing between Prenatal diagnosis171
true or pseudomosaicism usually needs a second prenatal diagnostic 
test to detail the genetic counselling.
In this presentation, we report two numerical and two structural mosaicisms detected in amniocyte cultures. The ﬁrst fetus had a 47,XY,+mar[10]/46,XY[10] karyotype. The marker chromosome was shown to be derived from chromosome 15 by FISH method. The delivery was by caeserean section. The newborn had intrauterine growth retardation and cerebral thrombosis and died at 29
th day of age. 
The second fetus had a 45, X[4]/ 46,XX[26] karyotype. The parents refused cordocentesis and decided to terminate pregnancy in the 23
rd 
week.Third case had a 46,XX, dir dup(1)(q22-q32)[9]/46,XX[21] karyotype. The parents’ karyotypes were normal and the pregnancy was aborted in the 23
rd week of gestation. Second structural abnormality was reported 
as 46,XX,t(6;11)(q23; p13)[3]/46,XX[20]. The mosaicism was detected in only one ﬂask. The parents decided to continue pregnancy and cordocentesis could not be performed due to the fetal and placental position. Fetal USG revealed no abnormalities. The gestation is at 32 
weeks at the time of abstract submission.All cases had different chromosomal abnormalities. Information and risks were explained to all families during genetic counselling. Mosaicism in prenatal diagnosis needs both detailed examination and follow up, since clinical ﬁndings depend on the type of abnormality.
P0425. Single Cell Quantitative Fluorescent Multiplex PCR in 
Preimplantation Genetic Diagnostics
M. A. Ivanov1,2, V. V. Strelnikov1,2, V. M. Litvinenko3, I. G. Torganova3, M. V. 
Nemtsova1,2, D. V. Zaletaev1,2;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics at Russian Academy of Medical Scienc -
es, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Molecular Medicine at Moscow 
Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow Medical Academy, 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
In this study we are reporting about developing and optimizing the protocol for quantitative ﬂuorescent multiplex PCR (QF-PCR) based preimplantation genetic diagnostics (PGD) for in vitro fertilization 
(IVF). A great majority of patients seeking IVF are women >35 years old, who are at a higher risk of having children with trisomies 13, 18 and 21. Our assay includes a number of speciﬁc highly polymorphic STR markers for 13, 18 and 21 chromosomes (D13S634, D13S742, D13S258, D18S391, D18S 386, D18S941, D21S11, D21S1411 and IFNAR) and sex chromosomes (AMG). The main problem of single cell PCR is a dramatically low quantity of a genome DNA, but our PCR conditions allow us to solve it. After a cell lysis and a single round of QF-PCR products were detected on an automated DNA analyzer ABI 310 by using a Gene Scan technology. The two-round PCR also was developed, which will allow us to identify most common chromosome aneuploidies as well as point mutations leading to monogenic disorders. All our results were conﬁrmed by routine cytogenetic methods. We have previously successfully tested this system on prenatal samples with 95 % efﬁciency and ~99,9 % accuracy. The efﬁciency of this method for single cells (blastomers and lymphocytes) is 80 % and accuracy is near 95 %. Our optimized protocol for multiplex QF-PCR based PGD is an effective and accurate instrument for a preimplantation sex and trisomies 13, 18 and 21 detection, allowing rapid prenatal or 
preimplantation testing within 6 hours.
P0426. Strategies And Outcomes Of Over 200 Cycles Of 
Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis For Single Gene Disorders
A. Biricik, F. Fiorentino, A. Nuccitelli, N. Vitale, L. Brardinoni, A. Morgante, M. 
Baldi;  
"GENOMA" Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Rome, Italy.
Couples at high risk of passing on a serious genetic condition to their offspring have the opportunity to use Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) to diagnose a speciﬁc genetic disease on embryos obtained through in-vitro fertilisation (IVF) before a clinical pregnancy 
has been established.This article reports the experience of our Centre, from 1999 to March 2004, in PGD for single gene disorders (SGD), describing strategies and overall outcome data of 219 PGD cycles performed on fresh cleavage embryos of 156 couples for 22 different genetic conditions. The single gene defect investigated were autosomal dominant (n=13), autosomal recessive (n=127), or X-linked disorders (n=17). Fifty-ﬁve cycles, for 42 couples, were also performed for SGD combined with HLA matching.A total of 1648 embryos were biopsied, in 1265 (76.8%) of which two blastomeres were removed for analysis. PCR ampliﬁcation was performed on 2913 blastomeres, obtaining a successful ampliﬁcation in 2678 (91.9%) cells. Diagnosis was achieved for 1536 (93.2%) embryos, 320 of which where transferred to the patients in 156 of the 219 cycles performed. Forty-seven pregnancies were established (30.0% per transfer). All ongoing pregnancies were conﬁrmed to be unaffected by conventional prenatal diagnosis and went to term without 
complications, resulting in the birth of 31 healthy babies.The present results, complementing other similar experiences on PGD, conﬁrm once again the feasibility of the procedure, providing the opportunity for couples who have a known genetically transmittable disease to start a pregnancy with the knowledge that their child will be unaffected with a genetic condition.
P0427. Mosaicism for unbalanced structural autosome 
rearrangement: better prognosis for male carriers
N. V. Kovaleva1, P. D. Cotter2;  
1St. Petersburg Center for Medical Genetics, St. Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion, 2Children's Hospital Oakland, Oakland, CA, United States.
Mosaicism for unbalanced chromosome rearrangements is rare and is problematic for genetic counseling when detected prenatally. 
Objectives: Analysis of pregnancy outcome in prenatally detected mosaic cases (PDM) according to the type of chromosome abnormality and sex. Comparative analysis of male/female ratio in PDM and postnatally ill-deﬁned mosaic cases (IDM) and in asymptomatic carriers (AM) (transmitting parents, patients with infertility/miscarriages, fortuitous ﬁndings). 
Method: Review of mosaicism for normal line/
unbalanced structural rearrangement cases of known sex identiﬁed from the literature. 
Results: (1) We identiﬁed 99 cases of PDM, from 
whom pregnancy outcome was reported in 89 cases. Poor outcome was reported in 62% of mosaics for additional material, and in 44% of mosaics for deletion. (2) Males were more frequently reported to be normal (27M/14F), while abnormalities were more common in females (17M/22F). In addition, an excess of females were found to be miscarried, stillborn or dead neonatally (1M/8F). (3) There is an increase in proportion of females in the
 IDM (57M/100F) compared 
to the PDM (49M/50F). (4) Seven-fold female preponderance was observed among AM (5M/38F). In contrast, among cases of mosaicism for balanced rearrangements collected during this study, there was no signiﬁcant female predominance (18M/13F in PDM, 12M/13F in the IDM and 12M/13F in AM). 
Conclusions : The higher incidence of a normal 
outcome for male fetuses may be the result of sex-speciﬁc selection against abnormal cell lines. The strong female prevalence among transmitting parents with gonadal mosaicism can also be explained by 
such selection rather than by impairment of male gametogenesis.
P0428. The role of genetic counseling on decisions of pregnant 
women aged 35 years or over regarding amniocentesis in Turkey
H. Ilgin-Ruhi , N. Yürür-Kutlay, A. Tükün, I. Bökesoy;  
Ankara University Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey.
We investigated the effects of genetic counseling given before 
amniocentesis that is given based on maternal serum screening (using the cut-off value of 1/250) and genetic sonogram results (+/- abnormal ultrasound marker) on pregnant women who are 35 years and older age. Their attitudes towards amniocentesis after genetic counseling were evaluated. Among 340 women, 223 (65.6%) were in the high-risk group and 117 (34.4%) were in the low-risk group according to non-invasive test results. After counseling, 216 pregnant women (167 cases to have high-risk, 49 cases who had low-risk) decided to have amniocentesis while 124 women (56 with high-risk and 68 with low-risk) declined it. Fourteen abnormal karyotypes were detected. All pregnant women who had fetuses with chromosomal aberrations were in high-risk group. Our study shows that screening by non-invasive prenatal diagnostic tool has an effect on families’ choice of amniocentesis. The use of these test results during counseling decreased the number of 
amniocentesis in a ratio of 36.5%. Prenatal diagnosis172
P0429. Characterization of an unbalanced whole arm 
translocation leading to monosomy 18p revealed in prenatal 
diagnosis
S. Yakut1, M. Simsek2, A. Baumer3, G. Bagci1, G. Luleci1, A. Schinzel3;  
1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and 
Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Antalya, Turkey, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, 
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
Monosomy 18p is among the most frequently observed autosomal 
deletions. Terminal deletion of 18p appears as the main reason for occurrence of monosomy 18, while an unbalanced whole arm translocation is reported in 16% of cases. We present a case of monosomy 18p resulting from an unbalanced whole arm translocation revealed in prenatal diagnosis. Amniocentesis was performed on a 41-year old women at 18 weeks of pregnancy, who referred initially for prenatal diagnosis due to advanced maternal age without any USG ﬁndings. All metaphases in fetus karyotype analysis revealed an unbalanced whole arm translocation between the long arm of one chromosome 18 and the long arm of one chromosome 22, 45,XX,der(18;22)(q10;q10), which lead to monosomy 18p in the fetus. A de novo origion for der (18;22) was suggested, as the karyotypic analysis of the parents were normal. Chromosome 18p STS markers D18S498, D18S481 and D18S170 were used for genotyping of the fetus and the parents, to determine the origin of der (18;22). Among these, D18S170 marker was informative. Only the paternal allele was detected in the fetus, leaving maternal 
chromosome 18 to be involved in der (18;22) found.
P0430. Double translocations in prenatal diagnosis
I. Tonkovic Djurisevic , K. Crkvenac Gornik, D. Muzinic, L. Letica, R. Lasan, 
D. Begovic;  
Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University 
Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
We report one case of a maternal double reciprocal translocation 46,XX,t(4;11)(q31;q23),t(5;8)(q35;q22) ascertainment through an offspring with partial trisomy 11q and partial monosomy 4q, karyotype of 46,XX,der(4)t(4;11)(q31;q23),t(5;8)(q35;q22)mat. The second child was healthy 46,XX girl. Cytogenetic analysis of cultured amniotic ﬂuid cells with GTG banding in following pregnancy showed an unbalanced 46,XX,der(11)t(4;11)(q31;q23),t(5;8)(q35;q22)mat karyotype. The parents decided to terminate the pregnancy. The normal karyotype 46,XX was also detected prenatally by amniocentesis in fourth pregnancy.A second case presents mother with a karyotype 46,XX,t(4;9)(p14;p24), and the father 46,XY,t(1;5)(p11;p11) karyotype. A case of multiple congenital anomalies in a female newborn was found to be associated with partial trisomy 4p and partial monosomy 9q. The karyotype was 46,XX,t(1;5)(p11;p11)pat,der(9)t(4;9)(p14;p24)mat. The unbalanced karyotype was detected prenatally in a fetus by amniocentesis in third pregnancy: 46,XY,der(9)t(4;9)(p14;p24)mat. The pregnancy was terminated. Cytogenetic analysis of cultured amniotic ﬂuid cells in following pregnancy showed double balanced translocation 46,XY,t(1;5)(p11;p11)pat,t(4;9)(p14;p24)mat.A review of the literature indicates that the risk of having unbalanced offspring is similar in couples in which both parents have a balanced translocation and in couples in which one partner is a translocation carrier. That result from very early spontaneous abortion of mutually unbalanced conceptuses. The fact that the mother with double translocation, and the couple with different balanced reciprocal translocation, has the healthy children indicates the importance of genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis in cases of double 
translocations.
P0431. Prenatal diagnosis of autosomal recessive primary 
microcephaly
Y. Tunca1, S. Vurucu2, J. Parma3, R. Akin2, I. Baser4, M. Abramowicz3;  
1Medical Genetics, GATA, Ankara, Turkey, 2Pediatric Neurology, GATA, Ankara, 
Turkey, 3Genetics, Hopital Erasme, ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 4Obstetric and 
Gynecology, GATA, Ankara, Turkey.
Primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a developmental abnormality resulting in a congenital small-sized but normally formed brain, with mental retardation, and no other neurological deﬁcit. It is usually transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait. Six loci have been reported to date, with ASPM at 1q31 (MCPH5) being most often implicated in the populations studied. We followed the third pregnancy of a consanguineous couple of healthy, third cousin parents aged 22 and 23 years at birth of their ﬁrst child, a girl with congenital microcephaly and no other malformation or dysmorphia, with normal skull X-rays and brain MRI except for size. At 2 years her head circumference was 37cm (< 8 SD), height 87.5 cm (p75) and weight 11 kg (p25), and she was diagnosed as MCPH. A second pregnancy was interrupted at the end of the second trimester when microcephaly was detected on ulstrasound scanning. DNA analysis in parents, proband, and fetus showed no evidence of autozygosity for known loci except at MCPH5. At 5 years the proband was mentally retarded with no other neurologic deﬁcit, and the couple had a new pregnancy. DNA analysis in amniotic cells showed heterozygosity for linked marker D1S1660 close to ASPM at MCPH5, which we interpreted as an indication that the fetus was probably not affected. Head circumference remained normal at ultrasonography throughout the pregnancy. A normal baby was delivered. We conclude that careful confrontation of linkage and 
morphometric data may help in prenatal diagnosis of MCPH.
P0432. Prenatal diagnosis of duplication of chromosome 
14q resulting from crossingover within a paternal pericentric 
inversion
G. Bagci1, M. Ozcan Caliskan1, I. Keser1, S. Ozturk1, I. Mendilcioglu2, G. Lu -
leci1;  
1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Akdeniz University, Faculty of 
Medicine, Antalya, Turkey, 2Deparment of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Akdeniz 
University, Faculty of Medicine, Antalya, Turkey.
We report an extremely rare occurence of pericentric inversion of chromosome 14 in female fetus with 46, XX, rec14,dup(14q)inv(14)(p11.2q31.2) karyotype. This abnormality was derived from paternal pericentric inversion of chromosome 14. The proposita’s partial duplication for the distal segment 14q is apparently the result of crossing-over within the inverted segment during meiosis. All conventional cytogenetic tecniques were used to perform chromosome investigation of this structural abnormality. The stillborn, female fetus had various abnormalities. With reference to previous reports, the risk at clinical abnormalities are discussed for both de novo and familial 
pericentric inversions at chromosome 14. To our knowledge, prenatal diagnosis of paternally inherited duplication 14q in a female fetus has 
not been previously described.
P0433. The single cell as a tool for genetic testing: credibility , 
precision, implications.
K. Dotan , B. Goldman, B. Feldman, G. Barkai, L. Peleg;  
Institute of Human Genetics, Ramat Gan, Israel.
Tay Sachs disease (TSD) is an autosomal recessive disorder due to impair activity of hexosaminidase A. In its severe form it leads to death during infancy. TSD is frequent among Ashkenazi Jews, with a carrier frequency of 1/29. Two mutations underlie nearly 100% of the infantile form +1278TATC (73% of carriers) and IVS12-1G to C (13%). An adult-onset chronic form, caused by the mutation G805A (4% among carriers) is usually in compound with a common one. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) was performed in few cases of couples at risk after terminations of affected pregnancies. Our objective was to measure quantitative aspects of single cell analysis: ampliﬁcation efﬁciency and allele-dropout rates in uni, simultaneous (of the two common mutations) and multiplex reactions in: peripheral lymphocytes, ﬁbroblasts (amniotic), mesenchymal (CVS) and blastomeres. A set of nested PCR protocols was designed for the three mutations in different combinations. Each of the protocols can be performed in multiplex with one of two markers ﬂanking the HEXA gene found to be highly polymorphic in the carrier population. Mutations were detected by agarose electrophoresis and two ﬂuorescent computerized genotyping systems. Ampliﬁcation rate was not signiﬁcantly different among cell types: 86.3% in lymphocytes (82/95) and 82% in the embryonic cell (64/78). ADO rate was signiﬁcantly lower (1.3%) in embryonic cells as compared to lymphocytes (12%). Lymphocytes treated with PHA to induce cell-divisions showed a 1.8 fold lower ADO rate than non-dividing lymphocytes. Hypothesis: ADO rate is lower in dividing cells 
having a less compact nucleus structure.Prenatal diagnosis173
P0434. Investigation of clastogenic effect of Mitomycin C(MMC) 
on ﬁbroblast cells(AF,CVS,skin biopsy) in referred patients for prenatal diagnosis of Fanconi Anemia and normal controls
K. Rezaee1, F. Behjati1, R. Karimi-Nejad2, Y. Shafaghati1, S. Ghasemi Firouz -
abadi1, H. Najmabadi1, M. Karimi-Nejad2;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Karimi-Nejad/Najmabadi Pathology 
& Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder with an 
extensive genetic and clinical heterogeneity. The affected patients show pancytopenia, many internal and endocrinal problems, as well as high risk of leukemia in particular AML. And the recurrence risk in affected families is 25%. As a result ,prenatal diagnosis of FA is an important factor to help such families and the society. Diagnosis of FA on the basis of ultrasound data and biochemical tests is not possible and its molecular diagnosis is difﬁcult and unavailaible in most cases. The diagnosis of FA exploits the hypersensitivity of chromosomes of FA lymphocytes and ﬁbroblasts to bifunctional alkylating agents such as mitomycine C (MMC). In this study a cytogenetic test was implicated to access to an accurate diagnosis. During study we have investigated 6 amniotic ﬂuid (AF) referred for FA.. Mitomycin C with the concentration of 2ng/ml have been applied successfully to the ﬁbroblasts of the patients and their normal (negative control) and positive controls .2 fetuses manifested increased chromosome breakage with MMC in their amniotic ﬂuid cells. They were therefore diagnosed as affected Fanconi Anemia.
P0435. Prenatal diagnosis of Osteogenesis imperfecta in 
Lithuania
E. Benusiene, V. Kucinskas;  
Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, V ilnius Uni -
versity, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a clinically, genetically, biochemically, and radiologically heterogenous group of inherited connective tissue disorders characterized by bone fragility and other evidence of connective tissue involvement. This deﬁnition embraces a very wide range of phenotype, from, at one end, intrauterine or perinatally lethal forms to, at the other end, a barely noticeable increase in fracture tendency.The form of prenatal diagnostic studies used for a particular pregnancy depends on the nature of diagnostic studies performed earlier and the type of abnormality identiﬁed. Four techniques can be used: high resolution ultrasound scan, analysis of the collagen synthesized by cultured chorionic villus ﬁbroblasts, haplotype analysis of fetal DNA, mutational analysis of DNA from CVS or amniotic ﬂuid cells.Lithuanian OI database comprises 137 case records covering the period of 1980 - 2001. Clinical and genealogical analysis of OI cases/families from Lithuania, available for examination, revealed 17 familial and 23 sporadic cases of OI. As a result of molecular genetic investigation, 13 mutations were identiﬁed in the COL1A1 gene. Nine mutations identiﬁed in the present study were registered in the Human Type I and Type III Collagen Mutations Database as novel mutations.Prenatal molecular genetic diagnosis is available for 16 families with OI from Lithuania: in three families indirect identiﬁcation (RFLP-based linkage analysis) of the mutant COL1 locus is possible, while in 13 families COL1A1 gene mutations can be identiﬁed directly. Prenatal molecular genetic OI diagnosis enables choosing an optimal strategy for the follow-up of pregnancy and the type of delivery.
P0436. Prenatal diagnosis of limb malformation: towards a better 
management of patients?
S. N. Manouvrier1, D. Thomas2, L. Devisme3, P. Vaast4, B. Herbaux5, A. Dieux-
Coeslier1, O. Boute1, Y. Robert6, F. Puech4, M. Holder1;  
1Clinical genetic Unit, Lille, France, 2Pediatric Unit, Lille, France, 3Foetopathol -
ogy, Lille, France, 4Prenatal diagnostic Centre, Lille, France, 5Pediatric surgery, 
Lille, France, 6Radiology, Lille, France.
Limb malformations (LM) are frequent since their prevalence is 1 in 1000 neonates and near 4 in 1000 stillborn. They can be isolated or occur associated with other malformations as part of multiple congenital anomalies syndromes (MCA). Prenatal detection of LM by ultrasound is difﬁcult but helpful to an accurate diagnosis and prognosis. We performed a 4 years prospective study (2001-2004) on 187 limb malformations in the North of France. LM were antenatally diagnosed in 96 cases (51%), straight after birth in 54 cases (29%), and after pathological examination if pregnancy was terminated or in utero death occurred in 37 cases (20%). Results are summarised in 
the following tables.
96 Prenatal diagnoses
Isolated LM: 43Associated malforma -
tions: 53
PregnancyTerminated: 
22Followed: 
21Terminated: 
44Followed: 
9
Different 
LM (after 
pathological 
or paediatric 
examination)13/22 6/21 26/44 3/9
Associated 
malformation6/22 3/2126/44 (dif -
ferent)4/9 (differ -
ent)
Right prenatal 
diagnosis 
could change 
the pregnancy 
management2/22 1/21
LM helpful to 
accurate diag -
nosis32/44 9/9
54 Neonatal diagnoses
Isolated: 
27Associated malfor -
mations: 27
Associated malformation could 
have been detected on foetal ultra -
sound17/27
Right prenatal diagnosis could 
change the pregnancy manage -
ment1/27 16/17
LM helpful to accurate diagnosis 18/27
37 diagnoses after pregnancy termination 
or in utero death
Isolated: 3 Associated malformations: 34
LM helpful to accu -
rate diagnosis23/34
CONCLUSION Prenatal detection of limb and associated malformations on ultrasound is very helpful to accurate diagnosis of most MCA syndromes, and should be performed with more ﬁerceness for a better 
management of patients.
P0437. Twin pregnancy with discordancy for Down syndrome - a 
case report
D. F. Albu, C. Albu, E. Severin, R. Purcarea;  
"Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania.
A 29-year-old Caucasian female, pregnant for the second time, underwent to ultrasound examination because of her family and obstetric history: ﬁrst pregnancy ended after 32-week stillborn fetus (normal morphologically appearance but no karyotype was established) and her sister had a baby with trisomy 21. 
Objective: to specify the most 
appropriate safety method of Down syndrome antenatal screening. 
Methods: routine ultrasonography at 7 weeks of pregnancy, selective ultrasonography for the detection of fetal abnormality at 12 weeks, triple test at 15 weeks, amniocentesis - amniotic ﬂuid samples were taken at 16 weeks from each of the two sacs, parental and fetal chromosome 
analyses. Results: ultrasound examinations revealed a twin dizygotic 
pregnancy with dichorionic placentas; one fetus showed an increased thickness of nuchal fold; biochemical maternal serum investigations revealed low AFP, low uE3 and high HCG levels; lymphocytes from both parents blood were analyzed for chromosomal abnormalities and showed a normal karyotype for the father (46,XY) and a chromosomal translocation for the mother (45,XX, -14,-21,+t(14q21q); the positive results of the tests and maternal chromosomal translocation suggested Prenatal diagnosis174
us to perform the amniocentesis; fetal chromosomal analysis showed 
twin 1 with normal karyotype 46,XY and twin 2 with abnormal karyotype 46,XX,+21. After an extensive counseling the parents decided to terminate the pregnancy with Down syndrome. 
Conclusions : ﬁrst-
trimester nuchal translucency scan was a strong and useful screening tool for the prenatal detection of trisomy 21; family history, maternal chromosomal translocation and maternal serum biochemistry were 
also useful for selective termination of abnormal fetus.
P0438. Multidisciplinary approach to antenatally diagnosed 
gastroschisis
K. Gardner, E. Lieber , B. Rajagowda;  
Lincoln Medical Center, Bronx, NY, United States.
Congenital anomalies continue to be the leading cause of infant mortality in the United States. Cause-speciﬁc mortality rates have been decreasing, reﬂecting many factors. But, the rate of serious birth defects continues to be high in economically disadvantaged communities. In New York City, the borough with the highest birth defect rates is the South Bronx, served by Lincoln Medical Center. The obstetric service screens approximately 3,000 pregnant women annually for genetic risk with genetic counseling being provided to 
about 1,200 of these women.Between January and July of 2002, there were 1,580 live births and three fetuses were detected with gastroschisis by fetal ultrasound. This translates to a rate of 19/10,000 - more than nine times the expected rate of 2/10,000. Maternal age ranged from 17-20 years. Two of the three mothers had abnormal MS-AFPs, and were Hispanic. All were 
delivered by cesarean section and no other anomalies were detected.These patients were evaluated by a multi-disciplinary team drawn from Genetics, Neonatology, Obstetrics, and Pediatric Surgery. The etiology and unique issues associated with gastroschisis as well as the special concerns of each family were addressed. This approach, with early detection and thorough patient education, resulted in excellent outcomes for all cases. Aspects of this unusual gastroschisis cluster 
and optimal psychosocial and clinical management will be described.
P0439. Nucleated Red Blood Cells in maternal blood as a 
second step in screening for fetal aneuploidies and pregnancy 
complications
A. Kolialexi1, A. Antsaklis2, A. Souka2, S. Kitsiou3, G. T. Tsangaris4, E. Kanava -
kis3, A. Mavrou3;  
1Medical Genetics Athens University School of Medicine, Athens, Greece, 21st 
Dept Obstetrics & Gynecology, Athens, Greece, 3Medical Genetics Athens 
University School Of Medicine, Athens, Greece, 4Division of Biotechnology, 
Center of Basic Research, Foundation of Biomedical Research of the Academy 
of Athens, Athens, Greece.
Nucleated red blood cells (NRBCs) in maternal circulation during pregnancy can facilitate genetic diagnosis either by FISH or PCR analysis, but their rarity and technical difﬁculties do not as yet allow their use for reliable non invasive prenatal diagnosis. It has been noted however, that an increase of their number could indicate fetal 
aneuploidies or pregnancy complications.NRBC number in maternal blood was determined in 173 pregnancies in the 2
nd trimester. NRBCs were positively selected by MACS with 
antiCD71MoAb and identiﬁed after anti UcHγ or May Grunwald-Giemsa staining. Among cases with chromosomally normal fetuses (n=119) an average of 8 NRBCs were detected (range 1-12). Among 16 cases with a trisomy 21 fetus the mean number was 71 (22-113) corresponding to a 10-fold increase. 37 NRBCs were isolated from a woman with a trisomy 13 fetus and 52 from a pregnancy with a 45X0 fetus. 64 NRBCs ( range 22-158) were identiﬁed among 26 women carriers of β-thalassemia trait with normal fetuses. Among 10 women with abnormal Doppler in both uterine arteries 15 NRBCs were isolated (range 2-75). One woman in this group developed PET (6 NRBC) and 
another delivered an IUGR baby (75 NRBCs).Determining the number of NRBCs in maternal circulation could represent an additional screening step for fetal aneuploidies as long as the anemic status of the mother is taken into account. More cases with abnormal Doppler must be investigated however before we determine 
the use of this test in the prediction of pregnancy complications.P0440. Results of chromosomal study of 2634 amniotic ﬂuids 
performed in Iran
A. Kariminejad, H. Jafarieh, I. Rajaee, M. Mirza-Zadeh, F. Azimi, N. Nabavinia, 
R. Kariminejad, M. H. Kariminejad;  
Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Chromosomal study of 2634 amniotic ﬂuid cultures revealed that 2486 (94.4%) had no chromosomal abnormality, 41 (1.6%) had balanced translocation and 107 (4.1%) had chromosomal abnormality. The most common chromosomal abnormalities were Trisomy 21 including free trisomy, Robertsonian translocation and mosaic forms, autosomal derivative chromosomes, Edward syndrome, marker chromosomes, Turner syndrome and sex chromosome mosaic abnormalities, in decreasing order of frequency(1.1%, 0.6%, 0.5%, 0.3%, 0.2% and 0.2% respectively). Sex chromosome abnormalities represented 13 (0.5%) of all chromosomal abnormalities. The reason for referral and their frequencies were high maternal age (1389 cases, 52.7%), history of offspring with chromosomal abnormality (566 cases, 21.5%), fetal loss (530 cases, 20.1%), abnormal alpha-feto-protein in maternal serum (213 cases, 8.1%), parents’ reassurance (197 cases, 7.9%), history of offspring with any form of psychomotor retardation (164 cases, 6.2%), maternal chromosomal abnormality (79 cases, 3%), abnormal ﬁndings in ultra-sonography (48 cases, 1.8%), abnormal ﬁndings in ultra-sonography (48 cases, 1.8%), paternal chromosomal abnormality (42 cases, 1.6%), sex determination (10 cases, 0.4%) and conﬁrmation of the results of chorionic villi sampling (6 cases, 0.2%). 87.4% of the mothers had one indication for chromosomal study 21.1% had two, 1.4% had three and 0.1% had four indications. The rate of chromosomal abnormality for those who had one indication was 3.3%, those with two indications were 5.9%, those with three were 15.8% and those with four were 33.3%. Maternal chromosomal abnormalities, abnormal ﬁndings in ultra-sonography and paternal chromosomal abnormalities had the greatest standardized beta coefﬁcients in a multiple regression analysis, respectively.
P0441. The human amniotic ﬂuid proteome
G. T. Tsangaris1, A. Kolialexi2, P. Karamessinis1, A. Antsaklis3, M. Fountoula -
kis1, A. Mavrou2;  
1Division of Biotechnology, Center of Basic Research, Foundation of Biomedi -
cal Research of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Medical Genetics, 
Athens University School of Medicine, Athens, Greece, 31st Dept Obstetrics & 
Gynecology, Athens University School of Medicine, Athens, Greece.
Proteomic analysis which combines two-dimensional electrophoresis and mass spectrometry has nowadays a wide application in biological and medical sciences, mainly for protein screening in tissues obtained from healthy and diseased conditions, for the detection of drug targets and diagnostic markers. Amniotic ﬂuid samples (AF) are routinely used for prenatal diagnosis of a wide range of fetal abnormalities. In prenatal diagnosis, proteomics have been applied for the analysis of tissues from abnormal fetuses in order to detect differences in the protein proﬁle as compared to the normal one and to determine possible diagnostic tools. A detailed two-dimensional protein database for the normal human AF cells, including 380 different gene products, has already been reported. In the present study we constructed the two-dimensional protein database of the normal human AF supernatant. Ten AF supernatant samples from women carrying normal fetuses were analysed by two dimensional gel electrophoresis. A mean of 412 proteins per gel were analysed and protein identiﬁcation was carried out by MALDI MS and MS/MS. We constructed a two-dimensional protein map comprising 152 different gene products. The majority of the identiﬁed proteins are enzymes, secreted proteins, carriers and immunoglobulins. Twelve hypothetical proteins are also icluded. The normal AF supernatant proteome map is a valuable tool to study aberrant protein expression and search for new proteins as possible 
markers for the prediction of abnormal fetuses.
P0442. CVS analysis can be considered the method of choice for 
rapid cytogenetic prenatal diagnosis. Ten years of experience.
A. Sánchez1,2, C. Morales3, A. Serés4, A. Goncé4, A. Borrell4, A. Soler1,2;  
1Servei de Genètica, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2IDIBAPS (Institut 
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques Agust Pi i Sunyer), Barcelona, Spain, 3Fundació Prenatal diagnosis175
Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 4Servei de Ginecologia i Obstetricia, Hospital Clínic, 
Barcelona, Spain.
Chorionic villus sampling keeps its great advantage over amniocentesis 
due to the early results produced. Recently, quantitative ﬂuorescent polymerase chain reaction (QF-PCR) has entered in the prenatal diagnosis of classical aneuploidies (13, 18, 21, X and Y chromosomes) in amniotic ﬂuid producing extremely rapid results with a detection rate of 98.6%. However, the pathological diagnosis in mid-trimester gestation implying voluntary abortion raises a more difﬁcult situation both surgical and psychological. We present the chorionic villi prenatal diagnoses over last 10 years in our laboratory. We performed 3,868 diagnosis resulting 266 abnormal karyotypes (7%). Among them, 196 were different classical aneuploidies and/or triploidies (73.7%) and 70 (26.3%) presented another chromosomal abnormalities including balanced chromosomal rearrangements. If only QF-PCR had been performed, 26.3% of samples with abnormal karyotype would have been missed and 2% of trisomic cases, which arose from unexpected parental rearrangements would not have beneﬁted from genetic counselling, the unique prevention tool for cytogenetical abnormalities. CVS cytogenetic studies identify a wider range of chromosomal abnormalities than QF-PCR in a few days and the results can be obtained still in the ﬁrst trimester. Considering the high number of chromosomal abnormalities detected in our series, we think that the CVS analysis is the method of choice for cytogenetic prenatal diagnosis due to its informativity and rapidity.
P0443. First-trimester diagnosis of lethal skeletal dysplasia: 
transvaginal ultrasound ﬁndings
G. B. Viot, C. Ngo, V. Tsatsaris, M. Aubry, G. Grange, D. Cabrol, E. Pannier;  
Maternité Port-Royal, Paris, France.
Over 200 skeletal dysplasias (SD) have been described and around 
50% of them are lethal. Current classiﬁcation of these disorders remains highly complex and molecular basis is yet unknown for many syndromes. Prenatal diagnosis is based on ultrasonography, commonly in the 2
nd trimester between 19 and 23 weeks. Ultrasonography is 
highly speciﬁc to predict lethal outcome. However, it is of limited value for identiﬁcation of the precise bone disorder (41 to 60% identiﬁcation, 
according to literature).This report describes prenatal transvaginal ultrasound ﬁndings in 4 cases of SD during ﬁrst trimester (achondrogenesis 2; thanatophoric dysplasia type 1; short rib-polydactyly syndrome type III Verma-Naumoff; diastrophic dysplasia). One of the 4 cases was a recurrence. All 4 cases were remarkable for enlarged nuchal translucency (3.2 to 6.5 mm) associated with bone abnormalities (femora short or deformed, osteopenia, macrocephaly, extremities or spine malformations).The aim of our study is to emphasize on transvaginal ultrasound performance during ﬁrst trimester. Overall, sonographers should be aware that enlarged nuchal translucency, when associated with shortness of fetal long bones, may allow detection of lethal SD as soon 
as 13-14 weeks.
P0444. Prenatal Diagnosis of Exencephaly associated with 
amniotic band sequence at week 17 by Fetal MRI
S. Blaser1, J. Drake2, D. Chitayat3, L. Velsher4, M. Rohrbach5;  
1Department of Pediatrics, Neuroradiology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Department of Pediatrics, Neurosurgery, The Hospital 
for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical 
Genetics Program, Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada, 4Department of Genetics, North York General Hospital, Toronto, ON, 
Canada, 5Department of Pediatrics, Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hos -
pital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Exencephaly is deﬁned as partial or complete absence of the calvaria (acrania or cranium biﬁdum) associated with a protrusion of abnormally developed brain tissue and is believed to be an embryological precursor 
of anencephaly or an encephalocele.We report a case with exencephaly detected at 17 week gestation on fetal MRI. The mother was a 31-year-old primigravida woman of Asian descent who was referred at 11 weeks of gestation because of an abnormal ﬁrst trimester ultrasound which suggested an occipital encephalocele. A repeat fetal ultrasound done at 17 week conﬁrmed occipital encephalocele, but could not further elucidate the dimension of the lesion. Prenatal MRI at 17 weeks of gestation showed total absence of cranial vault with bulging of eyes and the cerebral hemispheres were ﬂoating freely in the amniotic ﬂuid. Exencephaly was diagnosed with a small band tethering the hemisphere, suggesting amniotic band. The fetal karyotype was normal (46,XX)Amniotic band sequence is a sporadic condition and can result in a variety of abnormalities including exencephaly. Exencephaly is in most cases a multifactorial condition. Other possible causes include chromosome abnormalities, single gene disorders, maternal diseases and maternal exposures to teratogens. Amniotic band sequence is a rare cause of this abnormality and is difﬁcult to be diagnosed prenatally. To our knowledge there is only one previously reported case of prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of acrania secondary to amniotic band sequence and none documented by fetal MRI. Early fetal brain MRI allows early conclusive prenatal diagnosis 
and is therefore essential for counselling.
P0445. Chromosomal aberrations as IUGR cause
B. O. Joksimovic, A. Ljubic, M. Micic;  
Institute for gynecology and obstetrics, Clinical Center of Serbia,, Belgrade, 
Serbia and Montenegro.
IUGR is a pathological condition of pregnancy characterised by birth weight below the 10th centile. A number of fetal, placental and maternal causes can lead to IUGR; although, in most cases no speciﬁc causes can be identiﬁed. We have analized fetal blood karyotype taken by cordocentesis from 168 fetuses with diagnosed IUGR. Chromosomal rearrangements both numerical and structural were detected in 17 cases (11,3%). In three cases inversion 9 (p11; q12) was found; two cases were triploid; trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome), trisomy 18 (Edwards sindrome) and trisomy 21 (Down sindrome) were found in two cases each. There was one case of trisomy 7 and one case of trisomy 16; one translocation (2; 14) (q23; q32) and a deletion 12 (p12) as well as a case of mosaicism 46, XY/46, XX (87,5% / 12,5%). These ﬁndings suggest that a consistent number of IUGR cases (about 11%) can be associated with genetic anomalies. Chromosomal aberrations that cause IUGR are heterogeneous, aberration of autosomes, mostly 
autosomal trisomies, being the most common.
P0446. Distribution of Pvu II(a) alleles at the phenylalanine 
hydroxylase gene in Republic of Moldova
A. P. Gavriliuc , S. A. Groppa;  
National Centre of Reproductive health & Medical genetics, Chisinau, Republic 
of Moldova.
Phenylketonuria is an autosomal recessive disease, which results from a severe diminution of the liver enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). More than 10 RFLPs within the PAH locus have been observed 
in Caucasians population.On the date of mass neonatal screening we established that incidence of PKU in Moldova is 1:9000 newborns. The RFLP-analysis of Pvu II(a) alleles was performed as described by Dworniczak (1991). The CAG/CTG restriction site of the PAH gene was characterized in 59 
families with classical PKU, i.e. 236 parental chromosomes.Frequencies of normal alleles (see Table) slightly differ from average date in European populations, but not signiﬁcant
 (χ2 =1,29; p>0,5) and 
reveals more similarly to the Danish families (0,227/0,773). The level of observed heterozygosity in population of Moldova is 0,37, but the average date in European countries is 0,39. The distribution of mutant PKU alleles in our study not differs signiﬁcantly from those observed in European (χ
2=0,02; p>0,08) and Asian (χ2=0,01; p>0,8) populations. 
The Pvu II(a) alleles in our populations had a signiﬁcant difference in the distribution among normal and mutant chromosomes (χ
2=7,08; 
p<0,01). Frequency of informative cases by RFLP-analysis of Pvu II(a) alleles from PKU families is 29% that provide a tool for molecular 
diagnosis of these disease and carrier status in Republic of Moldova.Table. Distributions of Pvu II(a) alleles at the PAH gene
Allele Normal Mutant χ2
E10,216±0,035 0,093±0,026
7,08;  
p<0,01
E20,784±0,035 0,907±0,026Prenatal diagnosis176
P0447. Prenatal diagnosis of Crouzon Syndrome in the high-risk 
family
A. Kutkowska-Kazmierczak1, E. Obersztyn1, R. Jaczynska1, P. Sucharski2, T. 
Mazurczak1;  
1National Research Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Collegium 
Medicum of Jagiellonian University, Cracow, Poland.
Crouzon syndrome is an autosomal dominant craniofacial dysostosis. 
The main features of the syndrome are: craniostenosis, midfacial hypoplasia, proptosis, mandibular prognathism. The syndrome is caused by mutations in the ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor-2 (
FGFR2 ) 
gene. To date, over 30 mutations in FGFR2 are known. More than a 
quarter of them are de novo  mutations.
We present a familial case of Crouzon syndrome diagnosed prenatally by ultrasound examination and conﬁrmed by molecular analysis. Three-dimensional ultrasound examination performed in 27-28 Hbd in the 1
st and 2nd pregnancy revealed a deformation of temporal region 
of the skull and dysmorphic features (ocular proptosis; shallow orbits; wide, ﬂat nasal bridge and prognathism). These signs, together with data from pedigree analysis, have led to suspicion of Crouzon syndrome. The clinical picture assessed after birth varied between the two patients. The analysis of DNA, isolated from amniocytes in the 1
st and 2nd pregnancy, revealed the same mutation as found in the 
father - S267P in 7 exon of the FGFR2 gene. Presented case is one 
of only a few prenatally diagnosed cases of Crouzon syndrome and it documents the signiﬁcance of the modern techniques of prenatal visualization - three-dimensional ultrasonography and magnetic resonance - in the diagnosis of dysmorphic syndromes. Still however, molecular prenatal diagnostics remains the method of choice in high-
risk Crouzon syndrome families.
P0448. Screening for large CFTR  rearrangements should be 
considered in the diagnostic strategy for CF in fetuses with 
bowel anomalies
C. Costa1, F. Niel1, J. Jouannic2, J. Martin3, D. Feldmann4, M. Goossens1, E. 
Girodon1;  
1Service de Biochimie et Genetique Moleculaire, AP-HP et INSERM U654, 
CHU Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, 2Service de Diagnostic Antenatal, AP-HP 
Maternité Hôpital Rothschild, Paris, France, 3Service de Biochimie et Genetique 
Moleculaire, AP-HP, CHU Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, 4Laboratoire de Bio -
chimie et Biologie Moleculaire, AP-HP, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France.
Recommended investigations when fetal bowel anomalies are detected by ultrasound include fetal karyotyping, screening for infectious disease and screening for frequent cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) mutations. CF is found in France in about 3% of fetuses with bowel anomalies at the 2
nd trimester of pregnancy. When a frequent CF mutation is 
identiﬁed in the fetus, the increased residual risk of CF justiﬁes an in-depth study of the second allele by sequential analysis of the 27 
CFTR  
exons. Detection of large CFTR gene rearrangements using recently 
developed semi-quantitative ﬂuorescent multiplex PCR assays led to recognize about 20% of previously unidentiﬁed CF alleles in various populations of CF patients, which has increased the overall mutation 
detection rate of diagnostic tools.We describe a case of fetal hyperechogenic bowel with intestinal loop dilation and absence of gall bladder, a triad highly suggestive of CF. The W1282X mutation was present in the fetus and the father. Sequential analysis of the 27 exons was negative. Screening for large rearrangements led to detect a new deletion removing exons 2-6b in the fetus and the mother and to establish the diagnosis of CF. This case illustrates the need to include the semi-quantitative test in the diagnostic strategy for CF in fetuses with bowel anomalies. Moreover, the method is rapid and sensitive enough to detect micro-deletions/insertions. When applied after testing for frequent mutations, it increases the mutation detection rate of 4.5% in our population, thus being the method of choice for 2
nd line screening, especially in 
emergency cases.
P0449. Six years of preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) for 
thalassemia, sickle-cell syndromes and cystic ﬁbrosis: a Greek 
experience
J. R. Traeger-Synodinos1, C. Vrettou1, M. Tzetis1, A. Destouni1, S. Davis2, M. 
Mastrominas3, G. Palmer4, G. Kokkali5, K. Pandos5, E. Kanavakis1;  
1Medical Genetics, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 2Embryogenesis Cen -
tre for Reproductive and Fertility Studies, Athens, Greece, 32Embryogenesis Centre for Reproductive and Fertility Studies, Athens, Greece, 4Mitera IVF Unit, 
Mitera Maternity Hospital, Athens, Greece, 5Centre for Human Reproduction, 
Genesis Hospital, Athens, Greece.
In Greece β-hemoglobinopathies and cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) have carrier-
rates of 10% and 5%. Prevention programmes involving prenatal diagnosis (PND) are well established, but PGD to select unaffected IVF embryos for transfer, is appropriate for some couples. Genotyping of blastomeres from cleavage-stage embryos uses PCR-based methods. However, there are inherent pitfalls, including total PCR failure, allelic drop-out and contamination, which may compromise accuracy of results. Additionally protocols had be applicable for >25 β-thalassaemia and >80 CF mutations encountered in Greece. Initially we used denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) but now use real-time PCR with multiplexed “mini-ﬁngerprinting” to monitor contamination (Vrettou et al, 2002; Traeger-Synodinos et al, 2003; Vrettou et al, 2004). Over >6 years, 92 couples completed 105 PGD cycles for β-thalassemia and sickle-cell syndromes. Genotypes were achieved in 78% of embryos biopsied, identifying at least one unaffected embryo for transfer in all-but-one cycle. Forty-two pregnancies were initiated, with 14 spontaneously lost. Twenty-one pregnancies produced 29 unaffected babies (8 twins, 13 singletons); PND in 4 on-going pregnancies conﬁrmed 7 unaffected babies; 3 pregnancies await PND. One misdiagnosis (14
th PGD performed), was 
detected by PND and terminated. For CF, 2 couples (of 7 counselled) completed a PGD cycle. Eleven of 14 blastomeres analysed gave genotype result, with 7 unaffected. Transfer of all 7 embryos initiated one singleton and one triplet pregnancy, all conﬁrmed unaffected by PND. Our results demonstrate that PGD for these monogenic diseases is a reliable procedure, well accepted by couples at risk for transmitting 
β-hemoglobinopathies and CF in Greece.
P0450. Correlation between fetal sex and maternal serum AFP 
and free beta-hCG during second trimester normal pregnancies
B. Brajenović-Milić1, D. Tišlarić2, S. Ristić1, M. Kapović1;  
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Rijeka, 
Croatia, 2Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital "Sestre milosrd -
nice", Zagreb, Croatia.
Objective: To study the effect of fetal sex on maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein (MS-AFP) and free β-human chorionic gonadotropin (free β-hCG) during second trimester of pregnancy.
Methods: The study included 1776 non-smoking women with singelton and uncomplicated pregnancies who were participated in maternal serum screening test for Down's syndrome. The results for both biochemical markers were converted to multiples of median (MoM) for normal pregnancy at the relevant gestational age, and were adjusted for maternal weight. The mean maternal and gestational age were 30.8±5.2 and 16.1±1.4, respectively. The log
10MoMs of MS-AFP and 
free β-hCG were compared according to fetal sex.
Results:Table1. - Comparison of MS-AFP and free β-hCG levels between male 
and female-bearing pregnancies
MALES  
(n=885)FEMALES  
(n=891)P value*
median MS-AFP MoM 0.98±0.34 0.97±0.33
mean log10 MS-AFP MoM -0.032 -0.036 0.563
median free β-hCG MoM 1.1±0.66 1.1±0.77
mean log10 free β-hCG MoM -0.022 -0.029 0.508
*One-way ANOVA test
Conclusion:  No fetal sex differences in the MS-AFP and free β-hCG 
levels were observed during common term for performing second 
trimester maternal serum screening test for Down's syndrome.
P0451. Screening for chromosomal abnormalities in the ﬁrst 
trimester using ultrasound and maternal serum biochemistry in 
a one-stop clinic: a one-year review prospective experience for 
the ﬁrst time in the Czech Republic.
I. A. Dhaifalah ;  
Palacky universtiy, Olomouc, Czech Republic.
The increase of maternal age over the last years has intensiﬁed the 
effort to develop early non-invasive methods to screen for trisomy 21 Prenatal diagnosis177
and other chromosomal abnormalities in prenatal diagnosis. In so-called 
OSCAR clinic (One-Stop Clinic for Assessment of fetal Risk), maternal age, fetal nuchal translucency, as well as maternal levels of free ß-human chorionic gonadotropin (ß-hCG) and pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A) are used as screening markers. We report our experience of combining these biochemical and ultrsonographic markers in 686 pregnant women for the ﬁrst time in the Czech Republic. The speciﬁc Down syndrome risk was calculated by using the Fetal Medicine Foundation software. Karyotyping was offered to women with risks ≥ 1 in 250. On the bases of maternal age of the screened population, 1,5 Down syndrome and 1,5 other chromosomal abnormalities were to be detected. 2 out of 2 Down syndrome and 1 out of 1chromosomal 18 were found resulting in a detection rate of 100 % with a false positive 4,8 % (33/863). The maternal age of the detected cases were 30, 38, 42 years. The population screened showed 18 % aged 35 and more. After the introduction of the ﬁrst trimester screening to our clinic, the number of invasive genetic testing decreased from 18 % to 5 %. In our experience ﬁrst trimester screening for trisomy 21 and other aneuploidies has a high sensitivity with a low false positive rate and can be delivered in an efﬁcient manner in a one-
stop multidisciplinary clinic.
P0452. Prenatal Diagnostics in Estonia from 1990-2003.
M. Sitska1, P. Ilisson1, K. Kuuse1, T. Ilus1, P. Tammur1, T. Reimand1, A. Ehren -
berg2;  
1Tartu University Clinics, Medical Genetics Center, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu Univer -
sity Clinics, Women's Clinic, Tartu, Estonia.
In Estonia (pop. 1.46 million, birth rate 13082) prenatal diagnosis of 
genetic disorders was introduced into clinical practice in 1990.Invasive PND (amniocentesis, CVS, cordocentesis). Altogether 6128 procedures have been done. Abnormalities were detected in 194 (3.2 %) cases. For fetal chromosomal analyses we mostly use 
amniocentesis (97 %).%).Alltogether 6014 amniocenteses have been done. The main indication (69%) has been maternal age. Chromosomal disorder was diagnosed 
in 176 (2.9%) cases.Transabdominal CVS we have used only in high-risk pregnancies in 69 cases. Abnormalities were detected in 14 cases (20%).Cordocentesis has been done in high-risk pregnancies in 45 cases. 
Chromosomal abnormalties were detected in 3 cases (6,6%) .
Screening of chromosomal disordres.Chromosome anomalies have been screened for advanced maternal 
age since 1995. In 2003, 52 % of women >35 had fetal karyotypes. Maternal serum screening has been routinely offered since 1998 in Women's Clinic of Tartu , and only in 2002 in whole of Estonia. In 2003, 
altogether 70% pregnant women under 35 in Estonia were monitored.During the last two years 57% of the trisomy 21(DS) cases were 
detected prenatally .Conclusion. Incidence of Down Syndrome(DS) in Estonia after prenatal screening was started has decreased: provisional incidence of DS in Estonia is 1: 660 and after prenatal screening (1995-2003) the 
incidence of DS is 1: 919 in live birth.In the future ﬁrst trimester screening is currently under development 
in Estonia .We thank private hospital Ferthal , laboratory HTI and laboratory LTKH 
for presenting their data.
P0453. Our experience with rapid detection of trisomy 21 using 
SNP markers.
B. Nagy, Z. Bán, L. Lazar, J. N. Orosz, C. Papp, Z. Papp;  
Genetic Laboratory, 1st Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis Uni -
versity, Budapest, Hungary.
Chromosomal abnormalities are the most frequent genetic disorders 
observed in both live birth and miscarriages. Karyotyping is the most common diagnostic method to detect chromosomal abnormalities. Trisomy 21 is observed in 1 of 800 live births. During the last decade ﬂuorescent-PCR and DNA fragment analysis became also to the tool of rapid detection of gender and most common trisomies. Pont-Kingdon and Lyon (Clin.Chem 49;1087-94,2003) has published ﬁrst the rapid trisomy 21 detection using SNP allele quantiﬁcation combined with melting curve analysis. We have established this method in our laboratory using primer-probe system for chromosome 21 SNPs (WIAF899 and 2643). We have isolated the DNA from 60 trisomy 21 and 49 normal karyotypic samples. PCRs were carried out using Light-Cycler-DNA Master Hybridization Probes (Roche Applied Science) in LightCycler; melting curve analysis was performed following the runs. The whole procedure including DNA isolation and PCR run takes about 2 hours. We found the new trisomy 21 detection system informative with the WIAF 899. There was a signiﬁcant difference in curve area ratios (0.5234±0,2498 vs. 0,8347±0,099; p=0,001). We suppose the quantitative PCR with combined with melting curve analysis using selected SNP markers could be an alternative method for detection 
of trisomy 21.
P0454. Detection of aneuploidies on 5000 prenatal samples by 
QF-PCR
Z. Ban, B. Nagy, L. Lazar, G. Nagy, C. Papp, J. N. Orosz, Z. Papp;  
I. Dept. of Ob./Gyn., Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
QF-PCR analysis of amniotic ﬂuid samples has advantages over cytogenetic analysis. It is fast, detects aneuploidies from minute of samples and does not require viable cells, but it can not detect some 
chromosome disorders of clinical importance.Our aims were to test the reliability of QF-PCR for the prenatal diagnosis of the common aneuploidies and to analyze the indications 
in which amnio-PCR can be applied safely in prenatal diagnosis.We compared the QF-PCR results with those of the karyotyping of 4985 patients undergoing amniocentesis. We studied the occurrence of chromosome disorders which can not be detected by QF-PCR in cases with different indications of amniocentesis.98.3% of QF-PCR results were informative without false-negative and false-positive results. 126 chromosomal abnormalities of 152 were detectable by QF-PCR. QF-PCR detected all aneuploidies in case of advanced maternal age. In case of structural abnormalities detected by ultrasound, the chromosome disorder was not detectable in 23 cases. We applied a reliable, simple and cost-effective QF-PCR protocol using 7 STRs. It is a reliable alternative to karyotyping in case of advanced maternal age, but less reliable in case of ﬁrst and second trimester ultrasound markers. Prenatal multiplex QF-PCR diagnosis of trisomies 21, 18, 13 and sex chromosome anomalies is reliable, but the indication of the prenatal diagnosis should be considered prior its 
application.
P0455. Hartsﬁeld holoprosencephaly-ectrodactyly-clefting 
syndrome: further delineation and review
C. N. Vilain1,2, S. N. Whalen1, C. Largillière3, F. Menez4, C. Garel5, A. Verloes1, 
C. Baumann1;  
1Unité de Génétique Clinique. Hôpital Robert Debré., Paris, France, 2Service 
de Génétique Médicale. ULB. Hôpital Erasme, Bruxelles, Belgium, 3Service 
d'Imagerie Médicale. Hôpital Jean Verdier, Bondy, France, 4Laboratoire de 
biologie du développement. Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 5Service 
d'Imagerie Médicale. Hôpital Robert Debré., Paris, France.
The association of ectrodactyly, holoprosencephaly and clefting was ﬁrst described in 1984 by Hartsﬁeld et al. In 20 years, only 7 patients have been reported. We present a male fetus, third child of an healthy unrelated couple. Ultrasonography at 24 weeks of gestation revealed ectrodactyly and cleft lip, suggesting an EEC syndrome. Brain MRI performed at 32 weeks of gestation showed vermis hypoplasia. After termination of pregnancy, examination of the fetus showed bilaterally hypoplastic third ﬁngers with absent nails and cleft feet with only 3 toes, left labial and gingival cleft without cleft palate, and mild hypertelorism. Neuropathologic examination disclosed short vermis and arhinencephaly.The present case appears to belong to Hartsﬁeld syndrome (HS) spectrum. Its hallmarks are ectrodactyly and holoprosencephaly, unusual hypertelorism, cleft lip and palate, abnormal, low set ears, and in some cases, hypernatremia and gonadotropin deﬁciency. Surviving children have severe mental retardation. HS has only been reported in single male fetuses. Arhinencephaly which is part of holoprosencephaly spectrum was present in 2 of these cases, but vermian hypoplasia was not reported before. Genetic basis of HS are unknown. XLR inheritance is a possibility. Mutation screening of p63 and SHH are pending.This rare observation stress the usefulness of fetal brain imaging in differential diagnosis of syndromal clefting diagnosed in utero, 
particularly when EEC is suspected.Prenatal diagnosis178
P0456. Study of maternal and paternal age in 2634 chromosomal 
studies of amniotic ﬂuid
H. Jafarieh, A. Kariminejad, M. Mirzazadeh, A. Rajaee, S. Voghouie, N. Khos -
roshahi, M. H. Kariminejad;  
Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetic Center, Tehran, Islamic Repub -
lic of Iran.
We studied the age of the mother and father in 2634 amniotic ﬂuid 
chromosomal studies. We determined the distribution of chromosomal abnormality in the fetus according to the maternal and paternal age. Age groups with a ten year interval were determined and the frequency of each group determined for both parents. The frequency of chromosomal abnormality of the fetus was determined for each age group. The age group with the highest rate of chromosomal abnormality in the fetus was 35-44 years for the mothers and 30-39 years for the father. The mean (±SD) and median of mothers’ age ware 33.8±6.2 and 35 years (ranged from 15 to 48 years) and for fathers were 38.0±7.0 and 38 years (ranged from 20 to 76 years), respectively. The mean maternal and paternal age (±SD) of parents of fetuses’ with chromosomal abnormality were 32.8±6.2 and 36.8±7.2. When we excluded the parents with chromosomal abnormality the maternal and paternal age increased to 35 and 39. The mean age of the mother with a fetus with Down syndrome was (36.5), Edward syndrome(36.5) and Klinefelter syndrome(39.5) which were higher that the mean age of mothers with normal fetus. However the mean maternal age was signiﬁcantly lower in Turner syndrome (29). The mean age of mother’s with a fetus with an extra marker chromosome was similar to the normal group. The mean paternal age was higher than the normal group in Down syndrome(39.3) and Edward syndrome(43.5), but lower in Turner(31.4), Klinefelter(35.5) and fetuses with a marker 
chromosome(33.4).
P0457. Study of consanguinity in parents of 2600 amniotic ﬂuid 
samples
M. Mirzazadeh, A. Rajaee, H. Jafarieh, A. Kariminejad, N. Miraftabi, M. Tahsili, 
M. H. Kariminejad;  
Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetic Center, Tehran, Islamic Repub -
lic of Iran.
Consanguineous marriages are common in our country, ranging from15-25%. In spite of the prevailing policy to educate couples to avoid consanguineous marriages, many couples believe that performing an amniocentesis and chromosomal study, it can prevent the birth of a congenitally abnormal offspring. In our study we conﬁrmed that there was no increased risk of chromosomal abnormality in related couples. Consanguinity was studied in parents of 2600 parents of amniotic ﬂuid samples. 79% of the parents were not related and 21% were related. The inbreeding coefﬁcient was greater or equal to1/16 in 429 (16.5%) and less in 128 (4.9%). Reasons for referral for amniotic ﬂuid chromosomal study were as follows: high maternal age, history of offspring with chromosomal abnormality, abnormal alpha-feto-protein in maternal serum, abnormal ﬁndings in ultra-sonography, fetal loss, history of offspring with psychomotor retardation, sex determination, chromosomal abnormality in parents and reassurance. Cases with high maternal age had the highest frequency of related parents (29.6%) and those with fetal loss had the least (17.8%). The frequencies of related parents in the other cases were similar and ranged from 19.5-22.1%. The frequencies of chromosomal abnormalities in related and unrelated parents showed no statistically signiﬁcant difference (3.6% vs. 4.2%, p=0.513). The frequency of Down syndrome was greater in unrelated parents 1.4% vs. 0.2%, p=0.018). The frequency of Edward syndrome and Turner syndrome were 0.5% and 0.2% in the unrelated parents, respectively, and 0.2% and 0.2% in the related group (p=0.268 for Edward, p=0.477 for Turner syndrome).
P0458. The importance of cooperation between geneticist and 
gynaecologist; results of prenatal genetic diagnostics in the 
year 2004; interesting patients.
K. Melisova1, E. Cmelova1, M. Ondrejcak1, J. Karelova1, E. Juskova1, M. Dzu -
basova1, V. Janosikova1, J. Veljacikova1, A. Cunderlik2, J. Hinst2, P. Klesken2, L. 
Turkota2;  
1Faculty hosp.Bratislava, part Kramare, Dpt.of clinical genetics, Bratislava, 
Slovakia, 2Faculty hosp.Bratislava, part Kramare, Dpt.of gynaecology and ob -
stetrics SHU, Bratislava, Slovakia.Our hospital was the ﬁrst place where the prenatal genetic diagnostics (PGD) start in Slovak republic in 80 - years. We point to close cooperation of geneticist and gynaecologist in our work. In 2004 we indicate 490 patients to PGD at our department. We cytogenetically analyzed 487 samples of amniotic ﬂuid. Successful rate of cultivation was 98,1%. Gynaecologic clinics that cooperates with us performs consiliar ultrasound (US) examinations so that is the reason, why the 
ultrasound pathology is so frequent in our set.
Indication groupsNumber  
(n)Karyotype  
normal/patho -
logicTermination of 
pregnancy
Age over 35 y. 270 256/2 2x
Bioch.screening - 
chrom. aberrations97 
91/55x
Bioch.screening - NTD 58 50/0
Inborn develop. defect 
in anamnesis6 6)0
Pathologic US result 34 34/6 16x 1xSAb
Chr.aberration in an -
amn.25 25/0
Reprod.failures in 
anamn. 5 5)0
DNA dg 10 7)0
Others 11 11)0
∑ 516# 487/13 23x 1xSAb
 the total amount of diagnoses is bigger then number of indicated 
patients (combined indications to PGD)According to the examinations the special obstetrician management is indicated, that includes delivery in the hospital, where the specialised neonatologic intervention is possible. In cases when the termination of pregnancy is realized, geneticist makes observation of the fetus, veriﬁcation o prenatally postulated karyotype is done and pathological examination is indicated. This management is necessary for determination of exact etiology and prognosis. At the end of our 
presentation we demonstrate two interesting patients.
P0459. Contingent strategies for Down’s syndrome screening
H. Cuckle1, P. Benn2, D. Wright3;  
1University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 2University of Connecticut, Farm -
ington, CT, United States, 3University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom.
Screening sequentially across both the ﬁrst and second trimester can achieve a higher Down’s syndrome detection rate than within-trimester protocols. Among sequential strategies, by far the most efﬁcient is contingent screening. This involves restricting second trimester tests to those with borderline Down’s syndrome risks based on the maternal age and ﬁrst trimester marker proﬁle. Those with very high risks are offered immediate invasive prenatal diagnosis, those with very low risks are reassured and the remainder are classiﬁed as screen-positive or screen-negative from their ﬁnal risk based on all ﬁrst and second trimester markers combined. Statistical modelling can be used to predict the detection and false-positive rates of the different strategies. For example, a contingent protocol of ﬁrst trimester maternal serum pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A and free beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) together with ultrasound nuchal translucency (NT) followed by second trimester serum alpha-fetoprotein, free beta-hCG, unconjugated estriol and inhibin-A could yield a 94% detection rate for a 5% false-positive rate. This can be achieved with 70% of Down’s syndrome pregnancies detected in the ﬁrst trimester and selecting only 15% of women for second trimester tests. Contingent screening might also be considered within the ﬁrst trimester for localities with limited ultrasound facilities: NT would be restricted to 20-30% of women selected by risk based on age and serum markers. This approach could be extended with a further contingent step to select for even more specialist scans for nasal bone hypoplasia and ductus venosus. Moreover, the within-trimester and sequential contingent approaches 
can be combined.Prenatal diagnosis179
P0460. The incidence of cystic ﬁbrosis in second-trimester 
fetuses with hyperechoic bowel
F. Stipoljev1, T. Hafner1, J. Sertić2, M. Kos1, I. Fabijanić3, A. Stavljenić-Ruka -
vina2;  
1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hospital "Sveti Duh", Zagreb, 
Croatia, 2Clinical Institute of Laboratory Diagnosis, University Hospital Zagreb, 
Croatia, 3Department of Internal Medicine, Merkur University Hospital Zagreb, 
Croatia.
Objective. To determine the signiﬁcance of fetal hyperechogenic 
bowel as a speciﬁc ultrasonographic marker for the cystic ﬁbrosis in 
the low-risk pregnant women population.
Methods. Sixteen fetuses with the echogenity of bowel of surrounding bone were included in our study. Genomic DNA was obtained from amnyocytes and fetal blood. LightCycler-based ﬂuorescent-labeled oligonucleotide melting assay use the ﬂuorimeter to screen DNA samples for the cystic ﬁbrosis mutations. The family history was negative in all cases regarding to cystic ﬁbrosis and bowel disease.
Results. The mean gestational age was 19.2 weeks ranging from 17 to 26 weeks of gestation. The screening test for cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator mutations was performed in all included cases. One fetus was found to be a heterozygote carrier for ΔF508 mutation. The presence of echogenic dilated bowel loops was noted in one fetus homozygous for ΔF508 mutation. The incidence of cystic ﬁbrosis was 6% in our study group The termination of pregnancy was performed based on the abnormal result of cystic ﬁbrosis mutational analysis.
Conclusions. The appearance of  isolated hyperechoic bowel in the 
second trimester fetuses was found to be associated with a signiﬁcantly higher risk for cystic ﬁbrosis. The ﬁnding of speciﬁc ultrasonographic marker indicates the necessity for further prenatal molecular testing, 
which is of critical importance in low-risk population.
P0461. Carrier detection and prenatal molecular diagnosis in 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy in Iranian families
M. Hasanzad1,2, A. Taromchi2, Z. Golkar2, R. Karimi-Nejad2, A. Noorian1, N. 
Almadani2, Y. Shafeghati1, K. Kahrizi1, M. H. Karimi-Nejad2, H. Najmabadi1,2;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci -
ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kariminejad and Najmabadi Pathology 
and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a lethal X-linked recessive disorder affecting 1 in 3500 male births. It is caused by mutations in the DMD gene, located on Xp21.2. Two-thirds of the patients have large intragenic deletions or duplications and the remaining one-third have point mutations, small deletions or insertions. Mutations in the DMD gene result in a progressive muscle degeneration and early death. The direct mutation identiﬁcation in female relatives of DMD patients was done using multiplex exon ampliﬁcation by PCR. Also, linkage analysis using three intragenic RFLPs and two main CA repeats was performed. During the last ﬁve years, carrier detection was performed for 118 families.Our data indicates that deletions were found in 53.1% of the patients, with 77.6% of the deletions conﬁned to the distal hot spot and 22.4% of the deletions related to the proximal hot spot. When female carriers were detected, prenatal molecular diagnoses were performed in DMD families. Prenatal diagnosis in 34 families, including 21 male and 13 female fetuses, revealed that 5 of the males were affected and 16 were normal. Four of the female fetuses were carrier and the remaining cases were normal. We also performed three intragenic RFLPs for 81 families. In 51 families, one or more of RFLPs were informative (56.2%). In the remaining families, RFLPs were not informative. The most informative RFLP was BamHI and the least was TaqI. Microsatellite analysis on 38 families was informative in 27 families. The most informative STR was STR49 and the least 
was STR45.
P0462. Early prenatal diagnosis of triploidy and nuchal 
translucency measurement in the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy
A. S. Latypov , L. R. Samoilova, L. E. Teregoulova;  
Republic Hospital of Tatarstan, Kazan, Russian Federation.
Triploidy - one of frequent chromosome anomalies at early periods 
of pregnancy, revealing signiﬁcant deﬂections in development of embryo and chorion. In ditto time, there was describeded cases of births alive children with this severe pathology. Well-timed discovery and interruption of such pregnancy is important medical and social 
problem.Objectives: Study the ultrasonic markers 1 trimester, especially measurement nuchal translucency, in triploid embryoes.Study design: We have analysed the cases triploidy, revealled in the Centre geneticists of Republic Tartarstan during 2001-2003 years.Results: There was examined on the same ultrasound technic strategy 4980 womans from 11 to 14 weeks of pregnancy, amongst which there was revealled 6 embryoes with triploidy, conﬁrmed following invasive procedure (the chorion villies samples or cordocentesis). All conﬁrmed 
pregnancy was interrupted.Conclusions: There is strong effectiveness of nuchal translucency measurement as a screening tool for the early prenatal detection of triploidy.
P0463. Evidence of blood chimerism in a spontaneous dizygotic 
twin pregnancy discordant for trisomy 21
S. Allon-Shalev1,2, E. Shalev3,4, E. Pras5, Y. Shneor1, Y. Yaron6, E. Gazit7, R. 
Loewenthal7;  
1Genetics Institute Ha'Emek medical center, Afula, Israel, 2Rappaport faculty of 
medicine, Technion- Israel institute of technology, Haifa, Israel, 3Obstetrics and 
gynecology department, Ha'Emek medical center, Afula, Israel, 4Rappaport fac -
ulty of medicine, Technion-Israel institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, 5Genetics 
Institute, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel, 6Prenatal 
Diagnosis Unit, Genetic Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, 
Israel, 7Tissue Typing Laboratory and Bone Marrow Registry, Shiba medical 
center, Ramat Gan, Israel.
A monochorionic-diamniotic placenta (MCDAP) is rare in dizygotic twinning. All reported cases have been documented in IVF pregnancies. Consequently, this phenomenon was thought to be inherent to IVF.We report a spontaneous pregnancy in a 39-year-old patient with evidence of MCDAP in dizygotic twins, discordant for trisomy 21. First and second trimester sonographic scans indicated male twins with MCDAP. Amniocentesis, performed due to advanced maternal age, revealed a normal karyotype in one fetus, and trisomy 21 in the other. Molecular studies, performed in order to conﬁrm the zygosity and chorionicity, demonstrated that the fetuses were dizygotic. In order to identity the affected twin, a detailed sonographic examination was repeated, but no abnormal ﬁndings associated with Down syndrome were demonstrated in any of the fetuses. Therefore, umbilical cord blood samples were obtained from both fetuses. Chromosomal analysis revealed in both fetuses two cell-lines: a normal cell-line of 46,XY and a 47 XY +21 cell-line, in 65% and 80% of the cells, respectively. This result was independently conﬁrmed by both FISH and G-banding. DNA extracted from both cord blood samples, demonstrated an admixture of 2 distinct genotypes in each sample. We propose that this case represents a monochorionic-dizygotic twin pregnancy with blood chimerism. The most plausible mechanism underlying this phenomenon is that of placental fusion in early pregnancy, resulting in an architectually single placenta originating from two distinct zygotes. The newly formed blood vessels created anastomoses between the dizygotic twins and allowed reciprocal blood chimerism between the 
normal and the trisomic twins.
P0464. Volume of sampled amniotic ﬂuid and prenatal 
cytogenetic diagnosis: results of retrospective study
S. Ceylaner1, M. A. Guven2, G. Ceylaner1, I. Gunyeli3, H. Ekerbicer4;  
1Zekai Tahir Burak Women's Health and Education Hospital, Department of 
Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Kahramanmaras Sutcuimam University, Faculty of 
Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Kahramanmaras, Turkey, 
3Zekai Tahir Burak Women's Health and Education Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 
4Kahramanmaras Sutcuimam University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of 
Public Health, Kahramanmaras, Turkey.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the relationship between amniotic ﬂuid sample 
volume, culture time and culture failure in prenatal diagnosis.MATERIALS and METHODS: We retrospectively evaluated the results 
of 225 cases of genetic amniocentesis performed between 16 and 20 weeks of gestation. Cases were separated into four groups according to the amount of amniotic ﬂuid obtained: group 1, 1 to 5 mL (n=12); group 2, 6 to 10 mL (n=23); group 3, 11 to 15 mL (n=10); and group 4, 16-20 mL (n=180).RESULTS: Culture time was signiﬁcantly longer in group 1 than in the Prenatal diagnosis180
other groups. (median 19 days vs. 12.5, 10, 11 days).  Even if differences 
in culture time between groups 2 to 4 were not signiﬁcant, there was 
a trend towards an increase in culture time with decreasing amniotic ﬂuid volumes. Moreover, risk of culture failure was also increased with smaller volumes. There were no culture failures in groups 2, 3 and 4, 
but two culture failures in group 1.
CONCLUSION: When necessary, small amniotic ﬂuid  volumes may be 
used for fetal karyotyping after information of the family. Small volumes of amniotic ﬂuid increase culture time, rate of culture failure and cost 
of culture.
P0465. 2nd trimester ultrasound diagnosis of hypophosphatasia 
in a low risk pregnancy due to homozygous mutation 1130C>T in the tissue nonspeciﬁc alkaline phosphatase gene
G. Scarano1, A. Nazzaro2, E. Mornet3, A. Guadagnino4, F. Lonardo1, M. Della 
Monica1;  
1Medical Genetics Unit, General Hospital "Gaetano Rummo" Benevento, Italy , 
2Prenatal Diagnosis Unit, General Hospital "Gaetano Rummo" Benevento, Italy , 
3Centre d'Etudes de Biologie Prénatale - SESEP, Université de Versailles, Ver -
sailles, France, 4Obstetric and Gynecological Unit, General Hospital "Gaetano 
Rummo" Benevento, Italy.
Hypophosphatasia is an inherited bone demineralizating disorder 
caused bymissense mutations in tissue nonspeciﬁc alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP) gene. The clinical appearance varies widely from a lethal form (perinatal) to a milder adult-onset form (odontohypophosphatasia). So far 127 TNSALP gene mutations have been associated with hypophosphatasia. A few prenatal diagnoses of hypophosphatasia have been made, all in high risk pregnancies. We believe this is the ﬁrst diagnosis of hypophosphatasia in a low risk pregnancy made, on the basis of the US scan, in a G
3 P2 28-year-old 
caucasian woman earlier than the 28th gestational week. The patient 
was referred to our tertiary centre because of a diagnosis of skeletal dysplasia. The 2D scan showed a single living fetus with generalized demineralization of all bones. Ribs were shortened and fractured, mesomelic segments of the four arms appeared shorter and curved with evidence of epiphyseal osteolysis, rizhomelic segments appeared markedly hypoplastic. The fetus appeared hydropic. Hydramnios was present. The presumptive diagnosis was made on the detection of completely demineralised calvarium which seems to be a selective US marker for hypophosphatasia. The fetus, delivered at 35 weeks by a caesarean section, died after a few hours owing to respiratory failure. Dysmorphologic, X-Ray and necroscopic examination reinforced the suspicion of hypophosphatasia, which was conﬁrmed by sequencing the TNSALP gene, showing a 1130C>T homozygote mutation. The parents were shown by sequencing to be carriers. Accurate US scan 
is a useful tool for prenatal diagnosis of hypophosphatasia.
P0466. Prenatal diagnostics of congenital malformations and 
hereditary diseases in Bashkortostan Republic of Russia
S. Murzabayeva1, R. Magzhanov1, E. Khusnutdinova2;  
1Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Bio -
chemistry and Genetics of Ufa Science Center of Russian Academy of Sci -
ences, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Prenatal diagnostics of congenital malformations and chromosomal aberrations in Bashkortostan Republic of Russia is carried out using alphafetaprotein screening, ultrasonographic diagnostics of pregnant women. Medical Genetic Center provides the second phase of prenatal screening and implements invasive methods including chorion biopsy, placentocentesis, amniocentesis, and cordocentesis. The frequency of congenital malformations in Bashkortostan Republic is 8.1 per 1000 newborn children. The most frequent malformations are multiple congenital malformations, Down’s syndrome, cleft palate. Ultrasonic diagnostics reveals 22-34% of all congenital malformations. Karyotype anomalies have been found in 871 cases from 2064 children with congenital malformations. In 20 cases prenatal diagnostics has been carried out in patients at risk with phenylketonuria, Huntington’s disease, Duschenne-Bekker myodistrophy, cystic ﬁbrosis, hemophilia, adrenogenital syndrome. Genetic registers for the seven most spread monogenic diseases have been created and are used in medical 
genetic consultation.P0467. Fetal RHD  genotyping by maternal serum analysis: a two-
year experience
M. Olivi1, A. Benachi2, Y. Giovangrandi3, P. Ernault1, T. Gaillon1, E. Gautier1, J. 
M. Costa1;  
1American Hospital of Paris, Neuilly, France, 2Hôpital Necker-Enfants-Malades, 
Paris, France, 3Hôpital Notre-Dame de Bon Secours, Paris, France.
Fetal RHD genotype determination isis useful in the management of RhD-negative women, avoiding particularly the unnecessary administration of anti-D immunoglobulin (a blood derivative) iadapt prophylactic anti-D immunoglobulin infusion to n case of a RhD-negative fetus. The discovery of fetal DNA circulating in the serum of pregnant women offers new opportunities and non-invasive determination of fetal RHD genotype has become reality.We report a two-year experience with fetal RHD genotyping by maternal serum routinely proposed in a prenatal diagnosis center. After informed consent, 285 women elected to participateaccepted blood sampling; all were Caucasian but none were allo-immunized. 
The mean gestational age was 15.2 weeks (range:8-35).In two cases the status of the fetus could not be determined (RhD-negative phenotype of the mother not in relation with a complete RHD gene deletion). Fetal RHD genotype could be determined from all other 283 maternal sera; in 179 cases the fetuses were considered as being 
RhD-positive while the others (n=104) were RhD-negative.These results could be controlled for 272 patients either by analysis of amniotic ﬂuids and/or by serological study of the newborn (11 lost to follow-up) and were in complete concordance. All sera from women carrying a RhD-positive fetus (n=170) gave positive results for RHD gene detection while all sera from women carrying a RhD-negative 
fetus (n=102) gave negative results.Fetal RHD genotype can be determined with a high level of accuracy by analysis of fetal DNA circulating in maternal serum and could be 
included in prenatal care of RhD-negative women.
P0468. Identiﬁcation of a novel de novo PAX2  mutation in a 
fetus presenting asymetric renal involvement and optic nerve 
coloboma
J. Martinovic-Bouriel1, S. Zrelli1, A. Benachi2, N. Brahimi1, C. Esculpavit1, M. 
Gubler3, M. Vekemans1, T. Attie-Bitach1, F. Encha-Razavi1;  
1Unit of Embryo-Fetal Development, Department of Genetics, Hopital Necker -
Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Unit of Fetal Medicine, Hopital Necker-
Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3INSERM U-574, Hopital Necker-Enfants 
Malades, Paris, France.
The renal-coloboma syndrome (MIM 120330) is an autosomal dominant condition including clinically optic nerve coloboma and interstitial renal ﬁbrosis, nephritis or renal failure. Eccles reported that some cases have vesicoureteral reﬂux, high-frequency hearing loss, and/or genital anomalies, while central nervous system anomalies have been occasionnally reported. These clinical signs are consistent 
with the expression of PAX2 in these tissues during development.
Termination of pregnancy was elected at 24 weeks for anhydramnios and suspicion of renal agenesis in the healthy couple with unremarkable previous clinical history. At autopsy fetus presented sequence of external features related to oligo-anhydramnios including Potter gestalt, and multiple arthrogryposis. Internal examination revealed bilateral kidney anomalies including small multicystic left kidney (1,8g), and extremely hypoplastic right kidney (0, 34g). Histology showed highly dysplastic lesions in the left kidney, contrasting the normal organisation in however hypoplastic right kidney. Ocular examination disclosed optic nerve coloboma. The association of those anomalies highly suggestive of renal-coloboma syndrome led us to perform 
molecular study of PAX2  gene.
Direct sequencing of the PAX2 coding sequence identiﬁed a single 
G deletion of nucleotide 935 in exon 3 of the PAX2 resulting in a 
frameshift mutation (131fsX158).The parents underwent ultrasound kidney examination which was 
normal in both.This is the ﬁrst diagnosis of Renal-Coloboma Syndrome in a fetal case based on the kidney and ocular histology, and another example of impact of oriented fetopathological examination in genetic counselling 
of the parents.Prenatal diagnosis181
P0469. Evaluation of relationship between ductus venosus and 
umbilical artery blood ﬂow, nuchal translucency, maternal serum PAPP-A and free beta hCG in the ﬁrst trimester.
L. Dudarewicz , L. Jakubowski;  
Polish Mother Memorial Hospital - Research Instit., Lodz, Poland.
Evaluation of fetal ductus venosus waveform is important in the 
assessment of cardiovascular system. The objective of the present study was to investigate the ductus venosus and umbilical artery waveforms in ﬁrst trimester fetuses and to correlate them with nuchal translucency thickness and maternal serum PAPP-A and free beta hCG subunit concentrations. METHODS: Fetuses between 10 and 13-14 weeks of gestation were consecutively enrolled into the study. The analysis comprised the following parameters: ductus venosus pulsatility index for veins, presence of A wave, umbilical artery resistance indices and maternal serum parameters. The Doppler and biochemical values obtained were plotted on reference ranges. RESULTS: 194 fetuses were included in the study. We observed a signiﬁcant inverse correlation between PAPP-A and umbilical artery resistance and a borderline negative relationship between the pulsatility index for veins in the ductus venosus and PAPP-A concentration. CONCLUSIONS: The umbilical artery resistance is negatively correlated with maternal serum PAPP-A levels.
P0470. Congenital perisylvian polymicrogyria in four akinetic 
fetuses
C. Rouleau1, N. Bigi1, F. Daikha-Dahmane2, J. Martinovic3, A. Clemenson4, F. 
Razavi-Encha3;  
1Hôpital Lapeyronie, Montpellier, France, 2Centre hospitalier de Poissy, Saint 
Germain en Laye, France, 3Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 4Hôpital Nord et 
Hôpital de Bellevue, Saint Etienne, France.
Congenital Perisylvian Polymicrogyria (CPP) is reported in four male fetuses, medically aborted for prenatal ultrasonographic diagnosis of 
akinesia.
Methods. Complete post mortem studies were performed including skeletal X-rays, brain ultrasonography and extensive fetopathological 
examination.
Results. All fetuses shared external features of the dyskinesia deformation sequence. Karyotypes on amniotic ﬂuids were normal. Microscopic examination of the brain revealed a bilateral unlayered polymicrogyria, surrounding the sylvian ﬁssures. At the spinal cord level, the motor neuronal population was reduced or absent, replaced by gliotic tissue. Extraneurological lesions, matching with prenatal ultrasound ﬁndings, were consisted of scattered calciﬁcations within the liver in two cases and within the myocardium in one case, with a membranous interventricular septum defect. Excess of basal ﬁbrin 
deposits was present in the placenta in one case.
Conclusion.  CPP is a rare malformation of the cortical plate, 
characterised by a bilateral abnormal gyral pattern in the sylvian regions that may be responsible for developmental and neurological problems. An X-linked inheritance, suggested by the recurrence pattern in some families, is supported by the discover of a locus at Xq28. A spinal cord involvement in CPP has been evocated in children with a club feet deformity but a few cases are documented in association to fetal arthrogryposis. Concerning the pathogenesis, CPP has been attributed to hypoxic-ischemic insult in the middle cerebral artery territory. Similar transient vascular injury may also have occurred in the spinal cord and 
in viscera during the gestation.
P0471. Prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21 by de novo robertsonian 
translocation t (21;21).
C. Gug ;  
“Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Case report: We report a fetus who had robertsonian translocation with 47,XX+21,t(21;21) karyotype. A 36 year old gravida 1, para 0 woman was referred to our Genetic Department for genetic counselling at 16 weeks gestation due to advanced maternal age. Ultrasound scan demonstrated increased nucchal thickening (0,65 cm cervical-occipital fold). Genetic amniocentesis performed upon those ﬁndings revealed a 47,XX+21,t(21;21). 45/45 amniotic ﬂuid cells were trisomic and detected in 3 independent cultures. After detailed genetic counselling parents decided to have a therapeutic abortion, which was performed at 20+2 weeks of gestation. The post abortion examination revealed a dysmorphic phenotype and the cord blood culture conﬁrmed the prenatal diagnosis. Both parents had normal blood karyotype. Causes and mechanisms of development of de novo robertsonian translocation 
in our case are discussed.Conclusions: Pathological ultrasonographic results were highly correlated with chromosomally abnormal fetus. In our opinion in all cases with abnormal ultrasonographic ﬁndings amniocentesis must be performed. Fetal karyotyping is important in counselling and in 
pregnancy management implications.
P0472. Retrospective analysis of a series of fetuses referred 
for FGFR3-related skeletal dysplasia in Greece: report of two 
hypochondroplasia cases
C. Karadimas1, S. Sifakis2, D. Trouvas1, P. Valsamopoulos1, K. Makatsoris1, V. 
Velissariou1, G. Nasioulas3, M. Petersen4, E. Koumantakis2, A. I. Hatzaki1;  
1"Mitera" Maternity & Surgical Center, Athens, Greece, 2University of Crete 
Medical School, Dept. of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, 
3"Hygeia" Diagnostic & Theurapeutic Center, Athens, Greece, 4Institute of Child 
Health, Athens, Greece.
Molecular genetic screening for detection of mutations in the FGFR3 gene related to achondroplasia, hypochondroplasia and thanatophoric dysplasia type I and II, was performed in a cohort of 65 fetuses of Greek origin with ultrasound ﬁndings consistent with skeletal dysplasia. Preliminary results include the detection of the most common achondroplasia mutation in one case and hypochondroplasia mutation in two cases. Reports of prenatal diagnosis of hypochondroplasia are very rare and the phenotype/genotype correlation in these cases is poor. Hypochondroplasia is an autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasia characterized by micromelia, short stature and lumbar lordosis, exhibiting a phenotype similar but milder compared to 
achondroplasia . Molecular genetic analysis revealed that both fetuses 
were heterozygous for the C1620A mutation resulting in N540K substitution in FGFR3 gene. We conclude that the combination of ultrasound and molecular genetic approach is crucial for establishing an accurate diagnosis of hypochondroplasia in utero and subsequently 
for appropriate genetic counselling and perinatal management. To our knowledge this is the ﬁrst study in Greece in which the assessment of genetic and prenatal ultrasound data led to the differential diagnosis of 
hypochondroplasia.
P0473. Evaluation of rapid prenatal diagnosis by QF-PCR in 
28.000 consecutive prenatal samples
V. Cirigliano1,2, G. Voglino3, A. Marongiu3, E. Ordoñez1, P. Cañadas1, P. Ga -
glioti4, T. Todros4, C. Fuster2, J. Egozcue2, M. Adinolﬁ5;  
1General Lab, Barcelona, Spain, 2Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Bellater -
ra, Spain, 3Promea, Torino, Italy, 4Obstetrics & Gynaecology University of Turin, 
Torino, Italy, 5University College London, London, United Kingdom.
The Quantitative Fluorescent PCR (QF-PCR) assay, introduced during the last few years, allows performing prenatal diagnoses of common 
chromosome aneuploidies in a few hours after sampling.In this study we report the evaluation of QF-PCR tests performed on a large cohort of 28.000 consecutive clinical specimens analyzed in two different Centers. Results were compared with conventional cytogenetic analysis. QF-PCR detected 26.768 normal fetuses. No false positives were observed. A total of 1123 abnormal karyotypes were detected by cytogenetic analysis, 1036 cases were correctly diagnosed by QF-PCR as due to trisomy 21, 18, 13, triploidies, double trisomies and aneuploidies of the XY chromosomes. Four partial trisomies were also identiﬁed together with 27 cases of chromosome mosaicism; aneuploidy detection was only hampered by maternal contamination or low level mosaicism. In 22 cases of culture failures, QF-PCR was the only evidence of fetal X, Y, 21, 18 and 13 chromosome complement.QF-PCR proved efﬁcient and reliable demonstrating 93% overall sensitivity; the assay detected 95% of clinically signiﬁcant chromosome abnormalities with 100% speciﬁcity, PPV of 100% and NPV of 99.8%.The assay reaches the purposes of relieving anxiety of most parents within 24 hours from sampling or to accelerate therapeutical interventions in case of abnormal result. Main advantages of QF-PCR are its very low cost, speed and automation, enabling to analyze more than 100 samples per day. In countries where cytogenetic analysis is hampered by its high cost and lack of technical expertise QF-PCR may 
be used as the only prenatal diagnostic testPrenatal diagnosis182
P0474. The analysis of ﬁrst year activity in chromosomal 
prenatal diagnosis laboratory in Iasi, Romania
V. E. Gorduza1, M. Onofriescu1, V. Martiniuc2;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2"Cuza-Voda" Obstetrical 
Hospital, Iasi, Romania.
We analyzed the ﬁrst year of activity of cytogenetic prenatal diagnosis 
laboratory from "Cuza-Voda" Hospital Iasi, Romania. Our laboratory make the analysis by FISH method after amniocentesis. The reasons for amniocentesis were: maternal age - more 35 years (7 cases) sonographic abnormalities (21 cases) a child with Down syndrome in pedigree (4 cases) an abnormal triple test (1 case) and stopped pregnancy (4 cases). We discovered 9 pathological cases (24.32%): 18 trisomy mosaicism (5 cases), 18 trisomy homogenous (1 case) 21 trisomy (2 cases) and a 46,XX/46,XY formula (1 case). The correlation between reason for amniocentesis and chromosomal result was: maternal advanced age - 2 cases (18 trisomy); sonographic abnormalities - 5 cases (18 trisomy- 3 cases; 21 trisomy - 2 cases); stopped pregnancy - 1 case (18 trisomy homogenous); and a child with Down syndrome in pedigree - 1 case (46,XX/46,XY formula). The results was conﬁrmed by pathological examination (5 cases ended by abortion) or by clinical examination and postnatal karyotyping (2 cases). In 2 cases (one is 46,XX/46,XY) the pregnancies are not ﬁnished, and we will wait the birth for supplimentary examinations. The presence of 6 cases with 18 trisomy against 2 cases with 21 trisomy, can be explained by presence of more severe malformations in 18 trisomy. In conclusion our study reveals the importance of chromosomal prenatal diagnosis and the necessity of clinical and paraclinical trial at women 
that make amniocentesis.
P0475. Prenatal karyotyping of fetuses concieved by 
intracytoplasmatic sperm injection (ICSI)
Z. Szigeti , Z. Ban, C. Papp, E. Toth-Pal, Z. Papp;  
I. Dept. of Ob./Gyn, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Budapest, Hungary.
The objective of our study was to determine the incidence of chromosomal anomalies in a cohort of ICSI pregnancies. We examined 146 singular, 22 twin and 1 triplet pregnancies conceived by ICSI. The patients underwent genetic amniocentesis or CVS and cytogenetic analysis. We analysed the frequency of chromosome abnormalities and their relationship to parental age. The average maternal age was 34,6±3,7 years. Amniocentesis/CVS and karyotyping was performed to evaluate the 193 fetuses from 169 ICSI pregnancies. Intrauterine karyotyping showed 5 cases of chromosome disorders out of the 146 singular pregnancies (3.4%). Three cases of trisomy 21, one case of trisomy 18 and one case of X monosomy were found. Out of the 22 twin pregnancies we found one case of trisomy 21 (4,45%), while in the triplet pregnancy all three fetuses had normal karyotypes. In case of maternal age over 35 years, we found 3 aneuploid fetuses of 80 patients (3,7%). In case of mothers younger than 35, we found 3 aneuploid fetuses of 89 patients (3,4%). We did not detect abnormal karyotype from the parents of the affected fetuses. The ratio of chromosomal abnormalities seems to be slightly increased in ICSI pregnancies. We found no fetal aneuploidy in case of paternal age over 45. The incidence of aneuploid fetuses was not signiﬁcantly increased in cases of mothers aged over 35. Our observation supports the need for fetal 
chromosome analysis of fetuses conceived by ICSI.
P0476. Prenatal Diagnosis of Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) in 
Iranian families
I. Salahshourifar , Y. Shafeghati, Z. Golkar, N. Almadani, S. Mirissai, H. 
Najmabadi;  
Genetics Research Center, the Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences 
University, Evin, Tehran, I, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common neuromuscular disorder 
with progressive paralysis caused by the loss of α - motor neuron in the spinal cord. The SMA candidate interval genes are located on the long arm of chromosome 5 (5q13) on two highly homologous copies (telomeric and centeromeric) within the SMA region. Homozygous disruption of SMN1 (survival motor neuron) is the major cause of SMA, while SMA severity is mainly determined by another genes including; NAIP (neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein), P44 and copy number of SMN2. SMN1 is the SMA determining gene disrupted in more than 90% of SMA cases. In this study, SMN1gene was analyzed in amniotic ﬂuid or chronic villous sampling (CVS) smples of 46 Iranian SMA Families, in which at least one affected child was observed. We found 19% (9/46) SMN1gene homozygous deletion in fetus samples 
and 56% (26/46) of them was carriers for SMN1 gene.
P0477. Assessment of the effectiveness of combined ultrasound 
and biochemical screening of fetal chromosomal diseases in the 
ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy.
E. S. Nekrasova, T. K. Kascheeva, T. V. Kuznetsova, V. S. Baranov;  
Ott’s Institute of OB/GYN, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Assessment of risk of fetal chromosomal diseases proceeds due to 
maternal age, concentration of PAPP-A, free β-hCG, value of nuchal translucency (NT) and presence/absence of nasal bone. It is very important to make such analysis due to lack of such investigations in Russian literature. We investigate 1025 women at 10-13 weeks of pregnancy, mean age 32 (16-47). Among all women 22% was over 35 years old. We use ultrasound scanner Aloka SSD-2000 and system of prenatal screening «Life Cycle» (Pribori Oy, Moscow). In 40 of 1025 fetuses there was NT 2,5 mm or more and 17 of them have chromosomal diseases. In 4 of 1025 fetuses there was absence of fetal nasal bone, 3 of them have chromosomal diseases and one has severe malformations. In 109 of 1025 patients there was increased risk of fetal chromosomal pathology due to results of biochemical screening, 13 of them have chromosomal pathology. Totally we diagnosed 21 out of 22 fetuses with chromosomal diseases (8 fetuses with trisomy 21, 3 fetuses with trisomy 18, 6 fetuses with Turner syndrome, one of each with trisomy 13, 47,XXY, 47,XXX and triploidy). Detection rate of combined screening in the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy was 95,4%, sensitivity and speciﬁcity was 95,4% and 88,7%, false positive rate - 11%. High false positive rate in our results can be explained due to high percent of women over 35 years in our study.
P0478. Use of plasmid calibrators to quantify fetal and total 
DNA in maternal blood : application to Trisomy 21 affected pregnancy.
A. Levy-Mozziconacci1,2, B. Ponseillé1, F. Muller3, J. Mancini4, C. D'ercole5, L. 
Boubli5, J. Gabert1,6;  
1Molecular Biology Laboratory, CHU Nord, 13916 Marseille, France, 2ERT 
MEIDIA, IFR Jean-Roche, 13916 Marseille, France, 3Biochemistral Laboratory, 
Hopital R. Debré, Paris, France, 4DIM, CHU Sud, 13916 Marseille, France, 
5Gynecology-Obstetric Department, CHU Nord, 13916 Marseille, France, 6ERT-
MEIDIA, IFR Jean-Roche, Marseille, France.
Background: Quantiﬁcation of free DNA in maternal blood is a potential 
marker of genetic disorders and complications of pregnancy. Each 
laboratory generate data under speciﬁc conditions highlighting the need of procedure standardisation, ﬁrst step to an essential multicentric study. We propose tools and a methodology for standardization of the quantiﬁcation of free DNA in maternal blood and its application in Down 
syndrome pregnancies.
Methods: We have based on an original approach of calibration wich 
consists in a standardized procedure and manufactoring plasmid DNA calibrators containing the target gene sequence: β-globin for total DNA and SRY for fetal DNA in order to have sensibilty and speciﬁcity of 100%. Fetal and total DNA are quantiﬁed in 22 serum and 12 plasma issued from women with trisomy 21 fœtus whom seven where analysed 
in both serum and plasma.
Results: Cell-free fetal DNA levels is signiﬁcantly higher only in 
maternal plasma (p<0.001). The median fetal DNA level in plasma is respectively 41.5 copies/ml and 16.6 copies/ml for Down syndrome group and control group. No statistical difference has been shown in serum or in total DNA in plasma (p>0.05) by using standardized tools 
and procedure.
Conclusion: We have developped robust calibrators to standardize 
the step of RQ-PCR analysis and to perform intra and interlaboratory comparison of fetal and total DNA detection or quantiﬁcation from maternal samples. The stability of these calibrators will permit to develop standardization and quality control programs in a multicentric 
study and larger applications.Prenatal diagnosis183
P0479. Evaluation of a new automatic procedure to extract and 
amplify fetal DNA from maternal serum
T. Gaillon , P. Ernault, M. Olivi, J. M. Costa;  
American Hospital of Paris, Neuilly, France.
Real-time PCR has become the most widely used ampliﬁcation system 
for fetal DNA analysis from maternal serum. However, sensitivity may vary from 31 to 97% depending on the laboratory thus requiring reliable protocols for PCR but also for DNA extraction.Four DNA extraction protocols were evaluated for the detection of fetal RHD gene in 30 sera obtained from RhD-negative pregnant women carrying a RhD-positive fetus; two silica-based column starting with 400µl of sample, and a magnetic silica-based automatic system starting either with 400 or 1000µl of sample. Quantitative analysis, expressed as crossing-points (Cp), reveals a slightly but signiﬁcant increase of sensitivity with the automated protocol starting with 1000µl of serum when compared with the three others that gave similar results (33.10 vs 34.08 vs 34.12 vs 34.39).A prospective evaluation of this automatic “large volume” procedure was started; 87 sera were tested either for fetal SRY (n=62) or RHD (n=25) gene. Results showed a perfect concordance with the conventional protocol usually performed in our laboratory. Neither false negative nor false positive results were observed. Furthermore, quantitative analysis of the positive sera (n=45) conﬁrmed the slight signiﬁcant increase of sensitivity with the fully automated procedure with a mean Cp values of 36.40 (vs 37.74 for the conventional one) resulting from the possibility to treat a larger volume of sample. The herein described automatic procedure provides therefore a highly efﬁcient and safe procedure for fetal DNA in maternal serum.
P0480. Mosaic 21-trisomy with varying ratio observed by 
prenatal screening
K. Hadzsiev1, M. Czakó2, B. Veszprémi3, G. Kosztolányi1;  
1Medical Genetics and Child Development, University Pécs, Medical Faculty , 
Pécs, Hungary, 2Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Clinical Genetics Research 
Group,Medical Genetics and Child Development, University Pécs, Medical 
Faculty, Pécs, Hungary, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University 
Pécs, Medical Faculty, Pécs, Hungary.
Twenty-one years old gravida was referred for prenatal examination 
because of cystic ﬁbrosis of her ﬁrst child (ΔF508 homozygote) on 14th week of pregnancy. DNA examination of chorion biopsy showed that the fetus is a normal homozygote. Screening for chromosomal aneuploidy by interphase FISH gave unexpected result: there were three of 21 speciﬁc signals in ﬁve of the 50 cells (10 %) examined. In the same sample, 85% of examined metaphase (17/20) 47,XX+21 karyotype were observed. Because of the discrepancy between the interphasic and metaphasic cells examined, repeated sampling was indicated. In the sample from the amniocentesis achieved on the 16th of gestation there were three 21-speciﬁc signals in 50% of cells (30/60) examined by interphase FISH, while all of the 11 metaphases (100%) analyzed trisomy 21 were noticed. Although we proposed fetal blood sampling to shed more light on the ratio of mosaicism, the parents following detailed information regarding the results of the previous examination and the presumable prognosis, requested termination of pregnancy. In fetal blood we could complete only interphasic examination, which showed three 21-speciﬁc signals in 130 of the 200 cells (65%) examined. In fetal ﬁbroblast cells, we found trisomy 21 in 70% (105/150) and 100% (70 mitosis) examined in interphase and metaphase cells, respectively.In the course of aneuploidy screening in more than 600 cases, we did not ﬁnd such a great difference between interphasic and metaphasic cells. We found also interesting the different proportion of mosaicism in samples gained from different dates of the pregnancy.
P0481. Results of ﬁrst trimester Down syndrome screening in 
Saint-Petersburg.
T. K. Kascheeva , E. S. Nekrasova, T. V. Kuznetzova, V. S. Baranov;  
Ott's Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St.Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Since 2003 ﬁrst trimester screening included measurements of nuchal translucency (NT), nasal bone, serum markers (PAPP-A and free beta-HCG) and maternal age. We used ultrasound scanner Aloka SSD-2000. NT measurements was made according to FMF guidelines. Biochemical screening in ﬁrst trimester was performed with Wallac equipment (Pribori Oy, Moscow) and risk calculation was made by Life Cycle software. Samples of 1089 patients was investigated. Median level of PAPP-A in Saint-Petersburg was about 35% higher compared recommended one, while level of free β-hCG didn’t differ signiﬁcantly. 380 women (35%) were of 35 years old and elder. High risk of chromosomal diseases was revealed in 29% of this group (cut off 1/250) and 85 % (7 of 8) cases of Down syndrom were detected. There were 4.7% of 709 patients at risk level less than 35. One fetus with translocation variant of DS was detected in young woman (PAPP-A = 0.76 MoM, free β-HCG = 1.45 MoM, NT = 4.77 MoM). In 3 fetuses with Edward’s syndrome PAPP-A = 0.22 MoM, free β-HCG = 0.2 MoM. We also detected 1 fetus with triploidy, 1 - with tr16, 2 - 47,XXY and 
6 - 45,X.Combined screening in the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy increases the efﬁcacy of prenatal detection of fetal chromosomal diseases.
P0482. PAPP-A and proMBP proteins in contingent prenatal 
biochemical screening and detection of different types of 
coronary artery diseases
M. Macek Sr.1, P. Hájek2, H. Cuckle3, B. Houbová1, M. Simandlová4, M. Havlov -
icová4, R. Vlk5, I. Špálová5, J. Diblík1, Š. Vilímová1, P. Potu žníková1;  
1Center of Reproductive Genetics, Institute of Biology and Medical Genet -
ics, Charles University - 2nd School of Medicine, University Hospital Motol, 
Praha, Czech Republic, 2Department of Cardiology, University Hospital Motol, 
Praha, Czech Republic, 3Reproductive Epidemiology Unit, Leeds University, 
Leeds, United Kingdom, 4Clinical Genetics Unit, Institute of Biology and Medi -
cal Genetics, Charles University - 2nd School of Medicine, University Hospital 
Motol, Praha, Czech Republic, 5Clinic of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Charles 
University - 2nd School of Medicine, University Hospital Motol, Praha, Czech 
Republic.
PAPP-A/proMBP complex and free-ßhCG were evaluated by degree of deviation from 1.6-1.9 MoM. Kryptor system was used for ﬁrst and second trimester screening (AFP and ßhCG), Elipse/LifeCycle software for aneuploidy risk evaluation and software for ﬁrst and second trimester integrated risk determination. Study of 1825 samples indicates, that category I. (normal values) and II. (border-line values) of PAPP-A/proMBP are without risk of aneuploidies. Category II. indicate increased risk of abnormal prenatal development only. Category III. (abnormal one biomarker) suggests increased risk of autosomal aneuploidy (p=0.05). Category IV. (both analyte abnormal levels) and V. (increased ßhCG, decreased PAPP-A, increased NT) point out the highest risk of autosomal/X-chromosome aneuploidies (p=0.001) with six-times increased risk of preeclampsia, abortions and prematurity. The contingent screening is recommended in categories II.-III., since for categories IV. and V. invasive prenatal diagnosis is indicated, if amniocentesis/placental biopsy are not contraindicated due to high abortion risk. No single case of trisomy 21 or other severe aneuploidy was missed. The amnio-PCR is performed in high risk/late referred pregnancies or to decrease mother’s anxiety. PAPP-A/proMBP screening was applied in adult patients with different types of coronary artery diseases (CAD). No increased levels were found in stable CAD. Highly increased levels were disclosed in unstable CAD with highest increase in NSTEMI and STEMI myocardial infarctions with area 0.92 under the ROC curve. PAPP-A/proMBP complex is earlier and more sensitive marker of acute CAD than C-reactive protein, creatine 
kinase-MB isozyme and cardiac troponin I.Supported by grants: Copernicus-2 ICA2-CT-2000-10012 and IGA 
MZ-CR NR/7962-3.
P0483. Facilitated polar body biopsy by laser-assisted 
microdissection of the zona pellucida
R. Burgemeister1, A. Clement-Sengewald2, T. Buchholz2;  
1PALM Microlaser Technologies, Bernried, Germany, 2Center for Polar Body 
Diagnosis, Planegg, Germany.
Polar body extraction allows to reveal information about the genetic status of the oocyte. This prefertilization diagnosis, which in contrast to preimplantation diagnosis is allowed in Germany, provides an option for couples at high genetic risk. In women of advanced maternal age, polar body extraction is an effective method to eliminate the age-related increased risk of aneuploidies. Genetically altered oocytes may 
be excluded from in vitro fertilization.Polar body extraction is a safe and accurate technique. However, it Prenatal diagnosis184
may be critical for the oocyte as the zona pellucida has to be opened 
to get access to the polar bodies. The most convenient and gentle method is laser-assisted microdissection. An UV-A laser of 337nm ist used to open the zona pellucida in a completey non-contact way. Subsequently a blunt-ending pipette instead of a sharp one can be used for polar body extraction. This procedure may decrease the 
degeneration rate of oocytes.
P0484. Telomeres lenght differentiation between newborns and 
their mothers
M. A. Hulten, S. Dhanjal, K. M. Getliffe, S. D. Keay, M. K. Tankimanova;  
University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom.
Telomeres are repeated DNA sequences that cap and protect ends of chromosomes. Telomere length is known to constitute a largely heritable trait, maintained during fetal development by the enzyme telomerase but shortening with each division in somatic cells after birth. Much attention has focused on the implication of telomere depletion with biological age, especially the association of reduced telomere length for the development of cardiovascular disease. It is against this background that we analyzed 38 pairs of matched blood samples from newborns and their mothers for genome wide telomere length, using real time quantitative PCR
. Newborn babies had signiﬁcantly longer 
telomeres in comparison to their mothers (mean 9,031 ± 1,511 bp vs. 5,960 ± 1,044 bp, P<0.001). Surprisingly, however, there was no correlation between maternal and newborn telomere length (r = 0.172, P=0.301), and the range of variation between mothers was small in comparison to that of their babies (range 4,087 - 8,042 bp vs. 6,439 - 12,243 bp). Consistent with previous reports we could not detect any statistically signiﬁcant correlation with telomere length in this limited maternal age range (20-39 years with majority aged 27-32). Neither did the substantial inter-individual variation between newborns relate to sex or birth weight in this cohort of normal full-term babies. This new information is of special importance as telomere length may constitute a biological marker for predicting individual risk of developing cardiovascular disease later in life - and telomere differentiation may aid identiﬁcation of fetal cells/DNA in maternal circulation.
P0485. The preimplantation genetic diagnosis in couples with 
balanced chromosomal rearrangements
I. Grochova1,2, K. Veselá1,2, P. Travnik1,2, J. Rubes2, P. Musilova2, E. Oracova1,2;  
1REPROMEDA, Brno, Czech Republic, 2GENPROGRESS, Brno, Czech Re -
public.
The preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is an established technique for patients at risk of transmitting a serious genetic disorder to offspring. One of possible indications for the PGD is when couples 
carry balanced chromosomal rearrangements.This is a retrospective review of data from a single center. We initiated a process of PGD for 19 cycles after the identiﬁcation of a parental balanced translocation. We performed PGD for translocation and aneuploidy screening using ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization (FISH).Speciﬁc FISH protocols were developed for every couple.One or two blastomeres were aspirated on day 3 after in vitro fertilisation (IVF) and analyzed with FISH technique. We used probes for aneuploidy screening and individual speciﬁc probes for chromosomal translocations. A total of 249 embryos were obtained, 228 embryos were suitable for FISH analysis. 36 embryos (15%) were diagnosed as normal or balanced. 175 embryos (76, 75%) were aneuploid or unbalanced for the translocation. 25 (10, 96%) unaffected embryos were transferred in 15 (78, 9%) cycles, achieving 3 pregnancies 
(implantation rate: 20%).All antenatal amniocentesis conﬁrmed the initial diagnosis. Post-natal 
physical examination showed no evidence of major abnormalitiesPGD is an alternative method allowing selected couples, with chromosomal abnormalities, to have healthy children. PGD may increase the implantation rate in infertile couples seeking IVF assistance. It has the advantage of avoiding repeated spontaneous abortions or therapeutic termination of pregnancies resulting from 
abnormal embryos.P0486. Prenatal diagnosis of a complete parental isodisomy in a 
live fetus coexisting with partial hydatiform mole
D. Hmida1, H. Elghezal2, M. Gribaa1, A. Chaieb3, T. Elyacoubi4, A. Saad1;  
1Department of Cytogenetic, Biology of Reproduction and Molecular Genetic, 
Farhat Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of Cytogenetic, Biology of 
Reproduction and Molecular Genetic, Farhat HachedHospital, Sousse, T unisia, 
3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,, Farhat Hached Hospital, SOUSSE, 
Tunisia, 4Department of Pathology, Farhat Hached Hospital , Sousse, Tunisia.
Objective : The aim of this study is to highlight the outcome of partial 
hydatiform mole (PHM) with a complete isodisomic live fetus.Subject and methods: A 27 years-old Tunisian women; expecting her 
third child; was investigated by ultrasound, pathological, cytogenetic 
and molecular techniques.
Results: The ultrasound scan performed at the ﬁrst trimester identiﬁed 
a hydatidiform mole with admixture of some normal-appearing villi with typical molar villi with a hypotrophic live fetus. The fetus karyotype was cytogenetically normal (46,XX) according to the examination of amniotic ﬂuid cells, but the chromosomes of each pair were extremely identical. But molecular analysis of Amniotic ﬂuid cells DNA found 
homozygous genetic markers.
Discussion: Homozygous genetic markers are paternal markers. So 
the fetus is isodisomic for the 23 pairs of chromosomes, transmitted by 
his father in duplicate.
Conclusion: Prenatal testing for fetal karyotype and genetic markers 
is therefore essential in deciding continuation and prognosis of the pregnancy. For this reason the termination of the pregnancy was 
decided.
P0487. Carrier detection and prenatal testing in families with X-
linked spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy
C. N. Yapijakis1, E. Kapaki1, M. Syrrou2, D. Vassilopoulos1;  
1University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece, 2University of Ioannina 
Medical School, Ioannina, Greece.
Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) is a rare late-onset motor neuron disorder characterized by slowly progressive weakness of the proximal muscles of limbs, bulbar symptoms, muscular atrophy, and endocrinological abnormalities (oligospermia, impotence, gynaecomastia and diabetes mellitus). The responsible mutation is a (CAG)n repeat expansion in the ﬁrst exon of the androgen receptor gene (Xq12). Here we report the study of this trinucleotide repeat in 55 members of 16 Greek families with SBMA by electrophoretic analysis of PCR products containing the polymorphic (CAG)n. The normal range, found in 200 healthy males of Greek origin, was 16-29 repeats (median 21 repeats). An abnormal size of 40-42 repeats was detected in 17 males conﬁrming the clinical diagnosis of SBMA, as well as in 11 female carriers in heterozygosity with a normal allele. Evaluation of the (CAG)n repeat in 36 parent-child pairs showed that 35 transmissions were stable, while in one case there was a contraction of one repeat (from 41 to 40). In four families, twelve prenatal tests were performed using embryonic DNA derived from CVS at 11th-12th weeks of pregnancy. Four prenatal tests resulted in positive ﬁnding of mutations in male embryos, and the respective pregnancies were terminated, after genetic counseling. The remaining pregnancies resulted in the birth of six healthy female carriers, one healthy female and one healthy male. The availability of molecular diagnostic testing for SBMA is very useful for clinical purposes (as in differential diagnosis from other motor neuron syndromes) and genetic purposes (carrier detection and 
prenatal testing).
P0488. Cordocentesis-diagnosed Congenital disorder of 
glycosylation type 1a (CDG1a) in a fetus with hydrops
M. J. Edwards1, S. O’Callaghan2, P. Woodford3, G. Spillsbury2, M. Fietz4, B. 
Fong4, J. Fletcher4, F. McKenzie1;  
1Hunter Genetics, Hunter New England Health Service and University of New -
castle, Waratah, Australia, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, John 
Hunter Hospital, Hunter New England Health Service, Waratah, Australia, 
3Hunter Area Pathology Service and Faculty of Health, University of Newcastle, 
Waratah, Australia, 4Department of Genetic Medicine, Women's and Children's 
Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia.
This fetus presented with hydrops fetalis and marked ascites on routine fetal morphology screening ultrasound scan at 19 weeks gestation Prenatal diagnosis185
. As there was some hyperechoic change in bowel wall suggesting 
cystic ﬁbrosis, fetal blood was collected in EDTA by cordocentesis. Transferrin isoelectric focussing of this plasma sample showed a distinctly abnormal pattern, consistent with congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1a. The fetus died in utero at 20 weeks gestation. At autopsy, there was severe cutaneous oedema and inverted nipples. Histopathological examination showed cerebellar hypoplasia. Other causes of hydrops were excluded by maternal serum testing for blood group isoimmunisation, TORCH or parvovirus infection and lupus autoantibodies. The delta F 508 cystic ﬁbrosis mutation was not detected. Phosphomannomutase enzyme activity in cultured amniotic ﬁbroblasts was 0.89 nmol/min/mg of protein, intrabatch controls 7.1 and 7.8, affected range (skin ﬁbroblasts) <2.1. Phosphomannoisomerase enzyme activity was normal, conﬁrming the diagnosis of CGD 1a. Mutation analysis is underway. We believe this is the ﬁrst reported case of abnormal fetal transferrin isoforms, although false negative results in this condition are well recognised. Fetal blood testing has enabled the diagnosis of a congenital disorder of glycosylation type 
1a in this fetus.
P0489. Fetal abnormalities in USG as an idication to prenatal 
diagnosis (PD)
A. Ilnicka1, B. Pawlowska1, J. Bogdanowicz1, A. Tomankiewicz-Zawadzka1, J. 
Czyżewska1, W. Szirkowiec1, E. Zdzienicka2, J. Kubalska2, S. Janabi2, T. Rosz -
kowski3, J. Garwoliński3, J. Szymkiewicz-Dangel4, J. Zaremba2;  
1Intitute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Psychiatry 
and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, 
Postgraduate Centre of Medical Education, Warsaw, Poland, 4II Department of 
Gynecology and Obstetrics, Medical Academy, Warsaw, Poland.
4095 prenatal cytogenetic tests were performed in the period 1999 
- 2003.In 575 cases (14%) fetal abnormalities detected by USG were the indication to PD. In 115 out of these cases (20%) chromosomal aberrations were found. This constitutes 46% of abnormal karyotypes detected in the overall group. Out of 115 aberrations - 102 were numerical ones: tris 18 - 28, tris 21 - 27, tris 13 - 7, Turner s. - 26, triploidy - 8, unbalanced structural rearrangments were found in 13 
cases.Among USG abnormal ﬁndings most frequent were congenital heart disease (CHD) - 139 cases, hydrocephalus - 102 cases, increased 
nuchal translucency (NT) - 83 cases.In 68 isolated CHD cases - chromosomal aberrations were found in 15%. In 71 cases with multiple fetal abnormalities, including CHD, chromosome aberrations were found in 50%. No aberrations were found in 55 cases of isolated fetal hydrocephaly. However when hydrocephaly was accompanied by other abnormalities cytogenetic 
aberrations constituted 27%.In 56 cases with increased NT as an only marker of aneuploidy - chromosomal aberrations were found in 13%. However karyotype abnormalities were documented in 19 of 27 cases (71%) of increased NT with other fetal abnormalities.We observe a steady increase of USG indications to PD: in1999 - 
10%, in 2003 - 18%.
P0490. Screening for ΔF508 CFTR and 35delG Connexin26 
mutations from maternal dry-blood samples in the 1st trimester 
of pregnancy
C. Konialis , B. Hegnefelt, S. Karapanou, C. G. Pangalos;  
Dept. of Molecular Genetics, Diagnostic Genetic Center, Athens, Greece.
AIMS Cystic ﬁbrosis has a carrier frequency of about 1/28 to 1/40 among the white Caucasian population and an incidence of about 1 in 3000 live births. One major mutation, ΔF508, accounts for the majority of the observed CF mutations in the Caucasian population. Pre-lingual, non-syndromic autosomal recessive deafness (NSRD) is also a relatively common hereditary disorder, affecting approximately 1 in 2500 newborns. One speciﬁc mutation in the CJB2 (Cx26) gene, termed 35delG, has been shown to be present in more than 70% of affected individuals and with a carrier frequency of about 1 in 40. We present our data and evaluation of a routine screening program for these mutations in pregnant women in the 1
st trimester of pregnancy, 
utilizing maternal dry-blood samples.MATERIALS & METHODS Maternal DNA was rapidly isolated from dry-blood spots and the ΔF508and 35delG mutations were identiﬁed by PCR analysis using ﬂuorescent primers followed by analysis on an ABI 310 automated sequencer. The results were reported within 48hrs, 
along with the results of the biochemical screen.RESULTS The detection method readily and unambiguously identiﬁed the ΔF508 mutation in 17 out of the 923 samples analyzed and the 35delG mutation in 2 out of 61 analyzed. This corresponds to a carrier frequency of approximately of 1/55 (1.8%) for ΔF508. The carrier frequency for 35delG is about 1/30 (3.3%), although the sample size is 
yet too small for accurate determination.CONCLUSIONS The screening for the ΔF508 CFTR mutation and the identiﬁcation of women carriers during the 1
st trimester of pregnancy 
has obvious advantages and beneﬁts over other approaches designed to prenatally detect this mutation in the fetus. The early detection of these 2 major mutations may be considered as a wide-scale prenatal screening strategy, affording the timely management of families at risk 
for CF and/or NSRD.
P0491. Comparison of developmental characteristics of 
implanted and non-implanted advanced blastocysts
T. della Ragione1, G. Verheyen2, L. van Landhuyt2, V. Papanicolaou2, P. Dev -
roey2, A. van Steirteghem2;  
1Centre for Reproductive Medicine, Academic Hospital, Dutch-speaking Brus -
sels Free University, Brussels, Belgium, 2, Academic Hospital, Dutch-speaking 
Brussels Free University, Brussels, Belgium.
Background: In single embryo transfers (SET) embryo selection is of crucial importance. The present retrospective study aimed to deﬁne which embryo parameters might be related to the implantation potential 
of selected advanced blastocysts.Materials and Methods: In cycles with SET, developmental characteristics of implanted (group A) and non-implanted (group B) advanced blastocysts were compared. The following developmental parameters were compared between the two groups: number of blastomeres on day 2 and on day 3, fragmentation rate on day 3, compaction on day 4 and cleavage pattern. Statistical analysis was 
performed by χ2 square test and t test.
Results: From the different parameters analysed, only the fragmentation rate on day 3 was different between groups A and B. Blastocysts with >10-50% fragments on day 3 showed a signiﬁcantly lower implantation 
rate (29.7%) than those with ≤10% fragments (49.4% P=0.03).
Discussion: Fragmentation rate on day 3 was related to the implantation potential of advanced blastocysts and should be better taken into account in the selection of the best blastocyst for transfer. Since the choice of the blastocyst for transfer was performed on the basis of already established criteria, it may be assumed that the selection on day 5 was carried out properly.
 
P0492. Loss of expression of MMR proteins; hMLH1, hMSH2 
and hPMS2, in secondary and therapy-related AML and MDS 
patients.
M. H. Sheikhha1,2, K. Tobal2, J. A. Liu Yin2;  
1Genetics Dept. IVF Center, Shahid Sadughi Medical University, Yazd, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2University Department of Haematology, Manchester Royal 
Inﬁrmary, Manchester, United Kingdom.
DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes are predominantly inherited DNA-
repair genes that, when mutated, confer susceptibility to cancer. Our goals were to study the protein expression of these genes in AML and MDS patients. Twenty-eight AML and 7 MDS patients were included in this study. Expression of three MMR proteins (hMLH1, hMSH2, hPMS2), plus the methylation status of promoter region of 
hMLH1  and 
hMSH2 genes, were investigated in these 35 patients. In addition, a panel of 12 microsatellite markers was selected to look for genetic instability associated with a mutator phenotype (RER+) in these patients. Lack of expression of at least one protein (MMR-) was seen in 11 of 28 AML cases (39.3%), and in 2 of 7 MDS cases (28.6%). This rate was 60% (3/5) in secondary, 50% (3/6) in therapy-related and 29.4% (5/17) in de novo AML patients. Both t-MDS patients were MMR-
, while all 5 de novo MDS patients were MMR+. The rate of MMR- was 
61.5% in RER+ AML patients (8 out of 13) while this rate was 20% in RER- AML patients (3 out of 15). All the patients with hypermethylation of either 
hMLH1  or hMSH2 genes showed lack of expression of the Cancer genetics186
same protein. Our results suggest that abnormalities of DNA mismatch 
repair due to lack of MMR protein expression is higher in secondary and therapy-related AML and MDS pateints than this rate in de novo
 
patients. Our data also showed a strong correlation between RER+ 
phenotype and lack of expression of MMR proteins.
P0493. Molecular cytogenetics of ovarian granulosa cell tumors 
by comparative genomic hybridization
Y. Lin1, H. Eng2, Y. Jan3, H. Lee4, W. Ho3, C. Tzeng1;  
1Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan Republic of China, 2Chang Gung Uni -
versity and Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan Republic of China, 3Taichung 
Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan Republic of China, 4Tri-Service 
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China.
Objective. Patients with stage I granulosa cell tumors (GCTs) may occasionally develop metastasis, which is hard to predict using pathologic criteria. It is interesting to elucidate whether certain chromosomal imbalances (CIs), detected by comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), could be useful prognostic markers. 
Methods. 
CGH was used to identify CI(s) in 37 adult-type GCTs from 36 women. Nonrandom CIs were compared with clinical and pathological features to evaluate their signiﬁcance as a prognostic marker. 
Results. Twenty-
two (61%) of the 36 primary tumors had CIs. One woman’s tumor showed identical CIs to another tumor that occurred in contralateral ovary 2 years later, supporting a metastatic nature. The nonrandom CIs included losses of 22q (31%), 1p33-p36 (6%), 16p13.1 (6%), and 16q (6%) and gains of 14 (25%), 12 (14%), and 7p15-p21 (6%). No tumor exhibited high-level ampliﬁcation. The associations between each CI and pathological features, including the growth pattern, tumor size, and mitotic activity, were not evident. The only CI repeatedly detected in tumors with metastasis was monosomy 22, which presented in 2 of the 4 cases with metastasis but also in 2 of the 5 cases without recurrence for more than 5 years. 
Conclusions. Monosomy 22 was 
the most common CI in GCTs, which often coexisted with trisomy 14 (in 55% cases). Deletion of 22q seems to be, albeit not very speciﬁc, associated with the risk of early metastases of stage I disease. The role of loss-of-function mutation(s) of certain putative tumor suppressor 
gene(s) on 22q is worthy of further investigations.
P0494. Analysis of Ile105Val Polymorphism of GST-P1 gene in 
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma from Iran - case control 
study
F. Biramijamal1, M. Sanati1, N. Saligheh Araghi2, S. Tanhaei3, G. Iravanloo4, A. 
Allameh5, R. Shariﬁ5, K. Banihashemi1;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Shahid 
Beheshty University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Cancer Institute, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran.
To investigate the genetic association between functional polymorphism 
(Ile105Val) in Glutathione-S-transferase (GST-P1) gene and incidence 
of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), the GST-P1  
genotypes were determined by direct DNA sequencing and RFLP analysis in 25 patients with ESCC (Fars ethnic group), 13 patients had 
p53 gene mutations in their tumors, and 83 unrelated healthy controls (42 Turks and 41 Fars ethnic groups). The incidence of esophageal cancer among Turks and Fars ethnic populations are recorded to be moderately high and low respectively. The patients carrying the G allele of GST-P1 (AG +GG) had more frequently CpG transition 
mutation in the 
p53 gene in their tumor compared with patients with 
the AA genotype ( p value = 0.00029). But the frequency of A allele was 
demonstrated more among ESCC patients. Polymorphisms in GST-P1  
occurred signiﬁcantly different in Fars and Turks ethnic groups and the G allele of GST-P1 (AG + GG) had more frequent among Turks ethnic 
group similar to Fars patient group with CpG transition mutation for p53 gene. Our ﬁnding suggested that GST-P1 genotype may play an 
important role in developing the CpG transition mutation for 
p53 gene 
and the developing esophageal tumor among Fars ESCC patients. This work was supported by NIGEB project number 148, 197 and IDB grant to F.B.P0495. PIK3CA mutations in familial colorectal and endometrial 
carcinomas
M. Ollikainen1, A. Lindroos1, N. Nupponen2, R. Butzow2, P. Peltomäki1;  
1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Helsinki University Central Hospital, 
Helsinki, Finland.
Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling pathway is activated in multiple cancers, which is associated with malignant cellular behavior. Activation may result from activating mutations in PI3-kinase genes or inactivating mutations in the tumor suppressor gene PTEN. PI3K/AKT and RAS pathways have been proposed to converge since binding of PI3K to activated RAS may activate the catalytic domain of the PI3-kinase (PIK3CA). While PIK3CA mutations occur with variable frequencies in sporadic tumors, their role among 
familial tumors is unknown.We explored the oncogenic role of PIK3CA mutations in colorectal (CRC) and endometrial carcinomas (EC) from patients with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) with germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes, or patients with familial CRC or EC without germline mutations in known genes. We focused on exons 1 (p85 binding), 9 (helical domain), and 20 (kinase), representing 
known mutational hotspots in CRC.Somatic PIK3CA mutations were found as detailed in Table 1. PIK3CA mutations, and immunohistochemically detected PTEN inactivation were mutually exclusive. Likewise, mutations in PIK3CA and KRAS 
were mutually exclusive.
Table 1. Proportion of tumors with PIK3CA mutations according to 
mismatch repair gene germline mutation status
MMR gene germline mutation
present absent total
CRC 4/46 (8.7%) 2/22 (9.1%) 6/68 (8.8%)
EC 10/61 (16.4%) 2/30 (6.7%) 12/91 (13.2%)
total 14/107 (13.1%) 4/52 (7.7%)
PIK3CA mutations were predominantly associated with EC with MMR gene germline mutations. Mutually exclusive involvement of PIK3CA vs. PTEN or KRAS suggests that alterations of each gene are sufﬁcient to activate the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway in colorectal and 
endometrial carcinogenesis.
P0496. Relative ﬂuorescent quantitation using capillary 
electrophoresis for assaying Loss of Heterozygosity in tumor 
samples
S. Karudapuram1, L. Joe1, A. Wheaton1, T. McElroy1, Y. Lou1, A. Rico2, C. 
Stemmer3, A. Schneider3, M. Gaub3, M. Legrain3, P. Oudet3;  
1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Applied Biosystems, 25 
Avenue de la Baltique B.P.96, 91943, Courtaboeuf Cedex,, France, 3Service de 
Biochemie et de Bilogie Moleculaire, Hopital Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France.
A variety of capillary electrophoresis based fragment analysis applications require the measurement of peak height comparisons across samples as a relative quantitation method. Some of these applications include screening for Loss of Heterozygosity (LOH), Microsatellite Instability (MSI) and detection of chromosomal deletions and duplications. The success of these assays depends on having optimized chemistries, a robust and reliable electrophoresis platform as well as ﬂexible, accurate analysis software. In this study we use a LOH assay to demonstrate relative quantitation using capillary electrophoresis. Microsatellite markers were run on the Applied Biosystems 3130
xl Genetic Analyzer and peak heights were compared 
across paired samples from tumor and healthy tissues. Using GeneMapper® v3.7 Software candidate LOH samples were ﬂagged for easy identiﬁcation and review. Our results highlight the 3130 Series Systems in conjunction with GeneMapper® Software as an optimal solution for relative ﬂuorescent quantitation assays.Cancer genetics187
P0497. Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer - Where 
does the buck stop?
J. E. Geary1, J. Mackay2, L. Izatt3, H. Dorkins4, R. Houlston5, S. V. Hodgson6;  
1St George's Hospital Medical School, London, United Kingdom, 2Great Or -
mond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3Guy's 
and St Thomas' Hospital Trust, London, United Kingdom, 4The North West 
London Hospital NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 5The Royal Marsden 
NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 6St George's Healthcare Trust, London, 
United Kingdom.
We are auditing the services and quality of care received by Hereditary 
Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC) families under the care of the London Regional Genetics Centres. All HNPCC families with a known mutation, or microsatellite instability or loss of protein on immunohistochemistry testing are included in the audit. Regional Genetic Centre notes are being assessed and follow-up details acertained from information held by their family doctor. Currently 136 families have been assessed, including 602 at-risk family members of whom 294 are known to live in the geographic area studied. One third of these families do not ﬁt the Amsterdam (Modiﬁed) Criteria. 180 individuals have had genetic testing carried out; in 162 individuals tested there was evidence in the notes that counselling was offered and in 162 cases
 a mutation testing consent form was found. 158 individuals 
were recommended a surveillance protocol by the genetics centres, but only in 13 cases did the patient notes specify which member of the combined services was responsible for ensuring follow-up. From the available data, 47 of 158 individuals were documented to be adhering to the recommended surveillance protocols. 56 abnormalities from 234 screening episodes were detected, 9 resulting in the detection of a cancer. Further, we have investigated the spectrum of cancers within families, in relation to the speciﬁc HNPCC mutation. More colorectal cancer is seen in families with MLH1 mutations and there is a marked 
increase in urothelial cancers in those with MSH2 mutations.
P0498. Systematic functional testing of the 3p21.3 critical region 
for tumour suppression of lung cancer
A. ter Elst, B. E. Hiemstra, W. Kamminga, I. Davelaar, A. Y. van der Veen, G. J. 
te Meerman, C. H. C. M. Buys;  
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
In lung cancer, a critical region of 370 kb containing 19 well-deﬁned genes has been deﬁned in the 3p21.3 region. In a systematic test for tumour suppressor activity, we have introduced seven PACs overlapping the critical region into a well-transfectable lung cancer cell line. We have used PACs to make it likely that the genes are accompanied by their main regulatory sequences. We check stable transfectants for complete PAC integration, purity, single site of integration and absence of ampliﬁcation, and have injected clones meeting all criteria into nude mice for tumourigenicity studies. In nine experiments, each on 24 mice, a PAC has been subcutaneously injected on either side of every mouse. Per experiment we used for one side of the mice one of two transfectant clones containing one of the PACs, for the other side of the mouse one of two transfectant clones containing another PAC. The tumours were carefully isolated, measured and weighed, four weeks after injection. The mean weight of the tumours caused by transfectants containing the centromeric PAC was signiﬁcantly less than that of the tumours caused by transfectants containing one of the other six PACs. This centromeric PAC contains two genes (PL6, 101F6). Our result suggests that one or both of the genes are more important for tumour development than genes on the other PACs.
P0499. The yield of chromosomal aberrations frequency in 
children with acute leukaemia using methods GTG banding, 
FISH, CGH, HR-CGH
D. Mentzlova1, A. Oltova1, V. Linkova1, P. Kuglik2, J. Sterba3, M. Pesakova1, V. 
Vranova2, D. Mendelova3, D. Zezulkova1, H. Filkova1;  
1Dept.Medical Genetics, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Dept.
Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University Brno, 
Brno, Czech Republic, 3Clinic of children oncology, University Hospital Brno, 
Brno, Czech Republic.
We report results from the study of 33 children with acute lymphoid (25) and myeloid (8) leukaemia. Karyotyping of bone marrow cells is an important step for the precise diagnosis and for the choice of the adequate treatment in leukaemic patients. Twenty six patients were examined in the time of diagnosis and seven in relapse.The cytogenetic analyses were performed on 24-hours bone marrow cells cultured in RPMI 1640 according to the standard methods. GTG banding technique revealed clonal karyotypic abnormalities in 45% 
(15) samples.Cytogenetic ﬁndings were conﬁrmed by ﬂuorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH) method.Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) was used on bone marrow samples obtained from this patients in time of diagnosis or relapse. CGH showed new DNA copy number changes in 70% (23) patients. For the ﬁrst time we were tested the modiﬁcation of CGH. We show examples of submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances being detected with this high resolution CGH technique (HR-CGH). By HR-CGH we 
detected new chromosomal aberation in more than 75% cases.Here we present comparing among GTG-band karyotyping, CGH and 
HR-CGH results.
P0500. Towards a better deﬁnition of unclassiﬁed genetic 
variants in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes: the clinical approach.
E. B. Gomez Garcia1, T. Ambergen2, M. J. Blok1, A. van den Wijngaard1;  
1Dept. Clinical Genetics, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Dept. Methodology and 
Statistics, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
One third of the nucleotide variants in BRCA1 and half of those in BRCA2 are genetic variants of uncertain signiﬁcance, also known as unclassiﬁed variants (UVs). Pre-symptomatic testing is not possible and genetic
 counseling can only be based upon the clinical features 
and family history.Whether patients with an UV have different clinical features than those with a mutation in the BRCA1/2 genes had not been investigated. Using BRCAPRO and Myriad II models, we retrospectively obtained the mutation probabilities in 24 patients with an UV. The UVs included: in BRCA1:Arg841Trp, Asp1739Gly, and IVS19: 5313 -25 A>C, and in BRCA2:Tyr42Cys, Ser384Thr, Lys467Arg, Pro655Arg, His1085Arg, Ser1750Phe, Arg2108His,Thr2337Ile, Ala2717Ser, Glu2856Ala, and Lys2950Asn. Secondly, we compared their clinical features and family history with those from 46 patients with an established pathogenic 
mutation.The probability to detect a mutation was signiﬁcantly lower in the group with UVs than in those with mutations (BRCAPRO: M±SD.297±.312 vs. .627±.315 p=.001; Myriad II: M±SD.124±.090 vs. .283±.176, p=.001). Presence of tumors other than invasive breast and ovarian cancer, number of affected relatives and of tumors among relatives correlated with that difference. The last two variables were independent predictive factors of ﬁnding either an UV or a mutation.The combined probability data show signiﬁcant differences between both groups. Individual probabilities (“low” vs. “high”) can be regarded as a help to guide the clinical management of patients with an UV in those genes. However, with the clinical criteria, evaluation of the pathogenicity of an UV should also include biochemical and 
epidemiological criteria.
P0501. Loss of 18q as a predictive factor for chemotherapy in 
stage II colorectal cancer
M. Caganova1, I. Hikkel2, A. Žákovičová2, D. Ilenčíková2;  
1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of Genetics, 
Mlynská dolina, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2National Cancer Institute, Department of 
Genetics, Klenová 1, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Colorectal cancer is the second most common cause of death from cancers in Slovakia. Patients diagnosed with colorectal cancer are divided into clinical stage I - IV according to the level of tumor´s 
invasion.The most discussing stage, when concerning adjuvant chemotherapy, is stage II characteristic for metastatic negative lymph nodes and other organs. Stage II-patients are not prognosticly unique at all. One subgroup shows prognostic similarity to stage III (worse prognosis), the other is similar to stage I. Adjuvant therapy is often not recommended to stage II for its uncertain beneﬁt, whereas patients in stage III with metastasis in lymph nodes undergo chemotherapy as a standard therapy.Recent studies have shown that what divides patients in stage II into two subgroups might be the status of the long arm of chromosome 18 (18q). If the tumor loses 18q (with potential tumor suppressor gene Cancer genetics188
DCC) it seems to acquire aggressiveness with high probability of 
metastatic progression. Therefore loss of 18q is connected with worse prognosis that equals prognosis in stage III. Stage II patients with 18q loss might beneﬁt from adjuvant chemotherapy.We screened 50 parafﬁn-embedded (stage II) tumors for the loss of 18q using PCR assay with primers speciﬁc for microsatellite markers 
on chromosome 18q.Our aims were (1) to asses the effectiveness of chemotherapy, that 
these 50 patients in stage II had taken, according to their 18q status;(2) to compare PCR-DNA diagnosis with FISH (Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization) focused on marker gene Bcl-2 localized telomeric to 
DCC.
P0502. The canine model in human genetics
H. Murua Escobar1,2, J. T. Soller1, A. Richter2, B. Meyer2, S. Winkler2, R. 
Nimzyk2, I. Nolte1, J. Bullerdiek2;  
1Small Animal Clinic, Hanover, Germany, 2Centre for Human Genetics Bremen, 
Bremen, Germany.
The canine genome offers a wide ﬁeld for genetic studies on various areas like e.g. phenotypic diversity, heredity and diseases including cancer. The different canine “purebred” breeding programmes led to expression of various recessively inherited diseases and allowed to observe that the different breeds have particular predispositions for these diseases. The “Canine Genetic Disease Information System” contains the clinical, pathological and genetic features of more than 370 genetic disorders. This offers the rare opportunity for human clinical geneticists to identify breed speciﬁc disease associated genes and to study them including their heredity in well documented canine pedigrees. Especially in cases where the number of human patients is small the high number of canine offspring is useful.In terms of cancer the dog shows additional advantages. The dog enjoys after the human the best medical care of all organisms allowing a detailed surveillance of the cancer, its progression and therapy. At least a dozen distinct canine cancers are hypothesized to be appropriate models for their human counterparts, among those osteosarcomas, mammary carcinomas, oral melanomas, lung carcinomas and malignant non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas.We cloned and characterized more than 10.000 canine ESTs, various disease and cancer related genes and evaluated these genes as targets for development of new therapeutic approaches done in dogs. Among the canine 
HMGA1 , HMGB1 , ZNF331 , CCND1  etc. 
The obtained results show that the canine genes and the deduced proteins are closer to their human counterparts compared to the rodent counterparts emphasising the importance of the canine model for 
human genetics.
P0503. Insertion of an Alu repeat in exon 3 of BRCA2: a 
candidate Portuguese founder mutation
R. D. Brandão, P. Machado, J. Eugénio, P. Rodrigues, F. Vaz;  
CIPM - IPOFrancisco Gentil, Lisboa, Portugal.
Genetic screening of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in the Portuguese Breast/Ovarian Cancer Families was performed in high risk families. Selection criteria were either 25% of BRCA1/2 combined probability of mutation, according to BRCAPRO or Myriad methods, or male breast cancer in the family.In 50 non-related families screened for both genes, only one recurrent mutation was found in 3 of them. After PCR ampliﬁcation of a 425bp product, corresponding to exon 3 of BRCA2 and its intronic boundaries, an extra product with approximately 800 bp was visible in all these 3 samples. The sequencing of this product followed by a BLAST search revealed an Alu motif insertion. Analysis of cDNA was performed using primers in exons 1 and 10 (corresponding to a PCR product of 1.3 Kb) revealing exon 3 skipping. This leads to protein truncation in codon 137 and disruption of the two transcription-activating regions of BRCA2 (residues 18-60 represent a primary activating region; residues 60-105 
represent an auxiliary activating region).Other Breast/Ovarian Cancer Patients were screened for this mutation and we observed it in 5 additional non-related families. Another family had already been studied by another group (E. Teugels, BicDatabase AN: 2971). In two of our 8 families the index patients were male with breast cancer. One of these also developed prostate cancer under 60 as did two of his ﬁrst degree relatives. Besides this, female breast cancer was the most frequent cancer observed.Haplotype studies are in progress to conﬁrm if this is a Portuguese 
BRCA2 founder mutation.
P0504. Co-existence of neocentromeric marker 3q and trisomy 
3 in two different tissues in a 10 year old boy having B-cell 
lymphoma: Support of a gene dosage effect hypophesis
J. R. Batanian1, K. Zenhenpan2, J. Frater1, G. Gale1;  
1Saint Louis University, Saint Louis, MO, United States, 2Cardinal Glennon 
Children's Hospital, Saint Louis, MO, United States.
A very small supernumerary de novo marker chromosome was ascertained during cytogenetic diagnosis of a 10 year old boy with B-cell lymphoma. The marker was C band negative but appeared mitotically stable. The marker was found in 15/15 lymph node cells and 10/14 pleural ﬂuid cells. The marker was duplicated in 5 of 10 pleural ﬂuid cells. An unstimulated bone marrow cultures revealed the presence of trisomy 3 in 10 of 15 cells. Two additional cells had the marker. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with chromosome-speciﬁc painting probes, alpha satellite probes, subtelomere probes, and physically mapped probes from chromosome 3q was performed and showed the marker to be consisted of inversion duplications of distal portions of chromosome 3q that contain no detectable alpha satellite DNA. The presence of a functional neocentromere on this marker chromosome was conﬁrmed by immunoﬂuorescence with antibodies to centromere protein-C (CENP-C). The extent of the marker chromosome was characterized by FISH using mapped BAC clone directed onto 3q27 (BCL6) that appeared duplicated. Whole or partial trisomy 3q represents the most recurrent chromosomal abnormality occurring in marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (MZBCL) suggesting that the 3q contains a critical region for the pathogenesis of MZBCL. This case which is unique by the fact that the bone marrow revealed a clone of trisomy 3 whereas the lymph node and pleural ﬂuid showed a neocentromeric marker of 3q supports the hypothesis that a gene dosage effect rather than a speciﬁc gene disruption may be involved in 
the developmentof this disease.
P0505. The DNA mismatch repair gene PMS2 is more frequently 
involved in Hereditary Non Polyposis Colorectal Carcinoma than 
thought
J. Wijnen ;  
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
PMS2 is a MutL homologue mismatch repair gene, involved in repair of single base mismatches and insertion-deletion loops. To date, seven 
disease-causing PMS2 mutations have been reported: three causative 
for Hereditary Non Polyposis Colorectal Carcinoma (HNPCC) and four causative for Turcot's syndrome. Our aim was to further delineate the 
role of PMS2 in HNPCC.
We performed Southern blot analysis in 112 MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6  
mutation negative HNPCC (suspected) families. In 8 patients, selected from 875 familial colorectal carcinoma cases including (suspected) HNPCC cases, on the basis of negative PMS2 and positive MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 staining on a tissue micro array, we performed a mutation scanning by Southern blot analysis (genomic rearrangements) and sequence analysis (point mutations). Subsequently 38 (from the 112) cases were scanned for point mutations. Families with a predicted 
truncating PMS2  mutation were further analysed.
Four genomic rearrangements and three PMS2 protein-truncating 
point mutations were identiﬁed. Three of these seven families fulﬁl the Amsterdam II criteria. The pattern of inheritance seems to be autosomal dominant with a decreased penetrance (older age of cancer onset) compared to families with pathogenic 
MSH2 or MLH1 
mutations. Microsatellite instability and immunohistochemical analysis performed in HNPCC related tumours from proven carriers showed in all an MSI-High phenotype, and absent PMS2 staining indicative for 
the involvement of PMS2  in the aetiology of these tumours.
We show that heterozygous truncating mutations in PMS2 play a 
frequent role in HNPCC (suspected) families. We advise mutation 
scanning in patients with absence of the PMS2 protein.Cancer genetics189
P0506. A Protein Phosphatase 2A Regulatory Subunit Can 
Modulate the Spindle Assembly Checkpoint
D. Markie, L. Wallis;  
Dunedin School of Medicine, Dunedin, New Zealand.
The spindle assembly checkpoint monitors spindle structure in early 
mitosis, and delays the onset of anaphase until all chromosome-microtubule attachments are appropriate to provide accurate segregation of chromosomes. The Bub1b protein (also known as BubR1) plays a critical role in this mechanism with mutations reported in sporadic aneuploid tumours and in cases of Mosaic Variegated Aneuploidy, an inherited developmental disorder characterised by somatic aneuploidy and tumour predisposition. There is also evidence that Bub1b is involved in attachment sensing and reorganisation, inhibition of the anaphase promoting complex, and initiation of apoptosis in polyploid cells that have escaped mitotic arrest without satisfying the spindle checkpoint. However, the detailed mechanism and regulation of Bub1b activity in these processes is poorly understood. We have identiﬁed a speciﬁc PP2A regulatory subunit (B56gamma) that interacts with phosphorylated BubR1 in vivo. PP2A regulatory subunits such as B56gamma confer substrate speciﬁcity to the catalytic subunit in the PP2A complex. BubR1 becomes transiently phosphorylated in mitosis and we have found that treatment of cells with a PP2A inhibitor extends the period of Bub1b phosphorylation. Furthermore, overexpression of B56gamma in cells reduces phosphorylation of Bub1b and decreases mitotic arrest in response to nocodazole, an agent that activates the checkpoint through spindle disruption. These results suggest Bub1b phosphorylation status is important in mitotic progression and implicate 
PP2A-B56gamma in its regulation.
P0507. 2300 HNPCC families: research, diagnostics and patient 
care - The German HNPCC Consortium meets the challenge
E. Mangold1, C. Engel2, E. Holinski-Feder3, C. Pagenstecher1, H. K. Schack -
ert4, M. von Knebel-Doeberitz5, T. Goecke6, E. Kunstmann7, R. Buettner8, H. 
Vogelsang9, S. Krueger4, M. Kloor5, G. Moeslein10, J. Willert11, J. Rueschoff12, M. 
Loefﬂer13, P. Propping1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Medi -
cal Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology,, University of Leipzig, Germany, 
3Institute of Medical Genetics, Ludwig-Maximilian-University, Munich, Germany, 
4Department of Surgical Research, Dresden University of Technology, Ger -
many, 5Department of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University 
of Heidelberg, Germany, 6Department of Human Genetics, Heinrich-Heine-
University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 7Human Genetics, Ruhr-University Bochum, 
Germany, 8Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, Germany, 9Department 
of Surgery, Technical University, Munich, Germany, 10Department of Surgery, 
Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 11Department of Medicine, 
Knappschaftskrankenhaus, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany, 12Department 
of Pathology, Klinikum Kassel, Germany, 13Institute of Medical Informatics, 
Statistics and Epidemiology, University of Leipzig, Germany.
Adequate approaches to HNPCC require clinically and genetically well characterized HNPCC patient cohorts of reasonable size. Since 1999, a registry for HNPCC families has been established in Germany. In a multi-disciplinary approach, six university hospitals collect clinical data of HNPCC families or patients suspected of HNPCC, provide genetic and clinical counseling, tumor tissue analysis, molecular genetic workup, predictive testing and surveillance examinations. Data storage, quality control and biostatistical analyses are performed centrally. A reference pathology center is in charge of histopathology data. So far, 2300 families meeting the Bethesda criteria are included in the study and germline mutations have been identiﬁed in 405 families. This cohort, which is one of the largest HNPCC cohorts world-wide, represents an ideal population for analyses in genetics, pathology and phenotype as well as evaluation of diagnostic and therapeutic strategies. Up to now studies on this cohort have produced important results in various ﬁelds: Mutation analysis uncovered MLH1,c.1489_1490insC as a frequent founder mutation in the German HNPCC cohort. Studies on genotype-phenotype correlations revealed that MLH1 mutation carriers have a younger age at diagnosis than MSH2 mutation carriers both in regard to ﬁrst cancer (41 vs. 44 years) and to ﬁrst CRC (42 vs. 46 years) and that the rate of CRC was higher in MLH1 versus MSH2 mutation carriers. In addition, the German HNPCC Consortium established a novel sequential strategy that can be used to minimize 
costs of screening diagnostics.This work was supported by the Verbundprojekt "Familiärer Darmkrebs" 
of the Deutsche Krebshilfe.
P0508. Deletion of 9p is signiﬁcantly more common in metastatic 
than in primary gastrointestinal stromal tumors
Y. Chen1, H. Tseng2, Y. Jan3, C. Liou1, C. Lu1, C. Tzeng1;  
1Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan Republic of China, 2Kaohsiung Veter -
ans General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan Republic of China, 3Taichung Veter -
ans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan Republic of China.
Objectives: Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common mesenchymal tumors of the gastrointestinal tract. Current diagnostic criteria could not reliably predict the metastatic behavior of this tumor. Whether presence of certain chromosomal imbalances (CIs) could be applied as reliable genetic markers for such a purpose 
is worthy to be examined.
Methods: Fifteen metastatic GISTs to the liver, as proved positive for CD117 immunoreactivity, were analyzed using comparative genomic hybridization. The CIs present more often in the metastatic tumors were determined by comparing with the CI pattern of the 28 primary GISTs reported previously (Chen Y et al. J Biomed Sci 2004; 11:65-
71).
Results: All tumors had a variable number of CIs, with nonrandom deletions more common than gains. The common CIs were deletions of 15q (80.0%), 1p (73.3%), 9p (53.3%), 14q (53.3%), 22q (46.7%), and 6q (40.0%), and gains of 17q (40.0%). Comparing with the CI pattern of the 28 primary GISTs revealed that the most saline differences were deletions of 9p and 6q. Their detection rates in primary and metastatic GISTs were 7.1% (2/28) and 53.3% (8/15) for 9p deletion, with minimal overlap on 9p13-p22 (
p = 0.001), and were 7.1% (2/28) and 33.3% 
(5/15) for 6q deletion, with minimal overlap on 6q11-q16 ( p = 0.040), 
respectively.
Conclusion : Among the common nonrandom CIs, 9p deletion was 
signiﬁcantly more often identiﬁed in the metastatic than in primary GISTs, which appears to be a useful marker to predict the metastatic behavior of this tumor.
P0509. Study of NSCLC gene expression and single nucleotide 
polymorphism
K. Välk1, T. Vooder2, A. Kurg1, A. Metspalu1;  
1Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology,Tartu Uni -
versity, Tartu, Estonia, 2Clinic of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery of Tartu 
University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia.
Cancer is worldwide problem and lung cancer is one of the frequent ones causing ca 1 million deaths every year. Although early stage lung cancer is in most cases surgically curable, about 80% of lung cancer cases due to tumor spread or distant metastases need either radiotherapy, adjuvant or neoadjuvant polychemotherapy. Despite of certain success achieved in the ﬁeld of combined therapy, the prolonged use of it is limited by developing resistance to drugs and side effects of this treatment.In everyday lung cancer diagnostics histological classiﬁcation is used. Accordingly, lung cancer is divided to small cell lung carcinoma (20% of all lung cancers) and non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC, 80% of all lung cancers) including three main groups: squamous cell carcinoma (20-35%), giant cell carcinoma (4.5-15%) and adenocarcinoma (30-50%). Despite of lung cancer histological subgroup diagnostics, the clinical course of the same stage patients is quite different. This fact suggests that histological form of cancer is not sufﬁcient predictor of 
clinical course of the disease.In the current study we have analyzed gene expression patterns of different NSCLC types using human 30K microarrays in hope to ﬁnd differentially expressed genes that would help us to predict the survival and clinical course of the patients. In the second step we look for SNPs from the region where the alternatively expressed genes are located. Finally we intend to develop the microarray based analytical test for 
everyday clinical practice of NSCLC.
P0510. Analysis of VEGF single nucleotide polymorphisms -1154 
A/G and 936 C/T in sporadic colon cancer
T. Cacev1, S. Radosevic2, K. Pavelic1, S. Kapitanovic1;  
1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2PLIVA d.d., Zagreb, Croatia.
Colon cancer is one of the most frequently diagnosed cancers in Cancer genetics190
Western Societies. Tumor growth requires the formation of new blood 
vessels, a process called angiogenesis. The most important regulator of angiogenesis is vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) that is overexpressed in several tumors. We examined genotype and allele frequencies of two VEGF SNPs, -1154 A/G in the promotor region and 936 C/T in the 3' untranslated region. VEGF -1154 GG genotype is associated with higher VEGF expression, while -1154 AA genotype is associated with lower VEGF expression. Carriers of a 936-T allele have reduced VEGF plasma levels. VEGF low producers genotypes may confer protection, whereas high producers may have a promoting effect on tumor progression. The aim of this study was to determine wether these SNPs might inﬂuence the risk for sporadic colon cancer 
development and progression.A total 150 colon cancer patients and 150 unrelated cancer-free controls were genotyped for the VEGF -1154 and 936 SNPs using real-time PCR TaqMan
® SNP genotyping assay and PCR-RFLP method. 
Genotype frequencies for VEGF -1154 were 12.6%, 49.6% and 37.6% in control population and 14.2%, 49.6% and 36.2% in colon cancer for AA, AG and GG genotype respectively. Genotype frequencies for VEGF 936 were 69.4%, 29.9% and 0.7% in control population and 69.9%, 26.7% and 3.4% in colon cancer for CC, CT and TT genotype respectively. There were no signiﬁcant associations between colon cancer susceptibility and -1154 and 936 genotypes however a role of 
other polymorphisms within VEGF cannot be excluded.
P0511. The relation between telomere length/ telomerase activity 
and proliferative effects of 190BCR-ABL and 210BCR-ABL fussion genes 
on hematopoietic cells
N. Y. Kutlay1, M. Ozcan2, A. Tukun1;  
1Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, An-
kara, Turkey, 2Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Hematol -
ogy, Ankara, Turkey.
The product of the Philadelphia chromosome translocation, the BCR/
ABL oncogene, exists in different principal forms that are found in distinct forms of Ph-positive leukemia, suggesting these proteins have different leukomogenic activity. Distinct forms of leukemia are differed from each other with respect to levels of telomerase and telomere lengths also. It has been known that telomeres and telomerase are essential in the regulation of cell life-span and division. It has been hypothezed that the difference in leukomogenic activities of distinct forms of 
BCR/ABL oncogene could be related with the telomere 
length and telomerase activity of the hematopoietic cells which were transformed by these proteins. We have directly compared the 190
BCR-
ABL and 210BCR-ABL forms of BCR/ABL with regard to the telomerase 
activity, telomere lenght and proliferative rate of both myeloid (32D cl3) and lymphoid (Ba/F3) cell lines transformed by both oncogenes. This study tested whether telomerase inhibitors suppress growth of cell lines related with telomer length and telomerase activity. There was found a difference between the telomerase related leukomogenic effects of 190
BCR-ABL and of 210BCR-ABL. 210BCR-ABL has been suggested to 
have a direct effect on telomerase activity in both cell lines.This work was supported by Ankara University, Scientiﬁc Research 
Projects Foundation
P0512. Determination of typical and atypical signals of 
chromosomes 9 and 22 in CML and ALL cases using by Bcr/Abl 
ES Dual color probe
S. Berker-Karauzum1, S. Yakut1, Z. Cetin1, E. Dirice1, I. Karadogan2, A. Kupe -
siz3, G. Tezcan3, G. Luleci1;  
1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and 
Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department 
of Internal Medicine and Hematology, Antalya, Turkey, 3Akdeniz University, 
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology , Anta -
lya, Turkey.
FISH probes with different properties can be used for determination 
of t(9;22) translocation including; Bcr/Abl Dual color/Single fusion, Dual color/Dual fusion and ES Dual color probes. In this study, we evaluated t(9;22) translocation in 59 cases with ALL, which constitute 42 pediatric and 17 adult cases, and 37 cases with CML by using ES-FISH technique. We observed atypical FISH patterns of chromosomes 9 and 22 in 8 cases of 37 CML cases (22%) and in 10 of 59 ALL cases (17%). These are; trisomy 9 in one Ph- CML (3%) and two ALL (3%) cases, ASS locus deletion in four cases (11% in Ph+ cases), double fusion of M-Bcr/Abl in two CML (7%) and one ALL cases (2%), four fusion of M-Bcr/Abl in one CML case (3%) and isochromosome 9q in one CML case (3%). Also, we found minor(m) Bcr/Abl fusion in four ALL cases (7%): one case had four copy m-Bcr/Abl signals, and one case had also monosomy 9. Furthermore, three signals for chromosome 22 were found in three ALL cases (5%), one of which had also trisomy 9. Twenty-eight of 37 CML cases (76%) and two of 59 ALL cases (3%) were found to have a simple t(9;22) translocation (M-Bcr/Abl fusion) 
by ES-FISH.Given these results, Bcr/Abl ES dual color probe decreases the false-positive results and detects structural and numerical abnormalities on chromosome 9 and 22 simultaneously. Therefore Bcr/Abl ES Dual color probe can be preferable for FISH studies in hematological 
malignancies.
P0513. Genetic polymorphism analysis of p53 in Iranian 
population with three different ethnicity and incidence pattern of 
Esophageal cancer
S. Tanhaei1, F. Biramijamal2, M. Sanati2;  
1Beheshti University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for 
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The incidence pattern of esophageal cancer is different among Iranian population and is up to 171/100,000. The p53 tumor suppressor gene is involved in the etiology of malignant disease. Several studies were described the polymorphism at codon 72 of the p53 gene (CCC, proline/CGC, arginine) and susceptibility of several types of cancer. 
Also, it was reported that p53 genotype is involved in patient survival.To investigate the relationship between p53 codon 72 polymorphism and incidence pattern of EC among different ethnicity, we collected samples from healthy population from three different ethnicity groups (Mazandarani from Babol, Turk from Urmieh and Turkomans from Gonbad). Incidences of esophageal cancer in Gonbad, Babol and Urmieh are highest, moderate and low respectively. The 
p53 
Pro72Arg genotypes were determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) and direct DNA sequencing analysis in 126 healthy controls. Among the healthy subjects with Mazandarani, Turk and Turkomans ethnicity, the genotype frequency of 
p53 Pro72Arg were 15.4% , 36.6% and 39.1 for Arg/Arg, 
56.4% , 51.2 and 54.4% for Arg/Pro, 28.2% , 12.2% and 6.5% for Pro/Pro, respectively. Signiﬁcance difference in p53 allele distribution was observed between Mazandarani and Turkomans healthy individuals ( X
2 =11.15 , P <0.01). In each groups, the distribution of genotypes 
ﬁts the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Our ﬁnding suggested that p53 
genotype play an important role in developing and an increasing incidence pattern of esophageal tumor among Turkomans.
This work was supported by NIGEB project number 197.
P0514. New complex variants of the simple translocations in 
leukemia cases.
Z. Cetin1, S. Yakut1, S. Berker-Karauzum1, A. Ugur2, K. Temizkan2, I. Karado -
gan2, G. Luleci1;  
1Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and 
Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine Department 
of Internal Medicine and Hematology, Antalya, Turkey.
t(9;22), t(8;21) and t(1;7) translocations are frequently observed in CML, AML-M3 and ALL respectively and complex variants of these translocations can be observed in leukemia cases rarely. We present here, three cases with new complex variant translocations, First case was a 60 year old male diagnosed as CML. Bcr/Abl fusion gene detected by FISH and RT-PCR. Karyotype of bone marrow cells was 46,XY[10]/46,XY,t(1;6;9;22)(p36.1;p21.3;q34;q11)[10]. Patient treated with Glivec subsequent to INF-γ therapy for two years. He is currently at follow-up as chronic phase CML. Second patient was a 68 years old male diagnosed as AML-M2. Karyotype of bone marrow cells was 45,X,-Y,t(8;16;21)(q22.1;q13;q22)[9]/46,XY, t(8;16;21)(q22.1;q13;q22) [13]. AML/ETO fusion detected by FISH. Patient treated with Ara-C + Ida (7+3) as remission induction and two courses of HIDAC as consolidation therapy. Patient achieved remission but died because of the early relapse. Third case was a 16 years old male diagnosed as CML. Bcr/Abl fusion was detected by FISH. Patient treated with Glivec subsequent to INF-γ+ AraC for one year. Transformation to ALL Cancer genetics191
was observed one year later. Karyotype of bone marrow cells at this 
time was 45,XY, der (7) t(1;7;22)(p31;p21;q13.2),-9[25]. Three courses of the HyperCVAD+Glivec was applied to patient. After given FLAG therapy, he died because of the progressive disease. Our results show that possible alterations of genes located in these breakpoints involved in complex variant translocations might effect relaps and overall survival durations of the patients. Therefore, determination of complex variant translocations at diagnosis might have prognostic signiﬁcance 
in hematological malignancies.
P0515. Identiﬁcation of polymorphisms in exon 4 of the p53 gene 
among Iranian esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
N. Saligheh Araghi1, F. Biramijamal2, M. Sanati2, G. Iravanloo3, S. Tanhaei4, B. 
Bayat2, M. Banouii2;  
1Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Ge -
netic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Cancer 
Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Beheshti University, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
It is recorded that most cancers carry p53 gene mutations. The p53 
protein is considered a key combination in countering stress messages such as DNA damage. The frequency of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), the predominant cancer in esophagus, is very high in northern Iran and identiﬁcation of 
p53 gene mutation is very 
important to ﬁnd the major causes of this type of cancer in Iran.In this investigation, we assessed allele frequency of 
p53 
polymorphism among ESCC patients with Fars ethnic group. The p53 
Pro72Arg genotypes were determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) and direct DNA sequencing analysis in 166 healthy controls and 35 patients. Among the healthy and ESCC patients subjects with Fars ethnicity, the genotype frequency of 
p53 Pro72Arg were 34.3% and 31% for 
Arg/Arg, 44.6% and 49% for Arg/Pro, 21.1% and 20% for Pro/Pro, respectively (
X2=0.17, P>0.9). No signiﬁcance differences were found 
for p53 genotype distribution among patients and healthy individuals. Our ﬁnding suggested that 
p53 genotype does not play an important 
role in developing esophageal tumor among Fars ESCC patients.This work was supported by NIGEB project number 197, 206 and the IDB grant to F.B.
P0516. Assessing NAD(P)H: quinine oxidoreductase 609C→
T polymorphism using simple PCR method on formalin-ﬁxed 
parafﬁn-embedded human colon and esophageal tumor tissues 
from Iranian cancer patients
F. Zandi1, F. Biramijamal1, M. Sanati1, G. Iravanloo2, K. Shamimi3, D. Farhood4,1;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Cancer Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tehran 
Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
The NAD(P)H: quinine oxidoreductase ( NQO1) is applied in the 
detoxiﬁcation of numerous endogenous and foreign compounds. It has 
been shown that homozygous patients having TT allele exhibit negligible 
NQO1 enzyme activity. The lack of NQO1 activity might increase the 
risk of certain types of toxicity and cancer. We assessed NQO1  609C→
T polymorphism in genomic DNA isolated from blood and formalin-
ﬁxed, parafﬁn-embedded human colon and esophageal tumor tissues from Iranian individuals by a simple PCR method. Also, the results were conﬁrmed by Direct DNA sequencing. Because the frequency of 
NQO1 C609T polymorphism has not been reported among the Iranian population so far. Therefore, the current study presents a simple and 
feasible method for detection of NQO1  genotype in Iran.
This work was supported by NIGEB projects number 176 and 197.
P0517. Mechanisms of apoptotic induction and cell cycle 
inhibition in cancer cells by novel compounds synthesized by 
using analogue synthesis and structure-based drug design
C. Lee, M. Kim, H. Lim, Y. Cho;  
Dept. Medical Genetics, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, Re -
public of Korea.
In recent years, it is known that normal cellular proliferation is tightly regulated by the activation and deactivation of a series of proteins that constitute the cell cycle machinery. The expression and activity of these cell cycle components can be altered during the development of a variety of diseases, such as cancer. Apart from yielding a new source of therapeutic target, it is likely that manipulating the activity of such proteins will provide an important route for treating cancers. The Cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) are Serine/Threonine protein kinases, which play a pivotal role in the transition from the G1 to S, and G2 to M phase of the cell cycle. Therefore, in an attempt to search for a speciﬁc CDK inhibitor with minimal side effects, the current authors synthesized an analogue of Toyocamycin and Sangivamycin, MCS-C2. Furthermore, in the course of screening for a novel inhibitor of CDK2 using the Structure-Based Drug Design (SBDD), we isolated CR2-R29 from the chemical library. The present study investigated the selective anti-neoplastic potential with signiﬁcant low toxicity and mode of action of apoptotic inductions by MCS-C2 in human cancer cells (HL-60, LNCaP, PC-3 and DU145), and CR2-R29 in HeLa and PA-1 cancer cells. The two compounds showed the inhibitory activity to the cell cycle progression, and apoptotic inductions in various human cancer cells, but no effect in normal cells. As the result, we suggest that MCS-C2 and CR2-R29 are novel potent anti-cancer drug candidate through the cell cycle regulation inhibition and apoptosis as CDK inhibitor .
P0518. BRCA1 mutations in Algerian breast cancer patients: 
high frequency in young, sporadic cases.
A. Abdelouahab1, N. Uhrhammer2, L. Lafarge2, R. Kraiba1, A. Kouchkar1, A. 
Bendib1, Y. Bignon2;  
1Centre Pierre et Marie Curie, Algiers, Algeria, 2Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont-
Ferrand, France.
Studies of breast cancer in Northern Africa have found striking differences with european breast cancer patterns. The size and grade of breast tumors in the Maghreb are increased, while the median age of onset is much younger. The increased size and grade may be explained by late discovery. Differences in diet and lifestyle, particularly earlier and more frequent childbirth, may change breast cancer incidence, as might genetic differences, or combinations of these factors.We tested the contribution of mutations in 
BRCA1 to breast cancer in 
Algeria. We used the same criterea to deﬁne ‘familial’ cases that we use for our french families, and added early onset ‘sporadic’ cases suggestive of a genetic predisposition component. All exons and splice-junctions of 
BRCA1 were sequenced. QMPSF was used to 
detect deletions and duplications.Cases were chosen at the Pierre and Marie Curie Hospital in Algiers according to the following criterea: age of onset before 38 years, or two or more affected ﬁrst degree relatives. 48 early onset sporadic cases (average age at diagnosis 31.1, range 18 to 38) and 5 familial cases 
(average age at diagnosis 39.3, range 32 to 53) were included.We observed six deletions of one to 29 nucleotides, and a change in the donor splice site of exon 5. No nonsense or missense mutations were observed. There was no difference in the average age of mutated sporadic cases (32, range 26 - 37) versus non-mutated sporadic cases 
(31, range 18 - 38) or mutated familial cases (37.2, range 32-41).
P0519. Molecular study on frequency of single nucleotide 
polymorphism of DNMT1 among Iranian patients with gastric 
cancer
F. Khatami, S. Akhoundi, M. Jedi-Tehrani, M. Zali, B. Noori-nayer;  
Research center for gastroenterology and liver disease, Tehran, Islamic Repub -
lic of Iran.
Introduction: Mutations of the DNMT1 gene has been frequently reported in gastric cancer. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been presumed to be associated with the genetic susceptibility to cancer. We have hypothesized that SNPs within the DNMT1 may be associated with sporadic gastric cancer.Method: we designed a case-control study of age, sex and ethnicity matched patients with sporadic gastric cancer and healthy controls. Up to now we have enrolled 70 cases and 65 controls. Genomic DNA was extracted and the locus for the SNP: 721186 on exon 20 of the DNMT1 gene was ampliﬁed. We used RFLP reaction by the AcyI enzyme. The undigested amplicons were of 300 base pairs (bp). In case of homozygoutes state for the CC allele the amplicons were digested to 100 and 200 segments. The heterozygoutes had three bands at 300, 200 and 100 bp.Results: The frequency of the CC, CT and TT genotypes among the cases and controls were: 98% vs. 98% , 0% vs. 0% , 2% vs. 2% respectively. The C and the T allele frequencies among the cases and controls were Cancer genetics192
98% vs. 98% and 2% vs. 2% respectively. There was no signiﬁcant 
difference between the cases and controls.Conclusion: Our result shows that the SNP: 721186 polymorphism of the DNMT1 gene has no apparent association with gastric cancer among a sample of Iranian patients. Further investigation involving more patients and more polymorphisms are required to delineate the true role of DNMT1 polymorphisms in the pathogenesis of gastric cancer.
P0520. Gene expression analysis of PAX2 and PAX8 in patients 
with sporadic renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
T. Viktorova1, M. Babjuk2, J. Duskova3, V. Soukup4, J. Stolz4, P. Goetz1, J. 
Mares1;  
1The Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical Faculty of Charles 
University, Prague 5, Czech Republic, 2Clinic of Urology, 1st Medical faculty of 
Charles University, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 3The institute of Pathological 
Anatomy, 1st Medical Faculty of CharIes University, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 
4Clinic of Urology, 1st Medical faculty of Charles university, Prague 2, Czech 
Republic.
Background: Sporadic renal cell carcinoma is one of the most common urological malignities in adults (85%). According to the IARC (The International Agency of Research on Cancer) is Czech Republic on the ﬁrst world position at incidence and mortality for RCC. The prognosis of RCC is very poor because of high mortality up to 40% and unpredictable progression after tumor abstraction. More precise molecular prognostic markers are required. Genes PAX2 and PAX8 control cell division during embryonic development and play crucial role in tumor development because of stimulation of cell proliferation 
or/and inhibition of apoptotic program.Material and Method: Our RCC sample collection (collected since 2002) contains 61 patients. mRNA was isolated from tumor cells and nonmalignant renal cells and converted into cDNA. Expression of PAX genes was analyzed by using relative quantiﬁcation real time PCR with TaqMan labeled probe. Gene GAPDH was chosen as an endogenous 
control.Results: Expression of PAX2 gene was found in 94% and expression of PAX8 gene was found in 89% of analyzed samples. The level of expression of both PAX genes was very variable with the range from hundred times lower to forty times higher compare to the expression of chosen endogenous control. Correlation between level of PAX2 expression and tumor size was found (p=0.07) on the cut-off of statistic signiﬁcance.Summary: These results haven’t got prognostic value yet because of short duration of patient observation. Follow-up clinical data are 
essential for completion of our research.Research is supported by IGA MZ 7519-3.
P0521. Differential methylation of LAMC3, SEMA6B, VCIP135 
and BIN1 CpG islands in breast cancer identiﬁed by methylation-sensitive restriction ﬁngerprinting (MSRF).
E. Kuznetsova1, L. Lubchenko2, I. Zborovskaya3, V. Strelnikov4, D. Zaletayev1;  
1Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Center 
for Oncology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Carcinogenesis, Rus -
sian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Research 
Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, 
Russian Federation.
MSRF is designed to screen for altered methylation patterns in 
genomic DNA. By use of our MSRF modiﬁcation we have identiﬁed four abnormally methylated CpG islands belonging to LAMC3, SEMA6B, VCIP135 and BIN1 genes encoding laminin gamma 3 chain; semaphorin 6B; valosin-containing protein p97/p47 complex-interacting protein p135 and bridging integrator 1, respectively, in breast cancer (BC) DNA samples.Laminins are major glycoproteins of the basal laminae. By methylation-sensitive PCR we detected methylation of LAMC3 5’-CpG island in 13/54 (24%) samples.We presume that LAMC3 gene abnormal methylation in cancer samples may result in disruption of cellular-lamina contacts resulting in cell cycling disbalance and metastatic 
spreading.Several members of semaphorin family have already been shown to take part in cell proliferation and differentiation, cell signaling and interactions with proto-oncogenes. Abnormally methylated CpG island 
of SEMA6B was detected in 17/54 (32.5%) of BC samples.VCIP135 gene product conaining an OTU (Drosophila ovarian tumor) domain is known to be necessary for VCP-mediated reassembly of Golgi stacks after mitosis and its possible roles in carcinogenesis are yet to be evaluated. We observed methylation of promotor region 
VCIP135 in 9/54 (16.7%) samples.BIN1 encodes a MYC-interacting protein with features of a tumor suppressor. Abnormally methylated CpG island of BIN1 was detected in 11/54 (20%) of BC samples.We detected no methylation of all investigated CpG islands in control 
peripheral blood lymphocytes and apparently intact breast tissues.Epigenetic alterations in above genes have not been reported previously.
P0522. Urothelial carcinoma detection with ﬂuorescence in situ  
hybridization
D. Yasar1, Z. Cetin1, S. Berker-Karauzum1, B. Akkaya2, T. Koksal3, G. Luleci1;  
1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and 
Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department 
of Pahtology, Antalya, Turkey, 3Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Depart -
ment of Urology, Antalya, Turkey.
Cystoscopy and cytology are techniques, which have high speciﬁcity but poor sensitivity for urothelial carcinoma detection. Identiﬁcation of genetic alterations at chromosomal or DNA level in urological malignancies is very important for evaluation of the response against therapy. We have performed FISH analysis by using centromeric and locus speciﬁc DNA probes to interphase tumor cells obtained from urine, without prior knowledge of clinical ﬁndings, that is pathology, cytoscopy and cytology results. A mixture of ﬂuorescent labeled probes for centromeres of chromosomes 3, 7 and 17 and band 9p21 (p16/CDKN2A) gene was used to assess urinary cells for chromosomal abnormalities, indicative of malignancy. A total of 16 urine specimens from 11 male and 5 female bladder cancer patients were analyzed. Two of these specimens were grade 1, ﬁve were grade 2, seven were grade 3 and two of them were grade 2 or grade 3 with pT2a stage. We found three specimens were tetraploid for chromosomes 3, 7 and 17, 3 specimens were tetraploid for these chromosomes and deleted for 9p21, one were triploid for chromosomes 3, 7 and 17 and normal for 9p21, two were triploid for chromosomes 3, 7 and 17 and deleted for 9p21, two specimens were deleted for 9p21, one specimen was normal and we have detected 4 non-speciﬁc ampliﬁcations. Our results strikingly showed that, these chromosomal pathologies could be detected in not only grade 3 specimens also found in grade 1 tumors, therefore FISH is very sensitive to detect urothelial carcinoma, 
even in earlier stages.
P0523. Investigation of mitochondrial common DNA deletion (5 
Kb) in Iranian patients with Gastric cancer
M. Bagher Shiroodi1, F. Mahjoubi2, M. Montazeri2, M. Shafa Shariat Panahi2, 
M. R. Abbaszadegan3, M. Houshmand2;  
1Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Ge -
netic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Booali 
Research Center, Mashad, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Human mtDNA is a supercoild, double stranded circular molecule compromising 16.569 base pairs. It codes for 13 proteins (all subunits of the respiratory chain complexes), 22 tRNAs and 2rRNAs. It has been known that mtDNA is far more vulnerable to mutations than nuclear DNA due to its lack of histone protection, limited repair capacity, and closed to the electron transport chain, which constantly generates peroxide radicals. In solid tumors, elevated expression of mtDNA - encoded subunits of the mitochondrial electron respiratory chain may reﬂect mitochondrial adoption to gain cellular energy requirements.Mt DNA mutations occur in a wide variety of cancers and may have utility in detection of cancer. We investigated the presence of mtDNA common deletion (a 4977bp deletion which characteristically ﬂanks by direct repeats) using conventional molecular techniques such as PCR, Southern blotting etc. We analyzed DNA from 30 parafﬁn embedded gastric adenocarcinoma tissues and 30 blood specimens for this deletion from the cancer patients. Our results showed that 40% blood tissues and 26% parafﬁn embedded gastric adenocarminoma had ~ 5kb deletion. Common deletion rate reported in aged people is only 6%, while the percentage of deletion in our specimens was about 10%. It has been known that ATP requirement is increased during cancer development. This may be one of the reasons that we detected more copies of mtDNA with common deletion in our patients.Since Cancer genetics193
several different mtDNA mutations have been detected in cancers, 
more investigation needed to reveal the role of mitochondria in Iranian 
cancer patients.
P0524. Association of two mutations in the CHEK2 gene with 
breast cancer
N. Bogdanova1,2, N. Enßen-Dubrowinskaja1, S. Festchenko2, G. I. Lazijuk2, Y. I. 
Rogov3, O. Dammann1, M. Bremer1, J. H. Karstens1, C. Sohn1,4, T. Dörk1;  
1Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Institute of Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, 
Belarus, 3Byelorussian Medical Academy of Post Diploma Education, Minsk, 
Belarus, 4Department of Gynaecology, Heidelberg, Germany.
The 1100delC mutation of the cell cycle checkpoint kinase 2 ( CHEK2 ) 
gene confers an increased risk for breast cancer, but the clinical impact of other 
CHEK2 gene variants remains controversial. We determined 
the frequency of two functionally relevant CHEK2 gene mutations, 
I157T and IVS2+1G>A, in two large series of breast cancer cases and controls from two independent populations. Our ﬁrst series consisted of a hospital-based cohort of 996 German breast cancer cases and 486 population controls, and the second series consisted of 424 breast cancer patients and 307 population controls from the Republic of Belarus. The missense substitution I157T was identiﬁed in 22/996 cases (2.2%) versus 3/486 controls (0.6%; OR=3.6, 95%CI 1.1-12.2, p=0.044) in the German population, and in 24/424 cases (5.7%) versus 4/307 controls (1.3%; OR= 4.5, 95%CI 1.6-13.2, p=0.005) in the Byelorussian cohorts. The splicing mutation IVS2+1G>A was infrequent in both populations and was observed in 3/996 German and 4/424 Byelorussian patients (0.3% and 0.9%, respectively) and in 1/486 German control individual (0.2%; adjusted OR=4.0, 95%CI 0.5-30.8, p=0.273). Heterozygous 
CHEK2 mutation carriers tended to be 
diagnosed at an earlier age in both populations, but these differences did not reach statistical signiﬁcance. Family history of breast cancer did not differ between carriers and non-carriers. Our data indicate that the I157T allele, and possibly the IVS2+1G>A allele, of the 
CHEK2  
gene contribute to inherited breast cancer susceptibility.
P0525. Genetic and epigenetic pathology of a number of cancer 
related genes in retinoblastoma.
O. V. Babenko1,2, V. Zemlyakova1,2, S. Saakyan3, A. Brovkina3, V. Kozlova4, M. 
Nemtsova1,2, D. Zaletayev1,2;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute 
of Molecular Medicine at Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federa -
tion, 3Moscow Institute for Eye Diseases, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Na-
tional Scientiﬁc Oncology Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Complex testing for structural and functional inactivation of the RB1 
gene in 60 retinoblastomas have revealed a molecular defect in at least one allele in 90% tumors. SSCP and heteroduplex analyses, along with direct sequencing, revealed 47 mutations in 
RB1 gene. Loss 
of heterozygosity (RBint2, RBint20, D13S262, D13S284 ) of at least 
one of markers was found in 70% of cases. RB1 aberrant methylation 
was detected in 25% analyzed tumors. To investigate the role of methylation-demethylation and its association with retinoblastoma we studied methylation status of 
p16/CDKN2A  and RB1CC1  promoter 
regions as these genes function as upstream regulators of pRB activity; and promoter regions of p15/CDKN2B, p14/ARF, N33, MGMT, 
HIC, ERα, CALCA,
 CDH1/E-cadherin  and IGF2 tumor related genes 
by multiplex methylation-sensitive PCR. High methylation frequencies were observed for 
CDH1 (60%), HIC1 (47%), p16 (15%), and p14 
(22%). Low levels of methylation were detected for MGMT (2%), ERα 
(7%), CALCA (3%) and RBCC1 (3%) genes. No methylation was 
shown for p15 and N33 promoter regions. We also detected a loss 
of IGF2 gene imprinting in 28% retinoblastomas. The methylation 
proﬁle was compared for unilateral and bilateral retinoblastomas and for tumors differing in the mechanism of 
RB1 inactivation. The 
mean methylation index in retinoblastomas with combined (structural and functional) inactivation of 
RB1 was signiﬁcantly higher than in 
tumors with incompletely inactivated RB1 (P = 0.01). The methylation 
frequencies of the above genes did not signiﬁcantly differ between the groups of tumors. These data conﬁrm necessity of methylation proﬁle studying in different tumor types.P0526. Dependence of Fas and FasL expression on genetic 
rearrangements in tumor cells
S. A. Alexandrova , L. B. Ginkul, I. N. Shvemberger;  
Institute of Cytology RAS, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
The development and progression of tumors dependeds on their interaction with the immune system of the organism and the instability of the tumor cell genome. The aim of this study was to reveal the effect of Fas-dependant apoptosis in tumor cells and splenocytes on genetic 
rearrangement in tumor cells.The study was carried out on the mouce hepatoma cell line MH-22a 
and the sarcoma J-774.Genetic variability in these tumors and their clonal lines was examined in vitro and in vivo at their proliferation in the subcutaneous connective tissue (SCT) and in the eye anterior chamber (EAC) by RAPD-PCR. Interinduction of apoptosis between tumor cells and splenocytes was carried out at their combined cultivation in vitro during 18 h. Apoptosis was revealed by electrophoresis of low molecular fractions of DNA, by clonogenic survival and ﬂow cytometric analysis. Expression of Fas-receptor (Fas) and Fas-ligand (FasL) was revealed by RT-PCR.The level of genetic variability in clonal lines of hepatoma MH-22a and sarcoma J-774 varied greatly both in vitro and in vivo. Apoptosis was revealed in tumor cells as well as in splenocytes. Clonal lines of tumor hepatocytes MH-22a and hystiocytes J-774 showed heterogeneity in the intensity of Fas and FasL expression. All clonal lines examined showed expression of Fas and FasL, but the levels varied widely. In many cases changes in the ﬁngerprints appeared, coinciding with signiﬁcant increases of Fas and FasL expression in hepatoma and 
histiocytoma clones.
P0527. Molecular study on frequency of single nucleotide 
polymorphism of TP53 among Iranian patients with gastric 
cancer
A. Melati-Rad, S. Akhoundi, M. Vossoughi, M. Jedi-Tehrani, M. Zali, B. Noori -
nayer;  
Research Center for gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Introduction:  Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of P53 gene 
have been presumed to be associated with the genetic susceptibility to gastric cancer. We have hypothesized that SNPs within the TP53 may be associated with sporadic gastric cancer. 
Method: we designed 
a case-control study of age, sex and ethnicity matched patients with sporadic gastric cancer and healthy controls. Up to now we have enrolled 81 cases  and 49 controls. We used PCR-RFLP to distinguish between the alleles at SNP 1042522 and the SNP 1800371. Both loci were ampliﬁed by a single PCR reaction which resulted in 240 bp amplicons. For the SNP 1042522, homozygous GG cases were digested to 100 and 140 fragments. The heterozygous cases had three bands at 240, 140 and 100 bp. For the SNP 1800371 homozygous cases for the TT allele were digested to 25 and 215 segments. The heterozygous cases had three bands at 240, 215 and 25 bp. 
Results: 
The frequency of CC, CG and GG genotypes among the cases and controls for the SNP 1042522
 were as follows: 22.7% vs. 14.6%, 
77.3% vs. 85.4%, 0% vs. 0% respectively. For the SNP 1800371 all the genotypes were CC among the cases and controls. No signiﬁcant difference was observed between the cases and controls for either of the SNPs. 
Conclusion: Our preliminary result shows that the SNPs: 
1042522 and 1800371 in the TP53 gene has no apparent association 
with gastric cancer among a sample of Iranian patients.
P0528. SET (TAF-IB) gene is highly expressed in acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia patients
S. Sirma1, K. Ayten2, C. G. Ekmekci1, G. Grosveld2, U. Ozbek1;  
1Department of Genetics, Institute for Experimental Medical Research (DE -
TAE), Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Genetics, St Jude 
Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, United States.
SET gene (TAF1beta) was orginally identiﬁed as a component of the SET-CAN fusion gene in a patient with acute undifferentiated leukemia (AUL). SET gene encodes a nuclear phosphoprotein that ubiquitously expressed. SET was shown to be a inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A which involved in regulating cell proliferation and differentiation. SET is also a subunit of INHAT complex. Binding of INHAT komplex to histones prevent their asetilation which cause transcriptional repression. Cancer genetics194
Overexpression of SET can inhibit demethylation of DNA which 
results in gene silencing. We have hypothesized that overexpression of SET gene may play an important role in leukemogenesis. To test this hypothesis we investigated SET gene expression in bone marrow sample of 57 acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients and 5 control samples from healthy volenteers using quantitative real-time PCR technique. SET gene expression in patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia was statistically higher than control samples(p=0.005). Using Pearson’s chi-square test, no signiﬁcant association between SET gene expression and peripheral WBC count, sex, FAB group and immunphenotype and presence of TEL-AML1 fusion gene in ALL was detected (Table 1). Overall survival and relapse-free survival was not signiﬁcantly different between high and low SET expressed patients with ALL (n=48, log-rank=0.06, P= 0,80 n=42, log-rank=0.12, P= 0,71 respectively). Finally, high level of SET mRNA expression were found in acute leukemia. SET gene may play important role in 
leukemogenesis.
Clinical characteristics at the time of diagnosis of patients studied
Low 
Expression  
nHigh 
Expression  
nP 
value  
(X2)
Gender  
(n=57)Female  
Male4  
817  
281.000
Age (Years)  
(n=57)9 years0  
9  
31  
35  
90.823
WBC (/ml)  
(n=55)100.000/µl6  
2  
433 
4  
60.187
Immunophenotype  
(n=57)Precursor B 
cell 
T cell5  
722  
230.751
FAB 
(n=48)L1 
L26  
523  
140.132
TEL-AML1  
(n=55)Positive  
Negative1  
1011  
330.240
P0529. VHL mutation analysis in sporadic haemangioblastoma
E. R. Woodward1, F. MacDonald2, E. R. Maher3;  
1Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women's Hospital, Birmingham, United 
Kingdom, 2DNA laboratory, Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham Women's 
Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Section of Medical and Molecular 
Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Research, University of Birmingham, Birming -
ham, United Kingdom.
Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease is estimated to account for ~30% of CNS haeamangioblastomas. A clinical diagnosis of VHL disease may be made in patients with multiple CNS haemangioblastomas or a single CNS haemangiobalstoma and a family history of VHL disease or an extra-CNS VHL tumour (retinal angioma, renal cell carcinoma or phaeochromocytoma). Previously we identiﬁed a germline VHL gene mutation in 4% of apparently sporadic haemangioblastoma cases. Although speciﬁc VHL missense mutations may be associated with a phaeochromocytoma only phenotype evidence for low penetrance ‘haemangioblastoma only’ VHL mutations has not been reported.We now report a survey of VHL mutations in a cohort of 168 apparently sporadic UK CNS haemangioblastoma patients (60 reported previously). We identiﬁed six patients (mean age 34.3 years) with germline VHL gene mutations (two reported previously). Three patients had loss of function mutations (one frameshift, two germline deletions) reported previously in VHL disease and three patients had germline missense mutations (two R200W and one N179D). R200W has been reported previously in patients with VHL disease and cerebellar haemangioblastoma but, when homozygous, causes 
Chuvash polycythaemia. N179D has not been previously reported.These preliminary results suggest that (a) all patients with apparently sporadic CNS haemangiobalstoma should undergo molecular genetic testing for VHL disease by direct sequencing and MLPA and (b) germline VHL mutations detected in patients with sporadic CNS haemangioblastoma do not necessarily predict classical VHL disease in the proband and carrier relatives. Thus in such cases the family should be counselled carefully.P0530. Combination of various molecular cytogenetic 
techniques in detection of structural rearrangements of 
chromosome 7 in hematological malignancies
J. Brezinova1, S. Ransdorfova1, Z. Zemanova2, L. Sindelarova2, L. Babicka2, J. 
Cermak1, K. Michalova1,2;  
1Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Cen-
ter of Oncocytogenetics Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Laboratory Diag -
nostics, General Faculty Hospital and 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
Deletion of long arms of chromosome 7 is one of the frequent chromosomal aberrations in myeloid disorders such as myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML), and is associated with aggressive disease and poor prognosis. Both terminal and interstitial deletions of 7q have been reported with variable breakpoints among patients. Only few studies have focused on the analysis of translocations, either balanced or unbalanced, involving deleted chromosome 7q. In our study we used combination of multicolor ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (mFISH), multicolor banding (mBAND) for chromosome 7 and FISH with locus speciﬁc probes for 7q22, 7q31 and 7q35 regions to detect the deletions and rearrangements of chromosome 7. Using classical cytogenetic techniques we examined 31 patients with different hematological malignancies, who had in malignant bone marrow cells 7q deletion or complex rearrangements of chromosome 7. FISH with locus speciﬁc probes conﬁrmed the deletion of 7q in 18 patients. The extent of deletion varied, del (7)(q22q35) was the most frequent one (5 patients). Different complex rearrangements of chromosome 7 were proved using multicolor FISH (in 27 patients) and multicolor banding technique for chromosome 7 (in 9 patients). Origin of these rearrangements and their prognostic signiﬁcance will be discussed in the poster.This work was supported by grants IGA MZCR NR 7995-3 and GACR 
301/04/0407.
P0531. Genetic detection and clinical signiﬁcance of occult 
lymph node metastasis in patients with liver metastasis from 
colorectal cancer
S. Kappel1, D. Kandioler2, R. Steininger2, F. Laengle2, M. Ploder1, G. Berlakov -
ich2, T. Soliman2, S. Rockenschaub2, F. Muehlbacher2;  
1Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery/ Surgical Research, Vi -
enna, Austria, 2Medical University of Vienna, Department of Transplantsurgery, 
Vienna, Austria.
Liver transplantation for nonresectable liver metastasis from colorectal cancer has been abandoned in 1994 on account of high recurrence rates and limited long-term survival. The aim of this study was to investigate whether the genetic detection of micrometastasis in histologically negative lymph nodes from colon cancer can be applied to select patients for liver transplantation. We retrospectively analyzed 21 patients with colorectal cancer and subsequent liver metastasis who had undergone a liver transplant within the 1983-1994 interval. Direct DNA sequencing was used to screen tumor material for p53 and K-ras mutations. Eleven of these patients had shown no histologically detectable lymph node metastasis at the time of surgery (pN0), 10 patients with lymph node metastasis (pN1) served as control group. We used mutant allele-speciﬁc ampliﬁcation (MASA) to identify corresponding genetic alterations in regional lymph nodes from colorectal cancer. p53 and K-ras mutations were detected in 12 (57%) and 3 (14%) of 21 patients in the primary colorectal cancer, respectively, and could be conﬁrmed in the corresponding liver metastasis. Nine of eleven histologically lymph node-negative patients were evaluable due to presence of p53 mutation. MASA revealed 6/9 patients to be genetically positive for micrometastasis. Three patients were genetically a n d histologically negative. These 3 patients showed a signiﬁcantly longer overall survival (p=0.011) of 4, 5 and 20 years, respectively. We conclude that the genetic detection of micrometastasis by p53 and K-ras MASA could be a powerful prognostic indicator to select patients with colorectal liver metastasis who beneﬁt from liver 
transplantation.Cancer genetics195
P0532. Mutation analysis of the MYH gene in Czech FAP patients
M. Šulová1, K. Zídková1,2, Z. Kleibl3, J. Štekrová1, J. Vandrovcová1, M. Kohou -
tová1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine and 
General Teaching Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 23rd 
Medical Department, the First Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching Hos -
pital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Institute of Biochemistry and 
Experimental Oncology, the First Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching 
Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is inherited predisposition to 
colorectal cancers characterized by adenomatous polyps in the colon and rectum. The autosomal dominant FAP is associated with germline mutations in the 
APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) tumor-suppressor 
gene. Germline mutations in the MYH gene have been associated 
with recessive inheritance of multiple colorectal adenomas. The MYH protein plays an important role in the base-excision-repair system as an adenine-speciﬁc DNA glycosylase.We screened for germline 
MYH mutations in individuals with multiple (3 
to 100) colorectal adenomas and in APC-mutation-negative probands 
with classic familial adenomatous polyposis (>100 adenomas). Mutation screening involves the entire 
MYH coding region and adjacent intronic 
sequences. We established mutation analysis using denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) on WAVE system. Deviations were conﬁrmed by direct DNA sequencing.We have detected compound heterozygotes for two the most common germline mutations c.494A>G (p.Y165C); c.1145G>A (p.G382D) and several other sequence changes (mutation/polymorphism) either in 
MYH coding sequences or in intronic sequences. Further elucidation 
of functional role of the altered residues, together with the analysis of other family members, will help to establish a more deﬁnitive correlation of these changes with pathogenicity.Supported by the grant project IGA MZ CR NR8103-3/2004
P0533. HER2/neu gene ampliﬁcation in muscle invasive bladder 
cancer; FISH analysis on parafﬁn-embedded specimens
T. Yakut1, M. Demiray2, Z. Çalışkan3, T. Gülten1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty of Uludag University , Bursa, 
Turkey, 2Department of Medical Oncology, Medical Faculty of Uludag University, 
Bursa, Turkey, 3Department of Urology, Medical Faculty of Uludag University, 
Bursa, Turkey.
Studies in bladder cancer have revealed a discrepancy between gene 
ampliﬁcation and protein expression of Her2/neu gene and the clinical importance as a prognostic value. Paraﬁn-embedded specimens from a total of 34 cases which non of them had received radiotherapy or chemotherapy of diagnosed bladder cancer were analysed using dual-color ﬂourescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Dual color hybridization signals belong to chromosome 17/HER2neu gene and chromosome 17/chromosome 8 were countered within 200 interphase nuclei per specimen. Among the 34 bladder tumor patients 5 cases had HER2/neu ampliﬁcation with the different copy number ratio and 17 cases had increased copy number for chromosomes 8 and 17. The average of overall survival for the 2 of 5 cases which had HER2/neu ampliﬁcation less than 5 copy number was 19.3 months and for the remain 3 cases which had HER2/neu ampliﬁcation more than 10 copy number was 34 months. Our preliminary results suggest that HER2/neu gene ampliﬁcations may play important role in the progression of bladder cancers. Furthermore, over expression of HER2/neu protein without DNA ampliﬁcation may be depend on increased copy number of chromosome 17 or poliploidy.
P0534. Polymorphic tandem repeats of three sexual hormone 
receptors genes in breast cancer
A. Anghel , M. Raica, C. Marian;  
"Victor Babes" University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Timisoara, Timisoara, 
Romania.
Case-control studies have reported inconsistent results concerning the association between polymorphisms in the androgen and estrogen receptor genes and breast cancer. While several studies investigated the association between the androgen receptor gene CAG repeat and breast cancer, for the CA and TA repeats in the estrogen receptor 
genes there are considerable fewer studies.We have investigated the potential link between three tandem repeats (CAG, TA and CA) in the androgen receptor, estrogen receptors α and β genes respectively and breast cancer. DNA was isolated from 153 invasive breast tumors and 318 controls, and the three tandem repeats were sized by polyacrylamide electrophoresis. Number of repeats in each allele and the total repeats of both alleles were taken as variables for classiﬁcation into dichotomous groups using the median of each variable in the control group as cut-off point. Relationship between polymorphic tandem repeats and breast cancer was assessed by 
multivariate logistic regression models.The overall success of the model in predicting breast cancer was 74.1% (for a 0.5 cut value). The results suggest that three variables combined, longer CAGsum (≥28; p<0.001; OR=9.262; 95%CI=3.583-23.945), shorter TA (<23; p<0.001; OR=4.195; 95%CI=1.912-9.206) and shorter CA (<23; p=0.028; OR=3.180; 95%CI=1.131-8.943) repeats could constitute a possible genetic proﬁle associated with breast cancer.Our data conﬁrm previous reports regarding an association between longer CAG repeats and breast cancer. In addition to that, we found that the combination of long CAG, short TA and short CA repeats are strongly associated with breast cancer.
P0535. The occurrence of a childhood choroid plexus carcinoma 
should be added to the indication criteria for testing for germline 
TP53 mutations
K. Novotna1, V. Krutilkova1,2, M. Trkova1, J. Fleitz3, V. Gregor4, A. Krepelova1, 
D. Sumerauer5, R. Kodet6, S. Siruckova7, P. Plevova7, L. Foretova8, S. Ben -
dova1, P. Hedvicakova1, N. K. Foreman3, Z. Sedlacek1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - Second Medi -
cal School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Gennet, 
Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology 
and BMT, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center and The Children´s 
Hospital, Denver, CO, United States, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Thom -
ayer University Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Department of Paediatric 
Haematology and Oncology, Charles University - Second Medical School and 
University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 6Department of Pathology 
and Molecular Medicine, Charles University - Second Medical School and Uni -
versity Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 7Department of Medical Genet -
ics, University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 8Masaryk Memorial 
Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic.
We present ﬁve new families of paediatric patients suffering from 
choroid plexus carcinoma in which we found germline TP53 mutations. Only one of the families conformed to the criteria of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, and only three (including the Li-Fraumeni syndrome family) met the Chompret criteria for germline TP53 mutation testing. There was no family history of cancer in the remaining two families and/or the parents of the patient were shown not to carry the mutation. Our results give further strong support to the notion that the occurrence of this rare paediatric tumour, especially in combination with a positive family history of cancer, but possibly also without any family history, may be a strong indicator of a germline TP53 mutation. The identiﬁcation of these ﬁve new families prompted us to analyse the efﬁciency of various clinical criteria for germline TP53 mutation testing. In total, we tested members of 102 cancer families, and found 14 germline TP53 mutations. All but two mutations were identiﬁed in families meeting at least one of the criteria (Li-Fraumeni syndrome, Li-Fraumeni-like syndrome (Manchester), or the Chompret criteria). The remaining two mutations were identiﬁed in two families with paediatric choroid plexus carcinoma patients mentioned above. Furthermore, in each of the total of six families tested with occurrence of this tumour a TP53 mutation was found. We suggest therefore that the occurrence of this tumour is added to the indication criteria for germline TP53 mutation testing. Supported by grant MSM0021620813 from the Ministry of Education 
of the Czech Republic.
P0536. Genomic and chromosome 17 imbalances as targets for 
platin-chemoresistance investigation in ovarian cancer patients
J. K. R. Heinrich1, L. C. Teixeira2, L. A. L. A. Andrade3, S. Toledo1, F. A. Böttch -
er-Luiz4;  
1CAISM/UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 2Gynecology and Obstetrics Dept/ FCM/
UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 3Pathology Dept/FCM/UNICAMP, Campinas, 
Brazil, 4Gynecology and Obstetrics Dept/FCM/UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil.
Ovarian cancer diagnosis and treatment are still one of the major Cancer genetics196
challenges for the clinical oncologist. Our hospital follows the 
international consensus of surgery followed by chemo, usually platin-based in most cases. Around 30% of the patients show some kind of resistance to the chemotherapeutic approach, which is very frustrating for the patient and ﬁnancially demanding for a public institution. New genomic approaches have been applied in order to ﬁnd molecular markers that could predict chemotherapy response or at least to indicate possible genes or chromosome regions involved in this phenotype. The objective of this study was to evaluate chromosome regions gains and losses through comparative genomic hybridization and correlate the genetic proﬁling to clinical data in ovarian tumors from patients that haven’t responded to cisplatin-based chemotherapy. Sixteen tumors were included, 75% with a resistant phenotype and 25% with a complete responsive phenotype. All tumors were of serous type and FIGO clinical stage III or IV. Four normal ovarian samples were taken as controls. All tumor specimens presented some degree of chromosomal imbalance widely varying from sample to sample. Resistant tumors displayed major gains in 11p12~14, 13q21~22, 16q12~qter, and repeatedly at 17q, which harbors the ERB-B2 region. Losses were found at 3q24-26, 1q31~41 and 17p. Twelve resistant samples presented some alteration at chromosome 17 which indicate that this chromosome might have “hot gene targets” for individual analysis by less expensive and less time consuming approaches that could be investigated before treatment such as mutation analysis, 
FISH and others.
P0537. Novel CDKN2A mutations and founder effect in 
melanoma families from Tuscany
F. Gensini1, R. Sestini1, L. Borgognoni2, P. Brandani2, P. Carli3, A. Chiarugi3, M. 
Piazzini1, M. Genuardi1;  
1Medical Genetics, Firenze, Italy, 2Plastic Surgery, Regional Melanoma Referral 
Center, S.M.Annunziata Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 3Dermatology, Firenze, Italy.
About 10% of melanoma patients have a positive family history for the 
disease, and a fraction of these pedigrees shows mendelian inheritance. 
CDKN2A  is the main gene involved in genetic predisposition to 
melanoma, and is associated with incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity. Constitutional 
CDKN2A  mutations are found in 15-40% of 
familial melanoma cases.We have investigated the frequency and spectrum of 
CDKN2A  
mutations in a series of 18 apparently unrelated families from a region of Central Italy (Tuscany). The whole 
CDKN2A  coding sequence was 
evaluated by direct sequencing. Three novel mutations were identiﬁed in 5 families. Two mutations (G23S and E27X, observed in 1 family each) are located in exon 1α, and the other one (P114S, observed in 3 families) in exon 2. Pedigrees segregating 
CDKN2A  mutations 
were characterized by the presence of >3 melanoma cases, multiple 
melanomas, early age at diagnosis, and non-melanoma tumors (pancreatic and oral cancer). G23S is located in the functionally important ﬁrst ankyrinic domain of p16. A different missense mutation affecting the same codon had been reported previously and shown to disrupt p16 activity by a functional assay. Haplotype analysis in members of the 3 families segregating the G23S mutation showed a common ancestral origin of the mutation. Our data show that the G23S mutation is an important cause of hereditary melanoma in Tuscany.
P0538. FISH is a reliable method to assess the tumour content of 
frozen old archival material
R. Schaub1, D. Bausch1, C. Oehlschlegel2, F. K. Niggli1, D. R. Betts1;  
1University Children's Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland, 2Kantonsspital St. Gallen, 
St. Gallen, Switzerland.
In order to perform genetic analysis of frozen tumour material it is important to know the actual tumour content of the available biopsy. However, the assessment of tumour content in old frozen material is often hampered by deterioration in cell morphology. To attempt to resolve this problem, prior to processing the material to molecular investigation, touch preparations were made for subsequent FISH (ﬂuorescence in situ hybridisation) analysis. Fifty three biopsies from childhood embryonal tumours (38 nephroblastomas, 9 embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas and 6 hepatoblastomas) were available of which the oldest sample was 28 years old. A range of FISH probes were employed that represented some of the frequent cytogenetic events of these tumours. In a number of cases the karyotype was already known and hence acted as a control for the FISH results. In 30/53 tumours an abnormal FISH result was obtained in which 21/30 (70%) indicated a tumour content of over 50%. In only two cases was no or an incomplete result obtained. For those cases where the karyotype was known no discrepancy was seen with the FISH result. In addition the signal quality from the touch preparations was superior to that typically possible with parafﬁn embedded material and valuable insights were gained on the karyotypic make-up of old archival material. The results demonstrate that the use of FISH is an efﬁcient and reliable method to accurately screen the tumour content of frozen samples prior to the 
employment of techniques such as arrayCGH.
P0539. Clinical follow up of BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers in the 
Czech Republic
L. Foretova , M. Navratilova, D. Hanouskova, B. Dvorackova, M. Lukesova, M. 
Palacova, R. Kalabova, K. Petrakova;  
Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic.
Genetic counselling and testing of BRCA1/2 genes in hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome is done at the Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute (MMCI) in Brno since 1997. Testing was done in 474 families that fulﬁlled our criteria, in 32.5% germline mutation in BRCA1/2 gene was discovered. Predictive testing was offered to 312 healthy relatives, 
in 82 women and 41 men genetic predisposition was found.To provide carriers with a clinical follow up high-risk preventive clinic was established at the MMCI. Patients (79 women and 4 men), healthy carriers (53 women and 6 men) of BRCA1/2 mutation and high-risk individuals with undetected mutation in a family are invited regularly to check ups by a specialised nurse. Psychological support, consultation with specialised nurse, geneticist and other clinicians is available to all 
individuals when needed.The role of preventive surgery is explained to all carriers. Until now 12 patients and 3 healthy carriers (age >35) underwent prophylactic adnexectomy after the genetic testing. Prophylactic mastectomy and reconstruction was done in 13 patients and 1 healthy carrier. At least 6 patients and 3 healthy carriers are decided for prophylactic surgery of breasts and 8 patients and 1 healthy carrier for adnexectomy. Psychosocial issues related to genetic testing and cancer prevention, preventive care in other centres in the Czech Republic are now 
investigated.Contract grant sponsor: Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic: 
MZ00020980501; Internal Grant Agency of the Ministry of Health of the 
Czech Republic, contract grant number: NR/8022-3
P0540. New Croatian PTCH mutation in Gorlin syndrome family 
linked to craniopharyngioma
V. Musani1, A. Basta-Juzbasic2, T. Stipisic3, P. Gorry4, S. Levanat1;  
1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Department of Dermatovenerology, 
University School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Department of Dermatovenerolo -
gy, Clinical Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 4Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France.
The Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS) or Gorlin syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by multiple basal cell carcinomas (BCCs), medulloblastomas, meningiomas, ﬁbromas of the ovaries and heart; cysts of the skin, jaws, and mesentery; pits of the palms and soles; diverse developmental abnormalities, often including rib and craniofacial alterations and less often, polydactyly, syndactyly, and spina biﬁda.The syndrome is caused by mutations in the human homolog of the 
Drosophila  patched gene, PTCH. PTCH is a tumor supressor gene, 
located at 9q22.3, and encodes a transmembrane glycoprotein that acts as an antagonist in the Hedgehog signaling pathway. It has 12-transmembrane domains, two large extracellular loops involved in ligand binding, one large intracellular loop and intracellular N- and C-
termini.We report a family case with Gorlin syndrome associated with typical phenothypical features of widespread basocelluar tumors and craniophacial and bone malformations but also with unusual appearance of craniopharyngioma. In this family we found by SSCP, dHPLC and direct sequencing a novel mutation of PTCH gene. Immunohistochemistry analyses demonstrated speciﬁc aberration of 
PTCH.Our ﬁnding provide additional evidence of craniopharyngioma 
involvement in the pathogenesis of Gorlin syndrome.Cancer genetics197
P0541. Functional analysis of MSH2  mutations associated with 
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer
S. E. Ollila , L. Sarantaus, R. Kariola, T. E. Raevaara, M. Siitonen, M. Nyström;  
Departmet of Biosciences, Division of Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland, Helsinki, Finland.
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is associated 
with germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes, mainly 
MSH2 and MLH1. Most of mutations are different with each other 
and quite evenly distributed. Furthermore, a signiﬁcant proportion of mutations give rise to single amino acid substitutions. A major challenge in the clinical management of patients with suspected HNPCC is the frequent occurrence of missense mutations, which can be considered 
neither deleterious nor clinically innocent à priori.To assess their signiﬁcance we studied 16 MSH2 missense variants that occur in several subdomains of the MSH2 protein for in vitro
 
mismatch repair capability. The mutations were chosen such that the biochemical data obtained could be correlated with genetic and clinical data relating to respective HNPCC families. PCR mutagenesis was used to create the mutated MSH2 cDNAs, the protein variants were expressed in a baculovirus expression system, and the functionality of the mutated proteins was investigated in a homologous human MMR 
system.Among the sixteen MSH2 variants, 10 variants with remarkably reduced repair efﬁciency were classiﬁed as defective. It is interesting to note that most of the 10 variants could be expressed only in lower amounts than the wild type protein suggesting that these amino acid substitutions impart also instability on the mutant proteins. Six variants acted like wild type protein in the repair assay and further examinations need to be done to evaluate their pathogenicity.
P0542. Analysis of chromosomal translocations involved MLL 
gene using hybridization with oligonucleotide microarrays.
O. N. Mityaeva1, E. A. Isaeva2, V. S. Zharinov2, A. V. Chudinov1, R. B. Yurasov1, 
A. S. Zasedatelev1, T. V. Nasedkina1;  
1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Re-
search Institute of Pediatric Hematology, Moscow, Russian Federation.
11q23 chromosomal rearrangements occur in 70-80% of ALL cases and in 50-60% of AML cases among infants and traditionally are characterized by poor prognosis. However, last investigations demonstrate the noticeable clinical heterogeneity of patients regarding to a gene-partner involved in rearrangements with 
MLL- gene. The 
diversity of genes ( MLL-gene has more than 30 different gene-
partners) makes difﬁcult the analysis of 11q23 abnormalities using standard methods (cytogenetics, FISH or standard RT-PCR).Here we present a biochip, which allows to identify 7 chromosomal aberrations with 
MLL gene: t(4;11), t(6;11), t(9;11), t(10;11), 
t(11;19) ENL, t(11;19) ELL, dup(11). The MLL-biochip consists of 16 
types of oligonucleotide probes, representing parts of gene sequences involved in aberrations, and allows the analysis of about 45 fusion 
transcript variants.The 82 bone marrow or peripheral blood samples from patients with primary AML and the 83 samples from patients with primary ALL were analyzed using RT-PCR with hybridization on biochips. We have found that translocations involved 
MLL-gene, occur in 67% of infants with 
AML, in 8 % of children older than 1 year with AML, in 46% of infants with ALL and in 9% of children with ALL aged 1 to 3 years. In the present investigation the dup(11) was not included in the analysis since during screening using standard RT-PCR approach we detected the 
MLL 
duplication more often than it was described previously for leukemia patients. We supposed that the dup(11) might be detected in low titer in the majority of patients but this fact had no clinical signiﬁcance.
P0543. TNFα promoter SNPs in Croatian population - association 
with colon cancer
S. Kapitanovic1, T. Cacev1, H. Kapitanovic Vidak2, R. Spaventi3, K. Pavelic1;  
1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Special hospital for children with 
neurodevelopmental and motor difﬁculties, Zagreb, Croatia, 3PLIVA d.d. Re -
search Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.
The immune system is a complex network of cells that are involved in the protection of humans against infectious agents and tumor growth. Inherited polymorphisms in immuno-modulatory genes may contribute to variation in immune function and genetic susceptibility for complex disease, including cancer.TNFα is a cytokine produced by activated monocytes and macrophages, which play a key role in the inﬂammatory response. Increased serum TNFα levels have been described in cancer patients, and are associated with an adverse disease outcome. TNFα gene is mapped to chromosome 6p21.3 and a large number of polymorphisms of its promoter, called "high-production" polymorphisms, have been described. The aim of our study was to estimate allelic frequency for four promoter SNPs in TNFα gene, -238, -308, -857 and -1031 in the Croatian population and in patients with colon cancer. DNAs obtained from 150 colon cancer patients and 150 unrelated healthy volunteers were genotyped for the TNFα -238, -308, -857 and -1031 SNPs using real-time PCR TaqMan
® SNP genotyping assays. The frequency of 
alleles associated with altered TNFα production was: 3%, 4%, 18.8% and 18.8% for -238A, -308A, -857T and -1031C, respectively. "High-production" allele variant -308A was more common in the population with colon cancer in the comparison to healthy volunteers. The association between these polymorphism and colon cancer has to be 
investigated in the future studies.
P0544. Differential activity of demethylating agents on the MLH1  
promoter.
E. Lucci-Cordisco1, L. Boccuto1, I. Zito1, G. Neri1, M. Genuardi2;  
1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy , 
2Sezione di Genetica Medica, Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia Clinica, Università 
di Firenze, Firenze, Italy.
Regulatory genes are often hypermethylated at their promoter regions and silenced in cancer. Therefore, the use of demethylating agents, that could reactivate these genes, appears as a logical way to approach cancer treatment. The most widely used demethylating agent is 5-aza-2’-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC), a nucleoside analogue, that, unfortunately, exhibits large side effects. This has prompted to ﬁnd out less toxic agents. Procainamide, a non-nucleoside inhibitor of DNA methyltransferases used in the clinical setting for the treatment of cardiac arrhythmias, induced demethylation and re-expression of several genes in different cell lines.Our purpose was to evaluate whether procainamide can be used to 
reactivate MLH1 in human colorectal cancer cell lines (HCA-7 and 
RKO) with MLH1 promoter hypermethylation. The compound was 
administered for 24h - 14 days at 50-1000 μM concentration. MLH1  
gene expression was evaluated by Real-Time PCR. No RNA could be detected at any drug concentration and time points tested in our cells. As a positive control 5-aza-dC was also used and, as expected, it restored 
MLH1 expression. To establish that our procainamide 
treatment regimen was effective on other promoters, we showed an up-regulation of 
RARβ  expression in the MCF-7 cell line following 
treatment at 500 μmol/L for 3 days.In conclusion, our results show that the effects of demethylating agents can vary among different cell lines and genes, suggesting potential limitations to the efﬁcacy of these compounds.
P0545. A novel RFLP analysis of mitochondrial D310 
polymorphism in breast and colorectals cancers
C. Aral, H. Kaya, Ç. Ataizi-Çelikel, M. Akkiprik, Ö. Sönmez, B. M. Güllüoğlu, A. 
Özer;  
Marmara University, School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Recently a homopolymeric C stretch (D310) was identiﬁed in the D-loop region of mitochondrial DNA as a hot spot of mutations. This region consists of two cytosine stretches interrupted by a thymine nucleotide. It is widely accepted that 7 cytosine residues are located at the ﬁrst stretch but, it is highly polymorphic between 6-C to 9-C. We conducted an RFLP analysis using restriction enzyme, BsaXI, in order to determine the distribution of 7-C sequence among 41 healthy persons and 50 cancer patients in the Turkish population. We found out that 65.9% of healthy individuals showed BsaXI (-) genotype that meant most of the population did not ﬁt into the 7-C sequence. No heteroplasmy was detected among the healthy individuals. Heteroplasmy was encountered in breast and colorectal patients (8 and 24%, respectively). No signiﬁcant difference was found between the matched samples of tumor and normal tissues in their BsaXI status. BsaXI status of colorectal cancer samples were signiﬁcantly different from that in healty individuals. In conclusion, BsaXI RFLP analysis is Cancer genetics198
a rapid and a non-radioactive method for the determination of D-310 
polymorphism and may be a useful tool for early tumor detection.
P0546. Signiﬁcance of additional chromosomal aberrations in 
bone marrow cells of children with TEL/AML1 positive acute 
lymphocytic leukemia
K. Michalova1, Z. Zemanova1, L. Sindelarova1, L. Babicka1, S. Ransdorfova2, J. 
Brezinova2, A. Oltova3, D. Mentzlova3, M. Jarosova4, M. Holzerova4, K. Muziko -
va5, R. Formankova6, P. Sedlacek6, A. Vrzalova6, J. Stary6;  
1Center of Oncocytogenetics UKBLD, General Faculty Hospital, Prague 2, 
Czech Republic, 2Institute of Haematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague 2, 
Czech Republic, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic, 4De-
partment of Hemato-oncology, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 5CLIP - Childhood 
Leukaemia Investigation Prague, 2nd Medical Faculty of Charles University , 
Prague 5, Czech Republic, 6Department of Children Hematology and Oncology, 
2nd Medical Faculty of Charles University, Prague 5, Czech Republic.
Cryptic translocation t(12;21)(p13;q22) which give origin to the hybrid 
gene TEL/AML1 can be found by FISH in approximately 25% of children with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) as the most frequent speciﬁc aberration. Despite of the fact that according to the most authors this ﬁnding is favorable prognostic sign, TEL/AML1 positive children can have late relapses. One of the reasons could be high instability of the genome of leukemic cells, which is manifested on chromosomal level by additional aberrations and complex rearrangements. As it was already proved in adult patients with acute myeloid leukemia or other hematologic malignancies, complex karyotypes in bone marrow cells mean adverse prognostic effect. The same could apply for pediatric 
patients.We examined 79 children with ALL and TEL/AML1 fusion gene proved by RT-PCR. Most of them are living in the ﬁrst or second complete remission. Relapse appeared in 16 children (20%). Two patients died (one because of relapse and second for treatment complications). Karyotypes were analyzed by conventional and molecular-cytogenetic methods (I-FISH, WCP-FISH, mFISH). In 48 children (61%) we found except t(12;21)(p13;q22) additional chromosomal aberrations, the most frequently trisomy or tetrasomy of chromosome 21 (14 cases), deletion of non-translocated TEL allele (14 cases) and/or deletion of 6q (6 cases). In seven children variant translocations of chromosomes 12 and 21 with other partners were found and in 35 children (44,3%) complex aberrations were identiﬁed. In our cohort additional aberrations 
were indicator of poor prognosis (p=0,05).Supported by grants GACR 301/04/0407 and MSM 0021620813 and IGA NC7490.
P0547. Molecular cytogenetic analyses of malignant brain 
tumour cells.
Z. Zemanova1, K. Michalova1,2, S. Ransdorfova2, L. Babicka1, L. Sindelarova1, 
J. Brezinova2, F. Kramar3, P. Kozler3;  
1Center of Oncocytogenetics UKBLD, General Faculty Hospital and 1.st Medi -
cal Faculty of Charles Univ., Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Hematol -
ogy and Blood Transfusion, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 3Neurosurgical Depart -
ment of Central Military Hospital and 1st Medical Faculty of Charles Univ ., 
Prague 6, Czech Republic.
Diffuse gliomas are heterogeneous group of central nervous system tumours with various histological subtypes that differ in their response to treatment and prognosis. Differentiation of glial subtypes based solely on morphology is subjective. Therefore, new diagnostic and prognostic indicators must be sought to enable stratiﬁcation of the treatment and to help reduce morbidity and mortality of patients. One possibility is subclassiﬁcation of patients according to ﬁndings of speciﬁc chromosomal aberrations.For detection of most frequent chromosomal changes in glial cells (deletion of tumor-suppressor genes p53, p16 and RB1, deletion of 1p36 and/or 19q13.3, ampliﬁcation of EGFR gene, trisomy 7 and monosomy 10) we used I-FISH with locus-speciﬁc and/or α-satellite probes (Abbott Vysis™). We examined 20 patients with different types of gliomas (4x low-grade astrocytoma, 4x anaplastic astrocytoma, 6x glioblastoma, 2x low-grade oligodendroglioma, 4x anaplastic oligodendroglioma). The results of molecular-cytogenetic analyses were correlated with morphological and clinical ﬁndings. In two patients with original diagnosis of anaplastic astrocytoma (grade III) we proved ampliﬁcationof EGFR gene - typical aberration of glioblastoma (grade IV). In other case with oligodendroglioma (grade II) we proved deletion of RB1 gene - typical ﬁnding in high grade astrocytoma. In four patients with anaplastic astrocytoma combined deletion of 1p36 and 19q13.3 was found, which could predict good response to chemotherapy in 
these patients.I-FISH is a powerful tool for surveying chromosomal abberations in tumour cells. A systematic molecular cytogenetic analysis may advance diagnosis, grading and classiﬁcation of brain tumours.Supported by grant IGA MZ CR 1A/8237-3.
P0548. Investigation of the genetic basis of the outcome of 
chemotherapy in breast cancer patients.
M. Jaremko1,2, C. Justenhoven2, P. Fritz2, B. Abraham2, W. Schroth2, C. 
Vollmert3, T. Illig3, H. Brauch2;  
1Institute of Molecular Techniques, Department of Forensic Medicine, Wroclaw 
Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 2Dr. Margarete Fisher-Bosch Institute of 
Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany, 3GSF National Research Center for 
Environment and Health, Institute of Epidemiolgy, Neuherberg, Germany.
Pharmacogenetics aims to identify the inherited basis for inter-individual differences in drug response. Polymorphisms contributing to this inter-individual variation may be located in genes encoding drug metabolizing enzymes (DME), drug transporters (DT), receptors, DNA repair enzymes, cell cycle regulators (CCR), and other potential drug targets. To draw conclusion on the relationship between the genome and chemotherapy outcome of breast cancer patients genotype and survival data are needed. This requires patients with long follow-up and their formalin-ﬁxed parafﬁn-embedded tissues (FFPET). Constitutional DNA was isolated from FFPET of 199 breast cancer patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy (CMF, and anthracyclines), and had at least 5 years documented clinical follow-up. There were 100 patients without and 99 patients with relapse. Genotypes were established by MALDI-TOF MS at 32 polymorphic loci of potentially relevant genes. We applied univariate analysis for genotype associated over all survival (OVS). All genotype frequencies were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. We observed signiﬁcant differences in genotype distributions with respect to OVS at three loci: CCNA2_159_A>G (p=0.0138), GSTP1_313_A>G (p=0.0192), XRCC3_11672_C>T (p=0.0062). These data provide a ﬁrst basis for the identiﬁcation of constitutional markers potentially useful for the prediction of chemotherapy outcome in breast cancer.
P0549. Results of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation analysis in the 
Czech breast/ovarian cancer patients
M. Lukesova, E. Machackova, H. Pavlu, V. Urbankova, J. Kuklova, M. Navrati -
lova, L. Foretova;  
Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic.
Germline mutations in highly penetrant cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 cause genetic predisposition to breast and 
ovarian cancers.Molecular genetic analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in 359 high-risk breast and breast/ovarian cancer families, 32 patients with bilateral breast or ovarian cancer or both, and 83 women diagnosed with early-onset sporadic breast/ovarian cancer below 40 years has been performed in our laboratory since 1999. Overall, in 32.5% of 
tested index cases pathogenic mutation was discovered.Concerning disease causing mutations, 45 different germline mutations were found, 22 in BRCA1 gene and 23 in BRCA2 gene. The most frequent mutations were c.5385dupC (42 cases), c.3819_3823delGTAAA (14 cases), c.300T> G (13 cases) in BRCA1 gene; and c.8138_8142delCCTTT (10 cases), c.8765_8766delAG (10 cases) in BRCA2 gene (using the BIC Database numbering). Altogether, these 5 
mutations represented 58% of all detected mutations.In addition to the pathogenic mutations, 26 different variants of unknown signiﬁcance (12 in BRCA1 gene and 14 in BRCA 2 gene) were found. The population frequency of these variants and segregation analysis 
was studied.Moreover, our predictive testing of 342 symptomatic and nonsymptomatic relatives revealed 145 mutation carriers. Preventive care in a specialised clinic is offered to all of them. Contract grant sponsor: Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic: 
MZ00020980501; Internal Grant Agency of the Ministry of Health of the 
Czech Republic, contract grant number: NR/8213-3Cancer genetics199
P0550. Quantitative Image Analysis for Scoring Her2 
Ampliﬁcation Status in Metastatic Breast Carcinoma.
C. M. Ellis1, M. J. Dyson1, T. J. Stephenson2, E. L. Maltby1;  
1Shefﬁeld Childrens NHS Trust, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom, 2Histopathology, 
Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Shefﬁeld, United Kingdom.
We examined parafﬁn wax sections from 114 cases of metastatic 
breast cancer in order to compare the ampliﬁcation status of the oncogene Her2 by means of an immunohistochemical (IHC) stain test (HercepTest) against FISH using the Abbott-Vysis PathVysion probe 
kit.The Her2 Digital Scoring Application of Applied Imaging’s Micrometastasis Detection System (MDS) was used in addition to manual scoring of FISH and HercepTest to determine if this system 
provides an accurate alternative.Of the IHC 3+ cases, 90% showed Her2 ampliﬁcation by FISH. Of the IHC 2+ cases, 32% showed ampliﬁcation by FISH. Of the negative IHC cases (0 or 1+), 6 % were ampliﬁed by FISH. Classiﬁcation discrepancies were observed in 18% of HercepTest cases scored by eye and by using the MDS system. The MDS proved to be consistent with manual FISH scoring and correctly differentiated most cases of 
ambiguous manual IHC scoring.Published response data has shown that the determination of Her2 ampliﬁcation by FISH is a more reliable selection procedure for Herceptin treatment than HercepTest. We have found that the MDS system does provide an accurate alternative to manual FISH scoring and that it also appears to improve the correlation between IHC and 
FISH categorisation.In addition, we have also presented an interesting case with heterogeneous tumour populations where FISH analysis has called into question the DakoCytomation HercepTest scoring criteria.
P0551. Detection of chromosomal changes in plasma cells by 
interphase ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization in patients with 
multiple myeloma
L. Sindelarova1, Z. Zemanova1, L. Babicka1, J. Brezinova2, S. Ransdorfova2, L. 
Houskova1, K. Michalova1,2;  
1Center of Oncocytogenetics, Institute of Clinical Biochemistry and Laboratory 
Diagnostics, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Hematology and Blood 
Transfusion, Prague 2, Czech Republic.
Multiple myeloma (MM) is hematological malignancy characterized 
by the inﬁltration of bone marrow by plasma cells with numerical and structural chromosomal abnormalities. The most frequent are deletions of RB1 gene at 13q14 or monosomy 13 and translocations involving 14q32, where is the locus for immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH). From different partner chromosomes in translocations, 11q13 is the most frequent one, giving better prognosis. FISH analysis of plasma cells labeled by immunoﬂuorescence allows their identiﬁcation even in cases with low bone marrow inﬁltration.The aim of the study is identiﬁcation of the frequency of deletions and/or monosomies 13, 14q32 rearrangements, t(11;14) and evaluation of their prognostic signiﬁcance.We examined bone marrow samples of patients with MM by FISH with speciﬁc DNA probes (Abbott-Vysis
TM). Identiﬁcation of deletion/
monosomy of chromosome 13, was done by locus speciﬁc probes LSI 13 (RB1) 13q14 and LSI 13q34, 14q32 translocations were veriﬁed with LSI IgH rearrangement probe, t(11;14)(q13;q32) was detected with LSI IgH/CCND1 probe. Totally 66 patients were examined with 13q14/13q34 probes, deletion of RB-1 gene was found in 22 (33%) and monosomy 13 was identiﬁed in 20 (30%), combination of both was proved in ﬁve (7,6%). IgH translocation was evaluated in 58 patients and was detected in 21 (36%) of them (deletions, partial trisomies and monosomies were also found). Five out of 10 patients examined for t(11;14) were positive.Prognostic signiﬁcance of chromosomal changes and the contribution of immunoﬂuorescence in cytogenetic examination of MM will be 
evaluated.Supported by grant IGA NR-8183-4.
P0552. Second hit analysis in tumors from HNPCC patients 
carrying novel large genomic deletions in MSH2 or MLH1
J. Zhang1, G. Marra22, H. Mueller11, K. Heinimann1;  
1Research Group Human Genetics,Center for Biomedicine DKBW,university of basel, Basel, Switzerland, 2Institute of Molecular Cancer Research,University of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is an autosomal dominantly inherited cancer predisposition syndrome caused by germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes. Large genomic deletions in MSH2 or MLH1 have been reported to account for up to 27% of all MMR gene mutations, missed by conventional 
mutation detection techniques.We screened for large genomic deletions/insertions in the germline using the multiplex ligation dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA) assay in 21 unrelated HNPCC patients whose tumors exhibited microsatellite instability and showed immunohistological loss of either MLH1 (n=12) or MSH2 (n=9) but in whom no pathogenic MMR gene mutation could be identiﬁed. We detected four novel large genomic deletions, two in MLH1 (EX7_9del and EX13del) and two in MSH2 (EX7_8del and EX8_11del).To assess the type of the second, somatic alteration (second hit) occurring in the tumors, we analysed 8 different cancers (5 colorectal, 2 renal and 1 brain tumor) from these deletion carriers using microsatellite markers and the MLPA assay. Assessing allelic imbalance by marker analysis was impeded by the presence of microsatellite instability in about 50% of informative markers whereas the MLPA assay allowed to determine exon-speciﬁc gene dosage in 7 out of 8 cancers. Consequently, none of the tumors showed evidence for whole gene loss. In two colorectal cancers (both from the MLH1 EX7_9del kindred) as well as in the brain tumor (MSH2 EX8_11del) the second hit was identical to the ﬁrst hit alteration, indicating mitotic recombination as 
primary mechanism of somatic inactivation in these tumors.
P0553. Increasing detection efﬁciency of microsatellite 
instabilities in colon carcinoma by applying a label-free method
R. Salowsky1, N. Barta2, S. Baldus2, S. Lammers2, O. Mueller1, M. Odenthal2;  
1Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany, 2Institute for Pathology, University 
Clinic Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
Microsatellite instability (MSI) is caused by a failure of the DNA mismatch repair system and occurs frequently in various types of cancer. Since MSI, associated with ca. 10 to 15 % of colorectal, gastric or endometrial carcinoma, impact clinical prognosis, MSI analysis is an important tool of molecular pathology. This study aimed to develop a simple and efﬁcient procedure of MSI detection. 40 cases with no (27), low (l) or high (h) MSI (13), pre-identiﬁed by conventional ﬂuorochrome-associated PAGE technology, were selected out of a panel of 150 patients with colon carcinoma. Microdissected non-tumor (N) and tumor (T) tissue areas of one or two 4 µm-sections were de-parafﬁnized and DNA was extracted. Primer sequences recognizing the ﬁve microsatellite loci BAT25, BAT26, D5S346, D17S250, D2S123, were selected according to the recommendation of the 1997 National Cancer Institute-sponsored conference on MSI. Primer sets were applied in label-free duplex or single PCR assays for DNA ampliﬁcation and amplicons were analysed by microﬂuidics based on-chip electrophoresis. In all 40 cases, chip linked microcapillary electrophoresis of the amplicons, arisen from tumor and non-tumor DNA, resulted in highly resolved, distinct patterns of each of the microsatellite loci. Label-free detection of MSI could be demonstrated by microsatellite loci-associated deviations in the electropherogram proﬁles of tumor and non-tumor material, and conﬁrmed the prediagnosis of the MSI cases by conventional technology. Here, we present a simple and robust approach for MSI detection, which allows a label-free microsatellite analysis of uncharacterized microdissected 
tissue areas within 30 minutes.
P0554. RNASEL R462Q is signiﬁcantly associated with Prostate 
Cancer in the Italian population
M. M. van Duist1, D. Giachino1, A. Zitella2, P. De Stefanis2, M. E. Graziano2, C. 
Cracco3, R. Scarpa3, U. Ferrando2, D. Fontana2, A. Tizzani2, M. De Marchi1;  
1Medical Genetics, University of Torino, Orbassano, Italy, 2Centro prostata, ASO 
S.Giovanni Battista, Torino, Italy, 3SCDU Urologia, Orbassano, Italy.
RNASEL is the most likely candidate prostate cancer susceptibility gene of the HPC1 locus at 1q23. It encodes a constitutively expressed latent 2'-5’-oligoadenylate-dependent ribonuclease that mediates the antiviral and pro-apoptotic activities of the interferon-inducible 2-5A 
system.Cancer genetics200
In single high risk families rare inactivating mutations have been 
reported and association studies of sporadic prostate cancer with the common R462Q polymorphism resulted in variable ﬁndings in different populations. To our knowledge, this putative low-penetrance allele has 
not been previously analyzed in the Italian population.We collected DNA samples of 192 prostate cancer patients attending four participating Urologic Units and 218 controls, with the aim to evaluate the frequency of R462Q in our population and detect possible differences between sporadic and familial cases, useful to plan a larger prospective study on this and other SNPs. Genotyping was done by 
PCR-DHPLC.Genotype frequencies (%) in controls were: RR 43.6, RQ 42.2, QQ 14.2 vs 31.2, 51.6 and 17.2 in patients. Allele Q was signiﬁcantly more frequent in patients (69%) vs. controls (56% p0.01), and RR have an average age of onset three years later than patients carrying Q in 
single or double dose.
Early detection of prostate cancer is currently based on PSA testing, which as a screening strategy is debated. Identiﬁcation of new predisposing genes might contribute both to a better understanding of the underlying molecular mechanisms, and also open new ways for deﬁning the individual risks, a difﬁcult challenge if prostate cancer susceptibility 
depends on several low-risk rather than few high-risk genes.
P0555. A Report of Cytogenetic Study in 146 Serbian Children 
with ALL and it`s Prognostic Value
N. S. Lakic, A. Krstic, S. Cirkovic, M. Guc-Scekic, G. Bunjevacki, D. Micic;  
Mother and Child Health Care Institute, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro.
In this study we present the results of cytogenetic analysis in 146 
children with ALL, diagnosed between 1998 and 2003. at the Mother and Child Care Institute of Serbia “Dr Vukan Cupic”. Patients, all under 15 years old, belonged to various ALL types (L1 or L2). There where 
more males patients then females (1,78 :1).Normal karyotype was found in 79 (54%) of our patients. Chromosomal abnormalities were seen in 67 (46%) children; among them 44 (65%) have numerical and 23 (35%) structural rearrangements. Structural abnormalities were presented in a form of speciﬁc and nonspeciﬁc chromosomal aberrations. Among speciﬁc chromosomal disorders cytogenetic analysis revealed: hyperdiploidy in 37 (55.7%) children with ALL L1 or L2, hyperhaploidy in one patient with ALL (L1), translocation 9/22 [t (9;22)(q34;q11)] in 4 (6%) patients with ALL (L1 or L2), translocation 4/11 [t (4;11)(q21;q23)] in one patient with ALL (L1) and translocation 11/14 [t (11;14)(p13;q11) ] in one patient with the sime tipe of ALL. Nonspeciﬁc chromosomal abnormalities detected in our group of patients were: hypodiploidy (6 patients (9%)with ALL(L1 or L2));translocations: t(6;9)(q23;p24) (1 patient with ALL (L1)), t(13;19)(q14;p13) (1 case with ALL(L1)); deletations: del(7)(q22) (1 patient with ALL(L1)) , del (8)(p11) (1 case with ALL (L2)), del(2)(q33) (1 patient with ALL (L2)) and inversion of chromosome 1[ inv (1)(p34;q21) ] in one patient with ALL (L1).The authors will discuss the prognostic value of nonspeciﬁc rearrangements in analysed sample of ALL patients.
P0556. Analysis of genetic events in the 17p13 region points to 
monoclonal origin of multifocal and recurrent bladder cancer.
M. Trkova1, A. Soukupova1, M. Babjuk2, V. Soukup2, J. Duskova3, J. Mares1, Z. 
Sedlacek1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - Second Medical 
School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department 
of Urology, Charles University - First Medical School, Prague, Czech Republic, 
3Department of Pathology, Charles University - First Medical School, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
Bladder cancer is the second most common malignancy of the 
genitourinary tract with about 90% of tumours belonging to transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). Approximately 70% of patients with superﬁcial TCC develop recurrences after transurethral resection, and nearly 30% of patients present at diagnosis with multifocal disease. Synchronous or metachronous development of superﬁcial TCCs evokes the question of clonal nature of these tumours. Published studies present evidence for both the monoclonality hypothesis (which proposes that malignant cells spread via intraluminal seeding or intraepithelial migration), and the ﬁeld cancerisation hypothesis (which proposes transformation of numerous urothelial cells at multiple sites due to exposure and accumulation of carcinogenic events).We attempted to address this question by the analysis of genetic events in the 17p13 region in multifocal and recurrent superﬁcial TCCs. TP53 gene mutations and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of three intragenic and two extragenic TP53 polymorphic DNA markers were tested in 25 patients with 2-8 TCCs sampled between 2000 and 2004 (a total of 83 tumours). We found that the tumours from an individual always showed the same TP53 mutation (4 of 25 patients (16%)). In similar, we found that with the exception of two patients with discordant ﬁndings and three non-informative patients, the tumours from each individual always showed either absence or presence of LOH, with the same allele lost in all tumours (14 of 20 patients (70%), and 6 of 20 patients (30%), respectively). These results rather support the monoclonality hypothesis for the development of multifocal and recurrent superﬁcial 
TCCs.
P0557. Expression proﬁling of T-cell lymphomas deﬁnes genetic 
determinants of survival and response to treatment related 
genes.
M. Cuadros ;  
Spanish National Cancer Centre, Madrid, Spain.
T-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas (T-NHLs) constitute an heterogeneous group. They are in general aggressive tumours with clinical behaviour that may not correlate with morphology. In a previous study (1) we tried to subclassify this group by use of cDNA microarrays and found that according to the mean survival (10 months) we could establish a common genetic signature with 5 genes related to survival and drug response. The aim of the present study was to validate these results in a new series and to identify genes related to survival and response to treatment in T-NHLs. Expression proﬁling of T-HNLs were established using a cDNA microarray, containing 6386 cancer related genes, developed by the CNIO. RNA from 60 T-NHLs was obtained and subsequently cDNA and T7-ampliﬁed RNA was synthesised. T-lymphocytes extracted from peripheral blood, thymus samples or 
reactive node tissues were used as control tissues.Previous results were validated and furthermore, cluster analysis identiﬁed genes that were signiﬁcantly over or under-expressed, most of them of immune response, genes involved in the NFkB pathway, cell cycle or T cell differentiation. Importantly, we found two different subgroups of PTCLs based on the expression of NFkB pathway genes. A reduced expression of NFkB pathway genes was signiﬁcantly associated with shorter survival, in contrast to longer survival times showed by the NFkB+ lymphomas. Over-expression of two representative genes of the NFkB pathway, NIK and IKBa, was found among NFKb+ lymphomas. These genes might be considered 
as targets for new therapies.
1- Martinez et al.Clin Cancer Res 2004
P0558. Study of mtDNA amount in prostate cancer by real-tyme 
PCR.
J. Abril-Jarilla, M. Gómez-Zaera, L. González, M. Nadal, V. Nunes;  
Institut de Recerca Oncològica (IRO), Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.
According to recent estimates of the global cancer prevalence, prostate cancer (PC) is the third most common cancer in men, causing 40,000 
death per year both in Europe and the United States.In recent years, a high number of point mutations, insertions or deletions in mtDNA have been identiﬁed in multiple cancers. The analysis of the mtDNA has been suggested as a very useful tool for the early detection of cancer.We studied the relative amount of mtDNA in normal, tumoral and hyperplastic samples corresponding to 30 patients with PC and 5 controls. Small cylinders of prostatic tissue were obtained from radical prostatectomy specimens. In addition, 7 seminal vesicles from patients and controls were also studied as a second control tissue because it 
seldom, very infrequently malignizes.Our purpose was to determine if there were differences in the mtDNA quantity between the different types of samples or between patients and controls. We used a real-time PCR technique for the ampliﬁcation of the 
mitochondrial gene ND2 and the nuclear housekeeping gene 18S.
There were no statistical signiﬁcant differences between normal, tumoral, hyperplasic or seminal vesicle groups, nor between patients 
and controls.Cancer genetics201
P0559. Germ-line mutations and large deletions of the APC  gene 
in Czech FAP patients
M. Kohoutová , J. Štekrová, K. Zídková, M. Šulová, J. Vandrovcová, V. Kebrd -
lová, J. Kotlas;  
Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the 1st Faculty of Medicine and 
General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
Germ-line APC (adenomatous polyposis coli gene) mutations are 
responsible for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). FAP is a 
dominantly inherited predisposition to colorectal tumors, which shows substantial phenotypic variability. Routine mutation detection techniques fail to detect 
APC germ-line mutations in 20 - 40% of 
patients with classical or attenuated FAP. The failure to detect germ-line mutations might be caused by large deletions, 
MYH mutations or 
by mutations in other genes. From a series of 103 Czech unrelated probands with colorectal polyposis, 72 (69,9%) were found to have truncating or missense mutations. Using PCR, PTT, DGGE methods and sequence analysis, the 39 previously reported and 33 mutations unique for Czech populations were detected. The 
APC mutation 
negative patients have been screened for large APC deletions using 
multiplex ligation dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA). Two whole-gene deletions and one exon 14 deletion were found in a set of the 37 
APC negative probands. Fine mapping has to be performed to assess 
the exact molecular extent of the APC germ-line deletions identiﬁed.
Supported by grant project IGA MZ CR NR8103-3/2004.
P0560. Novel 3’ mutation of the APC gene in a patient with 
isolated desmoid tumors in a family suffering from familial 
adenomatous polyposis (FAP).
L. Benoit1, N. Cheynel1, B. Diane1, M. Marty2, C. Thauvin-Robinet3, J. Fraisse4, 
S. Olschwang5, J. Cuisenier4, L. Faivre3;  
1Digestive surgery, CHU le Bocage, Dijon, France, 2Anatomopathology, Centre 
Georges François Leclerc, Dijon, France, 3Clinical Genetics, Hopital d'Enfants, 
Dijon, France, 4Surgery, Centre Georges François Leclerc, Dijon, France, 5Ge-
netic Oncology, Institut Paoli Calmette, Marseille, France.
Desmoid tumors occur sporadically or as part of the extraintestinal 
manifestations of FAP, the phenotypic expression of APC gene mutations. Considerable clinical variability is known both within and especially between families. Some phenotype-genotype correlations concerning the gastrointestinal and extra-gastrointestinal manifestations of the disease have been demonstrated. In particular, 3’ mutations of the APC gene may result in attenuated adenomatous forms or, in extreme cases the occurrence of desmoid tumors only. We present here the case of a 42-year-old women suffering from desmoids tumors without colonic involvement but for whom the history of FAP among siblings indicate APC gene mutation screening. A frameshift mutation due to a single adenosine deletion at position 5772 (codon 1924), located at the 3’ end of exon 15 of the APC gene was found. Six other families in whom desmoid tumors represent the main phenotype and mode of ascertainment have been described in the literature. All the mutations were found in the 3’ end of the APC gene. Desmoid tumors were found in 79 % of patients, FAP in only 37 % and mainly in its attenuated form, and colorectal cancer may be the only colonic manifestation in some individuals. This data suggests that an APC gene mutation must be looked for in cases of familial desmoid tumors, even in the absence of a personal or familial history of FAP. Likewise, colonoscopy must be performed in the case of a desmoid tumor, even when sporadic, in order to detect FAP and its risk of colorectal cancer.
P0561. Induction of apoptosis in BCLL cells by fatty acids
J. Kolano , A. Filip, B. Cisel, J. Wojcierowski;  
Department of Medical Genetics of Medical University in Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are a group of enzymes able to change nucleosome structure by removing acetyl groups from histone tails. This modiﬁcation results in more compact chromatine structure.Inhibition of HDACs in neoplasmatic cells leads to change in some genes expression (2-5% of cellular genes) and, subsequently, differentiation or apoptosis. Thus HDAC inhibitors posses antitumour activity and, since they are well tolerated, create a new strategy in 
cancer treatment.Short chain fatty acids and some of their derivatives form a class of 
substances who work as histone deacetylase inhibitors.In our study we cultured B-CLL (B-cell Chronic Lymphatic Leucaemia) cells obtained from 20 patients in liquid media with natrium butyrate and butyrate derivative, phenylbutyrate. After 24 hours of culture we observed signiﬁcant increase in number of apoptotic cells using anti active caspase 3 antibody in ﬂow cytometer, in comparison to control cultures (without fatty acids). The intensity of apoptosis was compared 
to positive control (with dexamethasone).In conclusion, the apoptotic properties of fatty acids alongside their low toxicity suggest that they could be used in modern schemes of B-CLL 
treatment.
P0562. Methylation proﬁle of N33, HIC, GSTP1  and CDKN2  at 
different stages of prostate carcinogenesis.
T. V. Kekeeva1,2, B. Y. Alekseev3, P. V. Shegai3, M. V. Nemtsova2;  
1Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre 
for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow Herzen 
Research Oncological Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation.
DNA methylation of CpG sites of tumor suppressor genes is a frequent epigenetic event in the cancer pathogenesis. We examined the methylation proﬁle of N33, HIC, GSTP1 and 
CDKN2  genes in 
the spectrum of prostate cancer disease progression, from benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) to primary prostate cancer. Biopsy specimens were obtained from patients with BPH (n=24), PIN (n=32) and adenocarcinoma (n=52), 28 prostate tissues were obtained from patients with prostate cancer after radical prostatectomy. Methylation status was determined 
using methylation-sensitive PCR.Methylation frequency of 
HIC1 in BPH samples was 37% and 
methylation frequencies of PIN and adenocarcinoma were signiﬁcantly higher 66% and 65% accordinally (P=0,05). Promoter hypermethylation of 
p16 was detected in 25% of hyperplasia, 29% of 
neoplasia and 36% of carcinoma. The similar pattern of methylation was shown for 
GSTP1 gene (25%, 16% and 42%). It was interesting 
that methylation of N33 was absent in the preinvasive lesions but was 
frequent in adenocarcinoma (18%, P=0,02). Methylation percentages in prostatectomy tissues were: 
GSTP1, 32%; HIC1, 71%; p16, 18%;  
N33, 20%. There were no signiﬁcant differences in the frequencies of 
methylation in biopsy and prostatectomy prostate adenocarcinomas 
specimens for individual genes.We can conclude that 
N33 methylation is related to late, tumor-
associated events, while HIC1, GSTP1 and CDKN2  methylation 
appears with different frequencies at cancer precursor lesions. These early epigenetic DNA alterations are the accessory component of extensive tumour reorganizations and provide clinically useful markers to diagnose early prostate cancer lesions and assess disease 
prognosis.
P0563. The survival of human B-CLL cells and “nurse-like” cells 
in the different conditions of culture in vitro.
B. Cisel, A. Filip, J. Kolano, J. Wojcierowski;  
Department of Medical Genetics of Medical University in Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a disease characterized by an accesive accumulation of B lymphocytes displaying deﬁcient programmed cell death and a different clinical course and prognosis.The aim of invastigation:  To examine the capacity of leukemic 
lymphocytes and “nurse-like “cells to survive in vitro and protective 
effects of “nurse-like“ cells on leukemic lymphocytes.Object and methods: The lymphocytes isolated from peripheral blood 
obtained from patient with B-CLL were examined. The cells were cultured under four separate conditions:1)medium alone, 2) medium supplemented by apoptosis-inducing dexamethasone, 3)medium conditioned by coculturing leukemic lymphocytes and “nurse-like” cells, 4) medium conditioned by coculturing leukemic lymphocytes and “nurse-like” cells and supplemented by apoptosis-inducing dexamethasone .The cells cells were quantieﬁed by ﬂow cytometry after labelling with FDA and propidium iodide / annexine-V.
Results: After 14 days of culture in vitro we have demonstrated 
increased survival of lymhocytes in the presence of “nurse-like” cells (96.35 vs 93.15% for cultures without dexamethasone and 67.80 vs 50.91% for cultures with this factor). We also have noticed decreased capacity of “nurse-like” cells to survive as compared with leukemic lymphocytes (83.02 vs 96.35% for cultures without dexamethasone 
and 1.60 vs 67.80% for cultures with this factor).Cancer genetics202
Conclusions: This experiment could show the protective role of “nurse-
like” cells in the apoptosis of CLL cells under different conditions of 
culture in vitro and decreased resistance to dexamethasone-induced 
apoptosis of these cells.
Because of the fact that it was an initial study further ones on the 
interactions between lymphocytes and “nurse-like” cells are needed.
P0564. Familial Nonmedullary Thyroid Carcinoma In Italian 
Families: Clinical And Genetic Heterogeneity
I. Torrente1, E. M. Valente1, C. Faloci2, R. Di Nardo2, B. Grammatico3, B. Dal -
lapiccola1,4, P. Grammatico3;  
1CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Dept of Surgical Sciences, University La 
Sapienza, Rome, Italy, 3Medical Genetics, University La Sapienza, S. Camillo–
Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy, 4Dept of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, 
La Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.
The familiar form of nonmedullary thyroid carcinoma (FNMTC) is a 
complex genetic disorder characterized by bilateral and multifocal thyroid cancer, occurring at an earlier age and with a more aggressive course than the sporadic forms, often associated with benign thyroid pathologies. Several environmental risk factors have been identiﬁed, but little is known about genetic risk factors of the disease. The ﬁnding of RET proto-oncogene mutations cosegregating with papillary thyroid cancer suggests an important role of this gene in epithelial thyroid carcinogenesis. In addition, a recent linkage study identiﬁed a novel FNMTC susceptibility locus on chromosome 2q21. We describe here ﬁve large Italian families with familial aggregation of PTC and benign thyroid disease. Twelve individuals had papillary thyroid cancer while 27 family members showed benign thyroid disease, either plurinodular goiter or thyroiditis. Mutational analysis of the RET proto-oncogene failed to identify pathogenic mutations in all families. Moreover, in the two families with at least three individuals with PTC, linkage to the FNMTC locus was excluded. Our ﬁndings indicate that different genes are involved in the pathogenesis of the familiar form of nonmedullary thyroid carcinoma, further conﬁrming genetic heterogeneity of this 
condition.
P0565. High frequency of p16INK4b (MTS1) gene promoter 
methylation in Iranian patients with breast tumor
M. Sedeaghat1, S. Vallian2, A. Farazmand1;  
1The University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2The University of 
Isfahan, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The methylation status of p16INK4b (MTS1) gene promoter was analyzed 
in 67 breast tumors from Iranian patients with breast cancer. The analysis was performed using methylation-speciﬁc polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (MSP) followed by restriction-enzyme related PCR (REP). Methylation of the p16 gene was detected in 47% of the breast tumors analyzed. The data showed that the tumors with high-grade (85%) were more often methylated than those with low-grade (27%). Moreover, a large variation in the methylation patterns of 
p16 exon 1 
was observed from one sample to another. Analysis of the expression 
of p16 promoter in methylated and non-methylated tumors indicated the 
association of methylation and the absence of p16 gene expression. 
The results suggested a role for p16 gene promoter methylation during 
breast tumorigenesis and a possible inactivation of p16 expression in 
high-grade breast cancers.
P0566. Familial breast cancer- two mutations, two phenotypes.
I. Winship1, S. Fawcett1, R. Bell2, M. Smith3;  
1Genetic Health Services Victoria, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia, 2Barwon 
Health, Geelong, Australia, 3Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Melbourne, 
Australia.
The co-existence in an individual of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations is unusual. Initially it was believed that the homozygous or compound heterozygous state of BRCA1 and/or BRCA2 was lethal. Reports now 
exist of such compound heterozygotes.We have encountered a family where two sisters have co-existent BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations. The proband aged 58 had bilateral breast cancer(aged 34 and 53) and colorectal cancer(aged 39 and 58 years). Her sister aged 63 has had regular cancer surveillance without the detection of malignant pathology thus far. The pattern of cancer in this kindred is consistent with a predisposing mutation in a BRCA gene. (BRCAPRO scores: A1 - 0.885; A2 -0.110 Combined score - 0.990) In a routine familial cancer clinic, 2 mutations were identiﬁed in the proband (BRCA 1 - frameshift mutation in exon 11 nt3450delCAAG STOP 115; BRCA 2 - splice site mutation IVS7+2 T>G in exon 7) Immunohistochemistry of the bowel cancer showed normal expression 
for the mismatch repair genes.Predictive testing was offered to her asymptomatic sister, who was 
found to be positive for both mutations.While it is acknowledged that the penetrance of each mutation within BRCA1 or 2 is incomplete, the very different phenotypes of these 
sisters if of interest.Studies of their demographic differences have given few insights into the differing clinical outcomes. Modiﬁer genes or haplotypes are a plausible explanation. Larger family studies are underway to eliminate other possible genotypic differences which account for this 
discordance.
P0567. Genetics of Diagnosis and Management in Chronic 
Myeloid Leukemia (CML)- An Indian study
R. Talwar, V. P. Choudhry, L. Kumar, K. Kucheria;  
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) is a hematopoietic malignancy 
characterized by presence of Philadelphia (Ph1) chromosome and/or 
bcr/abl fusion gene. Although CML has been widely studied, various genetic changes leading to progression of disease and relapse are still unexplored. The present study was conducted to evaluate cytogenetic and molecular anomalies and response to therapy in CML patients on various therapies (IFN-α 2b+HU, IFN-α2b+HU+Ara-C, STI571 and 
allogeneic BMT).Six hundred bone marrow samples from 349 suspected CML patients were analyzed using conventional cytogenetics and Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) analysis. Of these, 101 cases on the above therapies were followed at sequential intervals of 4-6 months for four years. Probes used for FISH analysis were speciﬁc for 
bcr and abl 
genes and centromeres of chromosomes X and Y (in cases of sex-mismatched BMT). Novel cytogenetic and molecular anomalies could be identiﬁed at diagnosis and during therapies that were found to be associated with speciﬁc clinical/hematological proﬁles. Appearance of some anomalies was followed by clinical/hematological relapse and progression to blast crisis. New variant Ph
1 translocations associated 
with resistance to therapy were also observed. Minimal residual disease (MRD) could be evaluated using FISH analysis in cases with 
complete cytogenetic response.These ﬁndings reiterate that molecular analysis in conjunction with cytogenetic analysis has tremendous importance not only in accurate diagnosis and management of CML but also in predicting relapse/progression. Further identiﬁcation of novel anomalies indicate the involvement of chromosomes other than 9 and 22 in the pathogenesis of CML, which needs to be explored further.
P0568. No sib pair concordance for breast or ovarian cancer in 
BRCA1 mutation carriers
P. Møller1, L. Mæhle1, N. Clark1, M. Bjørnslett1, J. Apold2;  
1The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Haukeland University Hospi -
tal, Bergen, Norway.
Modifying factor(s) of expression of BRCA1 mutations would be expected to induce concordance for breast and ovarian cancer in affected sibships. We identiﬁed all pairs with cancers where one or 
both sisters were demonstrated to carry a BRCA1 mutation.The preliminary results were that under the assumption of random distribution we would expect 23.4 pairs to be concordant for breast cancer, and the observed number of concordant pairs were 22 (p<<0.05). The expected number of concordant pairs for ovarian cancer were 10.4 and the observed number 9 (p<<0.05). Final results 
of the study will be given. Methodological problems will be discussed.In conclusion, there may be no single major modifying factor of expression of BRCA1 mutations. The mutations did not differ with respect to breast or ovarian cancer as clinical expression. Previous disease manifestations in close relatives may have no bearing on ﬁrst cancer to be expected in a young female mutation carrier. This means that, in BRCA1 carrying kindreds without ovarian cancer, the risk for ovarian cancer may be as high as in ovarian cancer kindreds. It means that, in ovarian cancer kindred, the next young cancer to expect may Cancer genetics203
be breast cancer because it occurs at an earlier age. It also means 
that research strategies to uncover modiﬁers of BRCA1 expression, may be suitable to uncover multifactorial systems and not only single 
factors.
P0569. A preliminary molecular analysis of APC gene in the 
Iranian FAP patients
M. Shahmoradgoli1,2, O. Mueller3, N. Kutzner3, P. Rostami1, B. Noorinayer1, M. 
R. Zali1;  
1Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Taleghani Hospital, 
Shaheed Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 2Young Researchers Club, Science and Research Campus, Islamic Azad 
University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Max-Planck Institute for Molecular 
Physiology, Dortmund, Germany.
Germ-line mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene 
are causative for familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), a dominant inherited syndrome characterized by presence of multiple adenomatous polyps in the colon and rectum. In this study, we screened the coding region of APC gene for germ-line mutations in seven Iranian FAP patients. Clinically typical FAP was diagnosed in three patients and four patients were diagnosed with attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli (AAPC). Our study began with a non-radioactive protein truncation test (PTT) to screen all patients for protein truncating mutations in mutation cluster region (MCR) of APC. Then, we analyzed all 15 exons of APC in patients negative for PTT test by single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) and DNA sequencing. We identiﬁed a C to T substitution at codon 1303 (CAA to TAA) resulting in a stop codon (Q1303X) in a FAP patient. Interestingly, no other nonsense or missense mutation was detected in the remaining subjects. Furthermore, two novel silent polymorphisms, 4509G>A and 5898A>G, were found in our patients. Based on our ﬁndings, other genes may have the major causative roles in the etiology of FAP in Iran.
P0570. Cytogenetic Analysis of over 500 Iranian Leukaemic 
Patients
M. Khaleghian1, F. Mahjoubi1,2, T. Tavakoli1, f. Javan1, M. T. Akbari1,3;  
1Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National 
Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 3Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Tarbiat Modarres, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
We analyzed bone marrow and peripheral blood samples of more than 500 Iranian patients referred from major hematology-oncology centers at Tehran and provincial capitals. They were either suspected of a leukemia condition at presentation or being monitored for their response to medication. Cell culturing and banding (GTG & high resolution) were carried out according to standard protocols. Chromosome analysis was performed following ISCN (1995) guidelines. The patients were divided into six major groupings as far as the leukemia subtypes were concerned: CML, AML, ALL, MDS, lymphoma and "others". With regard to the stage they were broadly categorized into "at presentation" and "under treatments". There were more male patients than females, approximately1.32:1 ratio. In terms of sample type, most cases had bone marrow aspiration whereas peripheral blood was utilized only in a fraction of cases. The common typical chromosomal abnormalities as well as rare and combined forms were observed. The overall chromosomal abnormality rate obtained was around 50%. The breakdown ﬁgures for different categories were roughly as follows: 80% in CML, 40% in AML, 25% in ALL, 30% in MDS and 50% in other types. Compared to published data, the observed chromosomal abnormality 
rate in the present study is considered average.
P0571. Diagnostic and prognostic signiﬁcance of initial genetic 
examination in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: 
results of a ten-year study in Hungary(1993-2002)
Z. Jakab1, E. Balogh1, L. Pajor2, E. Olah1, G. P. Szabó1, Hungarian Pediatric 
Oncology Study Group;  
1University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2University of Pécs, Pécs, Hun -
gary.
Population-based national study was started in 1993 in Hungary with the aim of providing genetic diagnosis for all new childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia cases. We investigated distribution of genetic aberrations, their prognostic role and use of different genetic methods in childhood ALL.All ten centres of Hungarian Pediatric Oncology Network and diagnostic laboratories accepted cooperation. In addition to initial routine cytogenetic examination ﬂow cytometric DNA-index determination, FISH (numerical aberrations) and molecular genetic tests (ABL/BCR, MLL/AF4, TEL/AML1 gene rearrangements) were introduced to determine different genetic subgroups of ALL. Event-free and overall survival of patients was analysed by Kaplan-Meier method in genetic subgroups. Multivariate analysis (Cox’s regression) was performed taking into account different other prognostic factors (age, sex, major congenital abnormalities, initial WBC, therapy, immunphenotype).588 new cases of childhood ALL were diagnosed in Hungary 1993-2002. Cytogenetic examination was performed in 537 cases (91%) with success rate of 73%. DNA-index was determined in 265 cases (45%), FISH in 74 (13%), TEL/AML1 RT-PCR in 215 (37%). Taking into account results of all genetic tests we came to genetic diagnosis in 456 cases (78%). Proportion of subgroups with good prognosis was lower than expected: hyperdiploidB 18% (80/456), t(12;21) positive 18% (45/215). Univariate analysis showed signiﬁcantly better 5-year event-free survival in TEL/AML1 positive (82%) and the hyperdiploidB cases (76%) than those with hypodiploid (54%), pseudodiploid (speciﬁc translocations: 48%) or combined aberrations (tetraploid/structural aberrations with TEL/AML1 positivity)(45%). Multivariate analysis identiﬁed congenital abnormalities, high initial WBC, delay in therapy and speciﬁc translocations as main negative prognostic factors.
P0572. Cowden syndrome may be under-diagnosed in the 
cancer genetics clinic
C. D. Delozier1,2, R. Pilarsky3, T. Treisman1, C. J. Curry1,2;  
1Genetic Medicine Central California, Fresno, CA, United States, 2University of 
California San Francisco-Fresno, Fresno, CA, United States, 3Ohio State Uni -
versity Cancer Genetics, Columbus, OH, United States.
Referrals to the hereditary cancer clinic are usually for a personal or family history of breast/ovarian, colorectal or endocrine neoplasias. Depending on the referral source, in some 30-40% of these families gene analysis is indicated; the majority of patients will be negative for mutations. Among the likely reasons for this low mutation yield is the under-diagnosis of phenotypically-mild cases of “rare syndromes” such as Peutz-Jaegers and Cowden syndromes. We would like to call attention to what we perceive as a high frequency of Cowden syndrome among patients referred for breast/colon cancer; we have seen at least three Cowden families in eighteen months, out of approximately 120 referred for hereditary cancer consultation. Patient 1 is a 58 year-old man with personal history of colon polyps and family history of a brain tumor. A frame-shift mutation in the PTEN gene (872-875insA) was identiﬁed. Patient 2 is a healthy 40-year-old man with colon polyposis, whose daughter had lipomas and enlarged thryroid. Patient 3 is a 64-year-old female with previous breast and uterine cancer, whose daughter had papillary thyroid cancer. Molecular analysis has also 
initiated in patients 2 and 3.In all three cases, the clinical diagnosis was suspected not so much by the proband’s phenotype as by the combination of history/physical examination and symptoms present in ﬁrst degree relatives. All three probands have normal intelligence, and only patient 1 has obvious skin lesions . The proband or family’s clinical management has been positively impacted by knowledge of the diagnosis of Cowden 
syndrome.
P0573. The Expression of IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 in Breast 
carcinoma.
H. J. Kim1, E. J. Choi1, H. J. Choi1, N. R. Kim1, K. S. Kim2, Y. H. Cho2, K. Y. 
Cha1, J. K. Kim1;  
1Pochon CHA University, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 2Hanyang University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
Immortalization-upregulated protein-1 and 2 (IMUP-1 and IMUP-2) were more frequently expressed in Breast tumor tissues in the same pattern with the gene. Our last data showed the open reading frame of IMUP-1 spans 321bp, coding for a 10.9kDa protein of 106 amino acids, while an insertion of 59bp in the otherwise identical mRNA of IMUP-2 leads to a frameshift, resulting in an 8.5kDa protein of 85 amino acids. We also studied the in vitro proliferation of cells overexpressing IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 in the low serum. Overexpression
 of IMUPs increased Cancer genetics204
growth rates and reduced serum requirements for growth compared 
with control cells. Consistent with these ﬁndings, cells overexpressing 
IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 showed increased IMUPs expression displayed 
a shortening of cell cycle by FACS cell-cycle distribution analysis. Especially, the level of S phase and G2/M in IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 transfectants cells are increased than cells transfected vector alone. In the yeast two-hybrid system to ﬁnd the function, IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 was fused with the DNA-binding domain(DBD) of GAL4 and HeLa cell cDNA library was fused with the transcription activation domain(AD) of GAL4. We performed a high-stringency scale procedure to screen IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 against HeLa cell cDNA library and characterized positives by sequence analysis. As the result, 12 novel and 27 known proteins were found as the binding proteins. Some of them are under-checking to conﬁrm whether binding with IMUP-1 and IMUP-2 or not 
by immuno-precipitation in vivo.
P0574. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction for 
evaluation of MRP1 mRNA level in Iranian AML patients
M. Golalipour1,2, F. Mahjoubi1, F. Moshiri1;  
1NIGEB, Teheran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tarbiat Modaress University, Teh -
ran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Multidrug resistance (MDR) is a complex phenomenon that includes 
the expression of many different genes regulating drug transport or metabolism, cellular repair or detoxiﬁcation mechanisms. The expression or co-expression of gene(s) such as multidrug resistance (MDR1) and multidrug associated protein (MRP1) could be at the basis of the resistant phenotype in vivo. We developed a quantitative
 reverse 
transcription (RT)-PCR method for MRP1 transcripts to evaluate drug 
resistance, and applied it to clinical samples. 
The cutoffs for copy numbers of MRP1 transcripts were deﬁned based 
on copy numbers in healthy blood. To conﬁrm that the cutoffs reﬂected biological resistance,
 we used HL60 (known to have over-expression 
of MRP1) to examine the correlation between the copy numbers of 
these transcripts and the biological resistance of this cell line.
After optimizing the assay, it has been employed to test possible prognostic roles of the expression of MRP1 in 30 patients affected by acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Among those patients, 33% showed over-expression of MRP1. These patients are under monitor to test whether or not the high level of MRP1 will contribute to the remission rate and remission
 periods. These results may also help the prediction 
of clinical drug resistance in AML Iranian patients. 
P0575. Expression of ras p21 oncoprotein and K-ras point 
mutations in colorectal cancer
M. Akkiprik, Ç. Ataizi-Çelikel, F. Düşünceli, Ö. Sönmez, B. Güllüoğlu, A. Sav, 
A. Özer;  
Marmara Univ. School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Mutational activation and overexpression of the ras family genes especially K-ras, have been associated with colorectal tumorigenesis. We investigated the clinicopathological characteristics and point mutation of K-ras oncogene codon 12/13 and ras p21 expression using parafﬁn embedded materials from 53 colorectal cancer cases and their surrounding normal tissues. Point mutation of K-ras was analysed by PCR-SSCP and followed by DNA 
sequencing, ras p21 
expression was examined immunohistochemically. Mutations of K-ras and overexpression of the ras p21 were detected in 11% and 76% of the tumors, respectively. Ras p21 overexpression did not correlate with any of the clinicopathological parameters examined. K-ras gene mutations were found mostly in presence of a mucinous component within the tumor (p=0.076). Follow-up data were available for 43 patients. There was no statistically signiﬁcant correlation between these alterations and patient survival. Our data suggest that apart from K-ras codon 12/13 point mutations, overexpression of the ras family genes is important in the development of the disease. Furthermore, mucinous secretion in the colorectum may represent a distinct genetic 
pattern
P0576. Preliminary genetic investigation of the patient with 
atypical long term malignant melanoma process.
M. Dobrut1, M. Jaremko2, M. Konopacka3, J. Rogolinski3, T. Dobosz2;  
1Clinic of Oncological Surgery, Center of Oncology, Marie Sklodowska-Curie 
Memorial Institute, Gliwice, Poland, 2Institute of Molecular Techniques, Depart -ment of Forensic Medicine, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 
3Department of Experimental and Clinical Radiobiology, Center of Oncology, 
Marie Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Institute, Gliwice, Poland.
Malignant melanoma is the most aggressive skin cancer, with incidence rapidly increasing throughout the world at a faster rate than any other tumor type and is usually connected with poor prognosis. We report a case of a melanoma patient X with 46-years long oncological history, which due to such long term of the disease seems to be a medical phenomenon. The patient X was diagnosed ﬁrst time in 1957 for Ca. basocellulare, and until 2003 recurrences of some other histological subtypes of the disease (i.e. Mel. malignum, Ca. plano keratodes) to different parts of the skin were observed. Moreover, during this period patient X underwent initailly 3 radiotherapies, and then 30 surgeries, and survived until today.In order to explain the basis of this phenomenon, polymorphisms of some genes (CYP2D6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19) were analyzed by TaqMan technology, and DNA repair capacity of peripheral blood lymphocytes irradiated in vitro with 2 Gy of γ-radiation was tested by comet assay .
Patients X was indicated as a heterozygote for all obtained genotypes. The comparison of DNA repair capacity of patient X, two other melanoma patients and controls has shown decrease for cancer patients. Although the initial DNA damage induced by radiation in cells from patient X was high, the kinetic of strand breaks rejoining during the 180 min of incubation was faster than those present in other melanoma patients. In conclusion this study requires the further evaluation in order to ﬁnd for patient X the molecular factors ensuring the better DNA repair capacity.
P0577. Tissue microarray analysis of c-myc copy number 
alterations in a large number ovarian cancers
I. Dimova1, A. Yosifova1, S. Raicheva2, R. Dimitrov3, N. Doganov3;  
1Department of medical genetics, Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Labora -
tory of gynecopathology, “Maichin dom”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3II Gynecologic clinics, 
“Maichin dom”, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
The genetic changes involved in the pathogenesis of ovarian carcinoma are not completely understood. Summarized data of different CGH studies in this tumor type showed that chromosome segment 8q24.1 is consistently gained in more than one third of ovarian cancers. A target gene for ampliﬁcation of 8q24.1 is likely to be the MYC oncogene, which is located at this sub-band. There is not complete information about the signiﬁcance of c-myc copy number increases for the disease outcome. Here we have used the high-throughput technique of tissue microarrays (TMA) in order to analyze by FISH 503 ovarian cancers (OC) for the correlation of c-myc copy number changes with clinicopathological parameters - histological type, stage, grade. C-myc was ampliﬁed in 35,9 % of OC and gained in 3,8 % of them. We have found that the ampliﬁcation tends to be more frequent in late-stage (42,5%) vs early-stage (31%) cancers without reaching statistical signiﬁcance. Regarding histological grade, there was no signiﬁcant difference between the frequency of ampliﬁcation in different grade tumors (G1-30%, G2-36%, G3-42,5%). Gains of c-myc did not show an association with clinicopathological parameters. Concerning histological type, the highest frequency of c-myc ampliﬁcation was established in mixed Mulerian carcinomas - 53%; We concluded that c-myc ampliﬁcation is common event in ovarian carcinogenesis. It could be targeted in novel anticancer strategies for improving the outcome 
of the disease.
P0578. Role of the -675 4G/5G PAI-1  gene polymorphism in 
breast cancer
F. Dora1, M. Alessandro2, D. Carla3, P. Marta2, C. Giovanni2, R. Stefania2, A. 
Claudia2, P. Andrea2, P. Fabio2, D. Giuseppe4;  
1Istituto di Genetica - Azienda Policlinico universitario a gestione diretta, Udine, 
Italy, 2Clinica oncologica, Udine, Italy, 3Istituto di Anatomia Patologica, Udine, 
Italy, 4Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Udine, Italy.
The molecular components of Plasminogen Activator system, Urokinase-type Plasminogen Activator (uPA) and its inhibitor PAI-1, are involved in tumor progression and have prognostic value in early breast cancer (BC) patients. The -675 4G/5G polymorphism of the PAI-1 promoter gene is associated with different activity levels of PAI-1 in serum. Cycloxigenase-2 (COX-2) expression is associated with poor prognosis in early BC. We aimed at studying the -675 4G/5G PAI-1 Cancer genetics205
polymorphism together with the immunohistochemical expression of 
PAI-1 and COX-2 in BC patients.Methods: Blood samples from a consecutive series of 199 BC patients and 132 controls were collected and PAI-1 -675 4G/5G polymorphism was analyzed by PCR technique. Immunohistochemical expression of PAI-1, COX-2 and MIB-1/Ki-67 was evaluated in the tissue sample of primitive BC. A score combining intensity and percentage of cellular immunoreactivity, was used to assess the staining of PAI-1 and COX2. PAI-1 positivity was evaluated both in tumor cells and stromal ﬁbroblasts.Results: No statistically-signiﬁcant difference of genotypic and allelic frequencies was found between BC patients and controls. The 4G allele was associated with regional lymph node involvement (P=.04). No statistically signiﬁcant association was found between genotype and immunohistochemical expression of the PAI-1 gene PAI-1 score directly correlated with COX-2 expression (P=.02), and strong PAI-1 immunostaining was associated with moderate/strong expression of COX-2 (P=.006). Tumors with PAI-1 positive ﬁbroblasts showed higher 
MIB-1/Ki-67 expression (P=.02). These ﬁndings suggest that BC patients carrying the 4G allele of the PAI-1 promoter may have an increased probability of axillary lymph 
node involvement.
P0579. The prognostic relevance of cytogenetic ﬁndings in 
malignant tumours of cervix and ovary
M. Krkavcová1, N. Jančárková2, M. Janashia1, R. Mihalová1, M. Kohoutová1, M. 
Jarošová3, M. Holzerová3, J. Dušková4;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Depart -
ment of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 3Department 
of Hematology/Oncology, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 4Institute of Pathology, 
Prague 2, Czech Republic.
The knowledge of tumour genetic proﬁle as tumour-related prognostic factor, in correlation with other known predictors ought to led to improved prediction of outcome and individualization of therapeutic 
strategies.The aim of the presented study is to estimate the major genetic alterations in examined tumours and to evaluate their signiﬁcance in 
correlation with other available markers.In tumour samples - 46 of ovarian cancer and 20 of cervical cancer tumours histological type and grading were estimated, than immunohistochemical semiquantitative method with quantiﬁcation of HSCORE according McCarty was applied to determine TP53 and the 
proliferative marker MIB 1 .Another part of the tissue sample was used for a cytogenetic processing combining conventional method and FISH method using DNA speciﬁc probes and painting probes. The isolated DNA samples 
were preserved to be evaluated by CGH method.Genetic instability and structural aberrations were detected in 90% ovarian cancer cells and in 48% cervical cells, 10% ovarian tumours and 52% cervical tumours were diploid. Most frequent structural aberrations were unbalanced translocations, deletions and unidentiﬁed markers. The rearrangements generally affected chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 11 in ovarian cancer cells and chromosomes 1, 3, 5, 9, 11, 17, 
18 in cervical cancer cells.The wide range of genetic ﬁndings corresponds with advanced stage, serous type of poorly differentiated tumours and highly positive TP53 
HSCORE.This work has been supported by the grant of the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic: IGA-MZ-NH/7659-3: Predictive value of molecular 
biological parameters in malignant gynaecological tumours.
P0580. Circulating EGFRvIII positive cells in early stage breast 
cancer: association with factors predicting recurrence
H. A. C. Silva1, M. F. Dias2, T. S. Silva3, C. F. Oliveira2, F. J. Regateiro1;  
1Faculty of Medicine, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Gynaecologic Department, Coimbra 
University Hospital, Coimbra, Portugal, 3Anatomopathologic Department, Coim -
bra University Hospital, Coimbra, Portugal.
This work aims to evaluate epidermal growth factor receptor variant III (EGFRvIII) as a possible marker for the diagnosis of breast cancer 
occult systemic disease.Thirty three (T1N0M0 or T2N0M0) breast cancer patients, with tumours < 3 cm of diameter, selected for curative surgery and 40 control women were studied. A RT-nested PCR assay amplifying both EGFR and 
EGFRvIII was performed.The RT-nested PCR allowed the detection of 0.5 pg of total RNA from an EGFRvIII expressing cell-line, diluted in 5 µg of total RNA from an hematogenous, non expressing cell-line. EGFRvIII RNA was detected in the peripheral blood of 30% of patients and in none of the control women. All positive results were obtained in the nested PCR (sensitivity of 10-7). When EGFRvIII positive results were compared with the presence of known recurrence factors, no correlation was noticed with microscopic lymphatic node metastases or tumour diameter. There was an association with risk factors of tumour aggressiveness such as absence of estrogen receptors, presence of ERBB2 or histopathologic grades G2/G3. All EGFRvIII positive patients had one or more of these risk factors, whereas in the EGFRvIII negative group of patients, only 56.5% did so (p<0.05), supporting EGFRvIII predictive value as a dissemination marker.Further studies are needed to conﬁrm the role of EGFRvIII RNA detection in the peripheral blood of early stage breast cancer patients as an independent relapse predicting factor.
P0581. Molecular genetic ﬁndings in patients with multiple 
polyposis coli
P. Plevova1, J. Stekrova2, M. Kohoutova2, I. Urbanovska1, E. Silhanova1, P. 
Opletal3, L. Foretova4, A. Krepelova5;  
1Faculty Hospital, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology, Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Hospital, Rymarov, Czech Republic, 
4Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, 5Faculty Hospital, 
Prague-Motol, Czech Republic.
Multiple colorectal polyposis (the occurrence of 3 to 100 polyps) might be associated with germline mutations in 
APC, MYH or mismatch 
repair genes.Patients and methods: A patient (age 62 years) with about 30 colorectal polyps and synchronnous occurrence of colorectal cancer and a patient (age 52 years) with tens of polyps have been referred to 
mutational analysis of the APC and MYH  genes. 
Results: In the 1st patient, a novel mutation was found in exon 2 of 
the APC gene located at splice site: c.220G→ T, p.Glu74X; IVS2 
ds-1. The mutation segregated with the ﬁndings of polyposis in presymptomatically tested members of the family older than 50 years. No polyposis was found in mutation carriers younger than 40 years. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (
MTHFR) gene polymorphism 
C677T, described to decrease the risk of colorectal cancer, was found in the family. In the 2
nd patient, no mutation in the APC gene was found, 
but two most common mutations in the MYH gene Y165C and G382D 
were detected.
Conclusion: We report a novel mutation in exon 2 of the APC gene, 
which segregates with clinical ﬁndings in multiple members of the family.
Supported by IGA MZ CR NR8103-3/2004.
P0582. Analysis of genotype-phenotype correlation in familial 
breast/ovarian cancer with BRCA1 gene mutations in Russia
N. I. Pospekhova1, A. N. Loginova1, L. N. Lyubchenko2, S. A. Tjulandin2, R. F. 
Garkavtseva2, E. K. Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer 
Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation.
BRCA1 mutations may confer as breast so ovarian cancer. One of the conceptions on a decision of the genotype-phenotype correlation problem consists in supposition of inﬂuence of a mutation disposition 
in the gene on breast/ovarian cancer risk.The BRCA1 mutation frequency in our sample of ovarian cancer families was 86%. This value was not signiﬁcant different from BRCA1 mutation frequency in the families with both breast and ovarian cancer (61%). In families of both types - ovarian cancer only and breast/ovarian - one mutation 5382insC was predominant (50% and 90%, respectively). We compare our proportion of families with breast/ovarian cancer and breast cancer only with published data on samples from the other populations and no found signiﬁcant difference, in spite of different mutation spectrums. As the results shown, the other genome peculiarities than a mutation position may have inﬂuence on cancer localization. Analysis of splitting on breast and ovarian cancer segregation in the families gives a possibility to propose that cancer localization may be deﬁned by interconnection of BRCA1 gene with Cancer genetics206
the other gene. We studied some variants of BRCA2 as a candidate 
for a risk modiﬁer gene under BRCA1 mutations. The evidence for inﬂuence on ovarian cancer risk increasing of BRCA1 variant 1038G and BRCA2 variant 372H combination was received (OR = 6,00; P = 
0,053).
P0583. No alteration of TH01 DNA marker at patients with skin 
cancers in Romanian population
G. Duta - Cornescu1, F. Stanciu1, I. Neagoe1, V. Stoian1, I. Nedelcu2, A. Alam -
oreanu2;  
1Genetic Department, Biology Faculty, Bucharest University, Bucharest, Ro -
mania, 2Histopathology Laboratory, Military Emergency Clinical Hospital – “Dr. 
Carol Davila Centre”, Bucharest, Romania.
The aim of this study is to determine if the TH01 STR marker suffer any type of alteration (like MSI (microsatellite e instability) or/and LOH (loss of heterozygosity)) in a Romanian population affected by skin cancers. We based our project on the facts that LOH was observed for 
TH01marker in malign transformations, especially in gastric cancers.For this research we determined (by PAGE technique) the genetic proﬁle of 200 healthy, unrelated individuals and 25 individuals affected by skin cancers from Romanian territory. The allele and heterozygout frequencies were analysed using population genetic tests (like χ2 test and Hardy - Weinberg equilibrium) and programs (like AMOVA 
program).We concluded that in the Romanian population affected by skin cancers that we have studied, the TH01 marker is not affected by microsatellite instability (MSI) or by loss of heterozygosity (LOH), when compared 
with the normal, healthy Romanian population.
P0584. STR typing of cancerous tissues for identiﬁcation 
purpose
S. Ceccardi, F. Lugaresi, T. Balbi, A. Conconi, F. Ingravallo, G. Ferri, C. Bini, 
S. Pelotti;  
University of Bologna Dept Medicine and Public Health Section of Legal Medi -
cine, Bologna, Italy.
Malignant tissue samples can be a source of biological material not only for forensic caseworks as personal identiﬁcation or paternity testing when no other specimen is available, but also for the attribution of a tissue to a patient or in transplantation matter. Aberrations in coding or non-coding region of genome have been reported in cancerous tissues also for those short tandem repeats (STRs) widely used in forensic analysis. Chromosomal instability, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and microsatellite instability (MSI), were previously described in different kinds of tumors with variable frequency. To increase the number of cancerous samples analyzed by the Identiﬁler PCR ampliﬁcation kit, routinely used in forensic laboratories, we present preliminary results on 23 gastrointestinal and 14 urogenital carcinomas with corresponding control normal samples. In our tumor samples we found four types of proﬁle alteration: MSI low, MSI high, partial or complete loss of one allele (pLOH or LOH). pLOH was the most frequent in all the two kinds of cancer. In addition on the samples showing a lower Y-amelogenin signal, no genetic alteration of 11 Y-STR markers proﬁle was detected. Previous microscopic analysis of the tissue sample and careful interpretation of DNA proﬁle in MSI and LOH are required for identiﬁcation purpose.
P0585. New APC and MYH gene variants among patients with 
familial adenomatous polyposis in Russia
T. A. Muzaffarova1, N. I. Pospekhova1, I. Y. Sachkov2, A. M. Kuzminov2, E. K. 
Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2State 
Scientiﬁc Centre of Colo proctology, Moscow, Russian Federation.
The new protein truncating mutations were near 50% of the APC gene mutation spectrum. Deletions were the more frequent both among new mutations and in the whole spectrum (60%). New (unique) deletions in 90% of cases were deletions of 1 or 2 nucleotides while all known (repeated) deletions were deletions of 4 or 5 nucleotides (P=0,0008). The published data on six countries have been analyzed for comparison. The signiﬁcant difference of unique and repeated deletions found by us was shown for a number but not all of the countries. The selections of patients with FAP from various populations are different on this parameter. Also there were three new missense variants (T1556S, P1780S, T2160A). These variants were not observed in a combination with protein truncating mutation and were not found in 100 control samples. The results suggest that these variants may be mutations. In contrast, the variant S2621C in two cases of three was found in a combination with a protein truncating mutation and in control samples. The samples of patients without APC mutations were tested on mutations in gene MYH. In four cases the mutations were revealed. There were two cases with mutations on both chromosomes (Y165C/Y165C and 1395delGGA/R95W) and two cases with heterozygote mutations (Y165C and G382D). The mutation R95W and variant IVS8+21C/A (in combination with G382D) were revealed for the ﬁrst 
case.
P0586. IL1β -511 promoter polymorphism and GEP-NET
M. Berkovic1, S. Kapitanovic2, V. Zjacic-Rotkvic1;  
1University hospital "Sestre milosrdnice", Zagreb, Croatia, 2Rudjer Boskovic 
Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.
Neuroendocrine tumors of the gut and pancreas (GEP-NET) produce biogenic amines, peptides and chromogranins, especially chromogranine A (CgA). Increased IL1 levels have been described in patients with NET, suggesting a regulatory link with this inﬂammatory 
cytokine and its role in tumor growth and morphogenesis.IL1β gene is mapped to chromosome 2q14 and a few polymorphisms associated with altered IL1β production have been described. The aim of our study was to estimate allelic frequency for -511 promoter SNP in IL1β gene in patients with GEP-NET. DNAs obtained from 30 GEP-NET patients and 150 unrelated healthy volunteers were genotyped for the IL1β -511 SNP using real-time PCR TaqMan
® SNP genotyping 
assay. There was statistically signiﬁcant difference in the frequency of -511T allele associated with altered IL1β production between healthy population and patients with GEP-NET. The association between other IL1β polymorphisms and GEP-NET tumors has to be investigated in 
the future studies.
P0587. SULT1A1 213Arg is a risk factor for the development of 
breast cancer in Macedonian woman
Z. Sterjev1,2, Snezana Smickoska2, Maneva2, Kraleva2, Stojmenovska2, Lju -
bica Suturkova1, Aleksandar Dimovski1;  
1Faculty of Pharmacy, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 
2Institute of Radiology and Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, Republic of 
Macedonia, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
Sulfotransferase A1 (SULT1A1) is an enzyme involved in both detoxiﬁcation and bioactivation of endogenous and exogenous compounds. A genetic polymorphism in the coding region of the SULT1A1 gene (Arg213His, CGC-CAC) has been associated with modular phenotype, where individuals with Arg allele have a substantially higher enzyme activity. Several studies investigated the inﬂuence of this variant on susceptibility of breast cancer (BC), but no deﬁnitive conclusion has been obtained. We determined the allele frequency and genotype distributions of SULT1A1 Arg213His variant in 100 sporadic, non-syndromic, breast cancer patients and 200 normal controls from the Republic of Macedonia. The Arg allele was more common in cases than controls (74% vs. 63%, respectively, p=0.0051, RR 1.99; 95%CI:1.0449<R.R<3.745). A dose dependant effect of Arg 213 allele on BC risk was detected (Arg/Arg vs. Arg/His + His/His p=0.036. RR 1.38, 95% CI: 1.0188<R.R.<1.876; Arg/Arg + Arg/His vs.His/His p=0.0178, RR 1.99, 95%CI 1.0449<R.R.<3.7745). When we examined the data by stadium of diagnosis, patients with an advanced disease (stadium III & IV) have a signiﬁcantly higher frequency of Arg than His allele (82% vs. 18%, respectively, p = 0.0131, RR 0.68; 95%CI 0.5196<R.R<0.9003). No association was found in allelic frequency and genotype distribution of this variant with other clinicopathological parameters of patients (ethnicity, gender, age, menarche). Our data indicate that the SULT1A1 213Arg allele is one of the low penetrance 
alleles responsible for the development of BC in Macedonian women.
P0588. Homozygous or combined deletion 13q14.3 in patients 
with B-cell chronic lymphocitic leukemia
A. Carrió1,2, D. Costa1,2, I. Madrigal2, C. Gómez1,2, N. Villamor1,3, D. Colomer1,3, 
M. Rozman1,3, F. Bosch3, E. Monserrat3, E. Campo1,4;  
1Hematopathology Unit Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Genetics Service 
Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hematology Department Hospital Clínic, 
Barcelona, Spain, 4Pathology Department Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.Cancer genetics207
B-cell chronic lymphocitic leukemia (B-CLL) is the most frequent 
leukemia in the western world. Deletion of chromosome 13q14.3 is the most frequent genetic aberration in B-cell chronic lymphocitic, found in approximately 50% of patients with B-CLL and suggesting the presence of tumor suppressor gene(s) whose loss or inactivation may contribute to the pathogenesis of B-CLL. Loss of this region has also been observed in other human malignancies. The 13q14.3 deletion can be found in the onset of B-CLL, in contrast to other chromosomal aberrations. The deletion can be heterozygous, homozygous or 
combined.FISH analysis, with speciﬁc probes for chromosomes 11 (LSI ATM), 12 (CEP12), 13 (LSI D13S319/13q34) and 17 (LSI p53), were performed on 190 samples from B-CLL patients. The most frequent abnormality, as was expected, was del(13)(q14.3) in 50% of cases as sole anomaly plus 4.7% among others. In about 23% of these cases the deletion was found in homozygous or combined form. The frequency of the other aberrations were 11% for trisomy 12, 5.3% for the deletion of ATM and 
3.7% for the deletion of p53.Deletion 13q14.3, as sole anomaly, has a good prognosis in clinical evolution. The implication of homozygous or combined deletion in hematologic features and clinical follow-up of these B-CLL patients will 
be discussed.This work has been partially supported by a grant (V-2003-Red-07-0) 
from the “Instituto de Salud Carlos III”
P0589. RNASEL : a susceptibility gene for prostate cancer in the 
Jewish population?
A. Orr-Urtreger1,2, H. Matzkin3,4, N. Matarasso1,2, D. Bercovich1, A. Bar-Shira1;  
1Genetic Institute Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Sackler 
Faculty of Medicine Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Department of Urology 
Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 4Sackler Faculty of Medicine, 
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Prostate cancer (PC) is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy in men in the western world, including Jewish men in Israel, and one of the leading causes of cancer-related death. A positive family history is the strongest risk factor for PC and twin studies estimated that 42% of PC risk may be attributed to heritable factors. Highly penetrant susceptibility genes are predicted to account for about 9% of PC cases diagnosed through age 85 and 43% of early onset disease (less than 55 years). Genome-wide linkage scans in hereditary prostate cancer (HPC) families have revealed multiple loci possibly harboring candidate susceptibility genes, although conﬁrmation studies regarding most loci have been inconsistent.  RNASEL
/HPC1, localized at 1q24-25  is a 
candidate prostate cancer susceptibility gene that has been studied extensively in various patient populations worldwide. We identiﬁed the 471delAAAG frameshift mutation in 
RNASEL, the ﬁrst Ashkenazi 
founder mutation in a known hereditary prostate cancer candidate 
gene. We reassessed the frequency of this nonsense mutation in prostate cancer patients, and in patients with breast/ovarian, bladder and colon cancer, and in average risk control population (968 patients and 510 controls, 2.5% and 2%, respectively). Screening the entire 
RNASEL gene, we detected another novel RNASEL splice site 
mutation in 1/121 PC patient using DHPLC, but no deletions were detected, using MLPA, in 300 PC patients. Our results suggest that 
while RNASEL might represent a  prostate cancer susceptibility gene, 
RNASEL variations identiﬁed to date may account for only a limited number of PC cases in Ashkenazi men.
P0590. Large genomic rearrangements in BRCA1  and BRCA2  
genes in Spanish breast/ovarian cancer families
S. Gutiérrez Enríquez1, O. Diez1, M. Cornet1, M. Simón1, M. Domènech1, J. 
Sanz2, T. Ramón y Cajal2, C. Alonso2, M. Baiget1;  
1Genetics Service, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 
2Oncology Service, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
Background: Germ-line mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 cause a 
substantial proportion of inherited breast and ovarian cancer. Most of the mutations described are nonsense, frameshift and splice site alterations. Missense mutations have also been detected, their pathological signiﬁcance being unclear. The frequency of large rearrangements in both genes is not well documented. We screened these rearrangements using the MLPA method (multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation) in order to estimate their contribution to breast/ovarian cancer predisposition in Spanish families.Participants and methods: The MLPA technique was performed 
in 105 families for 
BRCA1 gene and 54 families for BRCA2 gene by 
using MRC-Holland kits. No mutation had been found in these families in earlier analyses by different techniques (SSCP, PTT, dHPLC and 
sequencing).
Results: Nine copy number variants were found within BRCA1 and 
two within BRCA2. One BRCA1 alteration involved the deletion of 
exons 1 to 23 and segregated with cancer in the family. Sequencing of genomic DNA with an apparent deletion of 
BRCA1 exon 18 revealed a 
missense variant in the hybridisation sequence of the MLPA probe. The remaining 7 aberrations are currently being conﬁrmed. Of the families analysed for 
BRCA2 a deletion of exons 15-16 has been conﬁrmed 
to date.
Conclusions: These preliminary results suggest that rearrangements 
within the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are not frequent in the Spanish 
population. MLPA is a sensitive and rapid method for molecular detection of large deletions and duplications in 
BRCA1 and BRCA2  
in high-risk breast/ovarian families and can be readily adopted by 
diagnostic services.
P0591. Cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic study of 72 CML 
patients treated with imatinib.
M. Holzerova1, E. Faber1, H. Pospisilova1, I. Lakoma1, V. Divoky2, J. Nausova2, 
M. Divoka1, J. Voglova3, K. Indrak1, M. Jarosova1;  
1Department of Hematology/Oncology University Hospital, Olomouc, Czech 
Republic, 2Department of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Palacky University, Olo -
mouc, Czech Republic, 3University Hospital, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic.
Additional chromosomal abnormalities in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) were reported to occur in chronic and accelerated phases of the disease, and also during treatment with interferon and, more recently, with imatinib. The aim of our study was to determine frequency and clinical importance of additional chromosomal changes in 72 patients 
treated with imatinib.At the initiation of imatinib treatment, 51 patients had only Ph chromosome, whereas Ph chromosome with additional changes was observed in 21 patients. The most frequent additional changes were der(9) deletion in 8 patients, trisomy 8 in three patients and double Ph chromosome in two patients. The remaining 9 patients displayed different aberrations. After 12 month of treatment the cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic response to imatinib was analyzed. Eleven patients died within the ﬁrst year of treatment. The cytogenetic and/or molecular cytogenetic response were presented in 51 (84%) patients (complete response in 7, major response in 41, minor response in 3), 10 (16%) patients were non-responders. All patients with der(9) deletion (n = 8) have responded to the treatment, one has achieved a complete cytogenetic response. Four patients developed new chromosomal 
aberrations, two of them in the Ph-positive clone.The results of cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic study in 72 CML patients after 12 months of imatinib therapy revealed 84% of responders including the patients with der(9) deletion. It conﬁrms efﬁcacy of imatinib treatment and ability to overcome the adverse 
prognostic signiﬁcance of der(9) deletions in CML patients.
Supported by grants IGA NC7490 and GA301/04/1239.
P0592. Non Hodgkin lymphoma: Incidence of Bcl2/IgH  
rearrangement in Mexican patients and its relevance as marker 
for minimal residual disease.
R. Arana1, G. Ignacio2, S. Kofman1, Grupo Múlticentrico Mexicano de Hema -
tología;  
1Hospital General de México O.D. and Medicina, UNAM, México D.F., Mexico, 
2Hospital Regional #1 Gabriel Mancera IMSS, México D.F., Mexico.
In the folicular lymphoma present the t(14;18)(q32;q21) which joints one of the J
H segments of the heavy chains of immunoglobulins ( IgH) 
in 14q32 with the Bcl-2 gene in 18q2. Objective: To determine the 
incidence of the Bcl2-IgH rearrangement in Mexican patients with folicular lymphoma and with NHL of intermedium and high grade. 
Methods: 300 patients were evaluated 155 had low grade lymphoma, 115 intermedium to high grade and 27 the grade was not determined. The analysis was made in blood samples (BS) in 64 cases or bone marrow (BM) in 228. The 
Bcl-2/IgH rearrangement was ampliﬁed by 
PCR using primers for JH and exon-intron 3 region of Bcl-2 (MBR and Cancer genetics208
MCR regions). The Bcl-2/IgH rearrangement was used as marker 
to determine minimal residual disease stage in cases ranging from 
8 to 35 months of evolution. The incidence and tissue type analysis was compared using chi-square statistics. 
Results: In the low grade 
folicular NHL the Bcl-2/IgH was positive in 79% with a breakage in the 
MBR region in 115 cases and in MCR in 5. In the intermedium to high grade NHL cases it was present in 33% with a breakage in 35 cases in MBR y 2 in MCR. Regarding the tissue type it was positive in 86% of cases in BM and in 42% in BS, with p<0.0001. The frequency of 
Bcl-
2/IgH rearrangement in Mexican patients was high, highlighting the relevance of the molecular analysis in the diagnosis and its use as a 
marker for minimal residual disease cases.
P0593. NBS1 germline mutations in children with acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia
M. Mosor1, I. Ziółkowska1, D. Januszkiewicz-Lewandowska2, J. Nowak1;  
1Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 2Polish Academy of Sciences, 
2. University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland.
Alternations of the NBS1 gene are associated with Nijmegen 
breakage syndrome (NBS). NBS is an inherited chromosomal instability disorder which is characterized by immunodeﬁciency and increased predisposition to lymphoid malignancies. Nibrin, the product 
of NBS1 gene, is functionally involved in double strand DNA break 
repair system. Heterozygous carriers of the NBS1 Slavic mutation 
have an increased risk of malignant tumors including ovarian,familial breast and prostate cancer. So far reports on 
NBS1 mutations in 
lymphoproliferative diseases are controversial. The aim of the present study was to analyze the mutations in all 16 exons of the 
NBS1 gene 
in children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). To discriminate between germinal and somatic mutations DNA was isolated from either leukemic or normal oral epithelium cells. All samples were analyzed by PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism and identiﬁed by direct sequencing. The ﬁve 
NBS1 heterozygous mutations were detected in 
9 of 114 ALL cases and only 2 in 160 control individuals (OR=6,771; p=0,0094). The most frequent mutation was I171V in exon 5 (5/114 cases versus 1/160 in controls). Mutations D95N, R215W, V210F and 657del5 were observed in single individual. In addition we identiﬁed 16 rare sequence variants: IVS7-18G/A, IVS7-29C/T, IVS15+88G/C. The germline origin of the observed mutations was conﬁrmed in all cases. The obtained results suggest that 
NBS1 heterozygous germline 
mutations can be considered as a risk factor in the development of 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.This work is supported by Ministry of Sciences and Informatics grant 
no PBZ-KBN-090/P05/2003
P0594. Trisomy 19 in a case of BCR/ABL negative chronic 
myeloproliferative disorder
A. A. Arghir1, M. Nedelcu2, N. Berbec1,3, A. Lungeanu1;  
1"Victor Babes" National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2"Sf. Ioan" Clinical 
Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3"Carol Davila" University of Medicine and Phar -
macy, Bucharest, Romania.
In this paper we report the case of a 52 year-old patient with a BCR/ABL negative chronic myeloproliferative disorder and trisomy 19 as a sole chromosomal anomaly, at diagnosis.The patient has been referred for cytogenetic investigation as a step of the diagnosis algorithm. The hematologic investigation revealed peripheral blood leukocytosis and bone marrow hypercellularity (granulocyte and erythroid series), with no signiﬁcant reticulin ﬁbrosis.Both classical and molecular cytogenetics methods were applied. Chromosomal studies were performed on GTG-banded slides obtained from bone marrow direct preparation and short term cultures (24h and 48h). FISH with Vysis dual colour, dual fusion BCR/ABL probes was applied on ﬁxed cytogenetic slides.90% of bone marrow cells were hyperdiploid with trisomy 19 as sole chromosomal abnormality (karyotype: 47,XY,+19). No numerical or structural anomalies were identiﬁed in the remaining 10% of the 
metaphases.So far, trisomy 19 as a sole chromosomal abnormality has been described by various authors in myeloid malignancies, particularly in acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome. As a part of complex karyotypes, trisomy 19 has been encountered in chronic myeloid disorders such as idiopathic myeloﬁbrosis and polycythemia vera. Also, almost 15% of chronic myeloid leukaemia patients gain trisomy 19 as an additional cytogenetic anomaly.In our case FISH analysis did not revealed cryptic BCR/ABL fusion.Thus, the cytogenetic investigation proves once again, its value for diagnosis and classiﬁcation of chronic myeloid disorders.
P0595. Tobacco carcinogen metabolism genes, tobacco 
smoking and gastric cancer risk in the European population
N. Sala1, G. Pera2, F. Rico3,1, N. García3,1, A. Agudo2, E. Riboli4, G. Capellà3, C. 
A. González2;  
1IDIBELL-IRO-Centre de Genètica Mèdica i Molecular, l'Hospitalet de Llo -
bregat, Spain, 2IDIBELL-ICO-Servei d'Epidemiologia i Registre del Càncer, 
l'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 3IDIBELL-ICO-Laboratori Recerca Translacio -
nal, l'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 4IARC, Lyon, France.
Gastric cancer (GC) results from a multi-stage carcinogenic process in which interactions between environmental and genetic factors play an important role. This study was aimed at analysing the association between GC, tobacco smoking and polymorphisms in the CYP1A1 (T461N, I462V and 3801T>C), CYP1A2 -154A>C, NAT2 (R64Q, G286E, R197Q and 481C>T) and EPHX1 (Y113H) genes involved in carcinogen metabolism. The study includes 278 GC cases and 1101 paired controls from the Eur-Gast case-control study nested within the EPIC cohort. Genotyping was performed by real-time PCR and probe melting curve analysis in a LightCycler. Association was analysed by conditional logistic regression models. Interaction was analysed by the likelihood ratio test (LRT). Analysis of smoking habits revealed that 65% of cases and 55% of controls were ever smokers (OR=1.64 IC 95%: 1.22-2.33). Polymorphism analysis revealed that the CC genotype of the exon 3-28T>C (Y113H) SNP in EPHX1 was a risk factor for GC in univariate codominant (OR=1.72, IC:1.07-2.77) and recessive (OR=1.61, IC:1.02-2.53) models. Regarding interaction, tobacco smoking did not modify the risk associated with the EPHX1 variant. However, NAT2 G286E and CYP1A1 I462V were risk factors only in smokers (OR =2.88, IC: 1.38-6.03, LRT for interaction p=0.01, and OR=3.05, IC: 1.69-5.50, LRT p=0.08, respectively for smokers carrying the NAT2 and the CYP1A1 variants vs. wild type never smokers). These results are the ﬁrst to suggest a positive interaction between tobacco smoking and the NAT2 G286E and the CYP1A1 
I462V polymorphisms in gastric carcinogenesis.We acknowledge QLG1-2001-01049 grant from the European 
Commission.
P0596. Cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic characterization 
of a Endometrial Stromal Sarcoma presenting a t(10;17)(q22;p13) 
translocation.
W. Emberger1, S. Sodia1, R. Pfragner2, S. Regauer3, O. Reich4, H. Zierler1, E. 
Petek1, K. Wagner1;  
1Insitute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Insitute of 
Pathophysiology, Graz, Austria, 3Insitute of Pathology, Graz, Austria, 4Depart -
ment of Obstetrics and Gynecology University Hospital, Graz, Austria.
Endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESS) are rare neoplasms with 
variable clinical presentation, as a common feature local myometrial invasion is combined with extrauterine metastases. Cytogenetic aberrations have been described in 30 cases, they showed a broad variety of chromosomal aberrations with non-random involvement of 
chromosome 6, 7 and 17.The most common translocation of this tumor seems to be a t(7;17)(q15-q21;q12-q21) generating a JAZF/JJAZ1 fusion gene. A second translocation, a t(10;17)(q22;p13) has been described in two 
of the 30 ESS cases.We report on a female patient, age 59 years at time of diagnosis of a metastasing ESS. In addition the family history of the patient was positive for breast cancer. Cytogenetic evaluation of the tumor revealed a complex karyotype. Multicolour FISH was performed and combined analysis of G-banded and M-FISH metaphases revealed a reciprocal 
t(10;17)(q22;p13) and a t(12;13)(q24;q14).Therefore the t(10;17)(q22;p13) is a recurrent translocation in ESS and because it is an uncommon translocation in other neoplasms, it seems to be a ESS speciﬁc aberration.A detailed breakpoint characterization using FISH with band speciﬁc 
BAC clones is performed.Cancer genetics209
P0597. Hypermethylation of the Fanconi Anemia gene FANCF in 
bladder carcinoma
K. Neveling1, A. Florl2, C. Hader2, S. Herterich1, H. Höhn1, H. Hanenberg3, M. 
Knowles4, A. Baumer5, W. A. Schulz2, D. Schindler1, R. Kalb1;  
1Department of Human Genetics, University of Würzburg, Germany, 2Depart -
ment of Urology, University of Düsseldorf, Germany, 3Department of Pediatric 
Hematology and Oncology, University of Düsseldorf, Germany, 4Cancer Re -
search UK Clinical Centre, St James University Hospital Leeds, United King -
dom, 5Department of Medical Genetics, University of Zürich, Switzerland.
Bladder carcinomas frequently show extensive deletions on 9p and/or 
9q, potentially including the loci of the Fanconi anemia (FA) genes FANCG and FANCC. Using FANCD2 immunoblotting, the proﬁcieny of the FA/BRCA pathway of 22 established bladder carcinoma lines was tested. A single cell line proved defective for FANCD2 monoubiquination and particularly hypersensitive towards mitomycin C. Exploiting this sensitivity for functional complementation analysis after transduction of BFTC 909 with retroviral vectors (separately expressing six FA genes of the nuclear core complex), MMC sensitivity of the line was restored to normal speciﬁcally with the FANCF vector, not by FANCC or FANCG as originally expected. M-FISH revealed the presence of two chromosomes 11 in this hypo-tetraploid line (DNA index 1.75). CGH did not suggest loss of heterozygosity of 11p15 and sequencing of the FANCF gene of BFTC 909 failed to identify mutations. Methylation of cytosine residues in the FANCF promotor region and beyond was indicated by methylation-sensitive HpaII-restriction assay and bisulﬁte DNA modiﬁcation. There was no evidence for FANCF promotor hypermethylation in surgical specimens of 10 bladder carcinomas. FANCF silencing has also been observed irregularly in malignancies such as AML and carcinomas of the pancreas, cervix, ovary and prostate. Epigenetic interruption of the FA/BRCA pathway and/or silencing of other genes in the area of 11p13-11p15, reportedly a hot spot of methylation, constitutes a cellular response at unclear genetic 
end in a subset of human tumors.
P0598. NBS1  germline mutations in a series of 550 Polish 
pediatric patients with sporadic hematological malignancies
K. H. Chrzanowska1, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, E. Popowska1, M. 
Gładkowska-Dura1, J. Małdyk2, D. Perek1, A. Wakulińska1, M. Gajdulewicz1, K. 
Spodar1, M. Syczewska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, Polish Pediatric Leukemia/
Lymphoma Study Group;  
1Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2University of Medical 
Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is a human autosomal recessive disease with defects in DNA repair, which is characterized by immune dysfunction, radiation sensitivity, and a strongly increased risk of cancer, in particular of lymphoid origin. To examine the role of the Slavic founder mutation 657del5 and the R215W variant allele in constitutional susceptibility to childhood lymphoma and leukemia, we screened by PCR-SSCP analysis remission DNA samples from 550 children treated at 13 Hematology and Oncology Centers making up the PPLLSG. Frequencies of heterozygosity for the mutations 657del5 and R215W in the control group, matched by place of patient residence, were calculated as 0.0060 and 0.0027, respectively. We found 5 carriers of the 657del5 mutation among the patients: 3/272 patients with childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and 2/215 children and adolescents with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL); no carrier was found among 63 patients with Hodgkin lymphoma (HL). R215W was not detected in any studied group. The patient group is characterized by an increased odds ratio (range from 1.48 to 1.85 with 95% CI) for the occurrence of mutation 657del5 in comparison with the total Polish population; the Yates corrected chi-square test conﬁrmed that the occurrence of mutation 657del5 is indeed higher in patients with ALL and NHL (p<0.05). Nonetheless, 
NBS1 gene heterozygosity 
is not a major risk factor for lymphoid malignancies in childhood and 
adolescence.This work was supported in part by grants No 3P05A16622 and PBZ-KBN-090/P05/17 from the State Committee for Scientiﬁc Research, 
Poland.P0599. Cytogenetic and molecular characterization of t(4;12) 
involving the ETV6 gene with a novel translocation partner on 
chromosome 4 in a case of acute myeloid leukemia.
S. Sodia1, W. Emberger1, H. Zierler1, P. M. Kroisel1, E. Petek1, S. Hojas2, K. 
Wagner1;  
1Institute of Medical Biology and Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, 
Austria, 2Landeskrankenhaus Fuerstenfeld, Fuerstenfeld, Austria.
We report a 55 years old female patient with idiopathic myeloﬁbrosis and systemic mastocytosis, ﬁrst diagnosed in 2002.Cytogenetic investigation of a bone marrow sample showed a normal karyotype. Transformation to a AML FAB M0 was diagnosed after two years. Cytogenetic analysis revealed following karyotype :46,XX,t(4;12)(q26;p13). Detailed molecular cytogenetic studies conﬁrmed the involvement of ETV6 on 12p13. The ETV6 gene (also known as TEL) is the main target of chromosomal translocations affecting chromosome band 12p13. The rearrangements fuses ETV6 to a wide variety of partner genes in both myeloid and lymphoid malignancies. At present, more than 40 distinct translocations have been
 described, some of them have also been 
characterized at the molecular level. As a rare recurrent translocation 
in acute leukemia t(4;12)(q11-q12;p13) has been characterized at the molecular level, a fusion gene between ETV6 and CHIC2 could be identiﬁed. In our case the involvement of ETV6 could already be demonstrated but the breakpoint on chromosome 4 is different (4q26) from the upper described translocation. Therefore a molecular cytogenetic search for the novel translocation partner to ETV6 is 
performed.
P0600. Genomic deletions in MSH2 or MLH1 genes in patients 
with Lynch syndrome detected by MLPA
A. Krepelova1, K. Pavlikova1, P. Vasovcak1, A. Mrakotova1, A. Puchmajerova1, 
M. Papezova2, L. Foretova3, P. Plevova4;  
1University Hospital Motol and 2nd Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague 
5, Czech Republic, 21st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague 2, Czech 
Republic, 3Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Univer -
sity Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic.
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC, Lynch syndrome) 
is an autosomal dominant condition predisposing to colorectal, endometrial, including other cancers, caused by germline mutations in mismatch repair genes. Successful detection of a pathogenic mutation enables predictive testing in relatives at risk for the disease. While the majority of mutations - nucleotide substitutions, short insertions or deletions - could be detected by standard PCR and sequencing-based screening methods, genomic deletions escape detection when using such protocols. Recently, multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA), has been applied for examination of genomic deletions. Hereby, we studied the type and frequency of genomic rearrangements in MSH2 or MLH1 genes in patients with HNPCC in the Czech Republic. Genomic DNA from 53 patients fulﬁlling Amsterdam criteria II was investigated. Initially, mutation screening was performed by combination of PCR-ampliﬁcation of individual exons of the MSH2, MLH1 and MSH6 genes, DGGE and direct sequencing. This screening revealed a pathogenic mutation in 37/53 (70%) of patients (30 in MLH1, 5 in MSH2, and 2 in MSH6 gene). In 16 patients, classiﬁed as mutation-negative after the mutation screening, the presence of a gene rearrangement was analysed by MLPA. With this method we identiﬁed 3 deletions in the MSH2 gene (exons 1-2, exon 3, exons 9-16) and one deletion in the MLH1 gene (exons 1-13). Genomic rearrangements in either MSH2 or MLH1 genes were found in 4/16 (25%) previously mutation-negative patients and the overall mutation detection rate in 
our patients reached approximately 77%.
Supported by Grants NR/8294-3 and VZ00000064203.
P0601. A rare chromosomal translocation in a B-CLL patient.
A. Zatterale1, V. Altieri1, G. Gentile1, R. Calzone1, F. Donadio1, S. Russolillo2, L. 
Mastrullo2;  
1Genetics Dept. ASL Napoli 1 - Elena d'Aosta Hospital, Napoli, Italy, 2Haematol -
ogy Dept. ASL Napoli 1 - S. Gennaro Hospital, Napoli, Italy.
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is a disorder of morphologically mature but immunologically less mature lymphocytes and is manifested by progressive accumulation of these cells in the blood, bone marrow and lymphatic tissues. Bone marrow routine cytogenetic analysis of B-CLL usually fails to identify abnormal clones due to a low rate of Cancer genetics210
spontaneous mitoses, a poor response to mitogen stimulation and/
or a bad metaphase quality. Nevertheless recent studies utilising ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) suggest that prognostically signiﬁcant chromosomal abnormalities should occur in B-CLL more 
frequently than previously recognised.A case of a man, aged 77, affected by B-CLL conﬁrmed by the immunophenotypic proﬁle, not responding to therapy (clorambucil and 
cortisone), is presented.Combining both conventional and molecular cytogenetic techniques in bone marrow cells we found a deletion involving the chromosome 13 long arm (13q21-qter) and an additional chromosomal rearrangement, 
involving chromosomes #2 and #18 (q32;q12).It is already known that BCL-2 gene is localized in 18q21 band and overexpressed in about 85% of B-CLL tumours without any visible 
chromosomal rearrangement in that region.Then in this case we could hypothesize a position effect enhancing the 
BCL-2 gene expression.Moreover it could be hypothesized that cryptic rearrangements could occur in those cases with BCL-2 gene overexpression and without any 
visible chromosomal rearrangements.A major chromosome 13 deletion (13q14) characterizes about 46% B-CLL cases. Our ﬁnding shortens the critic region in agreement with previous evidence showing that the RB gene in 13q14 is not involved 
in B-CLL.
P0602. Mutation analysis of the BRCT domain proteins MDC1 
and 53BP1 in German breast cancer patients
S. Beußel1, T. Klose1, N. Enßen-Dubrowinskaja1, B. Wieland1, M. Bremer1, J. H. 
Karstens1, C. Sohn1,2, T. Dörk1;  
1Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.
The Mediator of DNA Damage Control 1 (MDC1) and the p53-Binding Protein 1 (53BP1) are central modulators of ATM signaling after DNA double-strand breaks and share a common motif with BRCA1, the BRCT domain. We thus considered these two genes as candidate breast cancer susceptibility genes and performed a mutation analysis of the whole coding sequence in 24 German patients who had hereditary breast cancer without identiﬁed BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. Selected mutations were subsequently screened in hospital-based series of 133 patients with bilateral breast cancer, 133 patients with unilateral breast cancer and 133 random individuals. One amino acid substitution of MDC1 was observed more often in bilateral breast cancer than in population controls (p<0.01). Our study also uncovered a polyvariant allele of the MDC1 gene, harbouring a 123 bp insertion within the coding region, that occurred at a modestly increased frequency in the breast cancer cohorts compared with the population controls (OR=2.1, 95%CI 0.7-6.3). Immunoblot analyses of lymphoblastoid cell lines from an insertion carrier revealed only subtle changes in the expression and radiation-induced phosphorylation of this variant MDC1 protein. In the 53BP1 gene, one common missense substitution was less abundant in the homozygous state in breast cancer patients than in population controls (p=0.02), and a rare two-amino-acid deletion was identiﬁed in three breast cancer patients. In summary, while our data do not provide evidence for truncating mutations of MDC1 or 53BP1 in hereditary breast cancer, the association of frame-conserving gene 
alterations with breast cancer deserves further investigation.
P0603. Gene expression proﬁling in endometrial cancer
T. Kubiatowski , K. Rózynska, K. Futyma, A. Filip, B. Marzec, R. Tarkowski, G. 
Polak, J. Kotarski, J. Wojcierowski;  
Medical Academy of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
Endometrial cancer is one of the most common neoplasms of reproductive system. According to data accumulated in last decades it has been concluded that microsatellite instability and PTEN, K-ras, β-catenin gene mutations are crucial for endometrial cancer etiopathogenesis. Moreover, it is well known that all genes encoded proteins involved in cell cycle regulation, cell differentiation or surrounding tissues inﬁltration are candidate for lesions leading to tumor and metastases development. Complexity of molecular mechanisms leading to endometrial cancer development stress that only experiments based on array technique can help to collect enough data to understand all interactions between different molecular pathways crucial for tumor formation. Using MacroArray technique we analyzed expression of oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, cell cycle regulators and others genes encoded proteins involved in signal transduction. Comparison of obtained data with tumor grade allowed us to give shape to gene expression proﬁlings reﬂecting G2 tumor grade.
P0604. The HPC1/RNASEL 471delAAAG founder mutation in 
Ashkenazi women with breast/ovarian cancer.
N. Levanon , E. Dagan, R. Gershoni-Baruch;  
Dept of Medical Genetics, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel.
471delAAAG is a 4-bp deletion mutation recently identiﬁed in the 
HPC1/RNASEL gene as a founder mutation associated with prostate cancer in patients of Ashkenazi descent. The objective of this study was to determine whether this mutation confers increased risk for breast and ovarian cancer in this population. The mutation frequency was thus determined in 260 breast/ovarian cancer patients sub-grouped on account of their being carriers of the BRCA1/2 predominant Ashkenazi mutations (130 BRCA1/2 mutation carriers and 130 non-carriers matched for morbidity and age at disease onset. Asymptomatic women from high-risk families sub-grouped as carriers or non-carriers of BRCA1/2 mutation (n=94) were also tested. Additionally, 200 healthy individuals from the general population were used as a comparison group. PCR products containing the 471delAAAG mutation were analyzed by the WAVE DHPLC apparatus (Transgenomics. All abnormal DHPLC proﬁles were conﬁrmed by restriction assays designed to differentiate between the wild type and the mutant allele. In all the cohorts studied, only two BRCA1/2 mutation carriers, with breast and ovarian cancer, respectively, were found to carry the 471delAAAG mutation. Our data contradict previous observations as regards the prevalence of the 471 4-bp deletion in the general Ashkenazi population estimated previously at 4%. As such, the 471delAAAG mutation does not seem to contribute 
to cancer morbidity in this selected population.
P0605. Overexpression of cyclin D2 and D3 genes in human 
acute leukemia cells.
D. Szczesniak-Stanczyk1, B. Marzec1, J. Kocki1, M. Cioch2, A. Dmoszynska2, 
J. Wojcierowski1;  
1Medical Genetics Department, Medical Academy, Lublin, Poland, 2Department 
of Haematology, Medical Academy, Lublin, Poland.
The cyclins are considered to be molecules involved in basic pathway of cell division. The overexpression of these positive cell cycle regulators seems to be one of the factors responsible for incorrect regulation of the cell cycle machinery and consequently uncontrolled cell proliferation. The most important cyclins for the G1 phase of cell cycle are D type cyclins. Their level and activity decide about start of cell division.In our research we examined the level of D type (D1, D2, D3) cyclins genes expression in bone marrow samples obtained from 26 patients with acute myeloblastic leukemia and 19 with acute lymphoblastic leukemia before treatment. The obtained results were compared with periferial blood lymphocytes. For the assessment of cyclins’ mRNA we used semi-quantitive method - The Multi-Probe RNase Protection Assay System (Pharmingen) with hCYC-1 set of probes. Proteins were detected by immunocytochemistry.The results we obtained shows the leukemic cells reveal signiﬁcantly high levels of cyclin D2 and D3 mRNA than lymphocytes. The level of cyclin D1 mRNA was similar in leukemic blasts and in lymphocytes. All D type cyclins protein was localized in cell nucleus in all examined 
cells.
Cyclins D2 and D3 are connected with disturbances of cell differentiation. The increased level of D2 and D3 cyclins expression seems to be concerned with incorrect cell differentiation in acute leukemia. Maybe, the blocking of cyclin D2 and D3 genes expression or protein activity will cause proper cell differentiation.
P0606. Genotyping of CYP3A5 and MDR1 polymorphisms in 
Bulgarian patients with colorectal cancer
D. T. Petrova1, S. Y. Atanasova2, D. Toncheva1, M. Oellerich2, V. Armstrong2, N. 
von Ahsen2;  
1Medical University-Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Georg-August-University, Depart -
ment of Clinical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) may contribute to the cancerogenesis. Genetic variants in xenobiotic metabolising enzymes Cancer genetics211
and transporters might be responsible for a higher susceptibility to 
colorectal cancer.We investigated the frequency of CYP3A5 polymorphisms (CYP3A5*6, CYP3A5*3, CYP3A5*3B and CYP3A5*2) and MDR1 SNPs (3435C>T and 2677G>T) in Bulgarian patients with colorectal cancer. We analysed tumor and normal tissue of 30 patients. The results, presented in table 1, are compared with the results of 36 healthy controls. We found no evidence of somatic mutations in the tumor samples as genotypes always matched with those of the corresponding normal tissue samples. No signiﬁcant difference was observed in the studied allele frequencies between patients and controls. Enlarged number of 
patients and controls will be included in further studies.Table 1. SNPs frequencies in patients with colorectal cancer and controls (allele-1 - wild-type alleles; allele-2 - variant alleles; N=number of studied individuals; n=number of alleles or number of heterozygous, 
homozygous)
SNPsPatients  
(N=30)Controls  
(N=36)
n frequency n frequency
CYP3A5*6  
Allele-1  
Genotypes  
(1/1)60 
301 
172 
361 
1
CYP3A5*3  
Allele-1  
Allele-2  
Genotypes  
(1/1) 
(1/2)52 
8 
22 
80.867  
0.133  
0.733  
0.26769 
3 
33 
30.958  
0.042  
0.917  
0.083
CYP3A5*2  
Allele-1  
Genotypes  
(1/1)60 
301 
172 
361 
1
CYP3A5*3B  
Allele-1  
Genotypes  
(1/1)60 
301 
172 
361 
1
MDR(3435C>T)  
Allele-1  
Allele-2  
Genotypes  
(1/1) 
(1/2) 
(2/2)31 
29 
8 
15 
70.517  
0.483  
0.267  
0.500  
0.23341 
31 
13 
15 
80.567  
0.433  
0.361  
0.417  
0.222
MDR(2677G>T)  
Allele-1  
Allele-2  
Genotypes  
(1/1) 
(1/2) 
(2/2)35 
25 
11 
13 
60.583  
0.417  
0.367  
0.433  
0.20049 
23 
17 
15 
40.681  
0.319  
0.472  
0.417  
0.111
P0607. Human genetic and skin in vitro studies in Gorlin 
syndrome
P. Gorry1,2, F. Brellier3, V. Musani4, M. Avril5, S. Levanat6, A. Spatz7, T. Mag -
naldo3;  
1Dpt of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 2Laboratory of 
Cancer Genetics, Institut Bergonie, Bordeaux, France, 3Laboratory of Genetic 
Instability & Cancer, CNRS UPR2169, Institute G. Roussy, Villejuif, France, 
4Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 
5Dept of Dermatology, Institute Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 6Laboratory of 
Molecular Oncology Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 7Dept of Pathol -
ogy, Institute Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
Gorlin syndrome or Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS) is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by developmental abnormalities and cancer predisposition to basal cell carcinoma (BCC). The NBCCS gene is the PATCHED (PTCH) tumor suppressor gene encoding for the Sonic Hedgehog receptor. While mutations reports and clinical studies have been published, the clear clinical delimitation of the disease and the molecular understanding of the 
BCC predisposition are missing.Through a clinical research network, we screened for PTCH mutations in 135 unrelated NBCCS patients, the largest cohort studied so far. 44 novel mutations were identiﬁed. Our results underline the high frequency of de novo PTCH gene mutations, and help us to revisit the clinical diagnosis criteria. However the non-detection of PTCH mutations pinpoint the non-exploration of other genetic events. So new molecular diagnosis strategy based on multiplex genomic PCR has been set up to explore the occurrence of PTCH genomic rearrangement 
in NBCCS patients. Preliminary results will be presented.Beside, it is unclear how germinal mutation of PTCH result in the predisposition to BCC in NBCCS patients. To answer the question, we generated an unique collection of NBCCS ﬁbroblast and keratinocyte primary strains from skin of NBCCS patients harboring a known germinal PTCH mutation. Although UV and gamma irradiation have been shown to contribute to BCC in NBCCS patients, NBCCS keratinocytes are neither photosensitive nor radiosensitive. Then, we reconstructed NBCCS skin in vitro. Preliminary results suggest the crucial role of abnormal mesenchymal/epithelial interactions in 
predisposition of NBCCS patients toward BCC development.
P0608. Investigation of molecular-genetic predictors in selection 
of personalized therapy for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
L. Benesova1, M. Minarik1, M. Pesek2, M. Jelinkova1, F. Bruha2, P. Muken -
snabl2;  
1Genomac International Ltd, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Faculty hospital Pilsen, 
Pilsen, Czech Republic.
Lung cancer is serious civilisation disease with high incidence and mortality. Over 6000 new cases are diagnosed in Czech republic each year. Despite to development of new drugs prognosis remains very poor. Most patients are treated by combined chemotherapy, radiotherapy and recently also by targeted biological therapy. The associated expenses are signiﬁcant, probability of remission is less than 50% and side effects of combined therapy are serious. Recent advances in research offer several genetic markers enabling prediction of therapy response for each individual patient. For example such molecular predictors can be used to indicate targeted biological therapy to spare the patient adverse effects of cytostatics or to avoid ineffective chemotherapy.Here we report investigation of several molecular predictors for rational selection of treatment for patients diagnosed with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We present utility of several molecular-genetic markers including somatic mutations in 
EGFR and k-ras 
genes from tumor tissue complemented by monitoring of inherited single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 
ERCC1  and ERCC2/XPD  
genes from patient's blood samples. The obtained molecular proﬁles are used to design the most effective combinations for chemothrerapy or targeted biological therapy.
P0609. Microsatellite instability in Czech patients with colorectal 
cancer
M. Papežová1, A. Křepelová1, P. Plevová2, L. Foretová3, V. Kebrdlová1;  
11st Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Faculty Hospital, Ostrava, 
Czech Republic, 3Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic.
Detection of microsatellite instability (MSI) is a part of mutational analysis of colorectal cancers (CRC). Characteristic phenotypic feature of MSI indicates loss of mismatch repair (MMR) in tumor cells. Loss of MMR can be caused by somatic mutation or epigenetic inactivation 
of that gene.We studied MSI in 199 tumors from 142 patients with colorectal cancer. Of these, 35 patients fulﬁlled Amsterdam criteria (group A+), 68 patients were familial (group A-) and 39 were sporadic cases (group Spor). We used method of fragmentation analysis (ABI Prism 310 Genetic Analyzer) with ﬂuorescent labelled primers; three mononucleotide (BAT-RII, BAT-25, BAT-26) and ﬁve dinucleotide (D2S123, D3S1029, D5S346, D17S250, D18S58) repeat loci were analysed. Tumors were classiﬁed as MSI-H (high degree of MSI, 2 or more loci with MSI), MSI-L (low degree of MSI, 1 unstable locus) and MSS (stable, no MSI detected). We detected 72 tumors with MSI-H, 10 tumors with MSI-L and 117 MSS tumors. In 41 of MSS tumors LOH was detected.Results correlated with mutational analysis of MMR genes (hMLH1, h 
MSH2, hMSH6) and immunohistochemical detection of their proteins.The work was supported by Grant Agency of Charles University (Grant 
No. 17/2001).Cancer genetics212
P0610. Genomic instability patterns in patients with sporadic 
colorectal cancer
A. J. Dimovski1, T. Josifovski2, M. Panovski2, Z. Sterjev1, L. Suturkova1, A. 
Stefanovska3, G. D. Efremov3;  
1Faculty of Pharmacy, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 
2Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, The for -
mer Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 3Macedonian Academy of Sciences and 
Arts, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
It is generally accepted that colorectal cancer (CRC) can progress 
through either chromosomal instability (CIN) or microsatellite instability (MSI). We evaluated the pattern of genomic instability in 91 sporadic colorectal cancer patients by analyzing the MSI status and loss of heterozygosity (LOH), as evidence for CIN, in 8 microsatellite markers located on chromosomal arms 2p, 3p, 5q, 17p and 18q. Five of the markers were from the NCI-recommended panel for MSI testing, while the others were located in the regions harboring tumor suppressor (APC, p53) or mismatch repair (MLH1, MSH2) genes important for CRC development. MSI was detected in 11 cancers (12.1%) that were primarily located in the right colon, with mucinous histotype and lower stage at diagnosis. The LOH of at least one chromosomal arm was detected in 57 (62.3%) of cancers, of which the most common was 18q (84.2%) followed by 5p (54.4%) and 17p (45.6%). Four out of 11 patients from the MSI group also exhibited LOH of at least one chromosomal arm indicating a signiﬁcant overlap between the two types of genomic instabilities. In 27 patients (29.67%) we did didn’t detect any evidence of CIN or MSI. Our data indicate a signiﬁcant overlap between CIN and MSI phenotypes and suggest that in almost 1/3 of all cases the molecular mechanism is not related to either CIN or MSI type of genomic instability.
P0611. Spectrum of chromosomal abnormalities in 
hematological malignancies
B. B. Ganguly1, N. N. Kadam1, M. B. Agarwal2;  
1MGM Centre for Genetic Research & Diagnosis, Mahatma Gandhi Mission's 
New Bombay Hospital, Navi Mumbai, India, 2Bombay Hospital Instiitute of 
Medical Sciences, Mumbai, India.
Malignant disorders are no longer considered as “killer-disease” owing to continuous reﬁnement of cytogenetic and molecular technologies, and development of molecular medicines. Among all neoplastic diseases, hematological malignancies are well characterized with the underlying genetic causes and treatment facilities. Chromosomal/genetic abnormalities are considered important parameters for classiﬁcation and risk evaluation of myeloproliferative disorders. We present the spectrum of chromosomal abnormalities in different hematological malignancies detected in 75 cases referred for diagnosis. Based on morphology and immunophenotyping, they were classiﬁed as acute lymphocytic leukaemia (ALL-12), acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL-4), chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML-15), multiple myeloma (MM-3), myeloplastic syndrome (MDS-15), Burkitt’s leukaemia (BL-2), acute myeloid leukemia (AML-13) and others (13). Normal karyotype was detected in 26 patients, whereas others were detected with numerical or structural abnormalities. CML patients were presented with Philadelphia chromosome, BCR-ABL rearrangements, and even three-way translocations, viz. t(9;22;11) and t(5;9;22). Constitutive abnormality, pericentric inversion in 9, was observed as genetic predisposition of early onset of myelodysplastic syndrome in two cases (16y and 18y), who further acquired deletion in 13q, and der(3),t(10;11),+9 respectively. Inversion in 16 (2), t(15;17) (2) and t(8;21) (4) were recorded in AML and APL patients. MDS patients had a number of deletions and numerical abnormalities and complex rearrangements. Presence or absence of characteristic abnormalities in different patients helped classifying the disorder accurately and treating patients accordingly. In many instances, additional abnormalities directed concomitant therapy for combating the secondary clone. Expression or ampliﬁcation of different oncogenes, its correlation with 
clinical presentation and treatment outcome will be presented.P0612. Tumor characteristics of BRCA 1- associated familial 
breast cancer from Russian population
L. N. Lyubchenko1, N. I. Pospehova2, A. A. Lushnikova1, S. M. Portnoy1, V. V. 
Bryuzgin1, A. V. Karpukhin2, R. F. Garkavtseva1, S. A. Tjulandin1;  
1N.Blochin Cancer Research Center, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
2Research Center For Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Cancer arising in carriers of mutation in BRCA 1/2 genes differs from 
sporadic breast cancer of age-matched control.195 breast or/and ovarian cancer patients with strong cancer history from cancer-genetics registry of Russian N.N.Blokhin Cancer Research Center were screened for germline mutation in BRCA 1/2 genes using 
a CSGE and direct sequencing.Results: 57 BRCA 1/2 mutation carriers have been detected. High frequency of mutation 5382 insC (76.4% of all revealed mutations) was shown. A multivariant analysis was performed, it includes 32 cases of BRCA 1-linked breast cancer (BC). Control groups consisted of 57 patients with sporadic BC selected on the basis of age and disease 
stage.Mean age in the groups studied was 39 years in cancer patients and 41 years in control. Mean menarche age was 13.3 years in BRCA-carriers and 13.7 years in sporadic cancer patients. In 4 patients with pathological BRCA genotype (12.2%) breast cancer developed during pregnancy. Histopathological characteristics of BRCA-associated breast cancer were: (1) inﬁltrated ductal carcinoma (89.8%/87.7%); (2) high grade - 58.2%/29.2%; (3) prominent lymphocyte inﬁltrate (60,2%/34.5%); (4) negative receptors of estrogen -77,6%/38.8%; (5) complete clinical response to primary chemotherapy (anthracyclin-based treatment) followed by surgery (98.1%/38.2% ) compared to the 
control group (p<0,05).Mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)-related sequences were found by speciﬁc PCR in 39% of sporadic BC patients and in 42% familial BC, while these sequences were detected in about 57% of BC patients during pregnancy or shortly after delivery. MMTV-related retroviral agent might be considered as BC risk factor, especially in familial and 
gestational BC cases.
P0613. RB1 Loss of the heterozygosity analysis in colorectal 
cancer patients from Singapore
A. S. Lee1, P. Kadam2, C. P. Yean3, E. K. Weng3, F. Seow-Choen3, L. P. San2;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Division of Medical Sciences, National 
Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore, 2Department of Paediatrics, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 3Department of Colorectal Sur -
gery, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
The RB1 gene is a tumour suppressor gene involved in many important roles in cell division, differentiation and apoptosis in many cell types. Allelic loss of RB1 has been observed in retinoblastoma as well as in a number of other tumours including prostate cancer (53%), bladder cancer (61%), breast cancer (32.5%) and ovarian cancer (61%). We determined the frequency of loss of heterozygozity (LOH) of the RB1 gene in 55 colorectal cancer patients from Singapore. The patients comprised 36 male and 19 female patients with a median age at surgery of 60.1 years. LOH analysis was done using Genescan analysis on the ABI 377 sequencer at three intragenic (D13S153, Rbi4 and Rb1.20) and two extragenic (D13S218 and D13S137) microsatellite markers for each sample. LOH at one or more marker was observed in 31% of our patients. No statistically signiﬁcant differences in occurrence of LOH between males and females or with Dukes’ staging of tumours were observed. LOH at RB1 occurred in patients with Dukes’ stages A and B, suggesting involvement of this gene in the early stages of 
colorectal carcinogenesis in these patients.
P0614. Molecular Analysis of Complex BCR-ABL1  Gene 
Rearrangements in Chronic Myeloid Leukaemia
S. M. Benjes1, L. C. Walker1, P. S. Ganly1,2, R. L. Spearing2, C. M. Morris1,3;  
1Cancer Genetics Research Group, Department of Pathology, Christchurch 
School of Medicine & Health Sciences, Christchurch, New Zealand, 2Haematol -
ogy Unit, Canterbury Health Laboratories, Christchurch Hospital, Christchurch, 
New Zealand, 3Cytogenetics Unit, Canterbury Health Laboratories, Christ -
church Hospital, Christchurch, New Zealand.
Leukaemia often happens when DNA that encodes genes at different chromosomal sites spontaneously recombines in progenitor cells of the haematopoietic system. In one subtype, chronic myeloid leukaemia Cancer genetics213
(CML), the BCR-ABL1  fusion protein is responsible for the clinical 
phenotype, and is expressed after recombination occurs between the 
BCR gene on chromosome 22 and the ABL1 gene on chromosome 
9. In about 90% of CML patients, this recombination results in a 
cytogenetically visible, simple reciprocal exchange involving the long arms of chromosome 9 and 22. In the remaining cases, recombination 
between BCR and ABL1 can be more complex involving additional 
chromosomal sites that may be visible cytogenetically or cryptically concealed within a normal appearing chromosome complement. Previously, we isolated 
BCR gene fragments linked to other participating 
chromosomes from four patients with complex rearrangements. Unexpectedly, coding regions were found disrupted at the additional 
chromosome- BCR recombination site in two cases. A combination 
of inverse-PCR and DNA sequence analysis has now been applied to isolate and characterize genomic features at 
BCR recombination 
sites in a new series of 20 CML patients having complex BCR-ABL1  
rearrangements. By this approach, BCR fragments linked to additional 
participating chromosomes have been isolated from seven further patients. Preliminary sequence analysis shows a disrupted coding region in one case at the 
BCR recombination site and in a further 
ﬁve cases the breakpoints map 95 bp and up to ~25 kb from coding domains. Additional gene involvement has potential to inﬂuence the biology and pathology of the leukaemic disease, with further study required to substantiate and extend these novel ﬁndings.
P0615. Detection of mitochondrial DNA mutations in gastric 
adenomas
R. A. Caruso1, L. Rigoli1, C. Di Bella2, F. Verginelli3, C. D. Salpietro2, R. Mariani-
Costantini4;  
1Department of Human Pathology,University School of Medicine, Messina, 
Italy, 2Department of Paediatrics, University School of Medicine, Messina, Italy , 
3Department of Oncology and Neuroscience, and Center of Excellence on Ag-
ing (Ce.S.I.), University G. d'Annunzio, Chieti, Italy, 4Department of Oncology 
and Neuroscience, and Center of Excellence on Aging (Ce.S.I.), University G. 
d'Annunzio, Messina, Italy.
Alterations of oxidative phosphorylation in tumor cells are thought to 
play a role in cancer growth. Recently, a high frequency of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations have been reported in human tumours. To determine the frequency and distribution of mitochondrial mutations in gastric adenomas of Italian patients, we screened the displacement-loop (D-loop) region and the hypervariable regions 1 (HV1) and 2 (HV2) of mtDNA. DNA was extracted from 24 samples of matched adenomas and normal tissues embedded in parafﬁn blocks.We performed the ampliﬁcation and automated direct sequencing of the following mtDNA regions: L15990-H617; L15990-H16434; L16431-
H162; L039-H407; L361- H617.In 9/24 adenomas, but not in normal tissues, some mtDNA mutations have been identiﬁed: heteroplasmic transition G:C/A:T at nucleotide position (np) 16004, heteroplasmic transition C:G/T:A at np16495 (2 cases); a 1-base-pair A:T insertion at np288 (1 case); heteroplasmic C:G/G:C transition at np16168 (1 case); a 1-base-pair C:G insertion at np16244, heteroplasmic C:G/T:A transition at np16495 (1 case); heteroplasmic T:A/G:C transition at np10, heteroplasmic A:T/T:A transition at np202 (1 case); heteroplasmic C:G/G:C transition at np16168 (1 case); homoplasmic C:G transition at np16013, a 1-base-pair A:T insertion at np288 (1 case); heteroplasmic C:G/T:A transition at np16356 (1 case). In our cases, the mtDNA mutations were found only in the gastric adenomas, but not in matched normal tissues. Our ﬁndings suggest that mtDNA is mutated in a subset of gastric tumours, and that the disruption of the mtDNA repair system can be involved in 
gastric adenomas of Italian patients.
P0616. Oncogene identiﬁcation in Squamous Cell Carcinomas 
: mapping of chromosome 3 aberrations by array CGH and 
functional analysis of candidate oncogenes.
T. Hussenet1, J. Exinger1, C. Hammer1, R. Redon2, B. Wasylyk1, E. Brambilla3, 
D. Muller4, J. Abecassis4, S. du Manoir1;  
1IGBMC, Illkirch - Graffenstaden, France, 2The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, 
Hinxton, United Kingdom, 3Institut Albert Bonniot, Grenoble, France, 4Centre 
Paul Strauss, Strasbourg, France.
We are interested in mapping chromosomal aberrations in Squamous Cell Carcinomas (SCC) and analyzing their consequences. Indeed, chromosome 3 aberrations are among the most recurrently observed aberrations in these tumors: deletions of the 3p arm are often found and several tumor suppressor genes have been proposed. Ampliﬁcations and/or gains of the 3q arm are present in a majority of tumors and have been linked to a poor prognosis for the HNSCC patients. However, the oncogene targeted by these ampliﬁcations/gains has not been isolated 
yet even if some candidates have been proposed.To better dissect these aberrations, we have analyzed a series of 30 Lung SCC and 50 Head and Neck SCC (tumors of advanced stages: T3 and T4) by array CGH, using a home-built chromosome 3 dedicated array composed of 307 BAC clones. This screening allowed us to narrow down the common region of ampliﬁcations/gains to a small 3q26 genomic segment (< 2 megabases), highly ampliﬁed in approximately 20 % of these tumors, and gained in more than 80 %. Bioinformatic analyses show that this consensus region contains only 6 known Refseq genes. To discriminate between these candidate oncogenes, we are currently analyzing their expression levels in SCC with or without 3q26 ampliﬁcation as well as the functional consequences of their overexpression in cellular models. This work should pinpoint a new major oncogene of the squamous cell carcinogenesis, commonly ampliﬁed and overexpressed in consequence.
P0617. Prevalence of the FMR1 mutation in Taiwan assessed by 
large-scale screening of newborn boys and analysis of DXS548-
FRAXAC1 haplotype
C. Tzeng1, L. Tsai2, W. Hwu3, S. Lin4, M. Chao5, Y. Jong5, S. Chu6;  
1Chi Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan Republic of China, 2Taipei Municipal 
Women's and Children's Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 3National 
Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 4Bureau of Health 
Promotion, Department of Health, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 5Kaohsi -
ung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan Republic of China, 6Bud-
dhist Tzu Chi Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan Republic of China.
If carrier women could be identiﬁed in time and take appropriate measures, fragile X syndrome can be prevented. Wide screening of women to be or in their early pregnancy was considered a good approach to identify carriers without misdetection. Nevertheless, we argued against the cost-effectiveness of implementing such a screening program in Taiwan, due to the lower carrier rate found in our pilot study. To reliably estimate the prevalence of mutant 
FMR1 gene in Taiwan, we 
anonymously screened 10,046 newborn boys using bloodspot PCR. Among them, the sample from one boy, who was most likely a victim of FXS, failed repeatedly in PCR ampliﬁcation. The estimated prevalence of premutation (55-200 CGG repeats) and intermediate alleles (45-54 CGG repeats) were 1:1,674 (n=6) and 1:143 (n=70), respectively. All these estimates were constantly lower than that reported in Caucasian populations, with variable statistic signiﬁcance. Furthermore, when comparing analyses of the distribution of alleles at the two most often investigated microsatellite loci, DXS548 and FRAXAC1, between 100 control and 28 unrelated fragile X chromosomes, we found no apparent founder haplotype prevalent among the fragile X patients. Because a few founder haplotypes were reportedly prevalent in two thirds of fragile X alleles in Caucasians and in Chinese from central China, we thus suggested that lack of founder fragile X chromosomes might result in a relatively low prevalence of mutant FMR1 gene in a population, as observed in Taiwan.
P0618. Impaired mitochondrial glutamate transport in autosomal 
recessive neonatal myoclonic epilepsy
F. Molinari1, A. Raas-Rothschild2, M. Rio1, G. Fiermonte3, F. Encha-Razavi1, L. 
Palmieri3, F. Palmieri3, Z. Ben-Neriah2, N. Kadhom1, M. Vekemans1, T. Attie-Bit -
ach1, A. Munnich1, P. Rustin1, L. Colleaux1;  
1INSERM U393, Paris, France, 2Hadassah University Medical Center, Jerusa -
lem, Israel, 3University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
Early myoclonic encephalopathy (EME) with suppression burst (SB) is an early onset malignant epilepsy syndrome characterized by a typical EEG pattern, namely suppression-burst, in which higher-voltage bursts of slow waves mixed with multifocal spikes alternate with isoelectric suppression phases. The lack of consistent neuropathological features suggests that etiology may vary from case to case. EME has been reported in nonketotic hyperglycinemia (MIM 605899), propionic acidemia (MIM 606054) and some malformative disorders. However, in most cases, the 
underlying mechanism of these disorders remains unknown.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics214
Here we report on genetic mapping of an autosomal recessive EME to 
chromosome 11p15.5 and identiﬁcation of a missense mutation (Pro 206 Leu) in a gene encoding one of the two mitochondrial glutamate symporters (GC1, SLC25A22). The mutation co-segregated with the disease and altered a highly conserved amino-acid. Functional analysies showed that glutamate oxidation in patient cultured skin ﬁbroblasts was strongly defective. Further studies in reconstituted proteoliposomes showed defective [14C]glutamate uniport and [14C]glutamate/glutamate exchange by mutant protein. Moreover, expression studies showed that, during human development, SLC25A22 is speciﬁcally expressed in the brain, within territories proposed to contribute to the 
genesis and control of myoclonic seizures.These ﬁndings provide the ﬁrst direct molecular link between glutamate mitochondrial metabolism and myoclonic epilepsy and suggest potential insights into the pathophysiological bases of severe neonatal 
epilepsies with suppression-burst pattern.
P0619. Rapid Throughput Sequence-Based Mutation Scanning 
of L1CAM: An Improved Method Based on Meta-PCR
M. Panayi, A. Wallace, R. Elles;  
National Genetics Reference Laboratory (Manchester), Central 
Manchester&Manchester Children's NHS Trust, United Kingdom.
Mutations in the L1CAM gene are responsible for four related L1 
disorders; X-linked hydrocephalus, MASA ( Mental retardation, Aphasia, 
Shufﬂing gait, and Adducted thumbs) syndrome, X-linked complicated 
spastic paraplegia type I (SPG1) and X-linked Agenesis of the Corpus 
Callosum (ACC). The main clinical features of this spectrum are 
Corpus callosum hypoplasia, mental Retardation, Adducted thumbs, 
Spastic paraplegia and Hydrocephalus ( CRASH ). Since there is no 
biochemically assayed disease marker, molecular analysis of the 
L1CAM gene is the only means of conﬁrming a clinical diagnosis.
The challenge for a comprehensive mutation scan in a large multi-exon gene such as 
L1CAM is to fulﬁl demand for rapid and accurate 
screening while reducing cost and turn-round time. Our previous mutation scanning technique involved the labour-intensive method of SSCP/heteroduplex analysis and sequencing of the 28 coding exons. Here, we report a cost-effective high-throughput direct sequence 
analysis strategy for L1CAM .
The whole coding region of L1CAM is ampliﬁed and sequenced in 8 
separate fragments (6 Meta-PCR fragments and 2 long PCR reactions). Sequencing reactions are analysed on an ABI3730 automated sequencer and scanned for mutations using the trace subtraction 
software in the Staden Package.Panels of 10 patients can now be analysed for all 8 fragments in approximately 8 weeks. To date, ﬁve previously unreported sequence alterations and one known pathogenic stop mutation have been identiﬁed from a total of 30 patients screened. One of these patients was a re-test with a previously negative SSCP/HA result, further conﬁrming the increased sensitivity of this improved mutation scanning 
method.
P0620. Identiﬁcation of a 3.0-kb major recombination hotspot in 
Sotos syndrome patients with a common 1.9-Mb microdeletion
N. Matsumoto ;  
Department of Huma Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.
Sotos syndrome (SoS [MIM 117550]) is a congenital dysmorphic 
disorder characterized by overgrowth in childhood, distinctive craniofacial features and mental retardation. Haploinsufﬁciency of 
the NSD1 gene due to either intragenic mutations or microdeletions 
is known to be the major cause. The common ~2.2-Mb microdeletion encompasses whole 
NSD1 and neighboring genes and is ﬂanked by 
low-copy-repeats (LCRs). Here we report the identiﬁcation of a 3.0-kb major recombination hotspot within these LCRs, where we mapped deletion breakpoints in 78.7 % (37/47) of SoS patients with the common microdeletion. The deletion size was subsequently reﬁned as 1.9 Mb. Sequencing of breakpoint fragments from all the 37 patients revealed junctions between a segment of the proximal LCR (PLCR-B) and its corresponding region of the distal LCR (DLCR-2B). PLCR-B and DLCR-2B are the only directly orientated regions, whereas the remaining PLCR and DLCR are in inverted orientation. PLCR with a size of 394.0 kb and DLCR of 429.8 kb showed overall high homology (~98.5 %), with an increased sequence similarity (~99.4 %) within the 3.0-kb breakpoint cluster. Several recombination-associated motifs were identiﬁed in the hotspot and/or in its vicinity. Interestingly, an average of 10-fold increase of a translin motif over the normal 
distribution within the LCRs was recognized.Furthermore, a heterozygous inversion of the interval between the LCRs was detected in all fathers with a child carrying a deletion in the paternally derived chromosome. The functional signiﬁcance of these ﬁndings remains to be elucidated.
P0621. MEFV  gene is a probable susceptibility gene for Behçet's 
disease
A. Dursun1, N. Imirzalioglu2, B. Tastan3, Y. Soysal2, C. M. Yakicier4;  
1ZKU Medical Faculty Medical Genetics Dept., Zonguldak, Turkey, 2Military 
Medical Academy Medical Genetics Dept., Ankara, Turkey, 3Military Medical 
Academy Dermatology Dept., Ankara, Turkey, 4Bilkent University Molecular 
Biology and Genetics Dept, Ankara, Turkey.
Behcet’s disease (BD) is a rare, chronic multisystem inﬂammatory disorder. Epidemiologic ﬁndings suggest that both genetic and 
environmental factors contribute to the development of BD.The prevalence of BD is higher in the Middle Eastern and Mediterranean populations. Another chronic inﬂamatory disease Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF), is also known to be highly prevalent in these populations. The prevalence of BD is higher in the 
FMF patient population than in populations known to be rich in BD.Both BD and FMF have some pathophysiological features in common and they result from inappropriate activation of neutrophils. Clinical manifestations of both diseases can mimic each other and coexistence 
of both diseases in the same patient has been reported.Given that BD and FMF have similar pathophysiological, epidemiological and clinical features, we hypothesized that the gene responsible for FMF, 
MEFV , may also play a role in the pathogenesis of BD.
Therefore, we screaned common MEFV gene mutations (E148Q, 
M680I, M694V, and V726A) in 42 BD patients who had no symptoms or family history for FMF in addition to 66 healthy controls. Fifteen patients (36%) displayed 
MEFV mutations (9 M694V, 5 E148Q and 
one M680I) and mutation rates were signiﬁcantly elevated compared to 66 (11%) healty controls (p=0.0034).The occurence of frequent 
MEFV mutations in BD patients provides 
evidence that MEFV gene is involved in the pathogenesis of Behcet’s 
disease.
Patient Group Control Group P value
Mutation Frequency 15/27 7/59 0.0034
M694V 9(3*)/33 4/62 0.0367
E148Q 5/37 1/65 0.0321
M680I 1/41 2/64 0.9999
P0622. Mutation screening of the entire retinoblastoma gene 
(RB1) in 252 retinoblastoma cases
E. J. Doherty1, N. Grace1, J. Sibbring2, R. Elles1;  
1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Re-
gional Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Liverpool Women's Hospital, United 
Kingdom.
Retinoblastoma is the most common cause of ocular malignancy in childhood occurring due to inactivation of both alleles of the tumour suppressor gene, RB1. Individuals with familial, bilateral or unilateral multifocal retinoblastoma are carriers of a germ-line mutation. Only a small proportion of isolated, unilateral retinoblastoma (IUR) patients carry a germ-line mutation, 1.7-17%, the majority having somatic mutations in tumour tissue only. In total, we have screened peripheral blood DNA from 144 patients with bilateral retinoblastoma and 108 patients with unilateral retinoblastoma. Our screening strategy has involved preliminary analysis by combined SSCP/heteroduplex analysis of all 27 exons of the retinoblastoma gene (RB1) followed by bidirectional sequencing of subsequent shifts. Recently, we have introduced RB1 dosage analysis to identify larger duplications and deletions of the gene. To date, we have identiﬁed mutations in 85% of patients with bilateral retinoblastoma and in 16% of patients with unilateral retinoblastoma. Additionally, we provide a service for mutation screening in DNA extracted from parafﬁn-embedded Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics215
retinoblastomas (for unilateral patients where germline screening 
has proved negative). We have identiﬁed both somatic mutations in 13 retinoblastomas of this type. We describe the detailed analysis of these cases. With the use of RB1 dosage analysis we hope to increase our mutation-detection sensitivity and provide an improved service to 
retinoblastoma patients.
P0623. L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria; Three Iranian cases and 
review of litreture
Y. Shafeghati1, G. Vakili2, A. Entezari2;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Welfare Science and Rehabilitation, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetics Research Center, University of Wlfare Sci -
ence and Rehabilitation, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background:  L-2-Hydroxyglutaric aciduria is a rare and novel 
autosomal recessive inherited neurometabolic disorder. Since its ﬁrst description by “Duran” in 1980 about 46 cases have been reported. Occurring mostly in childhood, it is characterized by slowly progressive neurological dysfunction with cerebellar ataxia, pyramidal sign, intellectual decline, seizure and extra pyramidal symptoms. MRI scanning is highly characteristic and screening for organic acid (L-2-
Hydroxyglutaric acid) in urine, serum, and CSF is diagnostic.Materials & Methods:
 We investigated three Iranian children aged (4, 
14, 16 years) suspected of this rare disorder by urinary organic acid assay and MRI scanning. Symptoms were suggestive of one of the 
leukoencephalopathies accompanied with macrocephalia.Results: Affected cases were evaluated because of mild to moderate psychomotor retardation and regression. Head circumferences were above 2 standard deviation. Urine levels of L-2-Hydroxyglutaric acid were strongly increased. MRI scanning of the brain showed hyper intense signals on T2 weighted images of the sub-cortical white matter 
and basal ganglia in all of them.
Conclusions:  Because of its inheritance pattern (autosomal recessive), 
and the high rate of consanguineous marriages in Iran, the prevalence of this disorder may be high among mentally handicapped patients, especially those with macrocephaly. So we should consider this entity in differential diagnosis of mentally retarded patients with macrocephaly.
P0624. Analysis of some genes which may be involved in 
pathogenesis of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in 
Russian population.
M. Shadrina1, P. Slominsky1, A. Zherebtsova1, G. Levitsky2, A. Alekhin2, V. 
Skvortsova2, S. Limborska1;  
1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Department of 
Fundamental and Clinical Neurology, Russian State Medical University, Mos -
cow, Russian Federation.
The underlying causes of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (SALS) remain unknown until now. Current evidence suggests that genetic factors triggering focal initiation and then spreading of motor neuron degeneration may be implicated in ALS pathogenesis. Various hypotheses have been suggested as potential contributors of disease such as oxidative damage and excitotoxicity. In this connection, such genes as hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (
HIF1A) which plays an essential 
role in cellular and systemic homeostatic responses to hypoxia and may be involved in oxidative damage, glutamate transporter gene 
(SLC1A2 ) and ionotropic glutamate receptor genes ( GRIA1 and GRIA2 ) 
which are involved in excitotoxicity can play a causal role in SALS development. To investigate a role of these genes in SALS, we studied polymorphisms in these genes in 72 patients with SALS in Moscow andu nrelated control population from Russia. The comparative analysis for IVS9-675C>A polymorphism of 
HIF1A, Gly603Ala 
polymorphism in the SLC1A2  gene, SNP polymorphism (rs545098) 
of GRIA1 gene and SNP polymorphism (rs9307959) of GRIA2 gene 
has not revealed any signiﬁcant distinction between the frequency of different alleles and genotypes for these gene polymorphisms in SALS patients and controls from Russia. We conclude that none of the investigated gene polymorphisms is associated with SALS and, probably, these genes are not involved in the development of SALS in 
the Russian population.P0625. Analysis of His1096Gln mutation in Wilson disease 
patients from Russia.
E. V. Beshalova1, M. Shadrina1, P. Slominsky1, A. Karabanov2, I. Ivanova-Smo -
lenskaya2, S. Limborska1;  
1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of 
Neurology, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Wilson disease (WD) is an inherited autosomal recessive disorder caused by a defect in a copper transporting P-type ATPase (ATP7B
). 
More than 100 mutations in the ATP7B gene have been identiﬁed 
in the disease. Most of these mutations are rare and were found in only a single family. But some mutations have been reported at higher frequencies: in Eastern Europe up to 38% of WD patients are homozygous for the substitution His1096Gln. To investigate a role of the His1096Gln mutation in the Russian population we have carried out screening for this mutation in 43 patients with “abdominal” WD and 120 patients with “neurological” WD. The frequency of the mutant allele 1069Gln is 25.6% in patients with “abdominal” WD and 41.6% in patients with “neurological” WD. The observed differences between the two groups are signiﬁcant (X
2 = 7.00; p=0.0082). Moreover interesting 
differences have been revealed in the distribution of His1096Gln mutation genotypes between analyzed groups. Homozygous variants of His1096Gln mutation have not been identiﬁed in patients with “abdominal” WD, whereas in the patient group with “neurological” WD the frequency of homozygotes for this mutation was 18%. This difference in genotype distribution is statistically signiﬁcant (X
2=9.26; 
p=0.0098). These data conﬁrm that mutations of His1069Gln are the most frequent in patients with WD in Russia and are the main reason 
for the development of the disease.
P0626. Y Chromosome Microdeletion Analysis in Infertile Men
M. Solak1, H. Samli1, M. Samli2, A. Ozgoz1;  
1Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Afyon, 
Turkey, 2Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Urology, Afyon, 
Turkey.
30 % of cases that are diagnosed to have severe male infertility are due to genetic irregularities. Severe oligoasthenoteratozoospermia and azoospermia are accepted to be the most frequent symptoms in these cases. There are important genes that have roles in spermatogenesis on Yq11. It is thought a series of spermatogenetic disorders are related to microdeletions in this region.12 azoospermic and 11 oligozoospermic cases were referred for genetic couselling to our department during 2001-2004. Two spermogram samples 2-3 weeks apart, hormone proﬁles, transrectal and scrotal USG examination when needed, and peripheral chromosomal analysis were performed. The following 15 sequence-tagged sites on the Y chromosome were analysed by PCR: AZFa (sY81, sY82, sY84), AZFb (sY127, sY142, sY164, RBM1), AZFc (sY145, sY152, sY153, CDY, BPY, DAZ1, DAZ2, DAZ3). Peripheral chromosome analysis revealed 47, XXY in only one case in the azoospermic group. Y chromosome microdeletions were detected in 4 out of 12 azoospermic cases (33%) and in 1 out of 11 oligospermic 
cases (9%).Y chromosomal microdeletions are transmitted from a father to
a son via ICSI and also the microdeletions may be expanded
during such transmission. Genetic counseling for infertilecouples contemplating ICSI is important if the male carries Y
chromosomal microdeletions.
P0627. A 6.2-kb Taq I fragment of CYP21 gene in congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia
C. H. Huang1, F. J. Tsai2, H. H. Lee3,4;  
1Department of Gyn/Obs, Taipei Municipal Ho-Ping Hospital,, Taipei, Taiwan 
Republic of China, 2Department of Medical Genetics,China Medical University 
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan Republic of China, 3Department of Medical Re -
search, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 4College 
of Chinese Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan Republic of 
China.
Approximately 75% of defective CYP21 genes are attributable to 
the process of intergenic recombination  of the DNA sequence from 
the highly homologous CYP21P pseudogene in congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (CAH). Such a defective CYP21 gene shows a 3.7-
kb fragment produced by TaqI digestion from analysis of a PCR 
ampliﬁcation product. Otherwise, CYP21P, mutations of IVS2 -12A/Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics216
C>G combined with 707-71delGAGACTAC, and the chimeric CYP21P /
CYP21 gene show a 3.2-kb fragment. Therefore, the 3.7- and 3.2-kb 
fragments produced by TaqI digestion respectively are crucial markers 
of the CYP21 and CYP21P genes during the analysis of the C4-CYP21 
repeat module. Herein, we present one CAH carrier with a CYP21 
haplotype containing a 6.2-kb TaqI fragment, which was caused by a 
mutation of C to G at the TaqI site (TCGA) located downstream of the 
CYP21gene as determined by analysis of a PCR ampliﬁcation product and DNA sequencing.
P0628. ARNSD , GJB2 Mutations and the Δ ( GJB6-D13S1830 ) 
Deletion in Kurdish Population
N. Mahdieh1, C. Nishimura2, K. Ali-Madadi3, H. Yazdan4, Y. Riazalhosseini5, S. 
Arzhangi5, R. Smith6, H. Najmabadi1;  
1University of Social Welfare & Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Repub -
lic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, Department of 
Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States, 3Welfare & Reha -
bilitation Organization of Kermanshah, Kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
4Rehabilitation Organization of Kermanshah, Kermanshah, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 5University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 63Molecular Otolaryngol -
ogy Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, 
Iowa, IA, United States.
Introduction:  Non-syndromic hearing impairment is the most common 
form of deafness, affecting approximately 1 in 1000 neonates. In approximately half of cases, the deafness is inherited, and of inherited congenital deafness, mutations in GJB2 make up the largest fractional contribution in many world populations. In this study, we analyzed 209 persons from 77 Kurdish families segregating severe-to-profound autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness (ARNSD) to determine 
the frequency of GJB2 mutations in this population.Mutation screening of GJB2 was performed by allele-speciﬁc PCR, with DHPLC analysis of all samples excluding 35delG homozygotes. Direct sequencing was completed on samples with abnormal elution proﬁles. The Δ (GJB6-D13S1830) mutation was identiﬁed by PCR-based ampliﬁcation across the breakpoint region. We identiﬁed 6 mutations in exon 2 (35delG, R32H, delE120, R184P, R127H, and V153I). Based on these data, 
GJB2 mutations account for approximately 18.8% of 
severe-to-profound congenital deafness in the Kurdish population. We are going to continue our study on Non-GJB2 deafness family by (DFNB) Haplotype and linkage analysis to ﬁnd out the other genes that 
may be defect in Kurdish population in the west of Iran.
P0629. Molecular studies in 11 Silver-Russell syndrome patients.
P. Capkova, R. Vrtel, A. Santava, J. Zapletalova, J. Santavy;  
University Hospital of Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic.
Introduction : Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS; Silver et al. 1953; 
Russell 1954) is characterised by intrauterine growth retardation, short stature in later life, typical craniofacial abnormalities including a relatively large, prominent forehead, a small triangular face, asymmetry of head and limbs, and other less constant abnormalities. The majority of cases of SRS are sporadic; occasionally a familial occurence with autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive or X - linked inheritance is 
reported.
Objectives: To deﬁne the frequency of uniparental disomy (UPD) in 
the group of SRS patients.Material and methods: Eleven patients with SRS syndrome and their parents were typed with short tandem repeat markers from chromosome 7. Chromosomal investigations were also performed in 
all patients.
Results: Maternal UPD was detected in one SRS patient (maternal uniparental heterodisomy), accounting for approximately 9 % of the tested SRS patients. In one patient the balanced chromosomal rearrangement 46,XY,der(5;8)(q31.3;q21.3)mat. was revealed.
Conclusion : The etiology of SRS syndrome has been heterogenous 
which makes diagnosis so far difﬁcult. The responsible genes are still unidentiﬁed.
P0630. Molecular pathogenesis of metaphyseal dysplasia, 
Schmid type (SMCD).
R. Savarirayan , S. Freddi, R. Wilson, S. Lamande, J. F. Bateman;  
Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
Schmid metaphyseal chondrodysplasia (MIM156500) is a dominantly inherited cartilage disorder caused by mutations in the gene for the hypertrophic cartilage extracellular matrix structural protein, collagen X (
COL10A1 ). Thirty heterozygous mutations have been described 
to date, almost equally divided into two mutation types, missense mutations and mutations that introduce premature termination signals. 
The COL10A1 mutations are clustered in the 3’ region of exon 3, 
which codes for the C terminal NC1 trimerization domain. The effect 
of COL10A1 missense mutations have been examined by in vitro 
expression and assembly assays and cell transfection studies, which suggest that a common consequence is the disruption of collagen X trimerization and secretion, with intracellular degradation. We present data regarding the effect of 
COL10A1 nonsense mutations in cartilage 
in two patients with SMCD, demonstrating that mutant mRNA is completely removed by nonsense mediated mRNA decay. We propose that, for both classes of mutations, functional haploinsufﬁciency of 
COL10A1  in cartilage is the underlying basis of the clinical phenotype 
observed in SMCD.
P0631. Towards a genotype-phenotype correlation in individuals 
with Börjeson-Forssman-Lehmann Syndrome
W. Just1, J. Mücke2,3;  
1University of Ulm, Dept. of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 2Medical Practi -
tioner of Pediatrics and Human Genetics, St. Ingbert, Germany, 3University of 
Saarland, Saarbrücken, Germany.
Börjeson-Forssman-Lehmann Syndrome (BFLS) is seen as an XLMRS with severe mental retardation in connection with progredient microcephaly, facial dysmorphology, gynecomastia, trunk obesity, hypogonadism, and without any development of an adequate language so far. BFLS is caused by mutations in the PHD protein family gene 
PHF6. The majority of published mutations are missense mutations or nonsense mutations, which lead to a truncated form of the protein. We had published the ﬁrst triplet nucleotide deletion in 
PHF6, which 
caused only moderately mild symptoms of BFLS. This deletion maps to Exon 10 of 
PHF6. This part of the gene is not present in all PHF6  
transcripts, since at least two transcript isoforms of this gene exist. 
This deletion may be found only in isoform I.Here we report on two other cases of BFLS: one sporadic case and another family with two affected sons, one healthy son, and their mother who as a carrier shows only very mild facial symptoms of BFLS. 
PHF6  
sequence analysis of the sporadic case revealed the recurrent R342X mutation. The mutation in the family with mild symptoms of BFLS is again a triplet nucleotide deletion in isoform I of 
PHF6. However, this 
mutation is different from the earlier published sequence variant.It seems that severe cases of BFLS are due to single nucleotide changes in either isoform of 
PHF6, whereas mild form of BFLS may 
be diagnosed preferentially by a loss of nucleotide triplets in isoform 
I of PHF6 .
P0632. Molecular conﬁrmation of complete mole
M. Brouckova1, V. Hejda2, D. Stejskal1, M. Brestak1;  
1GENNET, Praha, Czech Republic, 2ÚPMD, Praha, Czech Republic.
We used Fluorescent Quantitative PCR for conﬁrmation of paternal uniparental diploidy at molar pregnancies. 15 different highly polymorphic STR markers (Ampfestr Identiﬁler PCR Ampliﬁcation Kit -Applied Biosystems, USA) together with amelogenin marker were co-ampliﬁed from DNAs isolated from product of conception tissue with karyotype 46, XX and mother’s blood. Paternal uniparental diploidy was conﬁrmed if all 15 STR polymorphisms of product of conception were monoalelic and more than one polymorphism could not be inherited from mother. Our method can reliably conﬁrm paternal origin of 46, XX karyotype at product of conception with its signiﬁcant clinical consequences. Partial and complete mole can be distinguished by ultrasound and histological appearance but cytogenetic and molecular genetic evaluation should be considered whenever there is a question 
of the diagnosis particularly to prevent malignancies.
P0633. Chaperone-procollagen interactions differ with mutation 
location in osteogenesis imperfecta
A. Ashok, A. M. Barnes, J. C. Marini;  
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) or brittle bone disease, is caused by mutations in type I procollagen. The heterotrimeric procollagen Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics217
molecule consists of a central triple helical domain ﬂanked by C and 
N-terminal propetides and mutations in these regions results in OI. As both ﬁbroblasts and osteoblasts secrete mutant collagen, the bone-speciﬁc pathophysiology of OI has not yet been delineated. However, in OI cases with mutations in the helical region of collagen, osteoblasts secrete a greater proportion of the mutant collagen forms than ﬁbroblasts. As interactions with ER chaperones can direct the fate of proteins between secretion and degradation, we hypothesized that differential interactions of mutant procollagens with chaperones in osteoblasts and ﬁbroblasts may be responsible for the ‘permissiveness’ 
of osteoblasts to mutant collagen survival.Using confocal microscopy, collagen and chaperone-speciﬁc antibodies, we compared the intracellular localization of procollagens and chaperones in control versus OI ﬁbroblasts. Normal procollagen and procollagen with a helical mutation displayed a distinct reticular pattern of immunoﬂuorescence in the ER that overlapped with calnexin, but not with Hsp-47, PDI and BiP. In contrast, procollagens with C-propeptide mutations displayed a diffuse pattern of ER localization that co-localized with Hsp-47, PDI and BiP, but not with calnexin. These 
chaperone interactions are maintained in normal and OI osteoblasts.Our novel ﬁndings demonstrate a clear correlation between the type of mutation and both the subcellular localization pattern of procollagen and the nature of chaperone interactions in both ﬁbroblasts and 
osteoblasts.
P0634. Leukemia inhibitory factor gene mutations contribute to 
embryo implantation failure in infertile women .
R. Sima1, M. Kralickova2, T. Vanecek1, P. Sima3, Z. Ulcova-Gallova2, Z. Rokyta2;  
1SPAU FN Plzen, Plzen, Czech Republic, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gy -
necology FN Plzen, Plzen, Czech Republic, 3Department of Immunology and 
Gnothobiology, Institute of Microbiology CAS, Praha, Czech Republic.
The successful implantation requires a functionally normal embryo at the blastocyst stage and an adequately receptive endometrium. Their cross talk is complex, promoted mainly by cytokines produced and received by both, the endometrium, and the blastocyst. As it was shown, leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) is one of the essential cytokines in this regulation. The defects in the embryo - endometrium 
communication may result in the implantation failure.We designed a LIF gene mutation screening method that is based on the Temperature Gradient Gel Electrophoresis (TGGE). The population to screen consisted of 176 clinically characterized women with diagnosed infertility including a subgroup of 57 women with idiopathic primary infertility and history of infertility treatment and failure of in vitro fertilization (IVF) or intracytoplasmatic sperm injection (ICSI). The control population comprised of 75 healthy fertile subjects that conceived spontaneously and delivered successfully.Six positive samples were detected by TGGE. The consequent DNA sequencing proved that all of them were potentially functional LIF gene mutations, the G→A transitions at the position 3400 of the LIF gene. This mutation causes the V64M exchange in the AB loop region of the 
LIF protein.All six positive women were infertile. Four of them were diagnosed with primary and two of them with secondary infertility. No positive samples were identiﬁed in the control group.The results suggest that LIF gene mutations can contribute to embryo implantation failure and consequent infertility and decreased pregnancy rates in ART.This study was supported by the Grant No: GA CR 301/05/0078
P0635. Osteocalcin gene HindIII polymorphism and bone 
mineral density in children with juvenile chronic arthritis in 
St.Petersburg.
M. Kostik, P. Glazkov, I. Vorontsov, V. Larionova;  
Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Osteopenia (OP), or low bone mineral density (BMD) for age, is a frequent complication in children with juvenile chronic arthritis (JCA). Osteocalcin is a biochemical marker that is often used in the assessment of bone turnover in OP patients. Previous studies have suggested an inﬂuence of osteocalcin gene 
HindIII alleles on bone metabolism. In 
the present study we investigated whether this polymorphism is related to BMD in JCA patients.Seventy JCA children (51girls, 19 boys) were included in our study. The mean age of patients was 11.56 ±4.17 years. Osteocalcin gene 
HindIII polymorphism and serum levels of intact osteocalcin, calcitonin, parathyroid hormone, Ca
2+, phosphate, common alkaline phosphatase 
was tested in all patients. OP was detected by dual-energy X-ray 
absorptiometry in lumbar spine (L1-L4).Using the data of BMD we selected the children in two groups: with OP - 39 children (55.7%) and without OP - 31 children (44.3%). There weren’t signiﬁcant difference in genotypes frequency in those groups. But we investigated sex differences in genotypes distribution. There was signiﬁcant difference in genotypes frequency between JCA girls with and without OP.
GenotypesBoys 
with OP 
(n=13)Boys 
without 
OP 
(n=6)Girls 
with OP 
(n=26)Girls 
without 
OP 
(n=25)Children 
with OP 
(n=39)Children 
without 
OP 
(n=31)
Presence 
of H 
(HH+Hh)4 
(30,8%)4 
(66,7%)13 
(50,0%)7 
(28,0%)17 
(43,6%)11 
(35,5%)
Absence of 
H (hh)9 
(69,2%)2 
(33,3%)13 
(50,0%)18 
(72,0%)22 
(56,4%)20 
(64,5%)
p 0,14 0,003 0,15
P0636. Role of polymorphism in the CYP1A1, EPHX1 GSTM1, 
GSTT1 and GSTP1 genes in the development of chronic 
occupation bronchitis
L. Akhmadishina, S. Mingazova, G. Korytina, D. Yanbaeva, A. Bakirov, T. 
Victorova;  
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientiﬁc Center, Ufa, Russian 
Federation.
The aim of this study was to investigate the possible roles of metabolic 
gene polymorphisms in the development and progression of chronic 
occupational bronchitisPolymorphisms in the genes encoding 
CYP1A1 , EPHX1 , GSTM1 , 
GSTT1 and GSTP1 were investigated in Russian patients with chronic 
occupational bronchitis (N=95); chronic dust bronchitis (N=40) and chronic toxic bronchitis (N=50) and in ethnically matched healthy individuals (N=205) living in Ufa, Bashkortostan (Russian Federation) by PCR-RLFP.The AG genotype of 
CYP1A1 gene was associated with increased risk 
of chronic occupational bronchitis (χ2=6.35, p=0.01).The frequency of the GG genotype of 
GSTP1 was signiﬁcantly higher 
in patients (8.4% compared to control 2.0%, χ2=5.49 p=0.02).The combination of AA genotype of 
CYP1A1 and GG genotype of 
GSTP1 have associated with increased risk of occupation bronchitis 
(χ2=4.66 p=0.03; OR=4.21).The distribution of the 
EPHX1 and GSTM1 genotypes did not 
signiﬁcantly differ between patients and healthy subjects.Our ﬁndings support that the polymorphisms of the 
CYP1A1 and GSTP1  
genes, which code for enzymes with dramatically altered activities, probably play a substantial part in susceptibility to development and 
progression of chronic occupational bronchitis.
P0637. Mental retardation and autism associated with a 1.2 Mb 
Xq25 duplication encompassing the glutamate receptor gene 
GRIA3
G. Borck1, R. Redon2, M. C. de Blois1, N. P. Carter2, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-
Daire1, L. Colleaux1;  
1INSERM U393 and Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Necker - En -
fants Malades, Paris, France, 2The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome 
Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SA, United Kingdom.
Chromosomal imbalances are a frequent cause of mental retardation (MR) but rearrangements smaller than 5 megabases (Mb) are frequently undetectable due to the limited resolution of routine chromosome analysis. Recently, genome-wide screening for submicroscopic deletions and duplications has become possible with array-based comparative genomic hybridisation (array-CGH). In the course of a systematic screening for submicroscopic chromosome imbalances in children with syndromic MR by array-CGH, we identiﬁed a small Xq25 
microduplication in a boy with MR and autism.The patient, a 15 year-old boy, was referred to our Department Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics218
because of developmental delay, speech delay, autistic disorder 
and sleep disturbances. He also presented facial dysmorphism and progressive scoliosis. High-resolution karyotype and FRAXA screening were normal. We ﬁrst performed array-CGH using a DNA microarray with ~1 Mb resolution. Gain of chromosomal material was detected for two clones in Xq25. This result was conﬁrmed using a tiling path BAC microarray covering the whole X chromosome and the duplication was found to span 1.2 Mb between BACs RP6-64P14 and RP13-158L7. The duplication was also detected in the phenotypically normal mother. However, she had a biased X chromosome inactivation (81%/19%), supporting the involvement of the duplication in the patient’s phenotype.Interestingly, the duplicated region encompasses the glutamate receptor subunit gene GRIA3. This gene has been proposed as a candidate gene for MR and bipolar disorder based on its disruption by a balanced translocation in a female patient. Our results provide additional evidence that abnormal GRIA3 expression may be involved 
in X-linked MR.
P0638. Y-position cysteine substitution in type I collagen (α(I) 
R888C) is associated with Type IV Osteogenesis Imperfecta
W. A. Cabral1, A. Ashok1, E. Makareeva2, A. D. Letocha1, N. Scribanu3, S. 
Leikin2, J. C. Marini1;  
1NIH, NICHD, Bone and Extracellular Matrix Branch, Bethesda, MD, United 
States, 2NIH, NICHD, Section on Physical Biochemistry, Bethesda, MD, United 
States, 3Georgetown University Medical Center, Dept of Pediatrics, Washing -
ton, DC, United States.
The most common structural mutations in type I collagen causing 
osteogenesis imperfecta are substitutions for glycine residues in the uninterrupted Gly-X-Y triplets. X and Y position residues have been shown to be important for normal interchain interactions; it is not known whether substitutions at these residues cause or modify clinical conditions. We have delineated a Y-position substitution in a father and son with mild type IV OI. The 12 yr old proband and his father had sustained several fractures, and had osteopenia and moderate joint laxity. Both had an α1(I) Arg888Cys substitution, which was conﬁrmed in gDNA by MboI digestion. Proband type I collagen had less overmodiﬁcation than expected from a glycine substitution at this position, supporting a minor effect on helix folding. There was also a faint, reducible α1(I) dimer, which was demonstrated in about 10% of heterotrimers in media and cell layer of cultured ﬁbroblasts by [
35S] 
cysteine labelling, compared to the theoretical maximum of 25%. In matrix deposited in culture, collagen containing mutant dimers and monomers efﬁciently formed mature crosslinks. Although differential scanning calorimetry revealed only local helix destabilization, in vitro processing of procollagens and western analysis of matrix deposition extracts suggest this mutation interferes with processing at propeptidase cleavage sites far removed from the mutation. In vivo, proband dermal ﬁbril diameters have a wider range than in controls. These data suggest that X and Y position substitutions in type I collagen may have a signiﬁcant clinical role as the cause or modiﬁer of 
connective tissue disease.
P0639. The molecular-genetic analysis of congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (21-hydroxylase deﬁciency)
E. Hrabincová1, D. Novotná2, S. Koloušková3, F. Votava4, J. Kytnarová5, R. 
Gaillyová6, E. Šilhánová7, L. Kozák1;  
1Center of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, Brno, Czech Republic, 
2Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 
3Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Prague-Motol, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 4Department of Pediatrics, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 5Department of Pediatrics, 1st Faculty of Medicine Prague, Prague, 
Czech Republic, 6Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Brno, 
Brno, Czech Republic, 7Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital 
Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a group of recessively 
inherited diseases, in which cortisol secretion is impaired. More than 95% of all cases of CAH are due to deﬁciency of steroid 21-hydroxylase. The disease is caused by mutations in the CYP21 gene encoding the steroid 21-hydroxylase. More than 90% of these mutations result from intragenic recombinations between CYP21 gene and the closely linked CYP21P pseudogene. It was described that approximately 20% of them are nonfunctional chimeric CYP21P/CYP21 genes due to 
unequal crossingover during meiosis.We established a PCR based approach which permits differential ampliﬁcation of the CYP21 and CYP21P genes, followed by direct probing for presence of know mutation sites in a secondary PCR analysis. The chimeric CYP21P/CYP21 gene, the deletion of the CYP21 gene and mutations 656A/C>G, P30L, G110del8, I172N, cluster E6 (I236N+V237E+M239K), V281L, Q318X, R356W, F306+1nt were detected in our patients. A total of 89 unrelated CAH patients from Czech Republic with 21-hydroxylase deﬁciency were examined. The most frequent mutation, chimeric CYP21P/CYP21 gene, was found on 68 mutant alleles (40.0%). Following frequent mutations were 656A/C>G (27.9%) and I172N (12.3%). After genotype-phenotype correlation it was found that the mutations P30L and V281L were characteristically identiﬁed in mild - late onset patients, the mutations 656A/C>G and I172N were usually seen in simple virilizing patients and remain mutations were presented in severe affected patients with 
salt wasting phenotype.Supported by scientiﬁc project CEZ MZ/98/0001/00209627 from the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic and grant S 4031209 AV 
CR.
P0640. Effects of C-propeptide Mutations in Type I Collagen on 
Extracellular Matrix Deposition and Fibrillogenesis
A. M. Barnes1, S. Milgrom1, E. Moriarty1, J. Cassella2, W. Cabral1, J. Pace3, J. 
C. Marini1;  
1NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2CEASR, Univ. of Derby, Derby, 
United Kingdom, 3University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States.
Type I collagen C-propeptide mutations have been found in a small number of patients with Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI). The mutations are not expected to be present in collagen ﬁbrils in tissues, because the C-propeptide is cleaved before ﬁbril assembly. Thus, their pathophysiological mechanism will differ from helical mutations. We identiﬁed 5 novel C-propeptide mutations by RT-PCR and sequencing of COL1A1 cDNA. Four involved substitutions at conserved residues: W1097C, D1233N (Type III OI), T1120I and P1266H (Type IV OI). The 5th proband (Type II OI) had a 6 nt deletion at the E51/I51 junction causing an in-frame insertion of all but 2 nt of I51 in cDNA. We compared proband ﬁbroblasts with a lethal C-propeptide mutation (D1263Y; Pace, J Med Gen 2002), 3 mutations adjacent to the C-propeptide (G898S, G967C, G997S) and control cells. All mutant collagens showed backstreaking of α1(I) steady-state collagen. Incorporation of pro-α1 chains with point substitutions required 3-6X longer than control or G898S (~20 minutes). Pro-α1 chains with an intronic insertion incorporated after 3 hours. Processing assays suggested delayed C-propeptide cleavage from secreted collagen containing C-propeptide or helical mutations. Overmodiﬁed collagens incorporated into ﬁbroblast matrix in culture and formed mature cross-links. Skin and bone ﬁbrils from two probands (T1120I, P1266H) were examined by EM. Proband dermal ﬁbril diameters are ~10% larger than control. SEM revealed disorganized bone ﬁbrils with variable diameters. These investigations provide insight into the pathophysiological mechanism by which mutations not expected to be incorporated into ECM structure 
alter matrix organization and weaken connective tissue.
P0641. Developing a successful screening strategy for X-Linked 
Retinitis Pigmentosa.
N. Hart-Holden1,2, J. Rice1,2, S. Ramsden1,2, A. Wallace1,2, R. Elles1,2;  
1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Aca-
demic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetics Service, Manchester , 
United Kingdom.
Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is the name for a genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous group of progressive retinal disorders 
with a combined incidence of approximately 1 in 3500.There are autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, X-linked recessive (XLRP) and sporadic forms of the disease and to date 
approximately 36 loci have been implicated.XLRP is the most severe form of the disease with affected males showing symptoms before the age of 20 and with total blindness by the age of about 35. Mutations in the RPGR gene account for approximately 70% of XLRP cases, with a mutation hotspot in the highly repetitive region known as ORF15. A second gene, RP2, yields approximately Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics219
10% of XLRP mutations, with a mutation hotspot in exon 2.
We have developed a high-throughput, semi-automated sequence detection strategy for detecting mutations in ORF15. To date over 130 cases have been screened and reported. To extend the service we are screening for mutations in RPGR exons 1-14 and RP2 exons 1-5. When this work is complete we aim to detect 80% of XLRP cases which will account for approximately 8% of all RP.No effective approach to prevention, stabilization or reversal currently exists for the majority of RP cases and consequently pre-symptomatic testing is controversial. We ensure that all testing is offered within the context of genetic counselling and have demonstrated a high level of demand for this service in families who have previously found it difﬁcult 
to obtain testing within an accredited laboratory environment.
P0642. Quantiﬁcation of TSPY gene and probable identiﬁcation 
of gonosomal aberrations in infertile men using capillary 
electrophoresis
A. R. Singh1, R. Vrtel1, R. Vodicka1, E. Krejcirikova1, L. Dusek2, D. Svabova1, J. 
Santavy1, A. Santava1;  
1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Repub -
lic, 2Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
TSPY gene is a multicopy gene distributed on the Y chromosome in 6 clusters. In the normal population there are 20-40 copies. The 
TSPY  
gene is known for its role in testicular carcinomas and seminomas and probably also has role in spermatogenesis. We are investigating the 
relation of TSPY  gene copies with azoospermia and oligospermia.
We used RQF PCR (Reﬁned quantitative ﬂorescent PCR) to determine the copy number of 
TSPY genes. Patients with azoospermia and 
oligospermia were compared with normal fertile males. The AMEL  
gene on the X and Y chromosome was used as an internal quantitative control. In addition to the number of copies we were also able to identify chromosome aberrations and mosaics of sex chromosomes in our study.We present our preliminary results in this poster; more detailed study 
is needed to reach conclusive results.
Supporting grant: Grant agency MH CR, NR/7821-3
P0643. Simultaneous detection of copy number changes and 
CpG methylation of all genes in the Chromosome 15 imprinted 
region with a novel method; Methylation-speciﬁc MLPA (MS-MLPA)
A. O. H. Nygren1,2, H. M. B. Duarte1,2, R. N. C. P. Vijzelaar2, S. I. Lens2, J. P. 
Schouten2, A. Errami2;  
1Department of Clinical and Human Genetics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 
2MRC-Holland BV, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) and Angelman Syndrome (AS) are 
autosomal dominant disorders and the vast majority of the cases are caused by copy number changes in the chromosome 15 imprinted region or by uniparental disomy. The recently developed MLPA method has increased the possibilities for multiplex detection of copy number changes in a routine laboratory. Here we describe a novel robust method: the Methylation-Speciﬁc Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Ampliﬁcation (MS-MLPA) which can detect changes in both CpG methylation as well as copy number of up to 40 chromosomal sequences in one simple reaction. In MS-MLPA, ligation of MLPA probe oligonucleotides is combined with digestion of the genomic DNA-probe hybrid complexes with methylation-sensitive endonucleases. Digestion of the genomic DNA-probe complex, rather than double stranded genomic DNA, allowed the use of DNA derived from formalin treated parafﬁn-embedded tissue samples
. We successfully used MS-
MLPA to detect copy number and methylation status of all genes in the chromosome 15 imprinted region in DNA samples of patients with Prader-Willy syndrome (PWS) or Angelman syndrome (AS).
P0644. Comprehensive mutation scanning in the ornathine 
transcarbamylase (OTC) gene using dye binding/ high resolution 
thermal denaturation
J. T. McKinney1, J. A. Harbour1, L. Caldovic2, M. Lynch2, M. Tuchman2, S. F. 
Dobrowolski1;  
1Idaho Technology, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 2Children's National 
Medical Center, Washington, DC, United States.
Ornithine transcarbabmylase (OTC, OMIM #311250) deﬁciency is an X-linked (Xp21.1) inborn error of metabolism involving the urea cycle. The algorithm for differential diagnosis of urea cycle defects (UCDs) is complex. OTC deﬁciency is the most common UCD. Molecular analysis of OTC is useful as an initial reﬂex to clinical presentation of hyperammonemia. Dye-binding/high-resolution thermal denaturation (DB/HRTD) chemistry and the new high throughput LightScanner
TM 
instrument were used to scan the OTC gene in 20 OTC deﬁcient patients. Primers amplify the coding regions and a minimum of 12 bases of donor/acceptor splice site sequence. A single PCR product was used to amplify each of the 10 exons in a 96-well microtiter plate. A common ampliﬁcation protocol is employed. OTC is X-linked, thus specimens from males were co-ampliﬁed with a known wild-type male control to force heteroduplex formation. Fragments ranged from 146-266 bp. The saturating dye LCGreen
TM Plus was included 
in the PCR reaction. Post-PCR, the 96-well plate was transferred to the LightScanner for thermal denaturation. Fluorescent signal change was monitored during thermal denaturation generating a unique melting proﬁle for each sample. Melting proﬁles were compared using automated analysis software. Samples with deviant proﬁles were recovered for DNA sequencing to characterize the causative nucleotide change. Nineteen mutations (13 reported, 5 novel) were identiﬁed. Known mutations: R23X, K46delA, IVS3+1G>A, R92X, R129H, N161S, A140P, N199S, IVS8+1G>T, C303G, R320X, V339L, and T343K. Novel mutations: R26K, L57Q, A217E, Q235H, E239G, and W265X. Rapid evaluation of OTC using DB/HRTD can speed diagnosis of OTC deﬁciency in affected patients.
P0645. Revised structure of human GLI2  gene reveals existence 
of the repressor domain and a novel mechanism for activator 
generation
P. Kogerman1,2, M. Speek1, O. Njunkova1,2, I. Pata2, E. Valdre2,3;  
1Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia, 2National Institute of Chemi -
cal Physics and Biophysics, Tallinn, Estonia, 3East Tallinn Central Hospital, 
Tallinn, Estonia.
Mammalian Gli proteins are important transcription factors involved in Sonic hedgehog signal transduction pathway. Because of the association of Gli2 with mammalian development and with human disease, we have studied the structure and expression of human 
GLI2 gene. We show that human GLI2 contains a hitherto unknown 
repressor domain encoded by exons 3-6 which is well conserved among vertebrates. 
GLI2 has two alternative 5’ noncoding exons, 
1a and 1b. Additionally, in ovary and testis we detected two novel alternative splice forms of 
GLI2 generated by either skipping of exon 
3, or exons 4 and 5. These two variants display different characteristics in the GLI-dependent transactivation assay. Our results suggest that in addition to proteolytic processing, alternative splicing may be another important regulatory mechanism for the synthesis of human GLI2 
protein variants with or without repressor and activator properties.
P0646. Molecular genotyping of CYP21 gene in Slovak patients 
with congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase 
deﬁciency.
R. Sepsiova1, Z. Pribilincova2, R. Behulova3;  
1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 22nd 
Pediatric Clinic, Children`s University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Centre of 
Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase deﬁciency 
is one of the most common inherited metabolic diseases. Enzyme 21-hydroxylase plays important role in the steroid biosynthesis of cortisol and aldosterone in adrenal cortex. Enzyme deﬁciency is caused by the defects in 21-hydroxylase gene (CYP21). About 90% of affected alleles are generated through non-homologic recombination with adjacent pseudogene CYP21P. We performed the ﬁrst molecular-genetic analysis of 45 Slovak patients (88 unrelated chromosomes) to detect the mutations in CYP21 gene using PCR, allele-speciﬁc PCR, enzyme digestion and direct sequencing. Among 45 patients, 38 were diagnosed as the salt-wasting type, 4 as the simple virilizing and 3 as the nonclassical type. Genotyping analysis of 87 affected alleles revealed I2splice mutation to be the most frequent (43,7%) in our group of patients. Eighteen of 87 alleles (20,7%) carried large deletions and large gene conversions were found in 11,5% of affected alleles. Point mutations Ile173Asn, Leu308insT, Val282Leu, Gln319STOP and Arg357Trp were present Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics220
rarely, with the frequency 5,7%, 4,6%, 3,4%, 1,1% and 1,1% respectively. 
Two alleles carried combination of 2 mutations: I2splice+Val282Leu and Leu308insT+Gln319STOP. Genotype of 2 of 45 patients did not reﬂect the expected phenotype. PCR analysis was not able to detect any mutation in 5 affected alleles. Subsequent sequencing analysis of two of them revealed no sequence changes in comparison with reference CYP21 sequence. Further analysis is performed to detect potential 
mutation of the 3 remaining alleles.
P0647. Comprehensive alpha- and beta-thalassemia genotyping 
by means of reverse-hybridization teststrips
H. Pühringer1, H. Najmabadi2, E. Baysal3, W. Krugluger4, H. Y. Law5, V. Vip -
rakasit6, C. Oberkanins1;  
1ViennaLab Labordiagnostika GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Genetics Research 
Center, Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences University, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 3Genetics Department, Al Wasl Hospital, Dubai, United Arab 
Emirates, 4Dept. Clinical Chemistry, Municipal Hospital Rudolfstiftung, Vienna, 
Austria, 5Genetics Service, KK Women's and Children's Hospital, Singapore, 
Singapore, 6Dept. Paediatrics, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 
Thailand.
Alpha- and beta-thalassemia (thal) are among the most common inherited diseases throughout Southeast Asia, India, the Middle East, parts of Africa and the Mediterranean area. Mutations in the beta-globin gene, or in one or both of the two alpha-globin genes, are leading to structural abnormalities (e.g. sickle cell anemia) or to haemoglobin imbalance due to the reduced synthesis or complete absence of the respective globin chains. Unlike the prevalence of point mutations in beta-thal, the majority of alpha-thal alleles are derived from single or 
double gene deletions.We have developed reverse-hybridization assays (StripAssays) for the rapid and comprehensive genotyping of alpha- and beta-thalassemia. The tests are based on multiplex DNA ampliﬁcation (including gap-PCR) and hybridization to teststrips presenting a parallel array of allele-speciﬁc oligonucleotide probes for each variant.The entire procedure from blood sampling to the identiﬁcation of mutations requires less than 6 hours, and hybridization/detection may be carried out manually or essentially automated using existing instrumentation. The tests are simple and convenient, and require very small amounts of samples, which is of particular importance for prenatal diagnosis. Although the spectrum of alpha- and beta-thal mutations is known to be highly population-speciﬁc, the broad range of variants covered by the StripAssays should make them globally useful 
diagnostic tools. (oberkanins@viennalab.co.at)
P0648. Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) - Basal 
Genetic Aspects
M. Gazdikova, A. Boday, P. Goetz;  
Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd School of Medical, Charles Uni -
versity, Prague, Czech Republic.
Attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder is a clinical disorder characterized 
by an inattentiveness, impulsivity and hyperactivity. The occurrence of this disorder alters between 3 and 6% of the children population afﬂicted 
with boys predominating over girls at a ratio of 3:1 or more.
At present, the existence of more than thirty genes of the dopaminergic, noradrenergic, serotoninergic and GABAergic systems is described which may take part in the development of the hyperkinetic disorder. In these genes, polymorphisms occur frequently that may affect function 
of gene products or modify gene expression.We investigated the association between ADHD and the polymorphisms in the genes of the dopamine receptors (DRD2, DRD3, DRD4 and DRD5), dopamine transporter (DAT1) and dopamin-ß-hydroxylase (DBH) involved in metabolism of dopamine and serotonin transporter (5-HTT). We examined the occurrence of the risk alleles in a group of 83 children with ADHD from Czech population at the age of 3 to 12 years and 92 controls. Also we assess the relationship between the presence of these alleles and the development and relevance of the 
hyperkinetic disorder and of comorbide psychiatric diseases.Preliminary results suggest association between A1 allele of the TaqA1 polymorphism (DRD2) and ADHD in our study cohort. Homozygous individuals for this risk allele were more frequent in the patients than in the controls. In the other genes, risk alleles were presented at absolute majority in the group of ADHD children.P0649. FBN1 mutation screening in infants and the importance 
of a family mutation database
P. Comeglio , G. Arno, A. H. Child;  
St. George's Hospital Medical School, London, United Kingdom.
Mutations in the FBN1 gene have been characterised at the molecular 
level in patients affected by Marfan syndrome and Marfan-related disorders. Starting with genomic DNA extracted from peripheral blood, we analysed the FBN1 gene using PCR, SSCP and/or dHPLC analysis, and automatic sequencing of abnormal bands/peaks. Accurate molecular diagnosis is useful in long-term prognosis, genetic 
counselling and preventive healthcare.We analysed a consecutive series of 451 patients, of which 18 were infants, and our results are comparable with those reported by other groups. Molecular diagnosis is especially useful for early diagnosis 
when the clinical symptoms are not yet evident.A total of 210 relatives (of which 29 were infants) of 82 patients for whom a mutation had been identiﬁed, here or at another facility, were tested for the presence of that particular mutation. Prenatal and postnatal screening and tests in adults are very simple and straightforward, underlining the importance of knowing in advance the location of the putative mutation. The identiﬁcation of a mutation allows for timely preventive management of mutation carriers and reassurance for unaffected family members.Prenatal molecular diagnosis is carried out via chorionic villus biopsy or amniocentesis. After counselling, it is the patient's decision to consider termination when the mutation is clearly causative. A viable alternative is postnatal buccal swab diagnosis, which permits suitable treatment 
early in life if the mutation is present.
P0650. Reduced cajal body number in a patient with 
happloinsufﬁcency for COIL
E. L. Engenheiro1, T. Carvalho2, I. Marques Carreira3, L. Ramos4, V. 
Kalscheuer5, Z. Tumer1, M. Carmo-Fonseca2, N. Tommerup1;  
1The Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Copenha -
gen, Denmark, 2Instituto de Medicina Molecular da Faculdade de Medicina de 
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Servico de Citogenética da Faculdade de Medicina 
da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Hospital Pediátrico de Co -
imbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 5Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, 
Germany.
Here we report a one-way translocation t(11;17)(p15.15;q23.2)del(1
7)(q23.2)mat in a proband and mother with developmental delay and dysmorphic features, both happloinsufﬁcient for COIL. COIL encodes for p80 coilin, the molecular marker of the Cajal Bodies (CBs), which are subnuclear domains that contain a wide variety of components, including factors involved in splicing, pre-rRNA processing, histone pre mRNA 3´ maturation as well as transcription factors. The nuclear coiled body is located in the interchromatin space between the nucleolus and the nucleus. CBs have recently been implicated in the assembly and/or modiﬁcation of the RNA-processing machinery.The breakpoint on chromosome 17 was shown by Fluorescence In Situ Hybridisation (FISH) using bacterial artiﬁcial chromosomes (BACs) to include a deletion of ~1Mb, which includes COIL. The CBs of LBV transformed cell lines from the 2 translocation carriers were immunolabeled with anti-coilin antibodies and antibodies that recognise a CB U2 snurp speciﬁc protein. Both happloinsuﬁcient cell lines presented CBs in only ~2% of the cells, as opposed to the control cell line, which presented ~20%. A mouse knockout has shown that full-length coilin is essential for proper formation and/or maintenance of CBs and recruitment of snRNP and SMN complex proteins to CBs (Tucker et al. 2001). If CBs, key organelles involved in RNA processing in general, are reduced in haploinsufﬁent patients for COIL, and main molecules necessary for RNA processing are thus absent or reduced, this may lead to alterations in splicing and RNA transcription with 
potential phenotypic consequences.
P0651. MLC1: a novel protein in distal astroglial processes
P. K. I. Boor1, K. de Groot1, Q. Waisﬁsz1, W. Kamphorst1, C. B. M. Oudejans1, 
J. M. Powers2, J. C. Pronk1, G. C. Scheper1, M. S. van der Knaap1;  
1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2University of 
Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, United States.
Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts (MLC) is a progressive cerebral white matter disease in children. The disease is Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics221
histopathologically characterized by myelin splitting and intramyelinic 
vacuole formation. We have shown that the disease can be caused by mutations in the gene 
MLC1. Missense and splice site mutations, 
as well as various kinds of deletions have now been found in this gene. Furthermore, in some MLC patients without mutations in the intron-exion bouderies or exons the expression of the MLC1 mRNA is reduced, as shown by quantitative RT-PCR suggesting mutations in regulatory elements outside the MLC1 open reading frame. So far, there does not appear to be a correlation between the geno and 
phenotype. MLC1 encodes a novel protein, with a putative transport 
function, which is mainly expressed in brain and leukocytes. MLC1 is a plasma membrane protein, which contains an even number of transmembrane domains. MLC1 is predominantly expressed in distal astrocytic processes in perivascular, subependymal and subpial regions. In gliotic tissue the expression of MLC1 is upregulated. The localization suggests a role for MLC1 in a transport process across the blood-brain and blood-CSF barrier. Elucidation of the function of MLC1 will contribute to a better understanding of not only the pathophysiology of the disease, but also of the role of astrocytes in normal brain tissue. Our recent work is aimed at characterization of the possible transport function. Since there is evidence for a second gene involved in MLC, 
we have started a genome wide scan.
P0652. Epidemiology of Huntington´s disease in Spain from the 
experience of symptomatic genetic testing
M. A. Ramos-Arroyo , A. Valiente, S. Moreno-Laguna, A. Pérez-Juana, M. 
Artigas-López, B. Hernández-Charro;  
Servicio de Genética. Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona, Spain.
Objectives: DNA molecular testing for Huntington´s disease (HD) allows us to identify cases with atypical symptoms and/or absence of family history. The aim of this study is to provide information on the epidemiology of HD from the experience of nine years of direct 
testing.Patients and methods: Determination of the CAG repeats of the IT15 gene was performed in 317 patients by PCR analysis. In all cases, demographic, clinical and family history were carefully reviewed. The incidence of HD was calculated on the bases of the number of clinically symptomatic cases newly diagnosed by genetic testing per million inhabitants and per year.
Results: HD diagnosis (CAG repeat length ≥36) was conﬁrmed in 52% of all symptomatic cases. Of them, 76 (45.8%) referred a positive family history and in 21 cases (12.7%) family history was negative. New mutation events were genetically proven in three families and highly suspected in another, estimating that the minimum new mutation rate for HD in our population is over 4% with a potential mutation rate of 8%. More than 16% of all HD cases had late onset (>59 years). The incidence rate for the Autonomous Communities of Navarra and the Basque Country, based on the number of newly diagnosed cases by genetic testing, was 4.7 per million per year.
Conclusions : The incidence and mutation rates of the HD seem in 
our population is two to three times higher than previously reported for other European countries. Late onset of symptoms may be more 
frequent than previously estimated
P0653. A novel Sod1  mutation in a patient with Brachial 
Amyotrophic Diplegia
F. L. Conforti1, P. Valentino2, T. Sprovieri1, R. Mazzei1, A. Patitucci1, A. Maga -
riello1, R. Nisticò2, D. Pirritano2, A. L. Gabriele1, C. Ungaro1, A. Clodomiro2, G. 
Peluso1, M. Zappia2, M. Muglia1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, 
University “Magna Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy.
Over 100 mutations have been described spreading through the entire 
Sod1 coding region, but also in the intronic and regulatory regions. This gene, located on chromosome 21q22, is implicated in the autosomal dominant form with late onset of the Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, ALS. Until now, all the 
Sod1 mutations reported are associated to this 
pathological phenotype. In this study we describe for the ﬁrst time a new 
Sod1 mutation in a patient with Brachial Amyotrophic Diplegia (BAD). The patient was a 77-year-old man with a 5-month history of severe, bilateral arm weakness and wasting. Family history was unremarkable for neurological disorders. Neurological examination showed a peculiar posture of the “man-in-the-barrel”. There was severe weakness and atrophy of both upper limb muscles, especially of shoulder girdles (MRC<3/5). A wide screening was performed to exclude other causes of “man-in-the barrel syndrome”. Molecular analysis of the survival motor neuron gene and X-linked spinobulbar muscular atrophy was negative. Genetic investigation of the ﬁve exons of the 
Sod1 gene 
by DHPLC and direct sequencing of the PCR products, showed a variant proﬁle of exon 4 caused by a heterozygous T→C substitution at position 1126 of the gene (Leu106Pro). This mutation was not found in more than 150 control subjects from southern Italy. In conclusion, Sod1 mutations have been actually described in a small percentage of apparently sporadic cases of ALS and, our patient is the ﬁrst case of 
sporadic lower motoneuron disease with a mutation in the  sod1  gene.
P0654. Mutations of the PKD1 and PKD2 genes in families with 
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
J. Stekrova1, J. Reiterova2, J. Zidovska1, M. Merta2, M. Kohoutova1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Depart -
ment of Nephrology,Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most common hereditary renal disease. The disease is caused by mutations of PKD1 (affecting roughly 85 % of ADPKD patients) and PKD2 (14 % of ADPKD patients) genes, though in several ADPKD families the 
PKD1 and/or PKD2 linkage was not found.PKD1 locus (MIM 601313) was linked to the short arm of chromosome 16, at 16p13.3 and so far 237 different germline mutations have been reported. PKD2 locus (MIM 173910) was localized to 4q13-23 and 61 different germline mutations were identiﬁed. Patients with PKD 2 mutation have milder clinical course (later onset of the disease and its 
complication) in comparison with PKD1 patients.>The direct detection of mutations in the non-duplicated region of the PKD1 gene was performed in 78 nonrelated individuals. We detected ten mutations/polymorphisms in 32 families/individuals; 9 mutations/polymorphisms unique. We identiﬁed 2 nonsense mutations, 5 missense mutations/polymorphisms and 4 mutations/polymorphisms 
in splice site.PKD2 mutation was performed in 121 nonrelated individuals. We detected twenty ﬁve mutations ; 10 mutations unique for Czech population. We identiﬁed the nonsense mutations in 9 patients, the 
frameshifting mutations in 13 patients and 3 missense mutations.<br /Establishment of localisation and type of mutations and their genotype - phenotype correlation in ADPKD families will improve DNA diagnosis and could help to assess the clinical prognosis of ADPKD patientsSupported by the grant projects IGA MZ CR NE/7633-3
P0655. Different mechanisms preclude mutant CLDN14 proteins 
to form tight junctions in vitro.
M. Wattenhofer1, A. Reymond1,2, V. Falciola1, A. Charollais1, D. Caille1, R. Lyle1, 
X. Estivill3, M. B. Petersen4, P. Meda1, S. E. Antonarakis1;  
1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Center for Inte -
grative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Genes and 
Disease Program, Center de Regulació Genòmica, Barcelona, Spain, 4Depart -
ment of Genetics, Institute of Child Health, Athens, Greece.
Mutations in claudin 14 (CLDN14) cause non-syndromic DFNB29 deafness in humans. The analysis of a murine model indicated that this phenotype is associated with degeneration of hair cells, possibly due to cation overload. However, the mechanism linking these alterations to CLDN14 mutations is unknown. To investigate this mechanism, we compared the ability of wild type and missense mutant CLDN14 to form tight junctions. Ectopic expression in LM cells of wild type CLDN14 protein induced the formation of tight junctions, while both the c.254T>A (p.V85D) mutant, previously identiﬁed in a Pakistani family, and the c.301 G>A (p.G101R) mutant, identiﬁed in this study through the screen of 183 Spanish and Greek patients affected with sporadic non-syndromic deafness, failed to form such junctions. However, the two mutant proteins differed in their ability to localize at the plasma membrane. We further identiﬁed hitherto undescribed exons of CLDN14 that are utilized in alternative spliced transcripts. We demonstrated that different mutations of CLDN14 impaired by different mechanisms the ability of the protein to form tight junctions. Our results indicate that the ability of CLDN14 to be recruited to these junctions is 
crucial for the hearing process.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics222
P0656. 769G→A Mutation in INHα1 and CGG - Repeats in FMR1 
genes pilot testing in Ukraine
G. Livshits , N. Hrischenko, S. Kravchenko;  
Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics (National Academy of Sciences of 
Ukraine), Kiev, Ukraine.
Premature ovarian failure (POF) is characterized by loss of ovarian 
function before the age of 40 years. It occurs in 1% of all women, and in 0,1 % of women under age 30 years. The inhibin, is a potential candidate for POF due to its role in the negative feedback control of FSH, which has a pivotal role in the recruitment and development of ovarian follicles during folliculogenesis. The functional mutation in any of the inhibin genes would lead to a decrease in the amount of bioactive inhibin and as a result to increase in the concentrations of FSH and hence result in POF. As well it have been shown that fragile X permutations to occur more frequently in women with POF than in the general population The frequency of 769G→A mutation in INHα1 among women population (n=61) was established as 5,6%. The CGG - repeats number in FMR1 gene analyses in group of 215 women (oocytes donors) revealed that the frequency of persons with high risk alleles (more 42 copies) is 2,3%. The results of our research can be the background for genetic testing of mutations in INHα1 and FMR1 genes among the women of reproductive age with the purpose of POF prognosis and/or prevention the birth of children with fragile X 
syndrome.
P0657. Informativity of FMF molecular diagnostics
T. F. Sarkisian, H. Ajrapetyan, G. Shahsuvaryan, A. Sarkissian;  
Center of Medical Genetics, Yerevan, Armenia.
Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF, MIM 249100) is recessively inherited and widely spread in Armenian population. FMF is an autoinﬂammatory disorder characterized by self-limited recurrent episodes of fever and serosal inﬂammation, caused by mutations in the MEFV gene, mapped on 16p13.3 locus. We have demonstrated the correlation between spectrum of MEFV mutations and clinical severity of the disease, including development of renal amyloidosis. In collaboration with Prof. Amselem and Dr.Cazeneuve (Hospital Henri Mondor, France) the complete screening of MEFV gene in patients with a clinical diagnosis of FMF (according to established criteria) identiﬁed a few patients without mutated alleles depending on the ethnic background. These results revealed the FMF-like syndromes in 
some cases without MEFV mutations.Colchicine largely prevents the development of renal amyloidosis in FMF, but once the latter is established the effect of colchicines remains controversial. The homozygous genotype M694V/M694V (10 exon) is associated with a severe phenotype of FMF. We demonstrated that the genotype might predict response to colchicine given to children with renal amyloidosis. FMF patients homozygous for M694V mutation not only present a more severe phenotype but also show a limited response to colchicine at the nephrotic stage of renal amyloidosis. In contrast, FMF patients with other genotypes still have a good chance to enter remission of the nephritic syndrome and to maintain renal 
function.In conclusion, our investigations on more than 5000 persons since 1997 conﬁrm the informativity of screening of MEFV mutations for prevention, treatment and prognosis of the development of FMF 
complications.
P0658. Predominance of W24X and absence of 35delG mutations 
in the Baloochi and Sistani deaf population of Iran: a different 
population
A. Naghavi1,2, C. Nishimura3, K. Kahrizi1, Y. Riazalhosseini1,2, H. Suraki Aliaba -
di4, S. Sheykhani4, N. Mahdieh1, R. J. H. Smith3, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular-Cellular Biology Depart -
ment, Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolar -
yngology Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of 
Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States, 4Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahe -
dan, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Hereditary hearing impairment is a heterogeneous disability showing different patterns of inheritance and involving a multitude of different genes. Mutations in the GJB2 gene, especially the 35delG mutation, have been established as a major cause of inherited and sporadic non-syndromic deafness in various ethnic groups. Because population-speciﬁc differences are relatively common, in this study we sought to determine the prevalence and spectrum of GJB2 mutations in two isolated ethnic groups: the Baloochi and the Sistani populations of southeastern Iran. Consanguinity and assortative mating are very common in these populations. We analyzed one hundred Baloochi and Sistani families suffering from autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing impairment. We performed mutation screening of GJB2 using an allele-speciﬁc PCR assay to detect the 35delG mutation. The negative or heterozygous cases for the 35delG mutation were screened by denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and sequencing analysis. Surprisingly, we did not ﬁnd the 35delG mutation, the most common GJB2 mutation in the white population and in other parts of Iran, in any of the Baloochi or Sistani patients. We identiﬁed GJB2 mutant alleles in 18 chromosomes (9%) including R127H, K122I, W24X, 167delT and M93I. Among them, W24X had the highest frequency (10 chromosomes). Based on these data, the hot-spot mutations in the GJB2 gene in the Baloochi and Sistani population with non-syndromic hearing loss may be different from other ethnic groups in Iran. In addition, these results further indicate the existence of an ethnic bias in the distribution of GJB2 mutations in western Asia.
P0659. Spectrum of  GJB2 mutations in patients with autosomal 
recessive non-syndromic deafness in Yazd province of Iran
M. Moghanibashi1, M. Seifati2, H. Khodaie2, M. Mirab2, K. Kahrizi1, Y. Riazal -
hossein1, A. Dehghani2, N. Bazazzadegan1, M. Abhaji2, M. K. Javan1, R. J. H. 
Smith3, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci -
ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetics Research Center of Meibod, 
Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laborato -
ries, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States.
Hearing loss is the most common sensory defect in humans, affecting 1 of 1000 neonates, with over half of these cases predicted to be hereditary in nature. Most hereditary hearing loss is inherited in a recessive fashion. Mutations in GJB2, encoding connexin26 subunit Beta 2, are major cause of inherited deafness in the most populations. We studied 95 probands from 95 families with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) in Yazd Province, central Iran. Mutations Screening of GJB2 was performed by Ampliﬁcation Refractory Mutation System (ARMS)-PCR to detect 35delG mutation. All samples excluding 35delG homozygotes were analyzed by DHPLC and sequencing. The frequency of GJB2-related deafness was found to be 7.4% in this population. We identiﬁed 5 mutations (35delG, 312del14, 314del14, R127H and 167delT) and three polymorphisms (V153I, V27I and E114G) in this study. Interestingly, 312del14, rather than 35delG, was the most common mutation found. Nine alleles (56.25% of GJB2 mutant alleles) carried the 312del14 mutation. In descending frequency, other common mutations were 35delG, 314del14, R127H and 167delT. The frequency of GJB2 mutant alleles was 9.5 % in this population. We conclude that: 1) 312del14 is common deafness causing GJB2 mutation in Yazd province; 2) this mutation may result from a founder effect; 3) The frequency of GJB2 mutations is very low in comparison to other parts of Iran. Further studies are needed to ﬁnd other genes that have a causal role in ARNSHL in this 
population.
P0660. Comparison of different methods for the detection of 
PMP22 gene deletions and duplications
S. Stangler Herodez, B. Zagradisnik, A. Erjavec- Skerget, A. Zagorac, N. Ko -
kalj-Vokač;  
General Hospital Maribor, SI-2000 Maribor, Slovenia.
By a dosage mechanism, overexpression of a duplicated PMP22 gene results in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A (CMT1A) whereas underexpression because of PMP22 gene deletion causes hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP). Several techniques can be used for molecular diagnosis of CMT1A and HNPP each having advantages and drawbacks. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA) is a method to detect gene dosage differences, by which not sample nucleic acids but probes added to the samples are ampliﬁed and quantiﬁed. We evaluated applicability of MLPA for the detection of the speciﬁc 1.5 Mb duplication/deletion present in CMT1A/HNPP by comparing its results with those from interphase Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics223
ﬂuorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH).
The sample included 70 patients referred with diagnoses of CMT1A or HNPP. Each patient was previously analysed with FISH using clone RP5-1005H15 (M. Rocchi) and with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay that detects a duplication speciﬁc recombination fragment. The MLPA was performed according to manufacturer's instructions.A total of 9 duplications and 19 deletions were detected. There was 100% concordance between FISH and MLPA results. A single duplication was missed by the PCR assay which is in accordance with 
lower sensitivity of the PCR method.The MLPA assay allows accurate detection of deletions/duplications of the gene PMP22. Therefore it should become an important method for molecular diagnosis of CMT1A/HNPP. The MLPA approach`s primary advantages are the relative simplicity and speed although in some cases (i.e. mosaic conditions) FISH should remain the prefered 
diagnostic method.
P0661. Evidence for a founder effect of a deletion mutation 
associated with Crigler-Najjar Syndrome types I and II in Italian 
population
M. d'Apolito1, M. Carella2, V. Servedio1, N. Maiorano1, C. Lasalandra1, F. Tor -
ricelli3, G. Bortone2, L. Boschetto4, A. Iolascon4,1;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy , 2Medical 
Genetics, CSS-IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 3Cytogenetics and Genet -
ics Unit , Azienda Ospedaliera Careggi, Firenze, Italy, 4Medical Genetics, Dpt. 
of Biochemistry and Medical Biotechnologies, University Federico II – CEINGE, 
Naples, Italy.
Crigler-Najjar syndrome types I and II (CN1 and CN2; MIM# 218800 
and 606785) are autosomal recessive conditions, characterized by 
non-hemolytic unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia. CN1 is the most 
severe form, associated with the absence of hepatic bilirubin-uridined
iphosphoglucuronate glucuronosyltransferase (UGT1A1) activity. CN2 
presents intermediate levels of hyperbilirubinaemia as a result of an 
incomplete deﬁciency of hepatic UGT1A1 activity. Here, we present 
the mutational analysis of UGT1A1 gene in a cohort of 32 unrelated 
patients, originating from different Italian regions. The previously reported mutation c. 877T>A + 878_890del resulted segregating in ﬁve apparently unrelated Italian pedigrees. In addition a c. 878_890del was also identiﬁed in three patients. The c. 877T>A + 878_890del is likely to be prevalent in our CN1 syndrome patients (31%, 10/32 CN1 chromosomes), although we found heterozygous c.878_890del in three CN-2 subjects (in one case associated with a substitution 877T>A). This result suggests that the mutation c. 877T>A + 878_890del might be inherited from a common ancestor. We also hypothesized that the c.878_890del might be originated from the same mechanism. To test this hypothesis, we genotyped available members of the eight families for markers D2S2344, D2S206, D2S2348, D2S2205, D2S336, D2S2202 and D2S338. In addition, a set of single nucleotide polymorphism (rs4399719, rs4663971, rs4148328, rs6719561) were 
been tested in all patients.Both mutations occurred on a shared haplotype which included D2S2348 and rs6719561 markers. The discovery of possible founder mutations has signiﬁcant clinical applications, as a directed search for mutations is likely to account for the majority of carriers in the 
population.
P0662. A rapid molecular genetic test for the diagnosis of 
Klinefelter syndrome
F. H. Fodor , B. Csókay, E. Kámory, Z. Holló;  
Laborigo Molecular Diagnostics, Budapest, Hungary.
Klinefelter syndrome is the most common genetic cause of male infertility. Cytogenetic evaluation of metaphase chromosomes is in itself time-consuming, and the turnaround time is often very long. We have developed a reliable molecular genetic method to identify the presence of any extra X chromosomes, which can be completed in 3 
working days.DNA samples are isolated from blood and subjected to ﬂuorescent 5-plex PCR for the ampliﬁcation of the following markers: 
amelogenin , 
which is present in both sex chromosomes in a diallelic form; X22, 
a highly polymorphic pentanucleotide STR on the pseudoautosomal region of X and Y; 
DXS6803  and DXS6809 , two polymorphic X-speciﬁc 
tetranucleotide STRs; SY134, a Y-speciﬁc marker. The PCR products are analyzed on an ABI 310 genetic analyzer. The conveniently designed product lengths and the two labeling dyes allow overlap-free marker identiﬁcation. Automated marker designation and peak size 
labeling is carried out by a home-designed Genotyper template.The presence of an extra X chromosome is diagnosed by either a supernumerary peak or an increased peak area based on criteria we developed. The quantitative feature of the test also allows the recognition of an identical extra X chromosome (error at meiosis II). Like with cytogenetic analysis, mosaic cases may not always test positive. In the past two years we identiﬁed 10 Klinefelter syndrome cases, all of which were conﬁrmed by cytogenetic analysis.While cytogenetics remains the standard method for the diagnosis of Klinefelter syndrome, our method offers rapid diagnosis on which 
hormonal and reproductive therapy can be based.
P0663. AP-1 and NF-kappaB activation and pro-inﬂammatory 
gene expression in foetus tracheal CF cells.
C. Verhaeghe, C. Oury, V. M. Bours ;  
University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.
AIMS: Cystic ﬁbrosis is a common autosomal recessive disorder due to a mutation in the cftr gene, coding for a chloride channel. The CFTR channel dysfunction is associated with chronic airway obstruction, infection and inﬂammation. Since inﬂammation is present before and even in the absence of pathogens, the elucidation of the inﬂammatory molecular mechanism could lead to a strategy to prevent ﬁbrosis in 
CF patients.METHODS: We analyzed tracheal epithelial cells isolated from cystic ﬁbrosis (CFT-2) and normal (NT-1) human fetuses for transcription factor activation. We also performed a micro-array gene analysis (U133 Plus arrays, Affymetrix).RESULTS: We demonstrated by mobility shift that CF cells display high NF-kappaB and AP-1 activities compared to the control cell line. Increased NF-kappaB activity was linked to a high IKK activity and a short IkB-a half life. The gene expression analysis conﬁrmed that many pro-inﬂammatory genes are expressed at higher levels in CFT-2 cells than in NT-1 cells. These gene code for cytokines, chemokines and inﬂammation linked enzymes.CONCLUSION: Our data then conﬁrm that pro-inﬂammatory mechanisms are activated in CF tracheal cells independently of any 
infection or stress.
P0664. Quantitative analysis of TSPY gene in Turner syndrome 
patients
R. Vrtel1, R. Vodička1, A. R. Singh1, L. Dusek2, D. Svabova3, A. Santava1, J. 
Santavy1;  
1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Repub -
lic, 2CBA Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3University Hospital and 
Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Republic.
The TSPY gene exists in multiple copies in several clusters, with assumed splicing variability. The role of the 
TSPY gene is not 
fully understood yet, bit it is supposed to be involved in directing spermatogonia into meiosis. Abnormal expression of 
TSPY was 
reported in gonadoblastomas. Our project analysed the percentage 
of TSPY loci in different tissues of Turner syndrome patients. DNA 
from 135 peripheral blood samples, from seven ovarian and tumour samples embedded in parafﬁn (4 resp. 3), and two RNA specimens from dysgenetic 
TSPY-positive patients were collected. QF PCR of 
TSPY loci and positive controls were used for quantitation. Eleven out of 135 patients were positive for Y sequences with extreme range of mosaicism or number of 
TSPY gene copies. Four ovarian and tumour 
samples out of 7 were TSPY positive, with a range from 0.01 % to 6 %. 
Tests of two cDNA samples were weakly positive in comparison with negative control. The 
TSPY gene is a signiﬁcant candidate for GBY, 
indicating a possible role of TSPY in the multistage development of 
gonadoblastoma and dysgerminoma in the dysgenetic gonads of TS patients. Diagnostic analysis of Y sequences in TS patients should include the 
TSPY locus. For better understanding of gonadoblastoma 
tumour genesis more detailed speciﬁc study of the TSPY gene will be 
required. Supporting grant: Grant agency MH CR, NR/7821-3.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics224
P0665. Investigation of Interferon-Gamma Receptor-1 
Polymorphism in Iranian patients affected with Pulmonary 
Tuberculosis
M. Dehghan Manshadi1, M. M. Banoei1, B. Hooshiar1, M. Houshmand1, M. 
Mirsaeidi2, P. Tabarsi2, S. Zargari2;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB)-T ehran, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Research Institute of Tuberculosis 
and Lung Disease,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background: Tuberculosis is one of the most common infectious 
diseases in the world. Environmental and host genetic factors involve in 
susceptibility to infection disease such as tuberculosis. In recent years, genetically approach has been developed and it has been reported that some genes and their variants involve in this susceptibility. One of the interesting genes for investigator is IFN-γR1. Our studies were to determine susceptibility to tuberculosis with polymorphism of IFN-γR1 
gene.Material and Method: Study was prospective case-control. 54 
patients with smear positive tuberculosis have been chosen randomly. All of patients were chosen based on having Iranian nationality, age above 15 yrs and conﬁrmed smear positive pulmonary TB and all of healthy controls were matched in nationality and age with samples. DNA was extracted from whole blood and PCR- RFLP technique used to determine polymorphism at 395 codon of IFN-γR1 gene. Data were analyzed with SPSS version 11.
Results: Mean age of patients and control were 55 ±20 and 53 ± 13.5 
years respectively. Demographic characteristic had no difference within two groups. (P-Value >.05) one patient in case group had heterozygote 
mutation at IFN-γR1 gene . In control group there were no mutations.
Conclusion: Genetically susceptibility to TB is not in 395 colon of IFN-
γR1 in Iranian TB sample and polymorphism of this loci has occur in 2% of TB patients and 0.96% of total study population.
P0666. Methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase C677T mutation is 
more frequently observed in recurrent abortuses than Factor V 
Leiden and Prothrombin 20210 G/A mutations
B. F. Atac1, F. I. Sahin1, Z. Yilmaz1, E. B. Kilicdağ2, H. B. Zeyneloglu3;  
1Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and 
Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Baskent University Faculty of Medicine Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Adana, Turkey, 3Baskent University Faculty of 
Medicine Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ankara, Turkey.
Miscarriage is common in 25% of conceptions without an identiﬁable 
reason. Recurrent pregnancy losses have been investigated widely since two or more successive losses affect about 5% of women of reproductive age. Anatomical, chromosomal, endocrinological or immunological problems consist only a small percentage of pregnancy losses. In addition to these factors, thrombophilic predisposition may 
be one of the underlying causes of fetal losses.In the present study we have determined the prevalence of Factor V Leiden (FVL), Methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) C677T and Prothrombin (Prt) 20210 G/A mutations by PCR-RFLP method in DNA samples from 66 patients (aged between 22 and 43 years with two or more pregnancy looses) who applied to our routine diagnostic laboratory. Our preliminary results strongly indicate that heterozygous MTHFR C677T mutation occurred more often in patients with fetal losses (30 patients - 45.45%) while no difference in the prevalence of Factor V Leiden (6.06%) and Prothrombine 20210 G/A (6.06%) mutations were detected with respect to the results normal Turkish population. The high prevalence of mutated MTHFR genotypes in fetal losses may emphasize the potential protective role of periconceptional 
folic acid supplementation.
P0667. Some aspects of spermatogenesis and male infertility in 
Ukraine
O. Yasinskaya1, V. Zinchenko2, L. Livshits1;  
1Institute of Molecular Biology & Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine, 2“ISIDA-IVF” clinic, 
Kiev, Ukraine.
In about 50% of couples infertility is entirely due to male factors. In addition to chromosomal anomalies, microdeletions in the azoospermic factor region (AZF) in the long arm of the Y-chromosome have been detected in men with azoospermia or severe oligospermia. We have screened 160 men with azoospermia and oligospermia - patients of “ISIDA-IVF” clinic involved in ICSI (intracytoplasmic sperm injection) program. The samples were analysed for Y-chromosome microdeletions by multiplex PCR. For this investigation 13 primer pairs were used that are homologous to previously identiﬁed and mapped sequence tagged sites (STS). The STS primers tested on each sample were sY84, sY85 (AZFa); sY117; sY124, sY134, USP9Y (AZFb); sY141, sY153; sY240, sY146, sY254 (DAZ), sY255 (DAZ), sY158 (AZFc). SRY was used as an internal control of PCR reactions. The PCR products were analyzed on a 1.8% agarose gel. In seven of the 270 infertile men (2.6%) we found one deletion in AZFb and 6 deletions in AZFc (gene DAZ) regions - thus the majority are concentrated in the AZFc region. We conclude that: a) genes damage in the AZFb region results in blocks of last stage spermatogenesis; b) deletions in the AZFc region are critical for early stage spermatogenesis. The genetic consultation and preimplantation sex analysis were recommended for the patients where Y-chromosome deletions were found.
P0668. A novel mutation in the sodium-channel gene SCN1A in a 
patient with severe myoclonic epilepsy (SMEI)
F. Annesi1, S. Carrideo1, G. Incorpora2, A. Polizzi2, F. E. Rocca1, D. Civitelli1, I. 
C. Cirò Candiano1, P. Tarantino1, P. Spadafora1, E. V. De Marco1, G. Annesi1;  
1Inst of Neurol Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy , 
2Inst of Pediatrics, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
Severe myoclonic in infancy (SMEI) is a distinct epileptic syndrome with the following principal features: normal development before onset; seizures beginning during ﬁrst year of life in the form of generalized or unilateral febrile clonic seizures; secondary appearance of myoclonic seizures; and often partial seizures. SMEI is intractable and is associated with ataxia and mental decline. Recently, mutations were found in the gene (
SCN1A) encoding voltage-gated sodium channel 
alpha-subunit type I in patients with SMEI. Those mutations were heterozygous and de novo. Here we describe the clinical features 
and genetic study of a patient with SMEI from southern Italy. The patient is an 11 year old boy who was born in Sicily. Onset of seizures was between 2 and 5 years of age with unilateral clonic seizures or generalized clonic or tonic-clonic seizures. The convulsions were often induced by fever, atypical absences were observed and the seizures were resistant to therapy.Mutational analysis was performed on all coding exons and splice sites 
of SCN1A. We detected a novel heterozygous point mutation C3866T 
that resulted in a Thr1289Ile aminoacid substitution. This mutation was not observed in any of the 50 control individuals.The mutant residues Thr1289Ile is located in S4 transmenbrane segments of the sodium channel alpha-subunit. The S4 segments of voltage-gated channels contain multiple positively charged aminoacids that are known to have 
a role in channel gating.Supported by MIUR-FIRB “Inherited channelopathies: identiﬁcation of molecular markers and functional development of advanced diagnostic systems, and identiﬁcation of pharmacological targets”
P0669. Molecular analysis of the Hexa gene in Italian patients 
with Tay Sachs disease: Detection of thirteen novel mutant 
alleles
A. L. E. Montalvo1, M. Filocamo2, K. Vlahovicek3, A. Dardis1, S. Lualdi2, F. Corso -
lini2, B. Bembi1, M. G. Pittis1;  
1Unità di Malattie Metaboliche, IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Laboratorio 
Diagnosi Pre-Postnatale Malattie Metaboliche,I.R.C.C.S. G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy , 
3International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechology, Trieste, Italy.
Tay Sachs disease (TSD; MIM # 272800) is an autosomal recessive inherited lysosomal disorder, characterized by hexosaminidase A (Hex A) deﬁciency, that results from mutations in the 
HEXA gene which 
encodes the alpha subunit of the beta-N-acetylhexosaminidase A. We report the molecular characterization of the HEXA gene in 31 Italian 
patients, twenty-two with the classical infantile TSD form and nine patients with the late onset form (B1 Variant). Of the 29 different alleles identiﬁed, thirteen were due to fourteen novel mutation including two mutations being in-
cis on a new complex allele, missense/null 
mutations, deletions, a single base insertion and splicing mutations.The missense mutations p.W203G, p.A246W, p.Q374R resulted in drastic changes in highly conserved residues among the human, mouse and rat α-subunits of Hex A. The 3D- structural analysis conﬁrmed that 
all three mutations alter the substrate binding site.The clinical presentation of the patients studied at the diagnosis was Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics225
similar to what have been already reported in literature: hypotonia, 
seizures, delayed milestones, cherry-red spots and startle reactions. A clear genotype-phenotype correlation was observed in the B1 Variant group: all patients carried the known c.533G/A (p.R178H) mutation, conﬁrming its milder nature. It is interesting to note the contrast between the allelic homogeneity of the B1 Variant group (c.533G/A allele frequency: 75%) and the infantile TSD, in which almost all the mutations are private and have been detected in a single or few 
families.
P0670. Genetic analysis of three Serbian families with GEFS+
S. Carrideo, F. Annesi, D. Civitelli, F. E. Rocca, I. C. Cirò Candiano, E. V. De 
Marco, P. Tarantino, P. Spadafora, A. Gambardella, G. Annesi;  
Inst of Neurol Sciences,National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy .
Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) is a familial 
epilepsy syndrome tansmitted as an autosomal dominant trait with incomplete penetrance. GEFS+ is characterized by heterogeneous phenotypes with most individuals having benign childhood seizures disorders ranging from classical febrile seizures to febrile seizures plus where febrile seizures continue past 6 years of age or afebrile convulsions occur. GEFS+ is associated with mutations in SCN1A, SCN1B (genes encoding respectively the alpha 1 and beta 1 voltage-gated sodium channel subunits) and GABRG2 (gamma subunit of the 
GABAA receptor).
Here we aimed to study the role of SCN1A, SCN1B and GABRG2 in 3 Serbian families with GEFS+. The 26 exons of SCN1A, 5 exons of SCN1B and 9 exons of GABRG2 were individually ampliﬁed using primers based on intronic sequences. The puriﬁed PCR produtcts were directly sequenced and analyzed with an automatic sequencer. We analyzed the proband of each family and we identiﬁed polymorphisms but no mutations. These data suggest that SCN1A, SCN1B and GABRG2 genes are not involved in the aetiopathogenesis of GEFS+ in these families. In the meantime we recruited others member of the largest family and we are performing a genomewide genetic-linkage analysis to identify a novel GEFS+ locus in this family.Supported by MIUR-FIRB “Inherited channelopathies: identiﬁcation of molecular markers and functional development of advanced diagnostic systems, and identiﬁcation of pharmacological targets”
P0671. Mutational analysis of EPM2A and NHLRC1 genes in 
three patients suffering from Lafora progressive myoclonus 
epilepsy
D. Civitelli1, F. E. Rocca1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, G. Milana2, N. Cutuli2, E. V. De 
Marco1, F. Annesi1, P. Tarantino1, S. Carrideo1, G. Annesi1;  
1Inst of Neurol Sciences,National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy , 
2Laboratory of Mol Genet, Univ of Catania, Catania, Italy.
Lafora's progressive myoclonus epilepsy (LD) is an autosomal-recessive disorder caused by mutations in the 
EMP2A gene. An 
additional causative gene for Lafora’s disease was recently identiﬁed, 
termed NHLRC1  or EPM2B. It is a single-exon gene, encoding 
a putative E3 ubiquitin ligase (malin). In this study, we screened 
NHLRC1  in three patients with LD who did not carry mutations in 
EPM2A. Probands are three Sicilian patients who received a diagnosis of LD after a comprehensive clinical and laboratory investigation. In two of them, age at onset of LD was 14 years, in the remaining patient LD started at the age of 11 years. Sequence analysis of 
EPM2A  
did not reveal any pathogenic variant in all three patients. Then, we proceded to sequence the 
NHLRC1  gene. We sequenced the whole 
NHLRC1  exon, including non-coding sequences. In one patient we 
found a homozygous nonsense mutation (G199T, giving rise to a stop codon at aminoacid residue 67). The second patient was a compound heterozygote for two mutations (C205G causing the P69A substitution, and G838A resulting in the E280K change). The last patient carried the heterozygous E280K mutation and a known polymorphism (C332T leading to the P111L substitution). All the mutations except the latter polymorphism were not found in 100 control chromosomes. Regarding the last proband, the P111L change represents a very common polymorphism and we found the pathogenic E280K variation in a heterozygous state. Supported by Ministero della Sanità -“Genetica 
dell’Epilessia”P0672. DJ-1 Gene in late-onset recessive Parkinson's disease
P. Tarantino, F. Annesi, I. C. Cirò Candiano, F. E. Rocca, D. Civitelli, S. Car -
rideo, P. Spadafora, G. Annesi;  
Inst of Neurol Sciences,National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy .
Mutations in DJ-1 were described as a novel cause of early-onset 
parkinsonism. We analysed the DJ-1 gene in 23 subjects with late 
onset (after the age of 45 years) Parkinson’s disease (PD) screened from 18 families originating from Southern Italy with autosomal recessive PD (LORPD). These patients were evaluated previously for the presence of parkin mutations (PARK2) by a combination of gene dosage and sequencing and were found to be negative. The 18 families with LORPD were selected according to the following criteria: reported parkinsonism in two or more siblings; a mode of inheritance compatible with autosomal recessive transmission (affected siblings without affected parents); an age at onset of 45 years or older in all the affected siblings. The entire 
DJ-1 open reading frame was ampliﬁed 
from genomic DNA, and PCR products were directly sequenced by means of forward primers. We did not ﬁnd any pathogenic mutation in the 
DJ-1 gene in any patients with LORPD. We identiﬁed at codon 
98 (exon 5) a G/A heterozygous substitution in four patients; this change was conﬁrmed by Msp I restriction analysis, and was found in 10 out of 700 control chromosomes. Moreover we identiﬁed an 18 bp insertion/deletion variant in the promoter region of 
DJ-1 (g.168_
185del) in six patients; this variant was also found in 3 out of 600 control chromosomes. Our results indicate that mutations in 
DJ-1 are 
not a common cause of LORPD. Further studies using quantitative PCR are needed to exclude heterozygous exon rearrangements in 
subjects with LORPD.
P0673. Hematopoietic chimerism analysis after allogeneic 
peripheral stem cell transplantation in pediatric cases by using 
STR polymorphisms
E. Manguoglu1, S. Berker-Karauzum1, A. Kupesiz2, Z. Cetin1, G. Tezcan2, S. 
Yakut1, V. Hazar2, A. Yesilipek2, G. Luleci1;  
1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and 
Genetics, 07070, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, 
Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, 07070, Antalya, Turkey.
Allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is carried out in patients with malignant and non-malignant hematologic diseases. Recently, peripheral blood has increasingly been used as a stem cell source in children. In this study, PCR analysis of polymorphic short tandem repeats (STR) was applied to 20 sex matched donor and recipient pediatric cases, with beta-thalassemia (n=10), immunodeﬁciency (n=2), adrenoleukodystrophy (n=1), juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) (n=1), aplastic anemia (n=1), Fanconi aplastic anemia (n=1), osteopetrosis (n=1), acute myeloid leukemia (n=1), acute lymphoblastic leukemia (n=1), and non-hodgkin lymphoma (n=1). Analyses were performed at different time points after transplantation, with a total of 55 samples studied. Fifteen tetranucleotide repeat loci (CSF1PO, D2S1338, D3S1358, D5S818, D7S820, D8S1179, D13S317, D16S539, D18S51, D19S433, D21S11, FGA, TH01, TPOX, vWA) and Amelogenin were ampliﬁed by 
AmpFlSTR®IdentiﬁerTMPCR kit, and analyzed on an ABI PRISM®310 
Genetic Analyzer. Calculations were based on relative areas of donor and recipient peaks. Patients are evaluated according to the cytogenetic, molecular cytogenetic and molecular results and clinical ﬁndings. Of the 20 patients, complete chimerism in 9 cases (45%), partial chimerism in 9 cases (%45) and no chimerism in 2 cases (%10) was observed in an average follow up time of 11.3 months. Interestingly, in one JMML patient with complete chimerism, donor cell derived JMML developed. We conclude that after peripheral stem cell transplantation, STR based analysis of chimerism is an important tool in post-transplant hematopoietic chimerism quantiﬁcation, leading to early detection of graft failure, relapse, donor cell derived disease as 
well as minimal residual disease.
P0674. SOX9 gene dosage effect in 20 XX-SRY negative sex 
reversal patients
G. Queipo , N. Najera, S. Kofman;  
Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico.
The early developing gonads are sensitive to gene dosage, and threshold levels of expression exist to control entry into the male or Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics226
female pathway. The sex determining genes SRY and SOX9 are 
required to initiate and maintain the testicular development. SOX9 is the critical downstream target of SRY and is up-regulated speciﬁcally in the XY gonad shortly after the onset of SRY transcription. SOX9 haploinsufﬁency is associated with campomelic dysplasia and XY sex reversal (75%). A single case has been reported in a XX sex reversal patient due to a duplication of 17q23-24, containing SOX9. To evaluate the SOX9 gene dosage in testis determination we performed Q-PCR analysis using Taqman MGB probe and RNase P as internal control in 9 XX males and 11 XX true hermaphrodites (TH). All patients were SRY negative. The SOX9 gene dose was establish comparing the ΔC
T 
= (SOX9 CT - RNase P CT), ΔΔCT = (patient ΔCT - control ΔCT) and the 
2 -ΔΔCT formula. Preliminary results showed that 3 XX males and 4 TH 
had an heterozygous duplication of SOX9, while 1 XX males and 1 TH showed an homozygous duplication. This is the ﬁrst report in which gene dosage effect of SOX 9 was analyzed in XX - SRY negative sex reversal patients suggesting that SOX9 duplications could induce 
testis determination in the XX primordium.
P0675. Scanning for Association of Mitochondrial Haplogroups 
BM, J, K and M with Multiple Sclerosis: Interrelation between 
Haplogroup J and MS in Persian Patients
M. Houshmand1, M. Sanati1, A. Ardlan1, F. Babrzadeh1, M. Teimori1, M. va -
kilian1, M. Akuchekian1, D. Farhud2, J. Lotﬁ3;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Department of Human Genetics, Faculty of Health, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department 
of Neurology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Teh -
ran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background. Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is an immunological inﬂammatory disease of the Central Nervous System, chronically observed in young adults. On the basis of earlier studies, potential relatedness between MS and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations was postulated.Materials and Methods. 246 individuals were examined using PCR-RFLP, including 70 MS patients for mitochondrial haplogroups BM, J, K and M and 176, 149 and 70 normal controls for haplogroups BM and M, J and K respectively.
Results. Our analysis revealed a high proportion of haplogroup BM in MS patients (~26%) compared to normal controls (~13%) at p= 0.027. There was also a slightly signiﬁcant correlation found between MS patients and normal controls for haplogroup J (20.00% for patients vs 9.39% for controls at p= 0.049), while haplogroups M and K didn’t appear relevant in MS occurrence (2.85% and 2.27% respectively at p= 1.000 for haplogroup M and 12.85% and 7.14% respectively at p= 
0.399 for haplogroup K).
P0676. Study on Mediterranean Mutation as the Major Mutations 
in G6PD Polymorphic Variant Identiﬁed in the Three Provinces in 
South, East and South East of Iran 
M. Noori-Daloii1, S. Mohammad Ganji2, S. Soltanian3, S. Hejazi4, A. Youseﬁ4, 
S. Hiradfar5, A. Bani-hashemi5, E. Sanee Moghadam6, M. Sanati2;  
1University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2NIGEB, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Cellular and Molecular, Faculty 
of Science, Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of 
Biology, Faculty of Science, Researches and Sciences Campus, Islamic Azad 
University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Doctor Sheikh Hospital, Mashad, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 6IBGO, Zahedan, Islamic Republic of Iran.
G6PD enzyme catalyses the conversion of Glucose-6-phosphate to 6-
phosphogluconate, with production of NADPH and ribose -5-phosphate in the red blood cells in the pentose phosphate pathway. Its gene consists of 13 exons. G6PD deﬁciency is the most common human metabolic inborn error. Acute hemolytic anemia and Jaundice are the main clinical symptoms, triggered by infection or ingestion of Fava beans or oxidative drugs. Three predominant variants of G6PD called Mediterranean, Chatham and Cosenza have been evident in several countries including Iran. Molecular identiﬁcation of the most prevalent mutations in G6PD gene was carried out in 121males and females with G6PD deﬁciency from Khorasan, Sistan-Balouchestan and Hormozgan provinces in south, east and south east of Iran. DNA was extracted from blood samples and analyzed for known G6PD mutation by RFLP. Adapting this method revealed that Mediterranean mutation at nt 563(C-->T) is predominant in these areas (72.7%). This ﬁnding, which is the ﬁrst investigation in east and south east of Iran, indicates a higher prevalence of this mutation in these provinces compared to the Coastal provinces of Caspian Sea (75.4%) by which we reported earlier. We are now conducting further studies for identifying other mutations. The distribution of this G6PD variant is more similar to that found in an Italian population in comparison with other Middle Eastern countries. Although the origin of Iranian population is rather uncertain, the closer similarity of the mutation spectrum to Italian rather than middle eastern populations may indicate that these populations have 
a common ancestral origin.
P0677. Searching for mutations of Cx32 and MPZ genes in 
families with Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy from Tadjikistan
N. P. Babushkina, O. N. Odinokova, M. V. Golubenko;  
Institut of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
The purpose of the study was to search for mutations in the coding 
sequences of Cx32 (Xq13.1) and MPZ (1q21.3-23) genes, which 
cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) neuropathy, in a group of patients with CMT from Tadjikistan and their relatives. Tadjikistan is situated in South-East Asia at Pamir mountains; and the population of this region is ethnically isolated. We studied 35 patients from 23 families, in general 114 individuals. Analysis of 
Cx32 revealed nucleotide changes in ﬁve 
families. Sequencing revealed C to T substitution in the second part of coding exon which resulted in Arg142Trp change (loss of HpaII site). In four families the mutation was detected in hemizygote state in sick men, while sick women as well as asymptomatic female carriers were heterozygous. A silent mutation (C to T substitution in the third position of Asp169) was identiﬁed in the same fragment in two healthy sibs in a big family. In the ﬁfth family, single-nucleotide change G>A in the third part of coding exon was revealed, leading to change Arg219His (loss of AciI and Cac8I sites). In general, 21% of CMT-families in Tadjikistan have mutations in 
Cx32. In MPZ, sequencing of exon 5 in 5 families 
revealed a heterozygous silent change G>A in Gly200. In summary, we describe 2 different missense (1 in 4 families, 1 in one family) and 1 silent mutation in exon 2 of 
Cx32, and 1 silent mutation in exon 5 of 
MPZ in patients from Tadjikistan.
P0678. The Effect of ACE I/I Genotype on OSAS
T. Bilgen1, O. Guzeloglu Kayisli1, S. Ket2, Y. Gocmen3, I. Keser1, A. Cilli2, S. 
Gumuslu3, C. Ogus2;  
1Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and 
Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine Department 
of Chest Medicine, Antalya, Turkey, 3Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine 
Department of Biochemistry, Antalya, Turkey.
Obstructive Sleep Apnoea Syndrome (OSAS) is a disease characterized by repeated obstruction of upper respiratory tract during sleep. There is a quite limited number of studies on role of genetic factors in the etiology of OSAS. The aim of our study is to ﬁnd out if ACE gene polymorphism and plasma ACE activity create susceptibility to OSAS in Turkish population. Ninety-seven patients, in total, were included in this study. The Epworth scores, ages, body mass indexes, neck circumferences, apnea-hypopnea indexes (AHI), average apnea durations, and minimum SaO
2 of the patients were 
recorded. Insertion (I)/Deletion (D) polymorphism of the ACE gene and plasma ACE activity levels were determined. When distribution of the I/D ACE polymorphism in our patients was compared to that of healthy controls from a previous study in Turkish population, it was observed that risk of OSAS development increased 2.8 times in patients who had I/I genotype of ACE gene. The average ACE activity in the patient group with I/I genotype was observed to be signiﬁcantly lower than that of the group with D/D genotype (p=0.019). ACE activity decreased signiﬁcantly in patients with severe OSAS, compared to those with mild OSAS (p=0.017). No statistically signiﬁcant difference was observed upon comparison of I/I, I/D, D/D genotypes and minimum SaO
2, neck 
circumference, Epworth score, average apnea duration, and AHI (p>0.005). As a consequence, these ﬁndings support that ACE I/D 
polymorphisms may have a role in the pathogenesis of the OSAS.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics227
P0679. DFNB1-causing allele variants in the Iranian Turk 
population
M. Mohseni1, F. Reihanifar2, J. Malbin2, M. Fadaie Haghi2, M. Zamani2, N. Ba -
zazzadegan1, N. Nikzat1, K. Kahrizi1, P. Imanirad1,3, C. Nishimura4, Y. Riazalhos -
seini1,3, R. J. H. Smith4, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Welfare Organization of East and 
West Azerbaijan, Azerbaijan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular-Cellular 
Biology Department, Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Mo-
lecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology , 
University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States.
Mutations in the GJB2 gene at the DFNB1 locus have been established 
as the major cause of autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss in many world populations. In addition to GJB2 mutations, the deletion Δ(GJB6-D13S1830) involving GJB6 gene (also localizes to DFNB1 interval) has been detected in many patients heterozygous for one GJB2 deafness-causing mutation. The aim of this project is to study the prevalence of GJB2 mutations in the deaf Turk population living in the East and West Azerbaijan provinces of Iran. Mutations screening began by ampliﬁcation refractory mutation screening PCR to detect the 35delG mutation. We then analyzed all samples excluding 35delG homozygotes by DHPLC and direct sequencing for other GJB2 mutations. We screened 276 chromosomes (138 probands) for GJB2 mutations. Seventy ﬁve chromosomes (27%) carried GJB2 mutations including 35delG, delE120,-3170G>A, W24X, 363delC, E129K, Q80L, Y155X. Among them, 35delG had the highest frequency and Q80L and 363delC were novel mutations which have not been reported in any other populations. Thirty ﬁve patients had biallelic GJB2 mutations (25.3%) and ﬁve probands had monoallelic GJB2 mutation. The Δ(GJB6-D13S1830) was not found in any heterozygous patients. Polymorphisms found were V153I and V27I. Based on our results, other genes are likely to play a major role in causing nonsyndromic 
deafness in this population.
P0680. MLPA analysis of the dystrophin gene in DMD/BMD 
patients from Serbia and Montenegro
T. Lalic1, R. Vossen2, J. Coffa3, J. Schouten3, D. Radivojevic1, M. Djurisic1, I. 
Novakovic4, M. Guc-Scekic1, D. Zamurovic1, M. Breuning2, S. White2, J. den 
Dunnen2;  
1Mother and Child Health Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro, 
2Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3MRC-Holland, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Faculty of Medicine,University of Belgrade, 
Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro.
We have designed an Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Ampliﬁcation (MLPA) assay to simultaneously screen all 79 DMD exons for deletions and duplications in Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD) patients. We validated the assay by screening 133 patients from Serbia and Montenegro previously screened using multiplex PCR. MLPA-screening conﬁrmed the presence of all previously detected deletions. In addition we detected seven new deletions, 10 duplications, one point mutation, and we were able to precisely determine the breakpoints of all rearrangements (21 were unknown from the previous study). Overall, unrelated patients from Serbia and Montenegro contained 64% deletions and 7% duplications, ﬁgures not signiﬁcantly different from other studies. In two brothers we identiﬁed a complex rearrangement involving two duplications and a triplication. To facilitate MLPA-based screening in laboratories lacking speciﬁc equipment, we designed the assay such that it can also be performed using agarose gel analysis and ethidium bromide staining. The MLPA-assay as described provides a simple and cheap method for deletion and duplication screening in DMD/BMD patients. The assay outperforms the Chamberlain and Beggs multiplex-PCR test, and should be considered as the method of choice for a ﬁrst DNA analysis 
of DMD/BMD.
P0681. A novel missense mutation (N258S) in the KCNQ2 gene in 
a Turkish family afﬂicted with BFNC
Ö. Yalçın1, H. S. Çağlayan1, Ö. Çokar2, K. Ağan3, C. A. Bingöl3, A. Dervent2, O. 
Steinlein4;  
1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Boğaziçi University , Istanbul, 
Turkey, 2Department of Neurology, University of İstanbul Cerrahpaşa Medical 
School, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Neurology, Marmara University Medi -cal School, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, 
Istanbul, Germany.
Benign familial neonatal convulsions (BFNC) is a rare monogenic 
subtype of idiopathic generalized epilepsy exhibiting an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. The disease is caused by mutations in the two homologous genes 
KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 that encode the 
subunits of the voltage-gated potassium channel. The heteromeric assembly of these subunits form the M-current which is the primary regulator of neuronal excitability. 
KCNQ2 is located on chromosome 
20q13.3 and composed of at least 18 exons, comprizing over 50kb of genomic DNA. This study reports the analysis of the 
KCNQ2 gene 
in a Turkish family with three BFNC patients in three successive generations. SSCP studies of the complete 
KCNQ2 gene indicated a 
migration shift in exon 4 of two patients. DNA sequence analysis of the region revealed an A>G transition that resulted in a novel substitution of serine instead of asparagine at position 258, which is between the S5 domain and the pore of the potassium channel. The absence of the mutation in healthy members of the family and in a control group of 60 German and 77 Turkish individuals excludes the likelihood of it being a polymorphism and indicates that N258S substitution is the pathogenic mutation leading to epileptic seizures in this family.
P0682. Novel homozygous mutation associated with a 
common variant in familial lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase 
(LCAT)deﬁciency
M. Gigante1, V. Defazio1, G. Cerullo2, E. Ranieri2, L. Calabresi3, A. Iolascon4, L. 
Gesualdo1;  
1Department of "Scienze Biomediche", University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy , 
2DETO-Division of Nephrology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy, 3Department of 
Pharmacological Sciences, University of Milano, Milano, Italy, 4Medical Genet -
ics, Dpt. Biochemistry and M. Biotechnologies, University Federico II-CEINGE, 
Naples, Italy.
LCAT  deﬁciency is an autosomal recessive disorder of lipoprotein 
metabolism, resulting from loss of function of lechitin:cholesterol 
acyltransferase, a key enzyme in extracellular cholesterol metabolism and cholesterol reverse transport. The human LCAT gene has been mapped to chromosome 16q22. The gene consists of 6 exons and encodes a protein of 416 amino acids. In the present study, we report the phenotypic and genetic characterization of one Italian patient and his relatives with classical clinical manifestations of familial LCAT deﬁciency. The diagnosis was conﬁrmed by biochemical data: the patient's α-LCAT activity and CER were totally absent, while plasma levels of HDL-C, ApoA-I, ApoA-II and ApoB were severely reduced. Molecular analysis of the LCAT gene was performed. Sequence 
analysis revealed a novel mutation, in the proband and his brother. This mutation is a nucleotide T-to-G transversion (g.4896, c.1187 T>G), converting codon 372 for leucine, a hydrophobic amino acid, into a codon for arginine, a basic amino acid (p.L372R). This novel mutation is near the catalytic site H377. This substitution of Leu372 with Arginine, a positively charged amino acid with a different steric size, may affect the typical α/β hydrolase fold conﬁguration of the catalytic triad and cause the lost of LCAT activity.Interestingly, the two brothers were also homozygous for a common variant in exon 5 (p.S208T), never detected in homozygous status. In conclusion, our ﬁndings suggest that homozygous p.S208T variant could act as modiﬁer allele, amplifying the effect of the p.L372R 
mutation and increasing the risk of cardiovascular events.
P0683. Two point mutations in the vWF gene leading to 
Normandy Type von Willebrand Disease
I. D. Fidancı1, Y. Pekçeren2, H. Çağlayan1;  
1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Boğaziçi University , İstanbul, 
Turkey, 2Department of Hematology, University of İstanbul, İstanbul, Turkey.
von Willebrand disease (vWD) is a common autosomally inherited 
bleeding disorder characterized by a qualitative and quantitative deﬁciency of vWF protein in the plasma. Three primary vWD types are type 1, type 2 and type 3. Normandy Type results from mutations in the vWF gene region coding FVIII binding site. The protein vWF consists of eleven domains. Each domain in subunits plays a role in interaction with, proteins and in the multimerization of vWF itself. For example, the FVIII binding site is found within the mature vWF subunit and encoded by exons 18 to 23 of the gene. In this study, three patients, who are two Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics228
sisters and a brother, clinically diagnosed as vWD and suspected to be 
Normandy Type were tested for mutations in exons 18-21 and 24 of the vWF gene. The sequencing results in all three patients revealed a C→T transition at n. position 2446 in homozygous condition. This study conﬁrmed Normandy Type of vWD in this family by DNA analysis. In addition, DNA samples of 3 hemophilia A patients who did not have inversions or point mutations in their F8 gene as a result of complete DNA sequencing, were tested for mutations in the same exons of the vWF gene. Sequencing results indicated that, one patient had a T→C transition at n. position 2362 in homozygous condition. This study showed that hemophilia A was a misdiagnosis for this patient.
P0684. Molecular pathology of acute recurrent and chronic 
pancreatitis in children. The CFTR , SPINK1 , PRSS1  and 
SERPINA1  genes defects analysis.
A. Sobczynska-Tomaszewska1, D. Bak1, B. Oralewska2, G. Oracz2, A. Norek3, 
M. Teisseyre2, K. Czerska1, J. Socha2, T. Mazurczak1, M. Zagulski4, J. Bal1;  
1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2The Children’s Memorial Health 
Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 3Lodz University of Technology, Lodz, Poland, 4Institute 
of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
Mutations in four genes: PRSS1 , SPINK1 , CFTR and SERPINA1 are 
thought to be a cause or a factor predisposing to pancreatitis. The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of these defects into molecular pathology of chronic (CP) and acute recurrent pancreatitis (ARP). 92 children with CP or ARP and 55 family members were investigated. In 31 patients (33.7%, P=0.001) we identiﬁed mutations in at least one out of four examined genes. Mutations in the 
SPINK1 and the PRSS1  
gene were found most frequently (8.7% vs 6.5% of total alleles). 
PRSS1 mutations were identiﬁed mainly in CP patients, while the 
N34S SPINK1 mutation was recognised with comparable frequency 
in CP and ARP patients. The frequency of identiﬁed mutations in the 
CFTR alleles was similar to the control group (4.9% vs 5%, P=1.000). 
Frequency of mutations E264V and E342K in the SERPINA1 gene 
was lower than in the control group (P<0.001). Analysis of disease course in patients with identiﬁed mutations in the examined genes and their families showed, that presence of molecular defect (especially, the N34S 
SPINK1 mutation) is not always associated with disease 
phenotype.The PRSS1 defects seem to be strongly causative for CP 
or ARP whereas defects in SPINK1 and CFTR are suggested to be 
only disease-modiﬁers. The SERPINA1 variants are not associated 
with CP or ARP.Work partially ﬁnanced by State Committee for Scientiﬁc Research 
grant KBN #3P05E 132 23.
P0685. Molecular Analysis of MeCP2 Gene in Patients with Rett 
Syndrome
I. Baris1, S. Ayta2, G. Dizdarer3, M. Eraksoy2, E. Battaloglu1;  
1Bogazici University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, 
Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Neurology, 
Division of Child Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey, 3SSK Tepecik Education Hospital, 
Child Neurology, Izmir, Turkey.
Rett syndrome (RS) is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental disorder caused by mutations in 
MeCP2, encoding methyl-CpG-binding 
protein 2. RS affects almost exclusively females with an incidence of one in 10 000-15 000 and more than 99.5% of cases are sporadic. Mutations in the MeCP2 gene were identiﬁed in approximately 35-80% of sporadic RS cases. Because the MeCP2 gene is subject to X chromosome inactivation (XCI) in females, the severity of the disease 
varies with the type of mutation and the pattern of XCI.In this study, the genetic basis of Rett syndrome was investigated in samples from 24 sporadic classical RS patients (2 male and 22 females). Screening of the MeCP2 gene in these patients using RFLP, SSCP and subsequent sequencing analyses revealed eleven point mutations, three novel deletions and a silent polymorphism (S293S). All patients were heterozygous for the mutations except one patient that was heterozygous for mutations P152R and R106W. They were found to be de novo mutations since the family members tested negative for 
them. Total skewed pattern of XCI was determined in nine patients and six of them were carrying MeCP2 gene mutations. Intact mutant mRNA was found to be present in patients with novel deletions by RT-PCR analyses. The ﬁndings were in accordance with the previously published data. Patients with skewed XCI and TRD domain mutations were more severely affected compared to patients having random XCI 
and missense mutations.The present study will help our understanding of the molecular basis of RS in Turkish population.
P0686. Caring for PKU families in the National Research Center: 
an Egyptian Experience
L. K. Effat ;  
Division of Human Genetics and Genome Research, National Research Center, 
Giza, Egypt.
Many countries have reported extensive data about PKU, describing the scope and problems of screening to the mutational patterns. However, no large-scale data has been reported from Middle East and Africa. This presentation focuses on PKU in Egypt, as a model developing country. A team working in the National Research center cares for about 100 PKU families within this context and trying to reach 
an optimum economic perspective.The clinical group offers genetic counseling, guided diet management, growth and neurological assessment and IQ evaluations. For each patient, phenylalanine level estimation was used for biochemical 
diagnosis and monitoring.A molecular study targeting six mutations (IVS10, R261Q, R252W,Y277D, E221G and V245V) was initiated using PCR and restriction analysis. The results revealed the presence of IVS10 (17%), V232V (17%) and R261Q (7%). VNTR analysis was analyzed among PKU and normal individuals. The 7, 8 and 9 repeat units were the most common among PKU cases whereas 9, 3 and 7 were prevalent 
among normals.Small-scale manufacturing was initiated to locally produce low 
phenylalanine food and milk products with promising success.A support group was founded by Dr Laila Effat and interested parents to offer help to PKU families and to raise the awareness and knowledge of PKU in the community, particularly the issue of preventing mental retardation with early diagnosis. This multifaceted approach lays background for future implementation of PKU screening program in the country and sets an example for tackling this problem in a third world country.
P0687. Detection of mutations in the gene encoding neutrophil 
elastase in congenital and cyclic neutropenia
G. Ahangari1, A. Farhoudi2, Z. Chavoshzadeh2, A. Ramyar2, S. Jamshidi1;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Re -
public of Iran, 2Department of Immunologyand Allergy, Children hospital center, 
Tehran Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Congenital neutropenia and cyclic neutropenia are disorders of neutrophil production predisposing patients to recurrent bacterial infections. Recently, mutations have been detected in the neutrophil elastase (
ELA2) gene in cyclic neutropenia and severe congenital 
diseases.Peripheral blood was obtained from 21 patients with cyclic and congenital neutropenia. Total RNA was isolated from fresh-polymorpho-prep separated cells using standard RNA techniques. RNA was analysed by PCR ampliﬁcation of reverse transcribed RNA using a total of ten speciﬁc primers. Mutation analysis was performed by direct sequencing. We ampliﬁed ﬁve exons of the 
ELA2 gene separately and 
sequenced each exon. We found most mutations in exons 3 and 5 and a lower number of mutations in exons 2 and 4; no mutation was found 
in exon 1.In conclusion, mutations in the neutrophil elastase gene were found in all the patients we studied. However in congenital neutropenia the 
mutations were more severe.
P0688. Molecular Analysis of the Williams Syndrome Critical 
Region through Fluorescence in situ  hybridization and 
quantitative Real-Time PCR.
C. Venegas , S. Cuevas, N. Nájera, K. Nieto, S. Kofman-Alfaro;  
Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico.
Williams Syndrome (WS) is a contiguous gene deletion disorder caused by haploinsufﬁciency of several genes in 7q11.23, including the elastin locus (ELN). Clinically the WS-phenotype is characterized by elastin arteriopathy, supravalvular aortic stenosis, connective tissue abnormalities, dysmorphic face, growth and mental retardation, visuo-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics229
spatial and cognition impaired and behavioural problems. About 95% 
of the patients with the classical phenotype present a deletion of WS Critical Region (WSCRD). Most patients had the WSCRD of 1.5 Mb. Nevertheless, recent studies have demonstrated a deletion of ~ 850 Kb. The aim of the present study was to identify through ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) the WSCRD in a sample of 16 Mexican patients with clinical diagnosis of WS. FISH analysis was performed with a LSI probe that included the ELN, LIMK-1 and D7S613 genes. qPCR was done with FKBP6, CLDN3, and GTF2I probes and RnaseP probe as internal control. The gene dosage were established comparing the ΔCT=(gene CT-RnaseP CT), ΔΔCT= (patient ΔCT-control ΔCT) and 2 
-ΔΔCT formula. 
Fourteen patients harboured the WSCRD, one patient had no deletion and the other one showed apparently an atypical pattern of deletion. In conclusion, we propose that the gene dosage analysis mediated 
qPCR allows a more accurately determination of the WSCRD size.
P0689. Molecular proﬁle of hypothyroid myopathy
M. Aguennouz1, C. Rodolico1, A. Toscano1, S. Benvenga2, S. Volinia3, C. 
Buemi1, F. Trimarchi2, C. Messina1, G. Vita1;  
1Dept. of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anesthesiology, University of Messina, 
Italy, 2Dept. of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Messina, Italy , 
3Dept. of Embryology and Morphology, University of Ferrara, Italy.
Background:  an overt myopathy during hypothyroidism may occur. 
The mechanisms whereby decreased circulating levels of thyroid hormones may interfere with muscular function are still uncertain. Although the molecular actions of thyroid hormones have been studied thoroughly, their pleiotropic effects are mediated by complex changes 
in expression of unknown number of target genes.
Objective: the purpose of the study is to study muscular gene expression in hypothyroid myopathy in order to elucidate the pathogenesis of such 
a disease.Materials and Methods: three groups of patients with hypothyroid myopathy were subdivided in relation of TSH levels: patients with TSH lower than 100 mU/l; patients with TSH about 100 mU/l; patients with TSH upper than 100 mU/l. Muscle specimens from age- and sex-matched normal subjects undergoing orthopedic surgery will be used as controls. Microarray experiments were performed using ampliﬁed RNA isolated in muscle specimens. A GeneChip microarrays panel of cDNA human Gene Array containing approximately 40000 genes from human genome (MWG-Affymetrix) was used.
Results: we found a correlation between TSH levels and the number of genes down-regulated. Patients with TSH levels upper than 100 mU/l had at least 1500 down-regulated genes. These were involved in energy metabolism, mRNA maturation, signal transduction cellular trafﬁcking. 
Discussion:  Microarray analysis is an effective tool for 
identifying genes differently involved in the response of skeletal muscle 
to hypothyroidism
P0690. Might there be a link between mannose binding lectin 
polymorphisms and vitiligo?
H. Onay1, M. Pehlivan2, S. Alper3, F. Ozkinay1, S. Pehlivan4;  
1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir , 
Turkey, 2Ataturk Education and Research Hospital,Department of Internal 
Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of 
Dermatology, Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege University Faculty of Science, Department of 
Biology, Izmir, Turkey.
Mannose binding lectin (MBL) is a calcium dependent lectin that causes predisposition to infections and autoimmune diseases. In this study we aimed to examine the presence of any association between 
MBL 
gene variants and vitiligo. Codon 54 (allele B) and codon 57 (allele C) polymorphisms in exon 1 of the 
MBL gene, were investigated in 
samples from 50 healthy controls and 40 patients diagnosed as having vitiligo. PCR-RFLP was used in order to investigate the polymorphisms in the 
MBL gene. The B allele frequency was signiﬁcantly higher in 
the patient group (20%) compared to the control group (3%). The AB genotype was found 35% and 6% of the patient and healthy control groups, respectively. These results suggest that the codon 54 polymorphism in the 
MBL gene may play a role in susceptibility to 
vitiligo.P0691. Mutation detection in the Neutrophil Elastase gene, 
ELA2, in an Iranian case affected with Kostmann syndrome
V. Hadavi1, R. Kariminejad1, M. Horwitz2, H. Najmabadi1, K. F. Benson2, K. Wil -
liams2, J. Luty3, M. H. Kariminejad1;  
1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, Is -
lamic Republic of Iran, 2Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Pediatric Hematology, 
NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States.
Originally described Kostmann in 1956, the disease is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of neutrophil number. The absolute neutrophil count is characteristically less than 500/mm
3. Severe persistent neutropenia 
results in an increased susceptibility to frequent bacteria infections. 
Neutropenia occurs in 1-2 cases per million population.Heterozygous mutations in the gene, 
ELA2, located on 19p13.3, 
encoding neutrophil elastase, are the commonest cause of severe congenital neutropenia, a leukemia predisposing condition. Mutation of the 
ELA2 gene prevents the maturation of neutrophils before they 
can enter circulation.Here we describe a patient with Kostmann syndrome who demonstrates somatic mosaicism in the bone marrow of multiple different 
ELA2  
sequences representing acquired mutations of constitutionally wild type alleles. The proband is the ﬁrst and only offspring of a second cousin couple. Initial infection occurred shortly after birth, and fever began on the second day. A typical pattern of recurrent fevers, Urinary Tract Infections, Irritability, localized site(s) of infection, Pneumonia, Boils, Cutaneous abscess and Omphalitis have been observed. Increased bone marrow monocytes (9%), and eosinophils (3%) and decreased neutrophils (2%) also have been observed. The patient is suffering from severe anemia, growth retardation and malnutrition.The patient, from an ethnically isolated population where recessive inheritance might be expected, has Kostmann Syndrome in the absence of a family history of neutropenia. Sequencing of PCR-ampliﬁed genomic DNA from peripheral blood that has been done in the University of Washington School of Medicine by Dr. Marshall Horwitz revealed two novel, apparently heterozygous ELA2 mutations, V69L and V72L.
P0692. Screening for Cys 282Tyr and His 63Asp mutations of 
HFE gene in Kazakhs and Uygurs populations of the Central 
Asia
N. Khusnutdinova1, R. Khusainova1, G. Cvyatova2, E. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Kazakhstan 
Republican Perinatal Centre, Almata, Kazakhstan.
Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder of iron metabolism. Two major missense mutations in HFE gene responsible for HH have been described: Cys282Tyr, accounting for 80%-90% of HH chromosomes, and His63Asp, which is associated with a milder HH form comprising from 40% to 70% of HH chromosomes. The availability of molecular genotyping for accurate HH diagnosis has led to increased interest in population screening to promote early diagnosis and therapy of this disease. For evaluation of carrier frequencies we have screened for Cys282Tyr and His63Asp mutations in HFE gene in populations of Kazakhs (N=260) and Uygurs (N=116) in Central Asia. We have detected both of the mutations in the populations studied, suggesting that hereditary hemochromatosis is likely to be present in Asian populations. The frequency of Cys282Tyr mutation carriage was 2.4% in Khazakhs and 1.7% in Uygurs. The frequency of Cys282Tyr mutation is lower than in European populations (8.65%) and in Turkic speaking populations of the Volga-Ural region (3.95%). We detected His63Asp mutation in heterozygous state in 16.0% of Kazakhs and in 16.4% of Uygurs, which is a lower frequency than in Europe (24.75%) and the Volga-Ural region (21.70%). These data conﬁrm the decreasing frequencies of these two mutations from north to south and from west to east. These results led us to 
recommend performing of molecular genetic testing in groups at risk.
P0693. Molecular and cytogenetic analysis of Leukemic patients 
for 7 common translocations
A. H. Taromchi, R. Kariminejad, M. Zanganeh, N. Miraftabi, T. Nayeb-Bagher, 
S. Voghouie, S. Asia, S. Jalilnejad, Z. Golkar, H. Najmabadi;  
Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
We have analysed 304 leukemic patients by multiplex reverse Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics230
transcription-polymerase chain reaction(RT-PCR) method for rapid 
diagnosis and screening of patients with 7 chromosomal translocations including: t(1;19)(q23;p13), t(12;21)(p13;q22), inv(16)(p13;q22), t(15;17)(q21;q22), t(9;22)(q34;q11), t(8;21)(q22;q22), t(4;11)(q21;q23) . Many of these translocations are related to acute and chronic, myeloid and lymphoid leukemias. Multiplex RT-PCR detects hybrid mRNAs transcribed from the fusion genes produced by translocations. Parallel 
cytogenetic analysis was performed on 120 of 304 patients too.Leukemic cell samples from patients admitted to Kariminejad-Najmabadi clinic were subjected to RNA isolation and cDNA synthesis were performed by random priming method on total RNA.To achieve maximal sensitivity a nested PCR protocol was used and a housekeeping gene was considered as internal positive control . Bone marrow culture were done and prepared cells were harvested with conventional methods and slides were prepared by GTG technique 
and studied.We have studied 304 patients with the following indications and 
results:From 216 CML patients 109(50.5%) was positive for t(9;22)(q34;q11),from 65 AML patients 3(4.6%) was positive for inv(16)(p13;q22) and 3(4.6%) was positive for t(8;21)(q22;q22) and 15(23%) was positive for t(15;17)(q21;q22), from 23 ALL patients 1(4.3%) was positive for t(9;22)(q34;q11) , 1(4.3%) was positive for t(4;11)(q21;q23) and 
2(8.7%) was positive for t(12;21)(p13;q22)..From 304 patients 120 cases were analysed cytogenetically and 
correlation between these results will be discussed.RT-PCR is rapid and sensitive method for screening of translocations and is also the best tool for monitoring of minimal residual disease but other numerical and structural abberations can be detected by 
cytogenetic analysis.
P0694. A Pilot detection study of alpha(1) antitrypsin deﬁciency 
in a targeted population in Iran
F. Mirzajani , S. Zare Karizi, R. Mirfakhraie, M. Hooshmand;  
National Institute for Genetic Engineering and biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Alpha-1-antitrypsin deﬁciency (A1AD) is a genetic disorder which is transmitted in an autosomal recessive pattern. Alpha-1-antitrypsin deﬁciency affects mainly the lungs and the liver leading, in the latter case, to neonatal cholestasis, chronic hepatitis or cirrhosis. Worldwide, approximately 1 in 2,500 individuals has alpha-1 antitrypsin deﬁciency. While this disorder is found in all ethnic groups, it occurs most frequently in whites of European ancestry. Estimates of the prevalence of A1AD (especially the PiZZ phenotype) have varied considerably, depending on the ethnicity of the population used to derive the estimate. Whether the A1AD is a very rare or is a widely under-diagnosed disease in Iranian population still is unknown. A pilot study was carried out on 75 unrelated children clinically characterized by idiopathic liver dysfuntions suspected to A1AD. Biochemical tests including enzyme assay were performed to identify the deﬁcient cases. Molecular diagnosis tests of the Z and S mutation of A1AD were performed in all of the samples using RFLP-PCR method. The result indicates the rare incidence of Z 
and S mutation in Iran.
P0695. Werner Syndrome and mutations of the WRN and LMNA 
genes in a european population.
N. Uhrhammer1, L. Lafarge1, L. Dos Santos1, A. Domaszewska2, M. Lange2, Y. 
Bignon1;  
1Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2University of Wroclaw, Wro -
claw, Poland.
Werner Syndrome (WS) is a rare hereditary disorder of premature aging. The clinical spectrum includes small stature, acute voice and a characteristic facies, plus the early onset of cataracts, diabetes, skin changes, grey hair, and other signs. WS can be difﬁcult to diagnose due to the variability of the patients’ presentation and the rarity of the disorder. Transmission is usually autosomal recessive.The gene for WS, 
WRN, encodes a member of the RecQ helicase 
family involved in DNA replication. Biallelic mutations of WRN are 
responsible for most patients, though in up to 40 %, no mutation can be demonstrated. Recently, heterozygous missense mutations in the nuclear envelop proteins lamin A and C, both encoded by the 
LMNA  
gene, have been observed in WS patients with severe symptoms and cardiac involvement, as well as in the more severe Hutchinson-Guilford progeria syndrome. Blood samples from fourteen WS cases were sent to us for molecular analysis. All 35 exons of the WRN gene and their splice junctions were ampliﬁed and sequenced. Four cases presented biallelic disruptive mutations. In three cases, only one mutated allele of WRN was identiﬁed. As dominant alleles of 
WRN 
have not been described, it is likely that a second mutation for each of these cases escaped detection, possibly due to large deletions, or to point mutations in the introns affecting splicing. The cases with no or only one mutated 
WRN allele are being analysed further for mutations 
in LMNA .
P0696. Mutations in the hemochromatosis gene (HFE) and 
multiple sclerosis
S. Ristić1, L. Lovrečić2, B. Brajenović-Milić1, N. Starčević-Čizmarević1, S. Šega 
Jazbec2, J. Sepčić1, M. Kapović1, B. Peterlin2;  
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Rijeka, 
Croatia, 2Department of Medical Genetics, UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
In the present study we have investigated wheather HFE gene polymorphism may play a role in the disease behavior of Croatian and Slovenian MS patients and their potential genetic susceptibility to MS. We genotyped 314 MS patients and 400 healthy controls for the C282Y and H63D mutations by polymerase chain reaction/restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis. Our results showed no signiﬁcance differences in the distribution of the two mutations between MS patients and controls suggesting that HFE polymorphisms do not inﬂuence the susceptibility to MS. However, we observed that MS patients carrying the mutant C282Y allele exhibited earlier onset of disease symptom relative to others genotypes. Also, our data indicate that a gradient of risk of iron overload associated with different HFE genotypes may contribute to the progression of MS, but 
it warrants further study in a larger series of MS patients.
P0697. Mutations in AHI1 gene of Joubert syndrome patients.
C. Lagier-Tourenne1, E. Boltshauser2, N. Breivik3, S. Affenberger1, C. Riether1, 
N. Drouot1, C. Barbot4, M. Koenig1;  
1IGBMC, CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, France, 2Department of Neurology, 
Children's University Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland, 3Department of Paediatrics, 
Aalesund Hospital, Aalesund, Norway, 4Department of Neurology, Hospital 
Maria Pia, Porto, Portugal.
Joubert syndrome (JS) is a recessively inherited disorder characterised by hypotonia at birth and developmental delay, followed by truncal ataxia and cognitive impairment, and suggestive facial features. Abnormalities on axial MRI are the neuroimaging hallmarks of JS, and include cerebellar vermis hypoplasia and abnormalities at the pontomesencephalic junction that lead to a characteristic “molar tooth” appearance. JS is clinically heterogeneous with some patients presenting with various combinations of breathing abnormalities in the neonatal period, oculomotor apraxia, retinal dystrophy, retinal coloboma, ptosis, hexadactyly, and nephronophtisis or cystic dysplastic kidneys. JS is also genetically heterogeneous, with two known loci, on 9q34 (JBTS1) and 11p11-q12 (CORS2), representing only a fraction of cases. We have identiﬁed a third locus in 6q23 (JBTS3) from the study of two large consanguineous families of Turkish and Swiss origin. LOD score calculation for the two JBTS3 families, including the consanguinity loops, gave a maximum value of 4.1 and 2.3 at θ = 0, respectively, indicating linkage between the disease and the D6S1620-D6S1699 haplotype spanning a 13.1 cM interval. Recently, Ferland et al. (2004) and Dixon-Salazar et al. (2004) found mutations in the gene AHI1 in 6 families with Joubert syndrome linked to 6q23. We are sequencing AHI1 in JS patients from 10 families. We have found so far a homozygous Serine to Stop mutation (S783X) in exon 17 and a truncating mutation 630-633delGAAA in exon 7 in the linked Turkish and Swiss families, respectively. Sequence analyses of the other 8 
families is in progress.
P0698. Identiﬁcation of mutations in the galactose-1-phosphate 
uridyltransferase (GALT) gene in 15 Iranian patients with 
galactosemia
F. Nabati1, R. Mirfakhraie2, N. Naghibzadeh Tabatabaei3, S. Saki4, E. Tala -
chian5, M. Raﬁei6, M. Houshmand3, F. Mirzajani3;  
1Khatam Institute of Higher Education, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics231
Azad University, Science&Research Campus, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
3National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 4Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
5Iran Medical science University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Tabriz Medi -
cal science University, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Classical galactosemia caused by deﬁciency of galactose-1-phosphate 
uridyltransferase (GALT) is a severe autosomal recessive disorder. We report here molecular analysis of 15 unrelated Iranian galactosemia cases conﬁrmed to have galactosaemia .Molecular testing is done in two steps: 1. The six most common mutations including Q188R, K285N, S135L, L195P, X380R and Q169K are ﬁrst tested using PCR-RFLP method.2) In order to determine the unknown mutations the entire coding region of GALT was subjected to 
the sequencing.The most common molecular defect observed in the Iranian population was Q188R (replacement of glutamine-188 by arginine) (60%). One homozygote for S135L mutation , one heterozygote for K285N mutation, three rare mutation and the presence of a deletion in the coding region of the GALT gene were detected.
P0699. Functional analysis of a human atp12 mutation in yeast 
S. cerevisiae.
S. Seneca1, R. Van Coster2, A. Meulemans1, J. Smet2, W. Lissens1, L. De Mei -
rleir1, S. Ackerman3, I. Liebaers1;  
1Free University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium, 2University of Ghent, Gh -
ent, Belgium, 3Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, United 
States.
Complex V (ATP synthase) of the respiratory chain couples the proton gradient, generated by the respiratory chain, to ATP synthesis. The ATP12 gene product is one of the proteins required for assembly 
of complex V. Here, we report on the functional effect of a W94R mutation, present in the ATP12 gene of a patient with an ATP synthase 
decreased activity. Until now, nuclear defects of the ATP synthase complex have not been disclosed. Both multicopy and single copy plasmid constructs containing the human and yeast wild type ATP12
 
gene, as well as the human mutation W94R and the yeast counterpart W103R were prepared. These constructs were introduced in a yeast host strain deprived of his ATP12 function, and as such respiratory deﬁcient. ATP synthase activity of individual yeast transformants was assayed by growth studies on a non-fermentable carbon source and by Blue Native Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (BN-PAGE) stained for ATP synthase catalytic activity. WT plasmid constructs rescue the respiratory defect of a yeast atp12 mutant strain. Growth on a non-fermentable carbon source was strongly impaired for the human W94R mutant, while the growth of the yeast W103R mutant strain was normal. These results were conﬁrmed by BN-PAGE studies and measurements of the complex V activity of the different plasmid constructs in yeast cells. CONCLUSION : Our yeast complementation studies showed clearly that the human W94R mutant does not confer respiratory competence to an atp12 yeast strain and is the cause of the 
complex V dysfunction in our patient.
P0700. Prediction of cis-acting splicing regulatory elements in 
the dystrophin gene
S. Tuffery-Giraud, A. Disset, C. Saquet, D. Thorel, C. Béroud, M. Claustres;  
Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et Chromosomique, IURC et CHU de 
Montpellier, Montpellier cedex 5, France.
We report a set of point mutations disrupting the correct pattern of 
dystrophin pre-mRNA splicing. We focused our attention on two types of events of peculiar interest for the deﬁnition of splicing regulatory elements (1) skipping-associated exonic mutations, (2) pseudoexons inclusion in mature transcripts. We have identiﬁed four different point mutations in the coding regions of the dystrophin gene leading to exon skipping. Such single base change are supposed to interfere with splicing by either disrupting Exonic Splicing Enhancer (ESE) elements or by creating negative-acting elements such as the Exonic Splicing Silencer (ESS) motifs. Moreover, we identiﬁed four cases of pseudoexon inclusion in the mature transcripts of Becker patients resulting (i) in three cases from an intronic variation which reinforces the strength of a pre-existing splice site, (ii) in one case from an intronic deletion in the vicinity of the pseudoexon suggesting the presence of a regulatory element in the deleted sequence. In order to correlate the observed splicing defects with the presence of putative cis-acting splicing regulatory elements, we analysed the sequences of exons and pseudoexons for the presence of ESE, ESS, and ISE (intronic splicing enhancer) motifs. We used the ESE ﬁnder program and the RESCUE-ESE method to predict ESEs, and we searched for the recently described RESCUE-ISE predicted ISE hexamers and ESS motifs. Data from mutational analysis based on transcript studies allow to evaluate the reliability of splicing regulatory motifs prediction by in silico approaches, and contribute to identify new cis-acting regulatory 
elements.
P0701. The molecular diagnosis of Spinal Muscular Atrophy 
(SMA) in Romania
P. Apostol1, D. Cimponeriu1, H. Stanescu2, N. Butoianu2, I. Radu1, M. Stavara -
chi1, R. Haraba1, L. Dan1, S. Magureanu2, L. Gavrila1;  
1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Alexandru Obregia Hospital, Bu -
charest, Romania.
Proximal forms of SMA are of 5q and non-5q type, the former being by far the most frequent. All cases of 5q SMA are determined by mutations of the SMN1 gene, the differences between clinical forms being explained by the inﬂuence of other modifying genes (e.g. NAIP). The vast majority of SMN1 gene mutations (95%) are localized in 
exons 7 and 8.In our study, 24 clinically diagnosed children for SMA, and 16 parents, were included. The patients were classiﬁed according to clinical criteria (age of onset, clinical evolution) and EMG tests in: SMA1 (onset < 6 months of life): 19 patients; SMA2 (onset: 6-18 months): 3 patients and SMA3 (onset: >18 months of life): 2 patients. We have tested the presence of SMN1 exon 7 and 8 using the PCR-RFLP method and PCR for NAIP exon 5.As shown in the table, the homozygous absence of exon 7 of SMN1 gene was observed in all patients with SMA1 and 2, but not in those with SMA3 and parents. The four patients with SMA1 and with complex deletions had an acute evolution. We note the high prevalence (47,4%) of SMN1 exon 8 deletion in our patients. Genetic counseling was offered to all couples having a child affected by SMA.
The distribution of mutations in SMA patients
Homzygote deletion SMA1 SMA2 SMA3
SMN1 exon 7 10 3 0
SMN1 exon 8 3 0 0
SMN1 exons 7 and 8 2 0 0
SMN1 exons 7, 8 and NAIP exon 5 4 0 0
P0702. Characterization of the molecular defects in the ATP7B 
gene in Wilson Disease patients from Bulgaria
T. Todorov1, A. Savov1, H. Jelev2, E. Pantaleeva2, D. Konstantimova3, I. Kremenski1;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Pediatrician clinic, Medical 
University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Department of Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Medical 
University, Varna, Bulgaria.
Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of the copper 
metabolism resulting from the absence or dysfunction of a copper transporting P-type ATPase, coded by the ATP7B gene. Pathogenesis of the disease is caused by accumulation of copper in liver, kidneys and brain. Approximately 240 mutations in the ATP7B-gene have been identiﬁed to date.We screened all coding regions and exon / intron boundaries of ATP7B-gene in 77 Bulgarian families using single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) followed by direct sequencing and characterized the molecular defect in 84% of WD chromosomes. In 65 of patients both mutations were identiﬁed. Fourteen different mutations including two non reported (D1279Y and P1352S) (Table 1) and nine polymorphisms within coding regions were observed. (Table 2).Our results demonstrate that ﬁve mutation - H1069Q (52.60%), 2304-2305insC (9.74%), 3400delC (4.55%), G1341D (3.90%), and V12171218L (3.25%) are relatively common and account for 74% of 
WND alleles.These data can be used to develop straightforward genetic testing in this population or in other countries composed of a genetically mixed 
population.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics232
Table 1 . Mutations in the WND gene in Bulgarian patients
NoMutation Type Exon Alleles Frequency %
1R616Q mutation 5 4 2.60
22298-2299insC mutation 8 15 9.74
3R778W mutation 8 1 0.65
4R778G mutation 8 1 0.65
52530delA K844K mutation 10 1 0.65
6A874V mutation 11 3 2
7R969Q mutation 13 2 1.30
8A1003T mutation 13 1 0.65
9H1069Q mutation 14 81 52.6
No Name Type Exon Alleles Frequency %
10 3400delC mutation 15 7 4.55
11 V12171218L mutation 17 5 3.25
12 D1279Y* mutation 18 1 0.65
13 G1341D mutation 20 6 3.90
14 P1352S* mutation 20 1 0.65
- Known - - 130 84.42
- Total alleles - - 154 100.00
Table 2 . Polymorphisms in the WND gene in Bulgarian patients
No Name Type Exon
1 L456V polymorphism 3
2 F764F polymorphism 8
3 K832R polymorphism 10
4 T991T polymorphism 13
5 A1003A polymorphism 13
6 L1015L polymorphism 13
7 L1140A polymorphism 16
8 K1260N polymorphism 18
9 K1436K polymorphism 21
P0703. Analysis of the JAG1 gene and clinical characterization 
of Polish patients with Alagille syndrome.
D. Jurkiewicz1, E. Popowska1, C. Gläser2, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, E. Ci -
ara1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, P. Kowalski1, M. Gajdulewicz1, K. Chrzanowska1, 
K. Spodar1, I. Hansmann2, M. Krajewska-Walasek1;  
1The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institut für Human -
genetik und Medizinische Biologie, MLU Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany.
Alagille syndrome (AGS) is an autosomal dominant disorder 
characterized by intrahepatic bile duct paucity and at least three of ﬁve main clinical anomalies: cholestasis, cardiac, skeletal and ocular abnormalities and a recognizable facial phenotype. AGS phenotype is caused by mutations of the 
JAG1 gene located on chromosome 20p12. 
The JAG1 gene encodes a ligand in the evolutionarily conserved 
Notch signaling pathway, taking part in cell fate determination and differentiation. In this study we present results of the 
JAG1 gene 
mutation analysis and clinical characterization of 42 Polish patients with clinically recognized AGS. Mutations were found in 23 patients. Twenty one different mutations, including 8 frameshift, 6 nonsense, 4 splice site and 3 missense mutations, were identiﬁed. Thirteen mutations are speciﬁc for Polish population. All mutations are localized in the extracellular domain of JAG1 protein. Most mutations lead to premature termination codons resulting either in creation of truncated proteins or in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Family studies revealed that the speciﬁc mutations were inherited in 6 out of 18 investigated cases. No apparent correlation between genotype and phenotype was observed. A considerable interindividual and intrafamilial variability of AGS features in investigated patients can be explained by existence of genetic modiﬁers.That study was partly supported by the Subsidies for Scientists 2000 program of the Foundation for Polish Science and by KBN, Project No. 
3P05E12625.P0704. Polymorphisms in the CYP1A2 gene and Theophylline 
metabolism in Turkish patients with COPD
I. Keser1, T. Bilgen1, A. Uslu2, T. Ozdemir2;  
1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, 
Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Chest 
Medicine, Antalya, Turkey.
Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A2 gene polymorphisms are thought to 
be involved in theophylline metabolism. We analyzed the effect of genetic polymorphisms -2964 (G/A) and -1569 (T/del) in the 5’-ﬂanking region and 155 (T/G) and 731 (C/A) in the ﬁrst intron of the CYP1A2 gene on theophylline metabolism in 100 Turkish patients with COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease ). Genetic polymorphisms were detected using PCR-RFLP technique. The frequency of the each genotype from four polymorphic sites in patients showed G/G= 93%, G/A=7%, A/A=0% for -2964 G/A position , T/T=2%, T/del=34%, del/del=64% for -1569 (T/del) position, T/T=92%, T/G=8%, G/G=0% for 155 (T/G) position, C/C=11%, C/A=58%, A/A=31% for 731 (C/A) position. Our results suggest that the “ del ” allele at position -1569 and “C” allele at position 731 in the gene may be causal factor which effect the CYP1A2 enzyme activity in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease.
P0705. Screening of the HFE gene mutations in patients with 
cryptogenic cirrhosis by PCR-RFLP technique
S. Ozturk1, I. Keser1, H. Dikici2, D. Dincer2, G. Luleci1;  
1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, 
Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Gas -
troenterology, Antalya, Turkey.
Cirrhosis is usually accepted as cryptogenic only after an extensive 
evaluation has excluded recognizable etiologies. The prevalence of cryptogenic cirrhosis ranges from 5% to 30% of cirrhotic patients. We performed to screen the HFE gene mutations on a series of 15 patients (8 females and 7 males) with cryptogenic cirrhosis and 100 randomly selected healthy controls. Following DNA extraction from peripheral blood and PCR ampliﬁcation, the PCR products were digested to determine C282Y, H63D and S65C mutations with RsaI, MboI and HinfI restriction enzymes, respectively. We detected a heterozygote H63D mutation in a patient with idiopathic cirrhosis. The data of patients and the healthy controls were compared for the HFE gene mutations and discussed with literature. Although number of the patients is a few, our results suggests that HFE gene mutations should be screened in 
patients with cryptogenic cirrhosis.
P0706. Relative prevalence of GJB2 gene mutations in 
autosomal recessive nonsyndromic deaf population in Kerman 
province of Iran
N. Bazazzadegan1, N. Mirhosseini2, H. Ziaddini2, K. Kahrizi1, S. Arzhangi1, A. 
Astani2, Y. Riazalhosseini1, M. Mohseni1, K. Jalalvand1, C. Nishimura3, R. J. H. 
Smith3, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Rehabilitation Organization of Ker -
man Province, Kerman, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolaryngology 
Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery , 
University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States.
Mutations in the GJB2 gene (at the DFNB1 locus) encoding the gap 
junction protein connexin 26, are responsible for 50% to 70% of autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) in many populations of European descent. To assess the importance of 
GJB2  
mutations in the Kerman deaf population in southeast of Iran, we screened 65 probands (130 chromosomes) with ARNSHL. Genetic testing began with an allele speciﬁc polymerase chain reaction (ASPCR) assay to screen patients for the 35delG mutation (the most common mutation in many world populations). Patients heterozygous or negative for the 35delG mutation were screened by DHPLC and sequencing for other 
GJB2 mutations. GJB2 mutations were 
detected in 12 (9.2%) chromosomes. Homozygousity or compound heterozygousity for 
GJB2 deafness causing allele variants were found 
in 5 patients (7.7%). Allele variants found were R127H (4 alleles), 35delG (3 alleles), W24X (2 alleles), delE120 (2 alleles), R143W (1 allele) and, V153I (5 alleles). V153I is a benign polymorphism. The dominant most frequent mutation was R127H (33.3%) rather than 35delG mutation. Since the frequency of 
GJB2 mutations is much Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics233
lower in this province comparing to the rest of Iran and other parts of 
the world, we propose that other genes may play a signiﬁcant role in the ARNSHL genetic load in Kerman province.
P0707. Two different-sized D4Z4 repeat within a FSHD family 
with an high clinical variability
A. Mosca1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, V. Dulieu2, M. Giroud3, M. Jeanpierre4, L. 
Faivre1;  
1Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d'Enfants, Dijon, France, 2Service de Rééduca -
tion et de Réadaptation fonctionelle, Dijon, France, 3Service de Neurologie, 
Dijon, France, 4Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, 
France.
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is an autosomal dominant myopathy characterized by progressive atrophy and weakness of the facial, shoulder, upper and lower limbs with high inter- and intrafamilial clinical variability. FSHD is associated with contractions of the polymorphic D4Z4 repeat on chromosome 4qter. A rough and inverse correlation has been observed between the severity and age at onset of the disease and the residual repeat unit number. We report on a family with a signiﬁcant intrafamilial clinical variability and two different-sized D4Z4 repeats. Indeed, 4/10 patients presented a predominant scapular form and 6/10 patients presented a predominant peroneal form. The mean age at onset of symptoms was of 38 years, but highly varied from 8 years to 58 years. We did not ﬁnd any correlation between the length of the repeat unit and the age of onset or the predominant location of the muscle weakness. Hypotheses in order to explain the two different-sized D4Z4 repeats included: 1) a common ancestor compound heterozygote for two different-sized D4Z4 alleles, 2) a common ancestor with de novo somatic mosaicism with two different-sized D4Z4 repeats on the same allele secondary to gene conversion with intrachromosomal crossover, 3) an affected individual with an inherited D4Z4 contraction and acquired somatic mosaicism with two different-sized D4Z4 repeats on the same allele secondary to gene conversion without intrachromosomal crossover. Interestingly, the second mechanism has been recently reported in 3 cases (Lemmers, AJHG 2004, 75: 44-53), indicating that gene 
conversion might not be a rare event in FSHD.
P0708. A novel mutation in the ARS (component B) gene 
encoding SLURP-1 in a Turkish family with Mal de Meleda
S. Artan, M. H. Müslümanoğlu, O. Çilingir, G. Bademci;  
Osmangazi University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genetics, Es -
kisehir, Turkey.
Mal de Meleda (MDM) is an autosomal recessive , transgressive 
palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK) associated with keratotic skin lesions, perioral erythema , brachydactyly and nail abnormalities.The ARS ( component B) gene has been mapped on chromosome 8qter and mutations have been implicated in MDM . The gene contains 3 exons and encodes the protein named secreted lymphocyte antigen-6/urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor-related protein-1 (SLURP-1). The small Turkish family with MDM has been analysed for the ARS gene mutation(s). DNAs were extracted from the peripheral blood of the family members and the ARS gene were sequenced by the automated DNA sequencer (ABI Prism 310). The mutation was detected in the 2nd exon of the gene.The mutation was changing of cysteine residue to premature stop codon at the position 43. The son diagnosed as the MDM was homozygote for the mutation whereas the 
parents were heterozygote
P0709. Multiplex SNP genotyping using Luminex bead arrays
B. Haberpursch1, B. van Stigt2, L. Kruska2;  
1Multimetrix GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Gemeinschaftspraxis für Laboratori -
umsmedizin, Mikrobiologie und Humangenetik, Mönchengladbach, Germany .
An economical multiparameter assay based on Fluorescent Bead Arrays (FBA) and the Oligonucleotide Ligation Assay (OLA) is described, which allows Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) genotyping of PCR ampliﬁed samples. The method is based on the Luminex LabMAP technology using microsphere beads available in one hundred different ﬂuorescent color tones of red and infrared. These microspheres serve as solid phase for the SNP genotyping reaction. Each bead species is coupled to a detection oligonucleotide carrying the discriminating base at the 3’ position. After ampliﬁcation of the relevant gene fragment a trimeric hybridization complex is formed consisting of one strand of the PCR product on one hand and the bead-coupled discriminating oligonucleotide and an adjacent 3’ biotinylated signal oligonucleotide on the other hand. Detection and signal oligonucleotide meet at the site of mutation due their complementarity to the sequence up and downstream of the test locus. Subsequently, a ligase is added which ligates the two nucleotides only when all nucleotides at the junction site are basepaired. Mismatched DNA fragments are not ligated. The detection of the ligated DNA fragments is accompished by the read-out of the biotin bound streptavidine-phycoerythrine conjugate within the Luminex analyzer.This highly accurate and sensitive no-wash assay can be used for economical genotyping reactions in the ﬁeld of routine diagnostics as well as in research. Due to the high ﬂexiblity of the FBA up to ﬁfty SNPs 
can be analyzed simultaneously in a single sample.
P0710. Complex genetic analysis of the AZF region, AR and 
CFTR on patients with various forms of male infertility
D. Mikhaylenko1,2, O. Babenko1,2, E. Kirillova3, O. Nikiforova3, N. Zaretskaya3, 
M. Nemtsova1,2;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute 
for Molecular Medicine of the Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 3Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Y-chromosome microdeletions (AZF region), mutations of CFTR and 
alleles CAG>26 of the AR are the most common genetic factors for male 
infertility. AZF loci microdeletions are responsible for azoospermia and 
severe or moderate oligospermia. These diseases are also associated with certain allelic variants of the 
AR CAG-repeat. The risk of pathology 
in men with CAG>26 is 4 times higher than the population average. 
Congenital absence of the vas deferens in some cases is caused by a 
combination of mutations in CFTR .
The purpose of this study is the complex molecular analysis of AZFa, 
b, c loci, AR and CFTR in Russian patients with various forms of male 
infertility. We have investigated 76 DNA samples from unrelated patients of Russian origin. Y-chromosome microdeletions were analyzed using 6 markers. We also determined the length of the 
AR CAG-repeat, the 
presence of delF508 and allelic variants IVS8(T)n in CFTR .
We detected AZF deletions in 8 patients with oligo- or azoospermia 
(10.5 % of cases). AR alleles CAG>26 were observed in 3 cases. The 
patient with absence of the vas deferens had a CFTR genotype delF508 
/ 5T. Two heterozygous carriers of the delF508 and 5 carriers of a 5T mutation were revealed. Altogether, screening has revealed mutations and predisposing allelic variants in 23 (30.2 % of cases) patients with male infertility. Detection of heterozygous carriers of 
CFTR mutations 
provides differentiation of the infertility and furthermore prevents cystic ﬁbrosis.
P0711. Evaluation of Association Between Glutathione S-
Transferase M1 and T1 Genotypes and Myocardial Infarction
T. Cora1, M. Tokac2, H. Acar1, E. Gabakci1, M. Kayrak2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty, Selçuk University, 
Konya, Turkey, 2Department of Cardiology, Meram Medical Faculty, Selçuk 
University, Konya, Turkey.
Myocardial infarction (MI) is the most frequent causes of mortality and 
morbidity. Heredity is the most important risk factor for developing of MI. Association between MI and genetic basis have been not established sufﬁciently. We aimed to evaluate distribution of glutathione S-transferase (GST-M1) and (GST-T1) genotypes in patients with MI, for investigated whether polymorphisms in these genes inﬂuence risk of coronary artery disease. The study population consist of 153 patients with MI admitted our Hospital to seek medical attention and 131 healty persons as a control group. DNA was extracted from whole blood by using DNA extraction method and the GST-M1 and GST-T1
 
polymorphism were determined using a multiplex PCR technique. We evaluated relation between coronary artery diseases and distribution 
of GST-M1  and GST-T1  polymorphisms.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics234
P0712. Rett syndrome - MECP2 mutations in Polish patients with 
classic form and variants of the disease.
E. Popowska , E. Ciara, D. Jurkiewicz, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, D. Pieku -
towska-Abramczuk, P. Kowalski, M. Gajdulewicz, K. Spodar, K. Chrzanowska, 
A. Tylki-Szymanska, M. Krajewska-Walasek;  
Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
Rett syndrome (RTT, MIM#312750) is a progressive neurological 
disorder affecting almost exclusively females. Mental retardation, loss of acquired skills, stereotypical hand movements, seizures, scoliosis and autonomic dysfunction are the common clinical features appearing after a few months of almost normal development. Besides the classic form of RTT, ﬁve distinct variants have been described. The prevalence of the disease is estimated to be 1 in 10000 - 15000 female births. RTT results from mutations in 
MECP2 gene in chromosome 
Xq28 coding methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2). To date more 
than 300 various MECP2 mutations have been found.
The aim of our study was to investigate molecular basis of Rett syndrome in Polish population. 
MECP2 gene mutation analysis was 
performed in 123 female patients with classic form and variants of RTT. Genomic DNA was extracted from lymphocytes, and coding region of 
MECP2A isoform was ampliﬁed with 8 primer pairs and analyzed by SSCP analysis. Amplicons with shifted mobility were subsequently sequenced. Twenty ﬁve different 
MECP2 mutations were found in 
45 probands from all analyzed families (37%), including 9 missense mutations, 4 nonsense mutations and 12 frameshift mutations. Nine mutations (K305Q, E472Q, c.329delA, c.506_519dup14, c.697_701del5, c.883delT, c.975_1186del212ins18, c.1162_1178del17, c.1353_1354insA) were speciﬁc for Polish patients. Almost all mutations are clustered in exon 4, mainly in regions coding methyl-binding domain (MBD), transcription repression domain (TRD), and C-terminal part of MECP2 protein. Seven recurrent mutations (R106W, T158M, R168X, R255X, R270X, R294X, R306C) account for 54% of 
all mutated alleles.The study was supported by KBN Project 3P05E11222.
P0713. Calcium-Sensing receptor gene A986S polymorphism 
and bone mass in hypertensive women.
A. Sanz-Cantalapiedra1, J. L. Perez-Castrillón2, J. Martin-Escudero2, J. Silva2, 
I. Justo2, E. Velasco1, A. Dueñas2, A. Blanco Quirós1;  
1Universidad de Valladolid. Instituto de Biologia y Genetica Molecular-CSIC, 
Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Río Hortega, Valladolid, Spain.
Only a few studies have analized the relationship between bone mass and hypertension, ﬁnding an inverse relationship between bone mineral density and hypercalciuria (the most frequent disorder of calcium metabolism in hypertension). The function of the Calcium Sensing receptor is to maintain the serum calcium concentration within a narrow physiological range. Activating and inactivating mutations of the gene causes hypercalcemia and hypocalcemia respectively. Allele S of A986S polymorphism, is associated with higher levels of calcium 
and lower calciuria.CaSR acts exerting an inhibitory effect on the Na-Cl Cotransporter 
(NCCT) of the distal convoluted tubule.To assess the effect of Calcium-Sensing receptor A986S polymorphism, in 48 hypertensive women with mild-to-moderate hypertension, we determined: Calcium, Phosphorus, Magnesium, PTHi, 25(OH) vitamin D, 1,25(OH)
2 vitamin D, osteocalcin, deoxypiridinoline in urine, 24-hour 
urine calcium and bone densitometry of the lumbar spine and studied by PCR Calcium Sensing receptor gene A986S polymorphism.Genotype frequency was 69% for AA, 27% for AS and 4% for SS, with an allelic frequency of 82% for allele A and 18% for allele S.There wasn´t differences between patients with and without allele S in calcium metabolism parameters, bone remodelling markers and bone mineral density, except lower levels of phosphorus in patients without 
allele S (3.5+/- 0.5 vs 4.0 +/- 0.4; p=0.034).Coclusions: The Calcium Sensing Receptor A986S Polymorphism have no clinical signiﬁcance in post-menopausal hypertensive women.
P0714. Spectrum of DHCR7 gene mutation in 48 patients with 
SLOS and carrier frequency of the disease in Poland.
E. Ciara1, A. Jezela-Stanek1, M. Witsch-Baumgartner2, E. Malunowicz1, E. 
Popowska1, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, D. Jurkie -
wicz1, P. Kowalski1, M. Nowaczyk3, G. Utermann2, M. Krajewska-Walasek1;  1The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Medical 
Biology and Human Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, 3McMaster University, Hamil -
ton, ON, Canada.
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is an autosomal recessive disorder of cholesterol biosynthesis caused by mutations in the DHCR7 gene. Forty eight Polish patients with SLOS underwent mutation analysis. In total we identiﬁed 15 DHCR7 mutations. The mutation frequencies in Polish patients were signiﬁcantly different from those observed in Western European populations. Two mutations, W151X (35/96 alleles, 38,2%) and V326L (26/96 alleles, 27,0%) accounted for 65,2% of all observed in our cohort. By comparing clinical severity scores, and the biochemical and molecular data a genotype-phenotype correlation was attempted. Mild phenotypes are correlated with mutations affecting the putative transmembrane domains TM1-TM6 or CT regions and severe phenotypes with mutations localized in TM7 and 4L region. The most severe and lethal cases were related with genotype 0/0. The phenotypic differences of patients with the same genotype suggest that severity of the disease may be affected by other factors. The disease is most prevalent among populations of Central Europe (Czech Republic 1:10000, Slovakia 1:15000-1:20000). Published data indicated that the incidence of SLOS may be as high as 1:1590 -1:13500 in USA (state of Oregon) population of European ancestry while in general populations of the United Kingdom and the United States of America the incidence is estimated as 1:60000. The observations of Polish groups indicate that the disease carrier rate is approximately 1 in 27 
and SLOS incidence is estimated as 1:2646 to 1: 4065.
The study was supported in part by KBN, Project No. 2P05E06727.
P0715. Analysis of telomerase activity in cervical samples as a 
diagnostic biomarker of cervical dysplasia.
A. Tsezou1, P. Oikonomou1, P. Kollia1, I. Mademtzis2, E. Kostopoulou1, I. Mes -
sinis1, N. Vamvakopoulos1;  
1University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece, 2University Hospital of Larissa, Lar -
issa, Greece.
Telomerase activity and human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) mRNA expression were investigated in cervical specimens and were correlated with cytologic ﬁndings and the presence of HPV infection. Telomerase activity was evaluated by the telomeric repeat protocol assay (TRAP) and hTERT mRNA expression by RT-PCR. HPV DNA was detected by PCR, as well as restriction endonuclease digestion. HPV DNA was detected in all 82 specimens with abnormal cytologic ﬁndings and in 4/34 normal samples. Low grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (LGSILs) were present in 74/82 specimens (90.2%) and high grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HGSILs) in 8/82 (9.75%). Seven of the 8 HGSIL (87.5%) and 26/74 LGSIL (35.1%) specimens were hTERT positive, while all normal specimens were hTERT mRNA negative. Telomerase activity was detected in 21/74 (28.4%) LGSIL/ASCUS and in 5/8 (62.5%) HGSIL samples. A correlation was observed between telomerase activity, hTERT mRNA expression and high risk HPV infection in HGSIL samples (p<0.001). Telomerase activity assessment in cervical smears showed sensitivity and speciﬁcity for HGSILs 62.5% and 80.5% respectively, while hTERT mRNA expression assessment showed 87.5% sensitivity and 86% speciﬁcity for HGSIL. Based on the above telomerase assessment values it is suggested that the telomerase system might be an appropriate diagnostic marker for cytology. However, the ﬁnal evaluation must rely on a combination of all available test assessment 
data and clinical diagnosis.
P0716. Mutation detection in Iranian patients affected with Cystic 
ﬁbrosis
F. Baldinotti1, M. Tabatabai1, V. Hadavi2, R. Kariminejad2, N. Almadani2, F. 
Afroozan2, H. Najmabadi2, P. Simi1;  
1Laboratorio di Citogenetica e Genetica Molecolare, Azienda Ospedaliera Uni -
versitaria Pisana, Pisa, Italy, 2Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics 
Center, 14665/154, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF), a common autosomal recessive disease, results 
from mutations in the cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. Since the isolation of this gene, almost 1300 mutations and a large number of polymorphisms have been discovered. It has been recognized as the most lethal genetic disease, CF often causes death in children. The frequency and the spectrum of CFTR Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics235
gene mutations vary in different populations.
The main object of this study was to determine the type of CF mutations in the Iranian population and to perform prenatal diagnosis. This study included 14 couples referred to our center. Using a test panel of 31 known European mutations, we analyzed samples from each individual by multiplex OLA-PCR and ABI Prism 3100 genetics assays. At this point, for patients in whom we detected no mutation, we performed SSCP and DNA sequencing. We identiﬁed the following six mutations in 30 of 54 CF chromosomes: dF508 (n=12), G542X (n=6), S466X (n=4), R1070Q (n=4), N1303K (n=2), 4005-1G->A (n=2). The overall detection rate was 41%. For the purpose of ﬁrst trimester prenatal diagnosis, we performed direct mutation analysis on fetuses from four CF families. The results showed that all four fetuses were 
homozygous.
P0717. The R369C mutation in the CBS gene: characterization 
and frequency
M. Janosik, B. Janosikova, J. Sokolova, V. Kozich;  
Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles University, Prague 2, Czech 
Republic.
Cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) deﬁciency is the most common cause of homocystinuria. More than 130 pathogenic mutations in CBS gene were detected on ~550 homocystinuric alleles. One of them, the R369C mutation was described as a very frequent variant among newborns in Norway. In contrast, only four patient alleles carrying this mutation were detected worldwide. As the protein carrying R369C was not yet characterized, we expressed this mutant by prokaryotic expression system and we examined the prevalence among 
newborns.To characterize the R369C mutation, we expressed R369C mutant in E.coli. Under physiological conditions (37°C) the mutant enzyme had no detectable activity, and form aggregates. However, the addition of pyridoxal-5-phosphate (PLP) increased the enzyme activity to 10% of wild type enzyme. In addition, the PLP saturated enzyme was also activated by S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) similarly like wild type CBS. These data suggests that R369C is indeed pathogenic mutation, 
although its activity may be stimulated.We analyzed 600 healthy newborns for the presence of R369C mutation. The heterozygocity for the mutation was observed in 6/600 samples, corresponding to expected incidence of homozygotes to 1:40.000 (95%CI 1:8.000-1:295.000). These data conﬁrmed that R369C frequency in another European populations is also very high, 
supposingly leading to high frequency of homozygotes.To conclude, the R369C mutation is a pathogenic variant which may be activated by PLP and SAM and homozygocity for this variant may confers a mild clinical phenotype which may be missed by existing 
diagnostic procedure.Supported by: Wellcome Trust grant, Research Project of Charles 
University No.VZ206100.
P0718. Mutations and Fenotype/Genotype Relations in 69 FMF 
Patients
H. Samli1, M. Solak1, O. Dogru2, E. Yuksel1, F. Ovali2;  
1Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Afyon, 
Turkey, 2Kocatepe University, Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Afyon, 
Turkey.
Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an inherited disorder characterized by episodes of recurrent fever, arthritis and pleuritis as 
well as development of amyloidosis.In this study, the frequency of M694V, M694I, V726A, M680I and E148Q mutations and phenotype-genotype correlations among 69 patients with clinical diagnosis of FMF have been tested. The correlation between genetic analysis and clinical ﬁndings were evaluated.Mutations were present in 53(76.8%) of 69 cases enrolled into study. Of 106 alleles 50(47.2%) were M694V, 9(8.5%) were V726A, 3(2.8%) were M694I, 9(8.5%) were E148Q and 9(8.5%) were M680I 
mutations.In clinical evaluation according to Tel Hashomer criteria, the positive major and minor criteria for patients with homozygote, heterozygote 
and patients with no mutations were shown in table.Table. Total numbers of criteria stratiﬁed according to mutationsGenotypeTel Hashomer Criteria  
Total number criteria (criteria per 
patient)
Major Minor
Homozygote Mutation (n=11, 
20.5%)17 (1.55) 14 (1.3)
Heterozygote Mutation (n=42, 
56.3%)45 (1.07) 52 (1.24)
No Mutation (n=16, 23.2%) 16 (1) 15 (0.94)
Among all cases, the frequency of Tel Hashomer criteria in homozygote mutations group was greater than other groups. Although the frequency of criteria in 16 patients who had none of these ﬁve mutations was less than the other two groups, the number of major and minor criteria per 
patient was not as low as to decide not to examine mutations.
P0719. Exon repetition mutations in Dyygve Melchior Clausen 
syndrome
E. Kinning1,2, C. Tufarelli1, S. Shackleton1, M. A. Aldred1, R. C. Trembath1,2;  
1University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 2Leicestershire Genetics 
Centre, Leicester, United Kingdom.
Dyggve Melchior Clausen syndrome (DMC OMIM 223800) is an autosomal recessive osteochondrodysplasia characterised by short stature with a short trunk, multiple bony abnormalities and mental retardation. The DMC gene on chromosome 18q21 encodes a protein product, dymeclin with no homology to any known protein. To better characterise the DMC gene we performed RT-PCR of dymeclin cDNA in subjects from 2 kindreds and detected aberrantly sized products compared to control samples. Sequencing revealed a duplication of exon 2 and repetition of 4 copies of exon 14 respectively. Fluorescent dosage PCR and Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA were consistent with these ﬁndings. Southern blot analysis of the exon 14 repetition allowed us to further delineate the region of duplication and studies underway are continuing to narrow down this region. Both mutations lead to a frameshift introducing a premature stop codon with 
presumed loss of protein as the pathogenetic mechanism.
P0720. Three novel mutations in the second exon of CYP1B1 in 
Iranian Primary Congenital Glaucoma patients
B. Khoramian Tusi1,2, E. Elahi1,2, H. Amini3, R. Zareii3, A. Abdoollahi3, Y. Eslami3, 
M. Jabarvand3, S. Yazdani4, M. Pakravan4, N. Nilfrooshan5, Z. Behroozi6, M. Sanati2;  
1Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Center for Ge -
netic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Farabi 
Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Labaﬁ Nejad Hospital, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Rasool Akram Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 6Imam Hossein Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Primary Congenital Glaucoma (PCG) is an important cause of childhood blindness in Iran. We aimed to determine the proportion of Iranian patients afﬂicted with PCG whose disease is due to mutations in the cytochrome P450 1B1 (CYP1B1) gene at locus GLC3A. Mutations in both alleles of the gene result in the PCG phenotype. The gene has three exons, two of which are coding. Most reported mutations in the gene are located in the coding exons. In this part of the study, mutations were sought in exon 2 which is the ﬁrst coding exon and has 
approximately 1000 bp.Sixty six chromosomes from thirty three unrelated Iranian patients afﬂicted with glaucoma at birth or before the age of 3 years old were studied. The second exon and neighboring intronic sequences of CYP1B1 was ampliﬁed from DNA of peripheral blood in two overlapping PCR reactions. PCR products were sequenced by the di-deoxynucleotide termination protocol using ﬂuorescent labeled nucleotides. Sequence data and chromatograms were analyzed by 
the Sequencher software.Twenty alleles (30%) among the sixty six chromosomes studied had putative disease causing mutations in exon 2 of the CYP1B1 gene. Five distinct mutations were detected, three of which are novel. The new mutations included a nine base pair duplication (c.N1166dupGCAACTTCA), a single nucleotide deletion (c.N553del A), and a missense mutation (c.N887G>A; p.E173K). Additionally, six putative polymorphisms were identiﬁed. As reported for other populations, mutations in the second exon were less frequent than 
mutations in the third exon.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics236
P0721. Novel CLCN5  gene mutations in Spanish families with 
Dent disease
E. Ramos-Trujillo1, H. González-Acosta1, C. Flores1, V. García-Nieto1, J. Ca -
macho Díaz2, E. Guillén Navarro3, S. Gracia Manzano3, F. Claverie-Martín 1;  
1Unidad de Investigación, Hospital Universitario N. S. de Candelaria, Santa 
Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 2Sección de Nefrología Pediátrica, Hospital Univer -
sitari Saint Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, 3Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital 
Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain.
Dent disease is an X-linked renal tubular disorder characterized by 
low-molecular-weight proteinuria, hypercalciuria, nephrolithiasis, nephrocalcinosis and renal failure. This disease is associated with mutations in the 
CLCN5  gene encoding the voltage-gated ClC-
5 chloride channel that participates in the acidiﬁcation of proximal tubule endosomes. Our goal was to identify and characterize 
CLCN5 
mutations in Spanish patients with Dent disease.Blood DNA from 11 unrelated patients and relatives was used for PCR ampliﬁcation. The 
CLCN5  coding exons and their intronic ﬂanking 
regions were analysed by automatic sequencing. Defects in pre-mRNA splicing were analysed in blood samples by RT-PCR.We identiﬁed 8 new mutations: 2 nonsense (R467X, R704X), 2 missense (C219R, W547G), 1 frameshift (976delG), and 3 splicing (IVS2-2A>G, IVS3-6A>T, IVS9-30C>T). In some cases, the mutations were shown to co-segregate with the disease. Analysis of RNA from the patient with the mutation in intron 2 acceptor splice site showed an aberrant 
CLCN5  pre-mRNA splicing. A similar analysis of the other 
two intronic mutations, located at the polypyrimidine tract and near the branch site, respectively, showed no splicing defect. We also found that the previously identiﬁed 
Alu insertion in the coding region of 
CLCN5 led to a splicing defect that skipped exon 11.
These mutations predict structurally signiﬁcant alterations of the ClC-5 protein and are likely to result in loss of chloride channel function. The absence of 
CLCN5  mutations in 2 patients indicates that variants in 
other genes could be associated with Dent disease.Funding source: Fundación Canaria de Investigación y Salud 
(FUNCIS)
P0722. Molecular diagnosis of HED : a ﬁve years experience
M. Vincent1, N. Chassaing2, S. Bourthoumieu1, M. Cossee3, C. Colombies1, N. 
Janisse1, P. Calvas2;  
1Medical Genetic Department, Toulouse, France, 2Medical Genetic Department 
and INSERM U563, Toulouse, France, 3Medical Genetic Department, Stras -
bourg, France.
Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is the most common form of over 150 different ectodermal dysplasias. This syndrome is characterized by the triade : hypohidrosis, hypodontia and hypotrichosis. The X linked form, caused by a mutation in the 
ED1 
gene, represents the majority of HED. However a minority of HED is inherited as a dominant or recessive autosomal trait. These last result 
from mutations in at least two genes EDAR  and EDARADD .
We carried out a mutational analysis of
ED1 gene in 145 unrelated HED families or sporadic cases between 
2000 and 2005,
EDAR  gene in 37 of 46 unrelated subjects with no mutation in ED1,
EDARADD  gene in 28 unrelated subjects neither ED1 nor EDAR  
HED.Our investigations allowed us to better assess the implication of the 
three loci in HED :66% of HED were caused by mutation in 
ED1 gene (75% in affected 
males versus 25% in affected females)about 25% of non 
ED1 HED were related to EDAR (2/3 males, 1/3 
females)
and only one case presented a mutation in EDARADD  gene.
Review of clinical features showed no obvious phenotype/genotype correlation. We can only observe more sporadic cases in 
EDAR  
related HED.Our study supports a molecular diagnostic strategy based only on the implication frequency of the different genes because of the large variability of clinical expression and the smaller size of most of the families making linkage analysis difﬁcult. A exception should be made for a consanguineous family where EDAR and EDARADD should be tested ﬁrst.P0723. Quantiﬁcation of cell-free fetal DNA in the maternal 
circulation and its correlation with clinical outcome of 
pregnancy
M. Korabecna1,2, A. Horinek2,3, Z. Ulcova-Gallova1,2, P. Calda2,3, K. Nouzova4, 
H. Viskova3, D. Bezdickova2,3;  
1Faculty of Medicine in Pilsen, Charles University, Pilsen, Czech Republic, 21st 
School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3General 
Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Gyncentrum, s.r.o., Prague, 
Czech Republic.
Objective: Recently, multiple studies has demonstrated the existence of cell-free fetal DNA in the blood of pregnant women. An elevation of DNA concentration in maternal plasma has been determined in various cases of pregnancy complications (preeclampsia, preterm labor, polyhydramnion etc.) or cytogenetic abnormalities (fetal aneuploidy). In our study, the concentration of cell-free fetal DNA in maternal plasma has been measured during all trimesters of pregnancy and the results 
were compared with clinical data.
Methods: Fetal SRY-speciﬁc DNA quantiﬁcation was carried out by real-time PCR method on the ABI PRISM 5700 and 7000 machines using the MGB probe and a couple of primers. Cell-free DNA isolated 
from plasma of 200 pregnant women were tested.
Results: We have found  statistically signiﬁcant elevation of fetal DNA 
in maternal plasma in the 3rd trimester both in the twin pregnancies with 
two male fetuses (p = 0.037) and with one male and one female fetus (p = 0.033), resp. We have seen even higher elevation of fetal DNA concentration (p = 0.096) for the IUGR and hypertension compared with the normal pregnancy women sample. No signiﬁcant elevation of cell-free fetal DNA in maternal plasma has been demonstrated in females with APA (antiphospholipide) syndrome (p = 0.511).
Conclusion : Quantiﬁcation of cell-free DNA in maternal plasma is a 
potentially useful marker for monitoring placental abnormalities, but further studies concerning the mechanisms of its transfer, turnover and 
clearance in maternal plasma are needed.
Supported by the grant no. 203/03/1025 of the Grant Agency of the 
Czech Republic.
P0724. Hailey-Hailey disease as an examplary orthodisease
R. Kellermayer1, R. Szigeti2, A. Miseta3, M. Czako4, G. Kosztolanyi1,4;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary , 2County 
Hospital of Baranya, Pecs, Hungary, 3Central Laboratory, University of Pecs, 
Pecs, Hungary, 4MTA-PTE Clinical Genetics Research Group, Pecs, Hungary.
The term orthodisease has recently been introduced to deﬁne human diseases in which the pathogenic gene has orthologs in model organism genomes. In this presentation Hailey-Hailey disease (HHD), a blistering skin disorder due to haploinsufﬁciency of ATP2C1 is reviewed as an orthodisease from a Saccharomyces cerevisiae perspective. ATP2C1 encodes the human secretory pathway Ca2+/Mn2+ ATPase hSPCA1 and is orthologous to the PMR1 gene initially identiﬁed in S. cerevisiae. hSPCA1 fully complements PMR1 deﬁciency in yeast and pmr1Î” S. cervisiae has proved to be a valuable tool to screen ATP2C1 mutations and address potential pathogenic/pharmacologic mechanisms in Hailey-Hailey disease. We have recently found that a PMR1 deﬁcient yeast is less reactive to increasing levels of extracellular calcium similarly as HHD keartinocytes are. Additionally calcineurin inhibition induced tolerance to high levels of extracellular calcium for a pmr1Î” strain suggesting a possible direct beneﬁcial cellular mechanism of calcineurin inhibition in the treatment of HHD. Our ﬁndings lend further evidence that this human skin disorder is an ideal example of an 
orthodisease.
P0725. The novel 312-326del14 mutation of the connexin 26 gene 
is the second common cause of non-syndromic sensorineural 
hearing loss in patients with deafness from Bashkortostan
L. U. Dzhemileva , I. M. Khidiyatova, E. K. Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Several studies have reported that mutations in the GJB2 gene are a common cause of non-syndromic hearing impairment. More than 80 different mutations of the GJB2 gene have been reported. Many of them are “private” mutations, they have been observed in only one or a few pedigrees, but examples of very common alleles have also been identiﬁed in several populations including the 35delG mutation in Caucasians (70% of all GJB2 pathogenic alleles), the 167delT Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics237
allele in Ashkenazi Jews (carrier rate is 3-4%), the 235delC allele in 
Asian populations (80% pathogenic GJB2 alleles among Japanese). We report the identiﬁcation of a novel 14bp deletion of the coding region GJB2 gene in a Russian family with autosomal dominant neurosensory deafness. This mutation results in the deletion of ﬁve amino acids, including K105, an amino acid residue, which is highly conserved throughout evolution. The 14bp deletion co-segregates with the diseases phenotype in these patients family, but is not found in unaffected relatives or 50 normal individuals. The 312-326del14 mutation is believed to be pathological: ﬁrst, because of it location and conservation and, second, because no change has been observed in a series of normal control. 312-326del14 mutation of the connexin 26 gene accounts for up to 3% of pathogenic GJB2 alleles among patients with nonsyndromic hearing impairment from Bashkortostan. So, the 312-326del14 mutation in GJB2 is the second most frequent 
cause of non-syndromic hearing impairment in our region.
P0726. At least 38% of Iranian Primary Congenital Glaucoma 
patients carry two mutated alleles of CYP1B1
F. Chitsazian1,2, E. Elahi1,2, H. Amini3, R. Zareii3, A. Abdoollahi3, Y. Eslami3, 
M. Jabarvand3, S. Yazdani4, M. Pakravan5, N. Nilfrooshan6, Z. Behroozi7, M. 
Sanati2;  
1Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Research Center 
for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
3Farabi Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Labaﬁ Njad Hospital, Teh -
ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Labaﬁ Nejad Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 6Rasool Akram Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 7Imam Hos -
sein Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Glaucoma is a heterogeneous group of optic neuropathies characterized by degeneration of the optic nerve, usually associated with elevated intraocular pressure. Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG), which becomes apparent at birth or before the age of three, is a major cause of childhood blindness. We aimed to determine the proportion of Iranian PCG patients whose disease is due to mutations in the cytochrome P4501B1 (CYP1B1) gene. Mutations in both alleles of the gene result in the PCG phenotype. The gene has three exons, two of which are coding. In this part of the study, mutations were sought in exon 3 which 
is the second coding exon and has approximately 600 bp.One hundred thirty six chromosomes from 68 unrelated Iranian PCG patients were studied. The third exon of CYP1B1 was ampliﬁed from DNA of peripheral blood by PCR. The ampliﬁed products were sequenced by the di-deoxynucleotide termination protocol. Sequence data and chromatograms were analyzed by the Sequencher software.Fifty four alleles (40 %) among the 136 chromosomes studied had putative disease causing mutations in exon 3 of the CYP1B1 gene. Seven distinct mutations were detected, two of which are novel. The new mutations were c.N1472C>T (p.R368C) and c.N1565A>G (p.I399V). Additionally, two putative polymorphisms were identiﬁed. Among seventy nine Iranian PCG patients in whom exon 2 and/or exon 3 of the CYP1B1 gene were sequenced, thirty carried two putative disease causing mutations in the gene, indicating that mutations in 
CYP1B1 account for disease in at least 38% of Iranian PCG patients.
P0727. Novel 1308delT mutation of the RPE65 gene in patients 
with nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa from Bashkortostan
E. R. Grinberg , L. U. Dzhemileva, E. K. Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a group of inherited disorders in wich abnormalities of the photoreceptors or the retinal pigment epithelium of the retina lead to progressive visual loss. RP is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of retinal degenerative diseases. The prevalence of RP is 19 to 27 per 100,000 in general population. At least 40 different genes or loci are known to cause nonsyndromic RP. RPE65 has a crucial role in the metabolism of vitamin A in the visual cycle. Gu et al. (1997) estimated that RPE65 mutations account for approximately 5% of autosomal recessive childhood-onset severe retinal dystrophy. We studied patients with RP and their relatives from Bashkortostan. We examined all 14 exons of RPE65 gene in 119 unrelated patients with RP and 77 unaffected individuals by single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis (SSCP) and direct sequencing. Patients were examined clinically and with visual function tests. We report the identiﬁcation of a novel 1bp deletion (1308delT) of the 12 exon RPE65 gene in 6 unrelated patients with sporadic form of RP from Bashkortostan. All these patients carried 1308delT mutation in homozygous form and have similar fundus appearances characterised as a maculodistrophy. Frequency of 1308delT mutation of the RPE65 gene among the patients with RP from Bashkortostan is 0.05 on mutant chromosomes. 1308delT of RPE65 gene heterozygous carriers were not identiﬁed in 77 healthy controls from Bashkortostan.Identiﬁcation of the molecular defects underlying retinal degeneration will allow clinicians to establish more accurate diagnoses and prospects 
for prenatal diagnostic.
P0728. Sulfatase activities are regulated by the interaction of the 
sulfatase modifying factor 1 (SUMF1) with SUMF2
M. Cosma1, E. Zito1, A. Fraldi1, S. Pepe1, I. Annunziata1, G. Kobinger2, P. Di 
Natale3, A. Ballabio1,3;  
1TIGEM Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 2University 
of Pennsylvania, Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3Faculty of 
Medicine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
Sulfatases undergo a unique post-translational modiﬁcation that converts a highly conserved cysteine located within their active site into formylglycine. This modiﬁcation is necessary for sulfatase catalytic activity, and it is promoted by the protein product of 
SUMF1, the gene 
mutated in Multiple Sulfatase Deﬁciency (MSD). A paralogous gene, 
SUMF2, was discovered because of its sequence similarity to SUMF1 . 
Both immunoﬂuorescence and co-immunoprecipitation experiments show that SUMF2 co-localizes with SUMF1 within the endoplasmic reticulum and that the two proteins form cysteine-mediated heterodimers. Furthermore, we show that SUMF1 and SUMF2 are also able to form homodimers. We have previously demonstrated that co-transfection of 
SUMF1 with sulfatase cDNAs greatly enhances 
the activities of over-expressed sulfatases. Now we obtained data demonstrating that SUMF2 inhibits the enhancing effect of SUMF1 on sulfatases. These results suggest that SUMF1-SUMF2 interaction 
represents an additional level of control of the sulfatase activities.
P0729. Diagnosis of lysosomal storage diseases in Romanian 
patients
C. Drugan, T. C. Drugan, P. Grigorescu-Sido, V. Cret, I. Olteanu, G. Jebeleanu;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy Cluj, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Lysosomal storage diseases represent an important group among inherited metabolic disorders. To date, more than 40 different lysosomal storage diseases have been identiﬁed, characterised by a deﬁciency of a lysosomal protein. We report the experience of the Romanian centre for the diagnosis of lysosomal storage diseases. 106 suspects originating from all regions of Romania were referred to our centre for further evaluation and speciﬁc diagnosis. Initial work-up was based on clinical and radiological evaluation. Lysosomal enzyme assays in peripheral leukocytes were performed according to standard techniques and indicated speciﬁc deﬁciencies in 46 patients (43.4%). Gaucher disease was diagnosed in 34 patients, followed by the mucopolysaccharidoses and mucolipidoses patients (5 mucopolysaccharidosis III B patients, one mucopolysaccharidosis VII patient and one mucolipidosis II patient) and the group of sphingolipidoses - other than Gaucher disease (2 GM1 gangliosidosis patients, one GM2 gangliosidosis, one metachromatic leukodystrophy and one Fabry disease patient). Frequent mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene were screened by PCR-RFLP and indicated an important prevalence of the N370S allele (56.45%) followed by the L444P (20.97%) and recNciI (4.84%) alleles. Sporadic, unknown mutations accounted for 17.74% of the mutant alleles in Gaucher disease patients. Genotype-phenotype correlations in Romanian Gaucher disease patients were similar to those reported in other Caucasian populations, but also indicated speciﬁc characteristics. We conclude that lysosomal storage diseases and especially Gaucher disease may represent an important pathology in our population, and that speciﬁc laboratory diagnosis and follow-up 
is the key step in the accurate management of these patients.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics238
P0730. Lack of association of TaqIB polymorphism in the CETP 
gene with HDL cholesterol levels and the risk of CAD in Turkish 
population.
M. Alikasifoglu1, L. Tokgozoglu1, S. Humphries2, D. Aktas1, V. Sansoy3, A. 
Onat3, E. Tuncbilek1;  
1Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 2UCL Medical School, London, United 
Kingdom, 3Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
Genetic variants at the cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) 
locus have been associated with CETP activity. Several studies have reported that the CETP TaqIB polymorphism is associated with HDL cholesterol levels and the risk of coronary artery disease (CAD), but the results are inconsistent. We have examined allele frequencies and lipid associations for the common CETP TaqIB polymorphism in a sample of 317 population controls and 185 angiographically evaluated patients with CAD. The prevalence of the TaqIB2 allele was 0.42 in population controls and 0.4 in CAD (CETP distribution does not differ from H-W p=0.98 and p=0.62). After adjustment for study age, sex, body mass index (BMI), diabetes, activity, alcohol and smoking, TaqIB genotype was not associated with HDL cholesterol levels and the risk 
of CAD (p=0.46).The CETP TaqIB polymorphism did not show a signiﬁcant interaction with other risk factors in inﬂuencing CAD risk. Our ﬁndings do not support the hypothesis that a genetic variant resulting in lowered CETP 
activity is associated with reduced risk of coronary atherosclerosis.
P0731. Clinical Findings and Mutation Analysis of Capillary 
Morphogenesis Protein 2 ( CMG2) Gene in Two Sibling Patients 
with Juvenile Hyaline Fibromatosis
H. Acar1, Z. Tosun2, H. Muslumanoglu3, O. Cilingir3, N. Savaci2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Selcuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, 
Konya, Turkey, 2Department of Plastic Surgery, Selcuk University, Meram 
Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Osmangazi 
Selçuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, Eskisehir, Turkey.
Juvenile hyaline ﬁbromatosis (JHF) is an autosomal recessive trait that usually presents skin lesions, often on the scalp and ears, around the nose and on the hands, which require recurrent excision, in the ﬁrst years of life. Diagnosis is conﬁrmed by histological examination of the skin, which typically shows the presence of hyaline deposition in the 
dermis.we present a 12 year follow-up of clinical ﬁndings in two siblings (one male and one female) with JHF in a Turkish family. Both patients have undergone eleven operations for skin tumors and gingival hypertrophy. In the latest examination, they had numerous subcutaneous nodules on the scalp, face and ﬁngers, but no gingival hypertrophy or joint contractures. The male patient had big tumors on his ears and osteolytic bone lesions on his hands, more than in his sister.In molecular genetic analysis, we undertook mutation screening of the capillary morphogenesis protein 2 (
CMG2) gene, which was mapped to 
chromosome 4q21, in members of the family. By direct sequencing, we have identiﬁed mutations in the probands and both parents, who have a consanguinous marriage. Both sibling patients were homozygous for a 25816 TT mutation in IVS17, and both parents were heterozygous (GT) for this variant. The elder brother had another new heterozygous mutation, insG at 2497 in IVS7 while he was heterozygous (GT) for the IVS17 mutation of 
CMG2. These mutations have not been reported 
previously.
P0732. Molecular Diagnosis of X-CGD in Iran
S. Teimourian, Z. Rezvani, Z. Pourpak, M. Moin, R. Safaralizadeh, F. Fattahi, 
S. Mamishi, P. Tabatabaei, M. Fazlollahi, G. Khotaei, M. Gharagozlou, A. Far -
houdi, L. Atarod, M. Mansouri, M. Heidarzadeh;  
Immunology , Asthma and Allergy Research Institute Tehran university of medi -
cal sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Chronic Granulomatous Disease (CGD) is an inherited phagocytic 
disorder caused by mutations in NADPH oxidase subunits. Patients with CGD have life-threatening bacterial and fungal infections. It has been reported that most common presentation of the disease is caused by mutation in CYBB gene located on the X chromosome (Xp21.1), coding for gp91
phox. Diagnosis of CGD is made by demonstrating 
absent or markedly reduced oxidase activity in stimulated nutrophils. In order to facilitate ﬁnal diagnosis of CGD and mutation analysis of CYBB gene, we have developed molecular diagnosis of the disease. We have done CGD screening by NBT slide test, quantitative NBT and ﬂowcytometric analysis using DHR123 for the patients and their family.Since characterization of mutation is very important for detection of carriers and prenatal diagnosis, genomic DNA from 10 unrelated male patients with X-linked CGD was isolated and CYBB exons were ampliﬁed. PCR products were subjected to SSCP analysis on silver 
stained polyacrylamide gels.Our CGD screening result over 24 patients shows that X-CGD is as common as autosomal recessive CGD in Iran, which was roughly 50%. Sequence analysis for PCR products related to abnormal migration on SSCP gels for the ﬁrst seven exons of CYBB gene from X-CGD patients didn’t show any mutation up to now.We are now continuing sequencing by ABI prism BigDye terminators. During the course of study any new mutation will be reported to Human 
Mutation Data Bank.
P0733. Screening of mutations in ENG and ALK1 genes in 
hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia patients using denaturing 
high performance liquid chromatography
S. Tourret1, S. Lefebvre1, S. Pinson1, H. Plauchu2, G. Lesca1, S. Giraud1;  
1Laboratoire de Genetique, HCL, Lyon, France, 2Service de Genetique, HCL, 
Lyon, France.
Background: Our previous molecular studies of HHT patients was based on heteroduplex analysis, which allows a rapid screening at low cost but has not a very high sensibility, needs the use of radioactivity and remains a manual technique. Methods: Our protocol was based on touchdown PCR using the Optimase Taq and the Wave system (TransgenomicÒ). The 90 different mutations, previously found in our patients, covering most of the coding sequence were used to test the sensibility of our reaction conditions.Results: All the 90 mutations (63 substitutions and 27 insertions/deletions) were detected, including the 14 not detected by the heteroduplex technique. We subsequently screened DNA from 36 HHT unrelated patients with a conﬁrmed clinical diagnosis. We found a mutation in 28 patients, corresponding to a mutation rate of 78%. Twenty mutations were found in ALK1, including 13 missense mutations, 4 insertions/deletions, 2 splice site mutations and 1 nonsense mutation. Nine mutations were found in ENG, including 5 insertions/deletions, 1 missense mutations, 1 nonsense mutation, and 2 splice sites mutations which were conﬁrmed on cDNA level. Ten mutations were novel. A patient had a mutation in both genes. Segregation study is in course in his family. Conclusions: Compared to systematic sequencing, dHPLC is a more simple and faster technique, with a lower cost. It appears to have a much higher sensibility than the heteroduplex technique and then, dHPLC is a good screening method for a frequent disorder like HHT, caused by mutations in, at least, two different genes.
P0734. Screening of six candidate genes involved in the TGF-b/
BMP pathways in HHT patients without mutation in ENG or ALK1
G. Lesca1, N. Burnichon1, H. Plauchu2, M. Marion3, S. Pinson1, G. Plessis4, S. 
Odent5, O. Boute6, S. Rivière7, R. Harle8, A. Calender1, S. Giraud1;  
1Laboratoire de Genetique, HCL, Lyon, France, 2Service de Genetique, HCL, 
Lyon, France, 3INSERM U271, Lyon, France, 4Service de Genetique, CHU 
Clemenceau, Caen, France, 5Service de Genetique Medicale, Hopital Pon -
tchaillou, Rennes, France, 6Service de Genetique Clinique, Hopital Jeanne 
de Flandre, Lille, France, 7SErvice de Medecine Interne, Hopital saint-Eloi, 
Montpellier, France, 8Service de Medecine Interne, Hopital de la Conception, 
Marseille, France.
Background: About 10% of HHT patients have no mutation in ENG or 
ALK1, even after extensive screening. Linkage analysis is hampered by the age-related penetrance of the disease, the wide variability of the phenotype and phenocopies. Candidate gene study may, indeed, represent a valuable alternative approach in HHT.Methods: RNA extracted from lymphoblastoid cells was used for cDNA sequencing of six genes, SMAD1, SMAD4, SMAD5, SMAD7, BMPR1A and BMPR2, in 19 HHT patients without mutation in ENG and ALK1. RNA was extracted from cultured endothelial cells (EC) from hepatic dilated vessels of one HHT2 transplanted patient to test 
gene expression.Results: A novel single-base silent substitution was found in BMPR1A. A novel SMAD1 non conservative substitution was found in one patient Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics239
(c.738G>C), changing a poorly conserved methionine to an isoleucin. 
Two novel conservative variants were found in SMAD7 as well as a novel non conservative substitution in one patient (c.738G>C), changing a glycin to an arginin. This letter variant was absent in controls and was not transmitted to the two affected daughters. All of 
these genes were expressed in EC, except BMPR1A.Conclusions: Our results are not in favor of a major role of these genes in HHT. Mutations of SMAD4 gene are not a common cause of HHT classical disease, i.e. in absence of JP. The lack of expression of BMPR1A in EC cells is in accordance with the absence of reported features of HHT in patients JP with a mutation in this gene.
P0735. Molecular study of WISP3  in 9 families originating 
from the Middle-East and presenting with progressive 
pseudorheumatoid pysplasia: identiﬁcation of two novel 
mutations, and description of a founder effect
V. Delague1,2, E. Chouery2, S. Corbani2, I. Ghanem3, S. Aamar4, J. Fischer5, E. 
Levy-Lahad6, A. Urtizberea7, A. Mégarbané8;  
1INSERM U491, Marseille, France, 2Université Saint-Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon, 
3Hôtel-Dieu de France, Beirut, Lebanon, 4Hadassah Hospital, Mt. Scopus, 
Israel, 5Centre National de Génotypage, Evry, France, 6Shaare Zedek Medi -
cal Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 7Institut de Myologie, Paris, France, 8Université 
Saint-Jospeh, Beirut, Lebanon.
We hereby report the molecular study of the WISP3 gene in 9 unrelated 
consanguineous families originating from the Middle-East: 3 from 
Lebanon, 5 from Syria, and 1 from Palestinian Bedouin descent, all affected with Progressive Pseudorheumatoid Dysplasia (PPD). Five different sequence variations were identiﬁed in the 
WISP3 gene, two 
of them being new mutations: the c.589G◊C transversion at codon 197, responsible for a splicing defect (A197fsX201); and the c.536_537delGT deletion (C179fsX), both in exon 3. In all other families, the affected patients were homozygous for a previously described nonsense mutation, namely c.156C◊A (C52X). Interestingly, in the latter families, the C52X mutation was always found associated with a novel c.248G◊A (G83E) variation, suggesting the existence of a founder effect.
P0736. The NSD1  transcript defective in Sotos syndrome 
escapes nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) in leukocytes and is 
alternative spliced in subsets of patients and controls
M. Duno , F. Skovby, M. Schwartz;  
Dept. of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
Sotos syndrome (Sos), characterized by large head circumference, dysmorphic facial features, advanced bone age, and mental impairment, belongs to the family of overgrowth syndromes. The disorder is due to haploinsufﬁciency of the 
NSD1 gene. In the 
Japanese population ~50% of Sos patients are deleted for the entire 
NSD1 locus, whereas only ~10% of Caucasian patients harbour a deletion. The remaining Sos patients have point mutations or indels 
in NSD1; more that 100 different aberrations have been identiﬁed so 
far. The 23 exons give rise to an open reading frame of 8088bp, which makes mutation screening quite laborious and expensive.We have 
sequenced NSD1 leukocyte cDNA isolated from genetically veriﬁed 
Sos patients and control individuals. Surprisingly, both point mutations and indels were conﬁdently detected at the cDNA level. A subset of patients and controls exhibited a distinct splicing pattern, where the proportion of alternatively spliced transcripts varied quite extensively. Thus, although Sos is caused by haploinsufﬁciency of 
NSD1, the 
mRNA apparently escapes nonsense-mediated decay in leukocytes. This suggests the possibility of cDNA mutation screening. Moreover, the observed variation in splicing patterns could potentially explain the 
clinical variability observed among patients with Sotos syndrome.
P0737. Epigenetic status of the SNRPN gene in human 
spontaneous abortions
E. A. Sazhenova, A. A. Kashevarova, I. N. Lebedev, S. A. Nazarenko;  
Institute of medical genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
15-20% clinically recognized pregnancies end in early embryonic death. For approximately 40% of abortions the genetic reasons for developmental abnormalities are unknown. Probably, in some cases the reproductive wastage may be due to defects of imprinted genes essential for early embryonic development. Uniparental disomy (UPD) is the most studied form of loss of imprinting gene function in human reproduction. But literature data have shown only a minor contribution of UPD to embryonic lethality. It is possible that chromatin remodeling changes connected with abnormal DNA methylation during early embryogenesis, rather than abnormalities in chromosome segregation per se, may have deleterious effects on imprinted gene function. The aim of our work was to analyze the methylation patterns of the promoter region of 
SNRPN gene (15q11) in extraembryonic tissues 
(extraembryonic mesoderm and cytotrophoblast) of 40 ﬁrst-trimester spontaneous abortions with normal karyotype and 6 induced abortions as a control group. DNA methylation of the 
SNRPN promoter on the 
maternal homolog only was found in all studied embryos. This result shows a normal epigenetic status of 
SNRPN. No differences in the 
methylation pattern of SNRPN between spontaneous and induced 
abortions were found. Probably, methylation changes of the SNRPN 
promoter make no signiﬁcant contribution to the early lethality of embryos with normal karyotypes. However, further data with analysis of other imprinted genes is necessary to determine the effects of loss of imprinted genomic loci functions during early stages of human 
embryonic development.
P0738. RNA analysis in IPAH patients reveals mutations in 
BMPR2 missed by routine DNA screening.
V. James, M. A. Aldred, R. E. Harrison, R. C. Trembath;  
University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom.
Heterozygous mutations in the gene bone morphogenetic protein receptor II (
BMPR2) underlie idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension 
(IPAH). Direct sequencing of our familial cohorts has left approximately 30% without identiﬁed mutations. We hypothesise that a proportion of our PAH cohorts have mutations which go undetected by current 
screening methods.To investigate this hypothesis we performed mRNA analysis on 4 patients with mutations in 
BMPR2 and 6 familial patients without 
mutations, all of which genomic DNA has previously been screened. Total RNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples and RT-PCR performed. We conﬁrmed that mutation IVS7 +3del T leads to aberrant splicing of exon 7. In addition, we identiﬁed a deletion of exon 2 in FAM19, subsequently conﬁrmed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA) using genomic DNA.Allele speciﬁc analysis of common coding polymorphisms was carried out on 6 patients and 3 unaffected relatives using quantitative primer extension assays. FAM03 was identiﬁed as having a marked reduction of one allele. No mutation identiﬁed by RT-PCR suggesting the defect may reside in the unscreened promoter region. This case alone demonstrates the potential for allelic expression studies as a method of screening pathogenic defects. The assay also conﬁrmed a reduction of the mutant bearing allele in two cases with previously identiﬁed mutations.These results indicate that a proportion of pathogenic defects are not detected by current DNA screening methods. RNA analysis can form a valuable part of mutation screening strategies to identify 
BMPR2  
mutations in PAH, and also improve understanding of their functional 
consequence.
P0739. Spectrum of  GJB2 mutations in autosomal recessive 
non-syndromic deaf patients of Kashan, Iran
E. Taherzadeh1, B. Azadeh2, T. Ehteshamzadeh2, K. Kahrizi1, Y. Shafeghati1, N. 
Nikzat1, N. Bazazzadegan1, M. Mohseni1, R. J. H. Smith3, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Welfare Organization of Esfahan, 
Esfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolaryngology Research Labo -
ratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United 
States.
Hearing loss is the most common sensory defect in humans, affecting 1 in 1000 neonates, with over half of these cases predicted to be hereditary in nature. Most hereditary hearing loss is inherited in a recessive fashion, accounting for approximately 80% of non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL). Mutations in GJB2, which encodes connexin 26 subunit beta 2, are a major cause of inherited deafness in most populations. We studied 35 probands with ARNSHL from 35 families living in the historic city of Kashan (population 40,000), in Esfahan Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics240
province in central Iran. Mutation screening of GJB2 was performed 
by ampliﬁcation refractory mutation system (ARMS)-PCR for the detection of 35delG. We then analyzed all samples, excluding 35delG homozygote samples, by DHPLC and direct sequencing. In this study, we identiﬁed three patients homozygous for 35delG, one homozygous for the 312del14 mutation and two patients with the polymorphism V153I. Based on our data the 35delG was the most prevalent mutation 
in this population.
P0740. VLA-4 and Multiple Sclerosis in Italian population.
V. Andreoli1, I. Manna1, P. Valentino2, A. La Russa1, M. Liguori1, A. Clodomiro2, 
R. Cittadella1;  
1Istituto di Scienze Neurologiche, Pianolago di Mangone (CS), Italy , 2Istituto di 
Neurologia-Università "Magna Graecia", Catanzaro, Italy.
In Multiple Sclerosis (MS), an autoimmune disease of the central nervous system caused by an interplay of environmental and genetic factors, recurrent inﬁltration of lymphocytes and monocytes producing inﬂammation in the brain and spinal cord, with consequent demyelination and axonal degeneration. Trafﬁcking of this white cells into the CNS results from the binding of the cell adhesion molecule alpha4beta1-integrin (very late antigen-4 VLA-4) with its corresponding ligand, vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM-1), expressed on brain endothelial cells.Recently, several studies demonstrated that treatment of MS patients with an antibody against alpha-4 subunit, which inhibits the interaction of VLA-4 with VCAM-1, prevents or limits the development of brain lesions. The effects of this antagonism of alpha-4 integrin on the formation of brain lesions are so far unknown. We hypothesized that, to understand the autoimmune inﬂammatory response in MS, the polymorphic VLA-4 gene could be involved as candidate for genetic susceptibility or drug resistance to the disease. We investigated the association of two single nucleotide polymorphisms at position 269 in the promoter region of exon 1 and 3061 in the exon 24 of the VLA-4 gene, through a case-control study involving 280 Italian patients of the Calabria region with deﬁnite MS and 255 age-, gender- and ethnicity-matched healthy controls. Our results showed no signiﬁcant differences in the distribution of the two polymorphisms between MS patients and controls, suggesting that, despite a biological plausibility, this VLA-4 gene polymorphisms are not a signiﬁcant genetic risk factor for the susceptibility to MS in Italian 
patients.
P0741. Fas-dependent apoptosis at interaction of tumor cells 
and lymphocytes
L. B. Ginkul ;  
Institute of Cytology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Prognosis of tumor growth depends on the capacity of tumor cells for induction of apoptosis in immune system cells and on the capacity of immune system cells to induce apoptosis in tumor cells. The aim of this study was to reveal expression of Fas and FasL in mouse hepatoma MH-22a, histiocytic sarcoma J-774 and syngenic splenocytes on combined cultivation in vitro by indirect immunoﬂuorescence staining. The expression of Fas in cultures of MH-22a, J-774 and in clonal lines after their combined cultivation in vitro with syngenic splenocytes ﬂuctuated from 5 to 80 in hepatocytes and from 10 to 100 in histiocytes. In splenocytes the expression of Fas rose to 100 %. Expression of FasL in hepatocytes was not seen and it rose to 70 % in histiocytes. Expression of FasL in splenocytes was about 40-70 %. Expression of Fas and FasL was not seen in control cells in experiments with hepatocytes and splenocytes. Expression of Fas in experiments with clonal lines J-774 and splenocytes was seen in only half of cases, as in histiocytes and splenocytes. In controls, expression of Fas in histiocytes and splenocytes was revealed in half of cases and expression of FasL in histiocytes was from 60 to 100 % and in splenocytes from 0 to 50 %. These experimental results on expression of Fas and FasL in tumor cells of different histogenesis at their interaction with syngenic splenocytes has shown that Fas-dependent apoptosis could allow 
tumor cells to escape from the immune system of the organism.P0742. SYT-SSX  fusion genes and prognosis in synovial 
sarcoma: a retrospecitve study of 51 patients from two 
institutiones
I. Kokovic1, M. Bracko1, R. Golouh1, H. J. J. M. van Krieken2;  
1Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2UMC St Radboud, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
Synovial sarcoma (SS) is characterized by the t(X;18)(p11;q11) chromosome translocation, which results in generating either SYT-
SSX1 , SYT-SSX2 or, infrequently, SYT-SSX4 fusion gene. The 
association of SYT-SSX fusion types with morphology and prognosis 
in SS has been conﬁrmed in several studies. In the present study we 
characterized SYT-SSX fusion types and evaluated the impact of two 
different fusions on clinical course of 51 patients with primary SS.
The SYT-SSX fusion transcripts were detected in 47/50 (94%) of 
tumors with adequate RNA for RT-PCR analysis. Contrary to our expectations and some other studies, we could not conﬁrm strong association of the fusion type and histology observed previously. Furthermore, we could not conﬁrm the impact of the fusion type or any clinico-pathological variable on survival of patients with synovial sarcoma. Patients whose tumors had the SYT-SSX1 fusion showed a 
trend toward better survival, although the difference between survival curves was not signiﬁcant .Slovenian group of patients is interesting with respect to several molecular ﬁndings. Thus, tumors with SYT-SSX2 fusion predominated 
in this group (73.5%), contrary to Dutch group, where tumors with SYT-
SSX1 fusion predominated (61.5%). Furthermore, we found unusually 
high proportion of biphasic tumors with SYT-SSX2 fusion in Slovenian 
group (78%).In conclusion, neither the association between genotype and morphology of SS, nor prognostic value of SYT-SSX fusion type is 
absolute as it appeared in early studies.
P0743. Molecular basis of holoprosencephaly: large deletions 
account for at least 10% in conceptuses and 1.5% in live births
C. Dubourg1,2, C. Bendavid1,2, I. Gicquel2, L. Pasquier3, M. R. Durou1, S. 
Odent3, V. David1,2;  
1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Rennes, France, 2UMR 6061, Faculté 
de Médecine, Rennes, France, 3Unité de Génétique Médicale, Rennes, France.
Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a common development defect affecting the forebrain and the face. The disease is genetically heterogeneous. We have collected 650 samples, 300 of them corresponding to typical HPE. We have systematically analysed the four main genes of HPE 
(SHH , ZIC2 , SIX3 and TGIF ), and identiﬁed 46 point mutations. 
Studying of two additional genes, GLI2 and TWSG , is in progress, 
and we have found 3 missense mutations (two in GLI2 and one in 
TWSG ) as yet. Point mutations, therefore, have been identiﬁed in only 
17% of the typical HPE cases (20.5% in living children and 12.5% in fetus). These data suggest either other alterations in the known HPE genes like large deletions, or the implication of other genes not yet identiﬁed.In order to detect microdeletions in the four main HPE genes, we used real time quantitative PCR. 10% of conceptuses and 1.5% of born alive children presented deletions. So this kind of alteration is signiﬁcant and must be tested as a matter of routine for each sample analysed for point mutations. That’s why we developed the QMPSF method which is a low cost method and allows the screening of several genes in the 
same experiment.Moreover we initiated a pangenomic approach by CGH array. Genes residing in these potential deleted regions will be considered as 
candidate genes for HPE.
P0744. A novel missense mutation in a C2 domain of OTOF  
results in autosomal recessive sensorineural hearing loss
M. Tekin1, D. Akcayoz1, A. Incesulu2;  
1Division of Pediatric Genetics, Ankara University Shool of Medicine, Ankara, 
Turkey, 2Department of ENT, Ankara Social Security Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
Screening of 12 Turkish families with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss without 
GJB2 and mtDNA 
A1555G mutations for 11 previously known loci revealed a family in which the phenotype segregated with the DFNB9 (OTOF) locus. Three affected children were later found to carry the novel homozygous c.3033T>C (p.Leu1011Pro) mutation in exon 25 of OTOF. Both parents Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics241
were heterozygote for the mutation. p.Leu1011Pro alters a conserved 
leucine residue in the C2D domain of otoferlin and is negative in 100 chromosomes obtained from normal hearing Turkish persons. This mutation expands the mutational spectrum in OTOF and points out the 
functional importance of C2 domains in otoferlin.This study was supported by the Ankara University Scientiﬁc Research Projects (Grant# 20030809103) and Turkish Academy of Sciences (MT/TUBA-GEBIP/2001-2-19). We are grateful to Dr. Susan Kupka from the University of Tubingen, Germany for providing us oligoprimers which were partially used in this study.
P0745. Cohen syndrome: Mutational and transcriptional analysis 
of COH1
W. Seifert1,2, M. Holder3, S. Spranger4, M. Hoeltzenbein5, E. Rossier6, G. Mae -
gawa7, H. Dollfus8, K. H. Chrzanowska9, D. Horn10, H. C. Hennies1;  
1University of Cologne, Cologne Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany , 
2Free University, Faculty of Biology, Chemistry, and Pharmacy, Berlin, Ger -
many, 3Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU, Génétique médicale, Lille, France, 
4Praxis für Humangenetik, Bremen, Germany, 5Max Planck Institute for Molecu -
lar Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 6University of Ulm, Dept. of Human Genetics, 
Ulm, Germany, 7University of Toronto, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, 
Canada, 8Hôpital de Hautepierre, Service de Génétique Medicale, Strasbourg, 
France, 9Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Dept. of Medical Genetics, War -
saw, Poland, 10Charité, University Medicine of Berlin, Inst. of Medical Genetics, 
Berlin, Germany.
Cohen syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, clinically highly variable and mainly characterized by developmental retardation, craniofacial dysmorphism, retinal dystrophy, and neutropenia. In 2003, a novel gene, 
COH1, on chromosome 8q22 was described, and we 
and others have identiﬁed mutations in patients with Cohen syndrome therein. Here we describe new molecular ﬁndings in thirteen patients with Cohen syndrome, descending from eight families originating from France, Germany, Poland, Turkey, and the U.K., with mutations in 
COH1. We identiﬁed fourteen different mutations, nine of these were novel, including four nonsense mutations, four frame shift mutations, and one potential splice site mutations. Our data contribute to further conﬁning the phenotypic spectrum of Cohen syndrome; a consistent genotype/phenotype correlation, however, has not been established so far. All data released until now indicate that Cohen syndrome is mainly caused by mutations in 
COH1 that result in a defective COH1 protein 
through frame shift or nonsense sequence alterations. The lack of a second pathogenic mutation in some patients points to the existence of further alternative exons and/or other transcripts of 
COH1. Therefore, 
we have embarked on a detailed analysis of COH1 transcript variants 
by RT-PCR and Northern hybridization. Furthermore, we are studying the expression of 
COH1 in humans and mice with respect to the 
different splice forms. Localization and speciﬁcity of the protein, which is similar to VPS13p from yeast and therefore supposed to be involved in intracellular protein sorting, are being characterized in order to shed 
light on the molecular pathology of Cohen syndrome.
P0746. Biochemical and molecular diagnostics of peroxisomal 
disorders in Slovakia from 1995 to 2004.
R. Petrovič1, J. Chandoga1, J. Futas1, A. Hlavatá2, F. Cisárik3, N. Mišovicová4, 
M. Vasil5, M. Kolníková6, J. Štofko7, D. Ďurovčíková8;  
1Centre of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 22nd 
Dept. of Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Dept. 
of Medical Genetics, Žilina, Slovakia, 4Dept. of Medical Genetics, University 
Hospital, Martin, Slovakia, 5Dept. of Medical Genetics, Humenné, Slovakia, 
6Dept. of Neurology, University Children's Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 7First 
dept. of Neurology, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 8Dept. of Clinical 
Genetics, Slovak Health University, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Introduction:  The group of peroxisomal disorders now includes 17 
different mostly severe diseases. Although different classiﬁcations have been proposed through the years, there is growing consensus to use a classiﬁcation in which two groups of disorders are distinguished: (a) the disorders of peroxisome biogenesis and (b) the single peroxisomal enzyme deﬁciencies. Except of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD), all diseases are based on autosomal recessive type of 
inheritance.
Methods: In peroxisomal diseases with defect in β-oxidation pathway determination of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA), phytanic acid, pristanic acid, pipecolic acid and plasmalogens were performed by Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GC/MS). In some cases digitonin permeabilisation of cultured ﬁbroblast was realised. Molecular diagnostic involved sequencing of chosen exons of PEX1 and cDNA sequencing was used to detect mutations in ABCD1 gene causing X-ALD. Primary hyperoxaluria and mevalonic aciduria were determined 
by GC/MS analysis of urinary organic acids.
Results: Two patients with peroxisome biogenesis disorder and three cases of nongeneralised peroxisomal disease with fatal course were revealed. X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy with variable phenotypes - childhood cerebral, adrenoneuromyeloneuropathy, adult cerebral and until now asymptomatic form (after bone marrow transplantation) have been found in 7 patients of male gender. One case of primary hyperoxaluria type I and mevalonic aciduria with hyper IgD were also 
diagnosed.
Conclusions:  During last 10 years inherited disorders of peroxisomal 
compartment have been deﬁnitively proved for 14 patients. Besides mutations presented previously we present a novel mutation of ABCD1 
gene - c.971G>C (R324P).
P0747. Detection His1069Gln mutation by ARMS test and a 
seminested PCR in Slovak patients with Wilson disease
H. Poláková1, B. Katrincsáková2, G. Minárik2, V. Ferák2, E. Feráková2, A. 
Ficek2, I. Zmetáková2, M. Baldovič2, V. Kupčová3, M. Žigrai4, &. Kádasi1;  
1Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia, 
2Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular 
Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Comenius University, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Comenius University, Neurological Clinic, 
Bratislava, Slovakia.
Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of copper 
metabolism. More than 250 disease-causing mutations have been identiﬁed in ATP7B gene. Some of these mutations are frequent in speciﬁc populations, which may help to introduce rapid diagnostic procedures based on direct DNA analysis into routine clinical practice. The His1069Gln mutation in exon 14 is the most frequent one, accounting for approximately 30-63% of all mutations in Caucasian patients. The aim of the present work was to introduce direct DNA-based analysis into routine molecular screening for the above mutation in Slovak WD patients and to clarify its frequency in patients as well as in a control DNA samples. Two different DNA-based methods to detect His1069Gln mutation have been used: ACRS (ampliﬁcation created restriction site) for Alw21I in combination with nested PCR and ampliﬁcation refractory mutation system (ARMS). The reliability and discriminating power of these techniques was tested on samples of WD patients homozygous and heterozygous for His1069Gln mutation and on random DNA samples, and conﬁrmed by direct sequencing. ARMS test seems to be more reproducible and precise. In summary, the mutation His1069Gln is the most frequent in either two copies or one copy in Slovak WD patients. In the control DNA samples it was present on 2 of 146 chromosomes. Our results represent a starting point of direct DNA diagnosis in the majority of WD patients in Slovakia. We hope, that data presented in this work might contribute to the geographical map of occurrence of His1069Gln mutation in Central 
Europe.
P0748. Screening of ARX in 414 families with X-linked mental 
retardation and report of the ﬁrst maternal somatic mosaicism for the ARX gene
K. Poirier1, J. Abriol2, I. Souville2, D. Lacombe3, M. Raynaud4, B. Hamel5, J. P. 
Fryns6, H. H. Ropers7, C. Beldjord1, B. Gilbert8, J. Chelly1, T. Bienvenu1;  
1Inserm U567, Institut Cochin, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire de Biochimie et Gé -
nétique Moléculaire, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 3Génétique Médicale, CHU 
Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 4Inserm U316, CHU Bretonneau, Tours, France, 
5Department of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Nijmegen, The Nether -
lands, 6Center for Human Genetics, Clinical Genetics Unit, Leuven, Belgium, 
7Max Planck Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany, 8Génétique Médi -
cale, CHU Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
Mutations in the human ARX gene have been seen to cause 
nonsyndromic mental retardation (MRX) as well as syndromic forms 
such as X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia (XLAG), Partington syndrome (PRTS) and X-linked infantile spasms (ISSX). The most common causative mutation, a duplication of 24 bp, was Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics242
found in families with a variety of phenotypes, but not in the more 
severe phenotype. The aim of the study was to access the prevalence of the 
ARX mutations in 414 families with established or probable X-
linked MR (XLMR) collected by the European XLMR Consortium. We screened for mutations all the coding region of 
ARX by dHPLC and we 
identiﬁed 17 mutations (11 c.428_451dup, 2 insertions and 4 missense mutations (including the novel p.Pro38Ser)) : 12 with MRX, 3 with PRTS and 2 with ISSX. All the missense mutations have been identiﬁed in MRX. This study conﬁrms that the prevalence of 
ARX mutations is high 
in XLMR, especially in established XLMR (9%) and that the screening 
of ARX in MRX should not be limited to the duplication. Moreover, we 
have identiﬁed for the ﬁrst time somatic mosaicism for the duplication found in an asymptomatic female, mother of two boys affected with MRX. Using a semiquantitative ﬂuorescent PCR, we found that only 1.3 % lymphocytes in the mother harboured the duplication. Our ﬁnding is particularly important for genetic counseling and should lead to reconsider the molecular screening in sporadic cases of MR to look 
for mosaicism associated with the phenotypes.
P0749. Spectrum, frequencies and haplotype analysis of GJB2 
gene mutations in Slovak NSHL patients of Caucasian and 
Romany (Gypsy) origin
G. Minarik1,2, V. Ferak1, E. Ferakova1, A. Ficek1, H. Polakova2, L. Kadasi2;  
1Department of Molecular Biology, Comenius University Faculty of Natural Sci -
ences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, 
SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) is one of the most common 
hereditary impairment. Mutations in GJB2 gene encoding connexin 
26 - gap junction protein are causative in almost 60 % of patients. The prevailing mutation can be identiﬁed for different population, e.g. 35delG for Caucasians, 167delT for Ashkenazi Jews, 235delC for Orientals. We studied two subpopulations which are present in Slovakia - Slovak non - Romany (Caucasian origin) and Slovak Romany (Indian 
origin) population.
Biallelic GJB2 gene mutations were found in 50.7 % and 28.3 % for 
non-Romany and Romany patients, respectively. In non-Romany 
subgroup, GJB2 gene mutations 35delG, 167delT, R75W, 310del14 
and 333delAA were identiﬁed. Polymorphisms V27I, M34T and E114G were also present in this subgroup. The prevailing mutation 35delG accounts for 92.2% chromosomes with NSHL causative mutation in GJB2 gene. In Romany subgroup mutations W24X, 35delG, V37I and L90P, and polymorphisms R127H and V153I were detected. The prevailing mutation W24X accounts for 63.2 % of NSHL causative 
mutations in GJB2  gene.
As in other populations of European origin the mutation 35delG was the most prevalent in Slovak non-Romany patients, while in Slovak Romany patients the most prevalent mutation was W24X, which is in consistency with high frequency of this mutation in India. In Slovak non-Romany patients testing for only 35delG mutation could reveal more than 90 % of 
GJB2 mutated alleles, while in Slovak Romany 
patients the testing for two mutations - W24X and 35delG (second most prevalent) reveal slightly lower proportion - 80 %, of 
GJB2  
mutated alleles.
P0750. Molecular genetic diagnosis of Limb-girdle muscular 
dystrophy type 2A (LGMD2A, Calpainopathy) in Bulgaria
B. Georgieva1, A. Todorova1, I. Tournev2, V. Mitev3, I. Kremensky1;  
1Soﬁa Medical University, Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Laboratory of 
Molecular Pathology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Soﬁa Medical University, Alexandrovska 
Hospital, Clinic of Neurology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3Soﬁa Medical University, Deprt -
ment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2A (LGMD2A; Calpainopathy) is 
caused by mutations in the muscle speciﬁc calcium-activated neutral 
protease 3 (CAPN3) gene, encoding the protein calpain 3.So far, we have registered 44 families (46 patients) with autosomal recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (AR-LGMD). All patients were screened for mutations in the CAPN3 gene. The diagnosis LGMD2A was genetically conﬁrmed in 17 families (19 patients), so calpainopathy represents about 40% of all AR-LGMD cases.In 12 LGMD2A families (13 patients) (70%) the disease was caused by the 550delA mutation in homozygous or heterozygous state.The rest mutations in our patients are private and scattered along the whole gene sequence: Arg49His located in the muscle speciﬁc unique sequence NS in Domain I of the protein; Arg169Gly in Domain I; Glu323X in IS1 muscle speciﬁc unique sequence in Domain II; Gly333Asp in Domain II; 1811_1812delTC in IS2 muscle speciﬁc unique sequence in Domain III; Asp753Asn in the third EF-hand of the 
Ca2+-binding domain. Big deletions covering the whole exon 4 were 
suspected in two families. In 4 families the second mutation was not 
found.Seven of the LDMD2A cases occurred missdiagnosed DMD/BMD and SMA type III patients. These genetically different disorders have some common clinical ﬁndings, which sometimes confuse the proper assessment of the clinical diagnose. Therefore, in genetically not conﬁrmed DMD/BMD and SMA III cases, LGMD2A could be also 
considered as a possible diagnosis.Acknowledgements: Part of the fundind was provided by Grant No 31/2004, Soﬁa Medical University.
P0751. A novel VDR gene mutation identiﬁed in a patient of 
Libyan descend with hereditary 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-
resistant rickets
P. Grammatico1, M. Barbato2, L. Barboni1, M. Roggini3, A. Crisi1, F. Viola2, S. 
Majore1;  
1Medical Genetics, University "La Sapienza" S. Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, 
Rome, Italy, 2Pediatry, University "La Sapienza", Rome, Italy, 3Radiology, Uni -
versity "La Sapienza", Rome, Italy.
Hereditary 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-resistant rickets (HVDRR), also 
known as vitamin D-dependent rickets type II (MIM: 277440) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder due to impaired responsiveness of target organs to the active form of vitamin D [1,25-(OH)
2D3]. The disease is 
caused by heterogeneous mutations in the vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene, located on chromosome 12q12-q22 and encoding a member of the steroid-thyroid-retinoid gene superfamily of nuclear transcription factors. It is characterized by early onset rickets, hypocalcemia and secondary hyperparathyroidism. In addition, affected subjects exhibit elevated serum level of 1,25(OH)
2D3, and, in most cases, total 
alopecia.Several alterations in the human VDR gene have been detected, including nonsense, missense, splicing mutations, a partial gene deletion and an insertion/substitution. They can cause premature termination of the VDR protein, affect its ability to interact with DNA elements or impair the binding with vitamin D, resulting in partial or 
total hormone unresponsiveness.Here we report on the clinical features and molecular basis of HVDRR in a patient originating from Libya, born from consanguineous parents, in whom we identiﬁed a novel homozygous mutation in the
 helix H1 of 
the VDR ligand binding domain .The mutation, occurring in VDR exon 4 changes a codon for Leucine at amino acid 135 to Proline (p.Leu135Pro), involves an amino acid residue highly conserved in all vertebrates and is likely to cause HVDRR 
altering the correct folding of the VDR ligand binding structure.
P0752. Homozygous p.M172K mutation of the TFR2 gene in an 
Italian family with hereditary hemochromatosis type 3
S. Majore1, F. Milano2, F. Binni1, A. Cerrone1, A. Tafuri2, P. Grammatico1;  
1Medical Genetics, University "La Sapienza" S. Camillo-Forlanini Hospital, 
Rome, Italy, 2Hematology, University "La Sapienza", Rome, Italy.
Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH), previously regarded as a single gene disorder, has been recognised to be clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous.Five distinct genes, encoding proteins with different functions in iron metabolism, have been characterized. HFE is responsible for classical or type 1 HH (MIM# 235200); HJV and HAMP cause respectively type 2A and 2B HH (MIM# 602390 and 606464); TFR2 is associated with type 3 HH (MIM# 604250). Eventually, mutations in the ferroportin1 gene are at the base of an autosomal dominant atypical form of HH (Type 4 HH, MIM# 606069).TFR2 mutations seem to account to relatively few cases of primitive iron overload. Only six causative TFR2 mutations in a total of about 11 Italian, Japanese, Portuguese or French families have been in fact 
described.We report on two sibling of central Italy descent, in whom we identiﬁed in homozygosis the TFR2 p.M172K mutation.The patients exhibited a phenotype characterized by severe iron overload and onset of hepatic damage at an earlier age compared to Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics243
type 1 HH.
This is the second family in whom the TFR2 p.M172K has been detected and the patients’ clinical features conﬁrm that HH type 3 is 
associated to a more severe phenotype than in HFE related HH.Our ﬁndings may indicate that rarity of HH type 3 can be due to lack of systemic investigations of the whole TFR2 gene and that this gene could be responsible for the iron overload in a more signiﬁcant 
percentage of patients, at least in some geographical areas.
P0753. The value of genetic diagnosis in hemophilia families 
from developing countries
C. A. M. Petrescu ;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Introduction . The genetic diagnosis of hemophilia  enables the early fetal 
diagnosis, with a possible decrease of the disease incidence. The primary prophylaxis of hemophilia, an expensive disease, would be beneﬁcial.
Objectives.  Characterization of the genetic abnormalities in hemophilia 
families, ellaboration of a mutation database, starting point for the carriers 
detectiond and the fetal diagnosis.Material and methods.
 The study involved families from Hemophilia 
Center Timisoara (CHT); 33 patients with hemophilia A (HA), and 14 of their mothers, and respectively, 6 patients with hemophilia B (HB) and one of their mothers were investigated. The genetic analyses were performed at “Institut für Humangenetik” Greifswald (Germany): direct genetic analysis (presence of inversions for HA, identiﬁcation of the mutation type for HB); indirect analysis (study of the restriction fragment 
length polymorphisms - RFLPs).Results and discussions. The presence of factor VIII gene inversion was analysed in 29 HA families; 18/26 (69.23%) of the patients with severe HA were positive (12/18 - type I, and 6/18 - type II inversions), as were all of their analysed mothers. A similar frequency of inversion was found, for the familial (57.89%) and sporadic (42.11%) forms of hemophilia. The RFLPs were analysed for 15 HA families, and one HB family; the limits of this method are underlined. Two patients The mutation with severe HB have missense mutations: codon -4 
CGG (Arg)→ TGG(Trp); codon 386 
GGT(Gly)→G AT(Asp).
Conclusions . The mutation was identiﬁed for half of the hemophilia 
families, making carrier detection and fetal diagnosis possible anytime 
in the future.
P0754. Genetic predispose and mineral disorders in risk group 
of osteoporosis in North-West of Russia
E. B. Mishchenko1, S. M. Kotova1, T. P. Sankova2, I. I. Dorokhova2;  
1Mechnikov Medical Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2State Poly -
technical University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Osteoporosis is a multifactor disease with a strong genetic component. 
The aim of this work was to investigate distribution of DNA polymorphisms associated with osteoporosis, regarding to mineral metabolism and hormone status of patients. Cohort1 (89 patients) includes patients having severe osteoporosis with compression fractures. Cohort2 (49 patients) includes immediate relatives of the patients and patients themselves. The TaqI, PctI, and ApaI polymorphisms of VDR gene and Msp20I polymorphism of the COLIA1 gene Sp1 site were studied by the PCR-RFLP method. The frequency of the osteoporosis associated PPAAtt genotype in cohort2 (28.6%) is noticeably higher than in cohort1 (21.3%). Five cases of familiar VDR gene polymorphisms were found. The frequency of the mutant homozygous genotype (ss) of COLIA1 is twice higher in cohort2 (12.5% and 6.8%, respectively). 61% of VDR and COLIA1 alleles have markers of osteoporosis. A correlation between the osteoporosis severity and polymorphisms in both genes was observed. DNAs of 69 patients were examined to determine length of AT-rich minisatellite repeats in 3’-UTR of the IL-6 gene. Individuals with prevailing homozygous genotype FF (51%) have a higher bone mass density compared to those having the CF (26%) genotype. 75% of the tested relatives have disorders of mineral homeostasis and 68.4% of them have a low serum Mg level. We have established familiar cases of reduced vitamin D content in the blood serum and enhanced concentration of parathyroid hormone. The data indicate that mineral disorders (especially Mg-related) and genetic predispose must 
be considered together for early recognition of osteoporosis.P0755. Spectrum of GJB2  gene mutations in Korean deaf 
patients and the functional study of syndromic GJB2  mutant 
alleles
H. S. Jin1, H. J. Park2, H. J. Oh1, S. C. Jung3, S. K. Koo1;  
1Div. of Genetic Disease, Dept. of Biomedical Sciences, NIH, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 2Soree, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 3College of 
Medicine, Ewha Womans University,, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
GJB2 is one of the most frequent causative genes in congenital deafness. It is inherited by autosomal recessive manner with some exceptions. It is known that the 35delG mutation is the most frequent type of mutation in white populations, and 167delT among Ashkenazi Jews and R143W in Africans. In this study, we investigated the proﬁle of GJB2 mutation in 93 Korean deaf patients. 
GJB2 nucleotide sequence 
analysis revealed 7 different mutations including 2 novel mutations (R75L and R143W). Fourteen percentile of total objectives has two or 
one GJB2 mutation. The most frequent allele was 235delC, which was 
found in four homozygous patients and two compound heterozygous patients. We also characterized two kinds of dominantly inherited 
GJB2  
alleles with skin abnormalities. To functional study of these two alleles, we transfected normal or the mutant type of 
GJB2 genes into the gap 
junctional intercellular communication (GJIC) deﬁcient HeLa cells. When we examined the GJIC with scrape-loading transfer of Lucifer yellow, the normal transfectant showed the active whereas mutant or vector only control transfectant did not show any sign of GJIC. The change of GJB2 subcellluar localization indicates that the failure of 
membrane targeting or plaque formation result in the impaired GJIC.
P0756. Allele dosage dependent penetrance of RET 
protooncogene in Israeli Arab inbred families segregating 
Hirschsprung disease.
L. Basel-Vanagaite1, A. Pelet2, Z. Steiner3, Y. Rosenbach4, M. Shohat5, S. 
Lyonnet2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel 
and Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 2Departement de Genetique, 
Unite INSERM U-393, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3Divi-
sion of Pediatric Surgery, Hillel-Yaffe Medical Center, Hadera, Israel, 4Pediatric 
Gastroenterology Institute, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel and 
Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 5Department of Medical Genetics, 
Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel.
Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is characterized by intestinal obstruction 
resulting from the absence of ganglion cells in a portion of the intestinal tract. The main mutations identiﬁed in the major gene, RET, associated 
with isolated HSCR, appear to be dominant loss-of-function mutations with incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity. We have ascertained two interrelated consanguineous Israeli Arab families. In one family there were 3 female siblings affected with total colonic aganglionosis; in the second family, there was one male affected with short-segment Hirschsprung disease (S-HSCR). Linkage to the 
RET 
locus was found using polymorphic genetic markers. Sequencing of the 
RET gene showed the heterozygous splicing mutation (IVS6+5 G->A) in a patient with S-HSCR. This mutation impairs the consensus donor splice site. Accordingly, only 1/8 heterozygous individual harbours the S-HSCR phenotype. Interestingly the IVS6+5 G->A mutation was found at the homozygous state in 2 females affected with total colonic aganglionosis, suggesting a gene dosage effect on the penetrance and expressivity of the HSCR phenotype. Homozygous 
RET gene 
mutations causing HSCR are extremely rare. While the heterozygous IVS6+5 G->A is of low penetrance (12.5%) for S-HSCR disease, there is a full penetrance for the homozygous state for total aganglionosis. As suggested in other inbred populations segregating weakly 
penetrant RET predisposing allele (Mennonites), our data support 
that the penetrance of RET gene mutations for the HSCR phenotype 
depend on : i) the nature of the mutation ,ii) the allele dosage , and iii) 
the gender of affected individual.
P0757. C282Y, H63D and S65C mutations of the 
hemochromatosis gene (HFE) in patients with alcoholic cirrhosis
N. Starcevic Cizmarevic1, S. Stepec2, S. Ristic1, S. Milic1, B. Brajenovic-Milic1, 
D. Stimac1, M. Kapovic1, B. Peterlin2;  
1School of Medicine, Rijeka, Croatia, 2UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
In the present study we have investigated the HFE gene mutations and 
its role in the predisposition of developing alcoholic cirrhosis in Slovenian Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics244
and Croatian patients. The groups of patients have been genotyped - 
147 patients with alcoholic cirrhosis, 66 alcoholics without cirrhosis and 350 healthy controls for C282Y, H63D and S65C. The analysis of these mutations were performed using polymerase chain reaction/restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method. According to our results C282Y, H63D and S65C allele frequencies were 3.4%, 18.0% and 1.4% in patients with alcoholic cirrhosis, 3.0%, 12.9% and 1.5% in alcoholics without cirrhosis and 3.4%, 13.6% and 1.1% in healthy controls, respectively. Our results indicated no signiﬁcant difference in the HFE allele and genotype frequencies between investigated groups, except the higher frequency of H63D heterozygotes observed in patients with cirrhosis (32.0%) than in healthy controls (19.1%) (p<0.05). These results suggested that C282Y and S65C mutations were not associated to the risk of developing alcoholic cirrhosis in our populations, but the role of H63D mutation has to be elucidate in 
further study in a larger series of patients.
P0758. Deletion of hypotonin, a novel serine oligopeptidase, in 
patients with the hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome
K. Martens1, S. Meulemans1, I. Pauli1, A. Vervoort1, J. Jaeken2, J. J. W. Creem -
ers1, G. Matthijs3;  
1Department for Human Genetics, KU Leuven/VIB, Leuven, Belgium, 2Depart -
ment of Paediatrics, University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium, 3Department for 
Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
Hypotonia-Cystinuria Syndrome is a novel recessive disorder identiﬁed in 12 patients. They present with generalised hypotonia and failure-to-thrive, which gradually diminishes after infancy. Growth is retarded due to a growth hormone hyposecretion. All patients present with cystinuria type I within their ﬁrst decade.Isolated cystinuria type I is caused by mutations in 
SLC3A1 . Screening 
this locus with quantitative PCR techniques resulted in the detection of deletions in all patients. In total, ﬁve different deletions ranging from 24 to 75 kb were identiﬁed. Interestingly, these deletions disrupt the coding region of only two genes, 
SLC3A1  and KIAA0436. As SLC3A1  causes 
isolated cystinuria type I, KIAA0436 is responsible for the extended 
phenotype.The KIAA0436 gene product, hypotonin, shows homology 
with two serine oligopeptidases (POP and OpdB) and secondary structure predictions reveal striking similarities. Moreover, amino acids forming the catalytic triad are conserved. Reactivity against FP-biotin, a biotinylated form of the serine hydrolase inhibitor DFP, was observed, indicating an active conformation. Site-directed mutation of the catalytic triad amino acids and generation of an inhibitor proﬁle suggest that hypotonin is a novel serine (oligo)peptidase with unique 
catalytic properties.
P0759. Genetic analysis in Spanish cases of dominant cerebellar 
ataxia
V. Volpini1, J. Corral1, I. Banchs1, H. S. Nicolás1, J. Armstrong2, J. Infante3, O. 
Combarros3, J. Berciano3, D. Genís4;  
1Cancer Research Institute - IRO, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Unitat Neu -
ropatologia, Universitat de Barcelona. Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 3Servicio 
de Neurología, Htal. Marqués de Valdecilla. Santander, Spain, 4Servei de Neu -
rologia, Htal. Josep Trueta. Girona, Spain.
Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias (ADCA) are a clinically heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders caused by unstable trinucleotide repeat expansions. Sevent spinocerebellar ataxia genes: 
SCAs1-3 , SCAs6 -7, SCA12 and SCA17 have been 
cloned with the ﬁnding of an expansion of a CAG repeat which encodes a polyglutamine tract. The exception is SCA8, which consists of an exonic but untranslated CTG repeat. We present here the molecular analysis of 222 unrelated familial and 522 sporadic and idiopathic Spanish cases of spinocerebellar ataxia. For ADCA familial cases 40.21% were SCA3, 28.87% SCA2, 11.34% SCA8, 7.22% SCA1, 5.15% SCA6 and 1.03% SCA17. None of ADCA mutated cases also have the SCA8 expansions in their reported pathogenetic range, thus we have not found coexistence of SCA8 expansions with other SCA expansions in our SCA series. About 56% of familial ADCA cases remained genetically unclassiﬁed. No SCA mutations were detected in 
the 522 isolated and idiopathic cases of spinocerebellar ataxia.P0760. Inherited disorders of bilirubin glucuronidation in Slovak 
population
I. Zmetáková1, G. Minárik1, V. Ferák1, &. Kádasi2;  
1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Department of Molecular 
Biology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, 
Bratislava, Slovakia.
Three forms of bilirubin UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (B-UGT) deﬁciency are known in humans. Absent B-UGT activity results in severe, and very rare unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I (CN-I), characterized by potentially lethal hyperbilirubinemia. Strongly reduced B-UGT activity resulting in Crigler-Najjar syndrome type II, characterized by intermediate levels of hyperbilirubinemia. Moderately reduced B-UGT activity causing the mildest form of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia Gilbert syndrome (GS), one of the most common inherited disorders, with prevalence of approximately 10-13% in Caucasians. All three diseases are caused by mutations in UDP-glucuronosyltransferase gene (
UGT1A1) encoding 
B-UGT, which is involved in detoxiﬁcation of bilirubin by conjugation with glucuronic acid. Here we report the results of molecular-genetic study of inherited unconjugated hyperbilirubinemias in Slovak population. Forty-seven families with suspected GS, a family with 4 children affected with CN-I, and a patient with CN-I were studied. Sequencing of promoter area and of all ﬁve exons of the 
UGT1A1 gene in CN-I 
patients was performed with PCR primers designed by us. In families with suspected GS, the A(TA)
nTAA motif in the promoter area of the 
UGT1A1 gene was analyzed by PCR followed by separation of the 
ampliﬁed products on 15% nondenaturating polyacrylamide gel. Out of 52 suspected GS patients, 49 had the most frequent GS mutation observed in Caucasians A(TA)
7TAA, 2 were heterozygous and 1 
was homozygous for normal allele A(TA)6TAA. The frequency of the 
A(TA)7TAA allele was 0,96% in suspected GS patients to compare with 
0,35% in 120 healthy control subjects.
P0761. Development of direct and indirect DNA-diagnostics of 
neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 in Russian Federation.
O. Drozd1, O. Babenko1, N. Serova2, L. Lazareva2, L. Satanin2, M. Nemtsova1, 
D. Zaletayev1;  
1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Bur-
denko Institute of Neurosurgery, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Neuroﬁbromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common autosomal dominant 
disorder affecting ~ 1 in 3500 individuals. The disease is caused by mutations in the tumor suppressor gene 
NF1, whose mutation rate 
estimated to be 10-fold higher than in most other genes. We have developed the protocol for direct and indirect NF1 DNA-diagnostics. DNA samples from 35 unrelated patients (16 familial and 19 sporadic cases) were screened for the presence of mutations by SSCP, HD and microsatellite analysis; all mobility shifts were sequenced. Twelve mutations have been found and ten of them were described for the ﬁrst time. Eight mutations were detected for the sporadic patients and four in familial cases. The complete spectrum of mutations has been found: small deletions and small insertions (192-195dupTGTT, 4973-4978delTCTATA, 5459delA, 998-999insA, 2415-2416dupTG, 1075delA and 2345delC), missense mutations (5498 T > A), nonsense mutations (1094C>G), splice site mutations (IVS2+1delGTGA and IVS10c+1G > A) and large deletions (deletion on markers TAGA/TAGGint27a and GTint38). For indirect DNA-diagnostics we have developed a panel of 4 intragenic microsatellite markers - TCCAint1, D17S1849, TAGA/TAGGint27a and GTint38, which were very helpful for prenatal diagnostics and for searching of long rearrangements of 
the NF1 gene in families.
P0762. Improvement in identiﬁcation of haemophilia carriers' by 
screening for gene rearrangements
F. Niel1, J. Martin2, A. Delahaye1, A. Frances3, E. Girodon1, M. Goossens1, C. 
Costa1;  
1Service de Biochimie et Genetique Moleculaire, AP-HP et INSERM U654, CHU 
Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, 2Service de Biochimie et Genetique Moleculaire, 
AP-HP, CHU Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, 3Service de Genetique Medicale, 
Hôpital Font-Pre, Toulon, France.
Haemophilia is a frequent X-linked bleeding disorder caused by factor 8 (
F8) or factor 9 ( F9) gene defects. Identiﬁcation of disease-causing 
mutations usually relies on extensive analysis of the coding sequence Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics245
in index-cases and subsequently allows carrier status determination in 
at-risk women. However, in case of large deletions, which account for 5% of disease alleles, direct molecular diagnosis of carriers becomes difﬁcult by conventional PCR. Quantitative real-time PCR can be efﬁciently applied once a particular deletion has been identiﬁed in an index case. Screening for gene rearrangements by semi-quantitative ﬂuorescent multiplex PCR, recently developed to identify such heterozygous rearrangements in various diseases, represents an attractive option. We developed an assay encompassing the eight exons, the promoter region and the polyadenylation signal sequence of the 
F9 gene, involved in haemophilia B. It was successfully applied 
to establish the carrier status of women in 5 families where various large deletions were previously found in patients. Furthermore, it identiﬁed a deletion of exons 7-8 in a woman having a low FIXc activity of 30% but no family history of haemophilia, and whose extensive screening for mutations was negative. Compared to gene dosage by real-time PCR, the method simultaneously analyses multiple gene loci and is cost effective. In addition, it is sensitive enough to detect micro-deletions/insertions, thus being a powerful diagnostic tool. Such an assay would also be advantageous as a ﬁrst step screening in the diagnosis of haemophilia A, with regards to sequential analysis of the 
26 F8 gene exons.
P0763. Evaluation of CFTR gene mutation testing methods 
in laboratories participating in the Italian External Quality 
Assessment
M. Salvatore, N. Bruzzese, F. Censi, V. Falbo, G. Floridia, F. Tosto, D. Taruscio;  
Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
The Italian External Quality Assessment (IEQA) in molecular genetic testing is coordinated by the Istituto Superiore di Sanità (ISS) and 
supported by the Italian Ministry of Health.IEQA organization is described in Taruscio et al.
 (1). Gene test for cystic 
ﬁbrosis (CF) is the most frequently performed in Italian laboratories 
(more than 30000 tests requested in 2002) (2).
We present an overview of results and impact of the IEQA in CF; moreover, Italian data are discussed in the European context.In particular the evaluation of CFTR gene mutation testing methods 
will be discussed.
At National level:1. Oligonucleotide Ligation Assay PCR (OLA-PCR) and Reverse Dot 
Blot (RDB) analysis were the most frequently used testing method2. The majority of Italian participating laboratories made use of commercial kit (i.e.: INNO LiPa CFTR12 and 17 + Tn Innogenetics; OLA CF assay - PE, etc.).We’ll focus on methods used by laboratories and frequent errors.This work is funded by the Project “Test genetici: dalla ricerca alla 
clinica”, Italian Ministry of Health (2003-2005).1.Taruscio D. et al., 
Clin Chem Lab Med  2004; 42: 915-21
2.Dallapiccola et al.,  Analysis  2/3. 2004
P0764. Autosomal Dominant Cerebellar Ataxia mutations in 104 
Italian ataxic patients.
L. Veneziano1, M. Spadaro2, E. Mantuano1, R. Penci1, S. Guida1, C. Jodice3, M. 
Frontali1;  
1Institute of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine, National Council of Re -
search, Rome, Italy, 2Dept of Neurological Science 1° Medical School, La Sa -
pienza University, Rome, Italy, 3Dept of Biology Tor Vergata University, Rome, 
Italy.
Autosomal Dominant Cerebellar Ataxias (ADCAs) are a heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders for which at least 25 SCA (Spino-cerebellar Ataxia) loci are known. In eleven of these loci the gene was identiﬁed and the mutation found to be an expansion of a microsatellite sequence in coding or non-coding regions. Two ADCAs are caused by point mutations in FGF14 (Fibroblast Growth Factor 14) and in PRKCG (Protein Kinase Cg) genes. CACNA1A gene mutations, responsible for Episodic Ataxia type 2, have sometimes been associated with an AD permanent progressive ataxia phenotype. SCA was also associated with premutation of FragileX CGG repeat. The relative frequency of the various genetic types of ADCAs appears to be remarkably different between ethnic groups. In order to contribute to the assessment of SCAs relative frequency in Italian population, 104 Italian ataxic patients were collected and screened for mutations of known SCA genes. The screening while conﬁrming the high frequency of SCA1 and 2 and the low frequency of SCA3 in Italy as compared to other countries, showed: a) a low frequency of SCA 6,7,8,17; b) presence of SCA14 and EA2 point mutations; c) presence of atypical Friedreich Ataxia cases with pseudodominant inheritance; d) absence of SCA10-12 and Fragile X permutation. Molecular diagnosis could be assigned to 70% of familial and only in 5% of sporadic cases. The data are relevant both in a genetic epidemiology context and in devising 
priorities for molecular tests in Italian ataxic patients.MIUR-FIRB2001 RBNE01XMP4-008, MIUR-FISR2000, MIN.Salute 
Final.2002 to MF
P0765. Positional cloning of four candidate genes for autism: a 
possible role for neuron vesicle trafﬁcking in the pathogenesis 
of autism.
D. Castermans1, J. R. Vermeersch2, C. T. Schrander-Stumpel3, J. Fryns2, W. J. 
M. Van de Ven4, J. Steyaert2, J. W. Creemers1, K. Devriendt2;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology , Leu -
ven, Belgium, 2Centre for Human Genetics, Division of Clinical Genetics, Leu -
ven, Belgium, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Research Institute Growth and 
Development, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 4Department of Human Genetics, 
Laboratory for Molecular Oncology, Leuven, Belgium.
Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder of unknown cause and 
pathogenesis. The identiﬁcation of genes involved in autism is expected to increase our understanding of the pathogenesis of this disorder. We initiated a positional cloning strategy, starting from four unrelated persons with idiopathic, non-familial autism carrying a 
de 
novo  chromosomal aberration.
Last year, we reported on the identiﬁcation of three different genes affected by the characterized translocations: 
Neurobeachin  (NBEA ), 
CLIC4 (chloride intracellular channel protein) and amisyn. Recently, the 
C10orf74  gene was found to be affected by the paracentric inversion 
present in the fourth patient. This gene encodes for a predicted protein with high homology to proteins in human and several other species, most of which have not been characterized yet. The best characterized homolog is yeast Yop1p, which interacts with the yeast Rab GTPase Ypt1p required for vesicular ER-to-Golgi transport.The involvement of these genes in the regulated secretory pathway of LDCVs is currently under study by means of RNAi-mediated gene knockdown in the βTC3 neuroendocrine cell line. For neurobeachin and amisyn, we showed that disruption of gene expression results in a signiﬁcant increase of regulated secretion, suggesting a role for both proteins as negative regulators of vesicle trafﬁcking and/or fusion. Similarly, overexpression of Yop1p (C10orf74 yeast ortholog) has been reported to block ER-to-Golgi membrane trafﬁcking.In conclusion, these data suggest a role for NBEA, amisyn and C10orf74 as negative regulators of neuron vesicle trafﬁcking. Moreover, it implies that vesicle trafﬁcking in neurons may be involved in the pathogenesis 
of autism.
P0766. Polyalanine expansions, missense and frameshift 
mutations of the PHOX2B  gene result in loss of function via 
different mechanisms
D. Trochet1, S. Jong Hong2, J. F. Brunet3, A. Munnich1, K. Kim2, S. Lyonnet1, C. 
Goridis3, J. Amiel1;  
1Hopital Necker and INSERM U-393, Paris, France, 2McLean Hospital, Harvard 
medical school, Belmont, MA, United States, 3CNRS UMR 8542, Ecole normale 
superieure, Paris, France.
Heterozygous mutations of the PHOX2B gene account for disorders 
of the autonomic nervous system either isolated or combined, including: congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS), tumours of the sympathetic nervous system (TSNS) and Hirschsprung disease. In CCHS, the prevalent mutation is an expansion of the 20 alanines stretch ranging from +5 to +13 alanines, while frameshift and missense mutations are found occasionally. Importantly, as opposed to polyalanine expansions, frameshift mutations predispose to TSNS.To further investigate phenotype/genotype correlation, we performed both transactivation and DNA binding assays on wild type and mutant PHOX2B proteins. Furthermore, as already reported in polyalanine expansion diseases, nuclear and/or cytoplasmic PHOX2B aggregations were investigated by immunoﬂuorescence and gel ﬁltration in protein with expansions ranging from +5 to +13. Except for the +5 alanines Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics246
expansion, all mutations resulted in reduced PHOX2B transactivation. 
However, the disease causing mechanism seems to vary according to the nature of the mutation. On the one hand, in vitro DNA binding 
was altered for both homeodomain missense mutations (R100L and R141G) and expansions. On the other hand, while cytoplasmic aggregation was observed only for expansions of +9 and above, in vitro spontaneous formation of oligomers occurred starting at +5 alanines expansion. Finally, considering frameshift mutations, mRNA 
decline could be excluded in tumoral tissues.Altogether, our data favor a loss of function mechanism irrespective of the nature of the mutation. However, as both transactivation and cellular localization were normal with the +5 alanines expansion, the disease-causing mechanism remains unclear for short alanine 
expansions.
P0767. Association of GABRG2 gene and polymorphic DNA-loci 
D5S422, D5S402 with idiopathic generalized epilepsy in Volga-
Ural region of Russia.
A. Fattakhova, A. Karunas, E. Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE) is a common form of epilepsy 
accounting for 20-40% of all epilepsies. Last genetic discoveries showed that IGEs are associated with mutations in genes encoding voltage- and ligand-gated ion channels (Na
+, K+, Cl-) and some neurotransmitter 
receptors (GABA, dopamine).We aimed to study association of some polymorphic DNA-loci linked to epilepsy genes with an increased risk of developing epilepsy. 125 patients from Volga-Ural Region of Russia with different forms of IGE and 150 healthy donors were enrolled in our investigation. We study polymorphic DNA-loci D5S422 and D5S402, linked to GABRG2 (gamma2 subunit of 
gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor) gene (5q34).The analysis of D5S422 polymorphisms revealed some differences in distribution of allele and genotype frequencies between IGEs patients and healthy donors. The research of D5S402 polymorphisms showed that allele 2 (169 bp) is signiﬁcantly frequent in patients (49, 5%) in comparison with controls (39, 7%) (OR=1, 49; p<0, 05). To further analyze the possible role of GABRG2 gene in epileptogenesis we determined the genotype and allele frequencies C588T polymorphism of the exon5. The allele frequencies in patient group were 0, 85 for C and 0, 14 for T.
Our results suggest that GABRG2 may be involved in epileptogenesis of common forms of IGE in Volga-Ural region.
P0768. Canavan disease in two Slovak patients
J. Futas1, R. Petrovič1, D. Kantarská2, M. Kolníková3, J. Chandoga1;  
1Centre of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Dept. of 
Clinical Genetics, F.D.Roosevelt University Hospital, Banská Bystrica, Slovakia, 
3Dept. of Neurology, University Children's Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Canavan disease (OMIM 271900) is an autosomal recessive spongy degeneration of the central nervous system and usually has fatal prognosis in 1 to 3 years. The disease is caused by deﬁciency of the enzyme aspartoacylase (ASPA) (EC 3.5.1.15) and characterised by increased levels of N-acetylaspartic acid (NAA), a possibly neurotoxic compound, in body ﬂuids. The human aspartoacylase gene is located on chromosome 17p13ter and contains 6 exons, which encodes a 
protein of 313 amino acids.Two unrelated patients have been diagnosed in Slovakia last year. Patient 1 a third child in family presented psychomotor retardation, hypertonic syndrome and leukodystrophy at 4 months of age. Patient 2 a ﬁrst child of non-consanguineous parents presented macrocephaly, spastic quadruparesis, amaurosis, seizures and leukodystrophy at 1 year of age. The gas chromatography/mass spectrometry analyses of organic acids in urine revealed high excretion of NAA in both cases.To elucidate the cause of disease at molecular level we analysed the ASPA gene by direct sequencing of polymerase chain reaction products of all 6 exons from genomic DNA of patient 1. We have found homozygous missense point mutation 914 C>A in exon 6 changing alanine 305 to glutamic acid (A305E), which is the most common mutation among European patients of non-Jewish origin and leads to complete loss of ASPA enzyme activity. Both parents were found heterozygous for A305E. The molecular genetic analysis of patient 2 has revealed heterozygous state for A305E mutation. The search for 
the second pathologic mutation is still in progress.P0769. Genetic analysis of the two major ADHSP genes in genes 
in Bulgarian patients with hereditary spastic paraplegia
N. Ivanova1, I. Tournev2, I. O. Litvinenko3, R. Rousev4, A. Lofgren5, A. Jordano -
va1, P. DeJonghe5, V. Mitev6, I. Kremensky1;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Department of Neurology, 
Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3University Hospital of Pediatrics, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4Medical Uni -
versity, Pleven, Bulgaria, 5Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, UA, Antwerpen, 
Belgium, 6Department of Biochemistry, Soﬁa Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
INTRODUCTION: Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a neurodegenerative disorder affecting the most distant parts of the corticospinal tracts in CNS with a main clinical characteristic, spasticity of the lower limbs. The most common genetic form of the disease among European population is the autosomal dominant (ADHSP). Mutations in two major genes - spastin and atlastin, contribute to about 50% of ADHSP cases.MATERIALS AND METHODS: We performed a mutation screening of spastin and atlastin genes, using direct sequencing, on a cohort of 40 Bulgarian patients with different ethnic background (Bulgarian, Turkish and clinical diagnosis of HSP.RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: We detected 4 spastin and 2 atlastin mutations. Five of them are new and one spastin mutation is already reported. All mutations in both genes are different single nucleotide substitutions. The 2 atlastin mutations and 2 of those found in the spastin gene result in amino acid changes. The other two spastin mutations affect different splice sites. The family history of the disease suggests AD or a dominant (D) inheritance for 11 out of 40 examined families. We found the genetic defects in 6 out of those 11 AD/D HSP families with clear family history for HSP in at least 2 generations. In one family with an atlastin mutation we observed incomplete penetrance of the disease. We did not ﬁnd any mutation in autosomal recessive or sporadic cases. In conclusion, the analysis of the two major ADHSP-related genes identiﬁed the genetic defects in about 55% of Bulgarian ADHSP families.
P0770. Promoter region of CACNA1A gene and Episodic Ataxia 
Type 2
E. Mantuano1, S. Guida1, L. Veneziano1, R. Penci1, C. Jodice2, M. Frontali1;  
1Institute of Neurobiology and Molecular Medicine, National Council of Re -
search, Rome, Italy, 2Dept of Biology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy.
Episodic Ataxia type 2 (EA2) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder 
characterised by attacks of vertigo, visual disturbance, dysarthria, ataxia and interictally by cerebellar deﬁcit of variable severity. The disorder is due to protein truncating or missense mutations leading to a loss of function of the Cav2.1 subunit, the pore-forming subunit of voltage-gated P/Q type calcium channels, coded by CACNA1A gene. Cav2.1 has a neuron speciﬁc expression and a very high number of isoforms with different biophysical properties. Its expression regulating mechanisms should therefore be remarkably complex. So far, only the coding regions of human CACNA1A gene are known, while expression regulating machinery remains unexplored. As a ﬁrst step towards the understanding of the human gene regulation we have identiﬁed a new region at 5’ of CACNA1A gene, that has a neuron-speciﬁc transcriptional activity. Within this region a mutation has been identiﬁed in a patients affected with EA2 for whom mutations of the CACNA1A coding region could be excluded. The mutation, not present in 230 random chromosomes, deletes 5 nucleotides and is predicted to disrupt a putative binding site for Interferon Regulating Factor 1 or 2. In a preliminary functional analysis the mutation completely abolished the transcriptional activity of the wildtype fragment. The region under study opens the way to a) increased probabilities to detecting mutations and exploring pathogenesis of CACNA1A-related disorders; b) detecting expression modulating polymorphisms; c) identifying signalling pathways involved in the expression of P/Q calcium channels as 
possible targets for drug development.
MIUR-FIRB2001 RBNE01XMP4-008, MIUR-FISR2000 to MF
P0771. Should we screen for the Fragile-X premutation in the 
older population presenting with ataxia ?
H. Van Esch , G. Matthijs, J. Fryns;  
Centre of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium.
In 2001, Hagerman described the occurrence of a late-onset neurological disorder in male carriers of the fragile-X premutation. Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics247
This disorder, designated the Fragile-X Tremor Ataxia Syndrome 
(FXTAS), consists of progressive intention tremor, cerebellar ataxia and cognitive decline. Since the ﬁrst description additional symptoms were documented and diagnostic criteria proposed. More recently, the occurrence of FXTAS was also reported in female carriers of the 
FMR1-premutation, presenting with tremor and ataxia.Since cerebellar ataxia is one of the cardinal features, we performed FMR-1 premutation screening in 122 male and 131 female patients, older than 50y, who were referred for testing of the spinocerebellar ataxia (1, 2, 3, 6, 7) genes and who were negative. In the group of male patients we found 5 with an 
FMR-1 premutation. In four of them, 
a deﬁnite diagnosis of FXTAS was made, based on the clinical and radiological diagnostic criteria. In the group of 131 females, we did not detect a patient with an 
FMR-1 premutation, with all repeat alleles 
within the range of 10-49.Combining our results and the results of similar studies, we propose to include 
FMR-1 analysis in the molecular diagnostic work-up of older 
ataxia patients, even though the FMR-1 premutation seems not to be a 
major cause of late onset ataxia in females. FMR-1 premutation should especially be excluded when additional FXTAS symptoms are present. Moreover, the important counseling aspects and the identiﬁcation of several new fragile X patients in the families of the 5 identiﬁed FXTAS males, further justiﬁes this screening.
P0772. Prenatal and Postnatal Molecular Study in Serbian SMA 
Families - two years experience
M. Miskovic, T. Lalic, M. Djurisic, D. Radivojevic, M. Guc-Scekic, D. Zamur -
ovic;  
Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia and Monte -
negro.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), with a prevalence of 1 in 10000 and a carrier frequency of about 1/40, is the second most frequent autosomal recessive disease. According to the age of onset and severity of the clinical manifestations, SMA is classiﬁed into three types (SMAI,II,III). Two candidate genes, SMN and NAIP, were isolated from chromosome region 5q11.2-q13.3. SMN gene exists in two nearly identical copies, telomeric and centromeric, but only deletion/mutation in SMNt is seen to cause SMA (>98%). Deletion of NAIP gene is observed more often in severe SMA (65%), but there is no evidence that these gene play a 
role in the pathology of the disease.In this report we present the molecular analysis of the SMN and NAIP gene in 26 SMA cases, over a two-year period. DNA extracted from blood samples, CVS and amniotic ﬂuid was ampliﬁed by PCR. We ampliﬁed exons 7 and 8 of SMN gene and exons 5 and 13 of NAIP gene. Restriction enzymes digestion was used to separate SMNt and SMNc. Results revealed the homozygous deletions of exons 7 and 8 of the SMN gene in 84% (16/19) and deletion of exon 5 of the NAIP gene in 4 SMAI cases. Seven prenatal samples, from pregnant women with affected child, have been tested (one case was with deletions of 
exons 7 and 8).These ﬁndings have important implications for genetic counseling and 
pre- and postnatal diagnosis of SMA.
P0773. DHPLC analysis of the EXT1 and EXT2 genes in patients 
with multiple osteochondromas.
W. Wuyts, R. Radersma, K. Storm, L. Vits;  
Department of Medical Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium.
Hereditary multiple osteochondromas (MO) is an autosomal dominant bone disorder characterized by the presence of bony outhgrowths (osteochondromas or exostoses) on the long bones. Standard mutation analysis performed by sequencing analysis of all coding exons of the EXT1 and EXT2 genes reveals a mutation in approximately 80% of 
the MO patients.We have now optimized and validated a DHPLC based protocol for screening of all EXT1 and EXT2 coding exons in a set of 49 MO patients with an EXT1 or EXT2 mutation. Under the optimized DHPLC conditions, mutations were detected in all patients. These include 20 previously described mutations and 29 new mutations, including 20 
new EXT1 and 9 new EXT2 mutations.The protocol described here therefore provides a sensitive and cost sparing alternative for direct sequencing analysis of the MO causing 
genes.P0774. Complex molecular-genetic analysis of patients with 
spinal muscular atrophy
E. Zapletalová1,2, J. Jedličková1, R. Gaillyová3, L. Fajkusová1;  
1Center of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, University Hospital, Brno, 
Czech Republic, 2Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Re -
public, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech 
Republic.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive neuromuscular disease, characterized by the loss of motor neurons in the spinal cord, leading to proximal, symmetrical limb, and trunk muscle weakness. The gene implicated in SMA is the survival motor neuron gene (SMN) located on chromosome 5q13. In humans, the SMN gene is duplicated with telomeric copy (SMN1) and centromeric copy (SMN2). The differences between these highly homologous genes result in alterations in their RNA expression patterns. Homozygous SMN1 deletions were found in ca 95% of SMA cases. Point mutations, micro-deletions or insertions and small duplications are scattered through all SMN1 exons in ca 5% of SMA cases. SMN2 may occur in more than two copies per diploid genome. Studies of correlation between disease severity and the number of SMN2 copies have shown 
an inverse relationship.In our study we present results of SMA diagnostics using 1) PCR-restriction analysis for detection of SMN1 homozygous deletion; 2) real-time PCR for detection of SMN1 copy-number - identiﬁcation of SMA carriers and SMA patients with SMN1 deletion on one chromosome and point mutation on the second one; 3) denaturing high performance liquid chromatography and sequencing for detection of point mutation in patients with one SMN1 copy; 4) real-time PCR for detection of SMN2 copy-number - determination of correlation between SMN2 copy-number and clinical ﬁndings (SMA of type I, II or III).This work was supported by the Ministry of education, youth and sports (FRVS 2422/2005).
P0775. Mutation screening of genes associated with long QT 
syndrome using PCR and SSCP methods
I. Papoušek , M. Raudenská, K. Kozubíková, K. Chroust;  
Masarykova univerzita v Brně, Brno, Czech Republic.
The congenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a hereditary cardiac 
disorder with known risks for ventricular ﬁbrillations, syncopes, seizures and arrythmic events potentially leading to sudden death. At least seven genes linked to LQTS were identiﬁed so far, mostly encoding various structural and regulative subunits of cardiac membrane ion 
channels.The aim of our study was to implementate mutation screening based on polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) in three genes associated with LQTS: SCN5A 
(27 coding exons divided into 34 parts, 
KCNE2 (1 exon) and KCNJ2  
(1 exon divided into 6 parts). Using primers which cover whole coding regions of these genes, we optimized PCR conditions for all studied fragments and used this methodics for ampliﬁcation of DNA samples of 66 patients with suspected LQTS. PCR fragments were subsequently analyzed by SSCP. Samples which have shown irregularity in pattern of bands on SSCP analysis were puriﬁed and sequenced. Total amount of 1961 samples was analyzed so far.In exon 28 of the 
SCN5A gene we found a single-nucleotide 
polymorphism C5607T. In total of 65 analyzed samples, 40 samples exposed T/T genotype, 22 samples were of C/T genotype and three samples represented C/C genotype. This would indicate allele frequency of 0,785 (T allele). This observation signiﬁcantly differs from results in other populations in which this SNP was previously observed 
(American - 0,123; Japanese - 0,46; Chinese - 0,413).No mutation directly causing LQTS was found so far.This work was supported by FRVŠ 554/2004 and NA/8063-3. 
P0776. Genomic deletions in STK11 in Peutz-Jeughers 
Syndrome detected by Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe 
Ampliﬁcation (MLPA)
H. M. B. Duarte1, F. H. Menko2, K. R. Heimdal3, J. P. Schouten4, J. J. P. Gille2;  
1MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Dept. of Clinical Genetics and 
Human Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 
3Dept Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, The Netherlands, 4MRC-Holland, 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics248
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is an inherited cancer syndrome, 
which results in a greatly increased risk of developing gastrointestinal polyps. Defects of the STK11 (LKB1) gene are the predominant cause of PJS. The STK11 gene has 10 exons and spans 21 Kb of chromosomal sequence on chromosome 19p13.3. Point mutations and small deletions / insertions in the STK11 gene can be detected by sequencing, DHPLC and other methods. Deletions and duplications of complete exons are usually not detected by these methods but can be detected by MLPA. A new MLPA probemix speciﬁc for STK11 was developed and covers almost all exons as well as the promoter and can be used to determine the copy number of most STK11 exons.We analysed 36 PJS families using conventional methods for mutation detection (DHPLC or DNA sequencing) and MLPA. There were 14 families (39%) with point mutations in STK11 and 7 with genomic deletion. The nature of the deletions was quite heterogenous.Four cases had the entire STK11 gene deleted, one had the promoter region and exon 1 deleted, one had exons 2-9 deleted and the last one had exons 3-9 deleted. These data show that 33% of pathogenic mutations in STK11 are genomic deletions which demonstrates that the deletion in STK11 recently described by Le Meur et al. is not a rare phenomenon. We conclude that MLPA is a sensitive, robust and easy to perform technique and an important tool for deletion detection in STK11.
P0777. Integrated homogeneous genotyping assay using dried 
blood spots.
A. Ylikoski, P. Ollikka, H. Raussi, V. Laitala, A. Godenhjelm , I. Hemmilä;  
PerkinElmer Life and Analytical Sciences, Wallac, Turku, Finland.
Laboratories performing genetic tests need simpliﬁed methods allowing automation. Our aim was to investigate the direct use of blood disks in homogeneous PCR for genotyping of celiac disease related risk haplotypes (DQ2: HLA-DQA1*05 and HLA-DQB1*02 alleles, and 
DQ8: HLA-DQB1*0302 allele).Blood samples from 134 volunteers were spotted onto 903 collection papers. A disk sample was punched and added to the reaction tube together with the PCR mix including detection probes. The reactions were sealed and moved to a thermal cycler. After cycling, the reactions were detected through the seal using time-resolved ﬂuorometry. DELFIA Celiac Disease Hybridization Assay Kit (PerkinElmer) was used as a conﬁrmatory test.The homogeneous PCR assay gave detectable signals (blank+3SD) with 1 ng of input DNA. The within-run variation was below 20%. The low detection limit of the assay allowed the use of blood disk samples. When the disk sample gave detectable signal with DQA1 and DQB1 controls, the ampliﬁcation was considered successful. All the blood disk samples were successfully genotyped. However, 4/134 disk samples were reanalyzed due to an unsuccessful ampliﬁcation in the ﬁrst analysis. Of the 134 samples, 29 (22%) and 26 (19%) had DQ2 and DQ8 haplotypes, respectively, which were in consistence with the DELFIA analysis.The integrated homogeneous assay presents an automation-friendly and simple way for genotyping without the need for pre-processing of disk samples. The analysis of 134 dried disk samples using the integrated homogeneous PCR assay showed successful genotyping 
results for the celiac disease related risk alleles.
P0778. Study of the prevalence of 35delG mutation in the Gjb2  
gene among patients with ARNSHL referred to the genetic 
counseling center of Isfahan Welfare organization, Iran
B. Azadeh ;  
Welfare Organization, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Hearing loss is one of the defects which has high prevalence. About 
1/1000 children are born deaf and 1.5 to 2/1000 will be affected by 
age six.The cause and nature of inherited deafness would become clear from identiﬁcation of a known syndrome, but mostly deﬁnite diagnosis is not simple. In such cases the pattern of inheritance can only be identiﬁed through family review or drawing the pedigree. Hearing loss relates to ten genes that could be observed among the affected people who were referred to the genetic counseling center of Isfahan. We reviewed 
the connexin 26 gene and our results were as follows:Among those referred to the genetic counseling center in Isfahan about 4400 ﬁles were reviewed and hearing loss was noted. From this number 50 members of different families were contacted whose pedigree suggested autosomal recessive hearing loss. 45 persons were tested.. In 30 cases connexin 26 was negative; 12 cases were positive and 3 cases are still under review. For those whose connexin 26 result was negative ﬁrst class of family members were considered individually and are under more consideration. Mutations detected were 35DelG 6 (13.3%); 312del14 1 (2.2%); v271/wt 1 (2.2%); Not 
DFNB1 2 (4.4%); Wt 1 (2.2%); 35DelG/Wt 1 (2.2%).
P0779. Quality assurance for genetic testing
C. A. Rundell , M. J. Connors, J. T. Gordon, S. M. Nesbitt;  
Maine Molecular Quality Controls, Inc., Scarborough, ME, United States.
Objective: Development and testing of multi-mutation molecular quality controls. Based on evaluation of quality assurance needs for molecular testing, controls were constructed through creation of DNA constructs, assembly of material, and performance testing. Evaluation showed high quality DNA recovery by common extraction methods, expected test results by clinical test methods, sensitivity to analytical test failure conditions, and stability.
Need: Quality controls that provide multiple mutations in one sample 
are needed for cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) and other genetic tests in order to monitor the entire assay, including extraction.Construction and Assembly: DNA constructs containing 24 CFTR 
exons including intronic borders and carrying multiple mutations were synthesized and suspended in artiﬁcial blood matrix.Extraction and testing: The CF Control and whole blood were extracted by common methods and ampliﬁed using CF Roche Gold 1.0. PAGE band intensities of control and genomic sample amplicons were similar. Test results were concordant with expected sequence 
except for known “neighboring mutation” method interferences.
Sensitivity:  Sensitivity to analytical factors was demonstrated by 
extraction and CF Gold 1.0 testing of control in parallel with genomic 
samples in a simulated polymerase failure.
Stability:  A CF Control was incubated at 4°C and 60°C and serially 
tested yielding a predicted stability of >679 days at 4°C.
Conclusions: Synthetic Controls are useful quality assurance tools.
Characteristics:
A. Mimic genomic samples in multiplex ampliﬁcation,
B. Contain rare mutations,
C. Allow for multiple mutation detection in one sample,
D. Can monitor several extraction methods,
E. Aid in setting up assays and genotype assignment.
P0780. Mutation screening in MSX1  gene in non-syndromic cleft 
lip and palate patients
J. Kasnauskiene, V. Mikštienė, V. Kučinskas;  
Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithu -
ania.
MSX1 is emerging as an especially strong gene candidate in non-syndromic clefting. Support for this comes from human linkage and linkage disequilibrium studies, chromosomal deletions resulting in haploinsufﬁciency, a large family with a stop codon mutation that includes clefting as a phenotype, the 
Msx1 phenotype in a knockout 
mouse. MSX1 mutations are found in 2% of cases of clefting and 
should be considered for genetic counselling implications.Aim of the study was to identify potentially etiological mutations in 
MSX1 gene in CL/P and CPO patients. In this study a total of 116 
independent MSX1 chromosomes (58 unrelated patients with CL/P 
and CPO residing in Lithuania) were investigated.5’UTR and exon one and intro of 
MSX1 gene of all probands were 
screened for DNA sequence alterations by direct sequencing.In the 5’UTR one SNP was found in 5 chromosomes (-36G>A); in the exon one one change in sequence was found - A34G (c.101C>G) in 9 chromosomes. Six different polymorphisms were found in the intron 
sequence.
No potentially etiological mutations in MSX1 gene were identiﬁed.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics249
P0781. Analysis of biotransformation system genes using 
'Detoxichip'
A. S. Glotov1, T. E. Ivaschenko1, V. S. Baranov1, A. S. Zasedatelev2, T. V. Nasedkina2;  
1Ott's Institute of Obstetrics&Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Engelgardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Most xenobiotics (carcinogens, drugs, food etc) are metabolized in the 
human organism by numerous enzymes of biotransformation system. Genes encoding these enzymes are characterized by signiﬁcant genetic polymorphism which is thought to be connected for genetic predisposition to different types of cancer. We present a diagnostic biochip ("DetoxiChip") for genotyping of biotransformation system gene polymorphism. We used multiplex PCR followed by allele-speciﬁc hybridization on biochip for the detection of SNP. Mutations were discriminated by analyzing ﬂuorescence intensities from individual probes on biochip. The following loci have been chosen: CYP1A1 (C4887, A4889G and T6235C), CYP2D6 (G1934A and DelA2637), GSTM1 (deletion), GSTT1 (deletion), NAT 2 (S1, S2, S3 alleles) and 
MTHFR (C677T).We tested "DetoxiChip" on 30 control and more than 100 diagnostic samples. Among 715 SNPs that yielded ﬂuorescent signals, 2 showed less than 99% of concordance, whereas 713 were performed accurately. Thus, the accuracy of the method was 99.7%. The biochip is suggested to be used for the analysis of genetic predisposition to multifactorial diseases like cancer, as well as for screening of polymorphic loci associated with individual drug sensitivity.
P0782. Rapid TPMT-genotyping for clinical applications using 
DNA-biochips
T. V. Nasedkina1, O. E. Fedorova1, A. S. Glotov1, E. V. Samochatova2, N. V. 
Chupova2, A. E. Roudneva2, V. V. Zemlyakova3, Z. M. Kozhekbaeva1, E. Y. 
Krynetskiy4,5, N. F. Krynetskaia5, R. C. Ribeiro4, W. E. Evans4,5, A. G. Roumyant -
sev2, A. S. Zasedatelev1;  
1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
2Research Institute of Pediatric Hematology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Re-
search Center for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4St. 
Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, United States, 5University of 
Tennessee, Memphis, TN, United States.
Thiopurine drugs are metabolized, in part, by S-methylation catalyzed 
by thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT). Patients with very low 
or undetectable TPMT activity are at high risk of severe, potentially fatal hematopoietic toxicity when they are treated with standard doses of thiopurines. Because human TPMT activity is controlled by a common genetic polymorphism, it is an excellent candidate for the clinical application of pharmacogenetics. A new molecular approach was developed to detect point mutations in the 
TPMT gene that cause 
the loss of TPMT activity. A ﬂuorescently labeled ampliﬁed DNA is hybridized with oligonucleotide DNA probes immobilized on a biochip. 
The TPMT biochip can recognize six point mutations in the TPMT gene 
and seven corresponding alleles associated with TPMT deﬁciency. The genotyping procedure is rapid, reliable, and cost-effective and can be used for rapid screening of inactivating mutations in the 
TPMT gene. 
Here we present the results of biochip analysis of the 625 DNA samples in the Russian population. 
TPMT gene mutations were identiﬁed in 
36 subjects. Thirty-one individual (4.96%) had genotype *1/*3A, ﬁve (0.8%) had *1/*3C, and two (0.32%) had *1/*2. The remaining 587 individuals (93.9%) had the wild-type genotype, *1/*1. The results show the feasibility of new chip-technology for pharmacogenetic testing in order to identify patients carrying the TPMT-deﬁciency alleles.This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (grant 03-04-49355), St.
 Jude Children’s Research Hospital 
International Outreach Program and by the American Lebanese Syrian 
Associated Charities (ALSAC).
P0783. An Evaluation of the VariantSEQrTM re-sequencing system 
and automated SeqScape® V2.1 mutation detection software for 
use in diagnostic laboratories.
Y. G. Patel , A. J. Wallace, R. G. Elles;  
National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom.
VariantSEQrTM primer sets are available for a wide range of genes 
involved with genetic disease. Clinical laboratories are interested in the performance of the VariantSEQr
TM system in a diagnostic setting, 
particularly since it can be coupled with SeqScape® v2.1 automated mutation detection. We performed a blind study on a panel of 76 patients to test the performance of the complete neuroﬁbromatosis type 2 (NF2) gene VariantSEQr
TM primer set (34 fragments) and 
analysed the data using the SeqScape® v2.1 automated sequence 
analysis/mutation detection software.The NF2 VariantSEQr
TM kit PCR gave robust ampliﬁcation for most 
of the fragments (28/34). Sequence data was produced for nearly all the fragments for each patient DNA. After only a single round of repeat ampliﬁcations and sequencing only 6 fragments from the whole data set of 76 patients (6/4560) failed to produce any sequence data. However a very large amount of sequence data is generated (18.3kb in one direction) to cover the regions of interest (complete coding and 
non-coding sequences of the NF2 gene = 7.6kb).The sensitivity of mutation detection of the VariantSEQr
TM/SeqScape® 
protocol observed with our panel (containing 20 mutation positive controls) was seen to be 17/20 mutations (85%) under default analysis conditions. Two of the mutations missed were heterozygous frameshift deletions, and the third a mutation lying within a portion of an exon that repeatedly failed to sequence. Although the NF2 VariantSEQr
TM/
SeqScape® system was able to detect the majority of mutations the 
inability to automatically detect frameshift mutations is a concern that 
needs addressing.
P0784. Evaluation of a service for Sorsby Fundus Dystrophy
J. M. Rice1, N. Hart-Holden1, Z. Saihan2, S. Ramsden1, S. A. Jenkins2, A. Web -
ster2, G. C. M. Black3, R. G. Elles1;  
1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2In-
stitute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, 3Central Manchester and 
Manchester Children's University Hospitals, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Sorsby Fundus Dystrophy (SFD) is an autosomal dominant macular dystrophy. Loss of vision in SFD results from the growth of new choroidal vessels or atrophy of the outer retina typically in the fourth or ﬁfth decades in those affected.SFD results from gain-of-function mutations in the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-3 (TIMP-3) protein which is encoded by ﬁve exons. All six pathogenic mutations reported are located in exon 5 and the intron 4 boundary. There is a very strong founder effect in the UK with the p.S204C missense mutation accounting for the overwhelming majority of positive 
cases.We report the results of 18 months of a diagnostic evaluation using bi-directional sequencing of exon 5 of TIMP-3. During this period we have performed diagnostic testing on 24 individuals and predictive testing on 3 individuals with a conﬁrmed family history. Of the 24 diagnostic tests carried out 11 cases carried p.S204C* and in 12/23 no mutation was found.
Additionally we have identiﬁed the unclassiﬁed variant p.E162K, previously unreported. It segregated with disease and was not present 
in 600 ethnically matched control chromosomes.We have demonstrated a demand for diagnostic and predictive testing for SFD from both ophthalmic and genetic specialist centres across the UK. Due to the potential outcomes for the patient, we request that samples are appropriately referred, with informed consent and have a requirement for duplicate samples where predictive testing is requested. 
All results are delivered within a genetic counselling environment.
*p.S204C (previously Ser181Cys) has been reclassiﬁed according to 
HGVS guidelines.
P0785. Mitochondrial variants in Non Syndromic Hearing Loss
S. Marlin1, D. Feldmann2, E. Chapiro3, C. Francannet4, H. Dollfus5, D. Bouc -
cara6, A. David7, V. Drouin-Garraud8, J. Vigneron9, C. Goizet10, B. Delobel11, R. 
Couderc2, E. N. Garabédian12, C. Petit13, F. Denoyelle12;  
1Unit Genet Med, INSERM U587, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 
2Lab Biochem, INSERM U587, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 3Lab 
Biochem, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 4Genet Med, CHU, Clermont 
Ferrand, France, 5Unit Genet Med, Hôp Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 6Serv 
ORL, Hôp Beaujon, AP-HP, Paris, France, 7Unit Genet Clin, CHU, Nantes, 
France, 8Serv Genet, Hôp Charles-Nicolle, Rouen, France, 9Mater Reg A 
Pinard, Nancy, France, 10Unit Genet Med, Hôp Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 
11Centre Génétique, Hôpital St Antoine, Lille, France, 12Serv ORL et Chirurgie 
Cervico-Faciale, INSERM U587, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 13IN-
SERM U587, Inst Pasteur, Paris, France.
Mitochondrial mutations have been previously reported in maternally inherited hearing impairment (HI). The most common mutation is Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics250
1555A>G usually associated with history of aminoglycosides exposure. 
In addition, three other mutations causing non syndromic hearing loss NSHL have been reported: 1494C>T in mtRNA12s, 7510T>C and 7511T>C in tRNA-Ser(UCN). To ascertain the contribution of mitochondrial variations to NSHL, we studied 200 unrelated patients included 50 sporadic cases with aminoglycosides exposure and 150 
familial cases with maternally inherited HI.We analysed mtRNA12s, tRNA-Leu(UUR) and tRNA-Ser(UCN) and the ﬂanking regions by DGGE and sequencing.The mutation 1555A>G was observed in 4 large families and was always homoplasmic. The phenotype was variable ranging from severe prelingual HI to mild progressive postlingual HI. No aminoglycosides administration has been noted in all the families. The families’ origin was varied: France, Arab-Palestinian, Madagascar and Pakistan. In addition, we observed 2 French large families with 7511T>C homoplasmic or heteroplasmic. The age of onset and the severity of the HI were variable even in the same family. In tRNA-Leu(UUR) the mutation 3243A>G was founded in 4 families with HI and other clinical symptoms. No known mutation was found in the sporadic cases. In addition, 25 different variations were founded, 20 have been previously 
reported as polymorphisms and 5 are new variations.In conclusion, we have identiﬁed a known mitochondrial mutation in 6.6 % of familial NSHL. So, it seems justiﬁed to screen only large 
maternally inherited HI families for mitochondrial mutations.
P0786. Mutation search in the DNAI1 and DNAH5 genes in 50 
Italian families with Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia
L. Bartoloni1, C. Cazzadore1, A. Beghin1, M. Collura2, M. DeSanti3, F. Ganz1, A. 
Ferlin1, C. Foresta1;  
1University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 2Ospedale dei Bambini, Palermo, Italy, 
3University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare heterogeneous hereditary disorder characterised by immotility of cilia, leading to recurrent pulmonary and upper respiratory tract infections. The infections often result in bronchiectasis, and they can seriously damage the lungs, which may need to be transplanted. Dextrocardia, with or without heterotaxia (situs inversus totalis), is present in about 50% of the patients. If respiratory infections, ciliary dyskinesia and situs inversus 
are present, the pathology is named Kartagener Syndrome (KS).We collected 50 unrelated KS/PCD families from all around Italy. Diagnosis was established on the basis of respiratory tract infections, bronchiectasis, electron microscopy of cilia or ﬂagella. Over half of the patients has a dynein arm deﬁciency.We searched the patients’ DNA for mutations in the genes in which mutations have already been described: DNAI1, an intermediate dynein chain and DNAH5 an heavy chain axonemal dynein. The analysis of the entire DNAI1 gene did not show pathogenetic alterations. In Italy, PCD/KS is almost never due to mutations in the DNAI1. The mutation search on the DNAH5 gene was focused on the exons carrying already published mutations. This strategy was necessary because of the size of this gene. Only one couple of brothers shows mutations in the DNAH5 gene: one is the A insertion in exon 32 at nt 5130, the second one is novel it is in exon 34, and changes a Glu in a stop codon. It is possible that the other Italian 
patients share the same mutated gene/s which is to be individuate.
P0787. Nance-Horan syndrome: results of mutation screening in 
19 independent families
A. Toutain1, B. Dessay1, N. Ronce1, J. Kaplan2, J. K. Hartsﬁeld3, C. Wallgren-
Pettersson4, I. Walpole5, S. Russo6, A. Nemeth7, N. Oyen8, A. Rossi9, P. Bi -
toun10, D. Heron11, J. Burn12;  
1CHU Bretonneau, Tours, France, 2Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, 
France, 3Indiana University School of Dentistry, Indianapolis, IN, United States, 
4University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 5Princess Margaret Hospital for Chil -
dren, Subiaco, Australia, 6Instituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 7Oxford 
Radcliffe Hospital NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 8Haukeland University 
Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 9EFS, Bois Guillaume, France, 10SIDVA, Savigny sur 
Orge, France, 11Pitie-Salpetriere Hospital, Paris, France, 12Institute of Human 
Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
Nance-Horan syndrome (NHS) is a rare X-linked condition characterized by bilateral congenital cataracts with microcornea, distinctive dental anomalies, typical facial features and mental impairment in 30% of 
male cases.The NHS gene was identiﬁed in 2003 by an Australian group. NHS  
is a large gene that encodes a 8.7 kb major isoform and a 7.7 kb minor isoform, resulting in predicted proteins, which differ by their N-terminus. The predicted amino acid sequence shows signiﬁcant homology between several animal species, but no homology with any known protein family. 
NHS expression is developmentally regulated 
in a range of embryonic tissues, including the lens, brain, craniofacial mesenchyme, and dental primordia. The function of 
NHS is unknown 
but the expression pattern together with the identiﬁcation of predicted nuclear localization signals support a key role in the regulation of brain, lens, tooth and craniofacial development. By positional cloning and database searching, we simultaneously identiﬁed the NHS gene. We found 2 additional mRNA isoforms which differ by their 5’ end, both lacking exon 1, and which display tissue-dependent alternative 
splicing of an additional exon.We present the detailed results of mutation screening in a series of 19 independent NHS families. All the mutations identiﬁed until now are truncating mutations, mostly nonsense or frameshift. They are spread over the gene and there is no consistent genotype / phenotype correlation. There is no signiﬁcant difference in the clinical picture between the mutated families and those where no mutation was identiﬁed.
P0788. Study of MEFV mutations in the Iranian population by 
means of reverse-hybridization teststrips
S. H. Amini1, C. Oberkanins2, B. Moghimi3, A. Ghamari4, N. Almadani1, K. Kah -
rizi4, G. Kriegshäuser2, H. Najmabadi1,4;  
1Kariminejad/Najmabadi Genetic and Pathology Center, Tehran, Islamic Re -
public of Iran, 2ViennaLab Labordiagnostika GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 3Medical 
School, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 4Genetics Research Center, Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences 
University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is a hereditary inﬂammatory disorder caused by mutations in the MEFV gene. Carrier rates are known to be high among Turks, Armenians and Arab populations, whereas no data on the frequency and the spectrum of MEFV 
mutations were so far available from neighbouring Iran.We have applied reverse-hybridisation teststrips (FMF StripAssay) to simultaneously analyse twelve common MEFV mutations in 208 asymptomatic Iranians from different regions and ethnic groups. The overall frequency of mutant alleles in our study population (15.6%) was moderate compared to Armenia, but exceeded the values known from Turkey and Iraq. The most common variant E148Q was identiﬁed in 9.6% of MEFV genes. Five other mutations (P369S, M694V, V726A, 
A744S, R761H) were observed with lower prevalence.In addition, we studied the case of an 8 year old boy with short recurrent fever attacks and abdominal pain from a small village in the northwest of Iran. He turned out to be homozygous for MEFV mutation M694V. His parents were M694V/N and M694V/R761H. Several other members of this large family were found to be affected by typical symptoms of FMF and to carry MEFV mutations. Among 30 asymptomatic inhabitants of this village, who consented to participate in our study, we identiﬁed six different variants (E148Q, P369S, M680I(G/C), M694V, V726A, R761H) in a total of 13 mutant MEFV genes. Given the high frequency of MEFV mutations in Iran, the awareness for FMF and the availability of testing needs to increase signiﬁcantly. (oberkanins@viennalab.
co.at)
P0789. Screening of GATA4  gene in patients with isolated 
atrioventricular canal defect
A. Sarkozy1,2, G. Esposito1,2, C. Neri1,2, E. Conti1, M. C. Digilio3, B. Marino4, A. 
Pizzuti1,2, B. Dallapiccola1,2;  
1IRCCS, CSS Hospital, CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Department of 
Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy, 
3Division of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy , 
4Section of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, University La Sapi -
enza, Rome, Italy.
Atrioventricular canal defect (AVCD) is frequently associated with extracardiac anomalies, and peculiar anatomic patterns are found with distinct genetic syndromes. In particular, the complete form of AVCD, which accounts for 70% of the cases, is associated with trisomy 21 (20%), and deletion 8p23 (40%), while the partial form occurs is some Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics251
mendelian disorders. Mutations in CRELD1  gene has been detected 
in 6% of isolated AVCD patients, while a missense mutation in GATA4  
gene, mapped to 8p23, was found in a family segregating either atrial 
or ventricular or AV septal defects. We screened GATA4 gene in a 
cohort of sporadic and familiar cases of non-syndromic AVCD. Twenty-two sporadic individuals and nine families, with at least one individual affected by AVCD have been enrolled in this study. Six sporadic and one familial patients had additional heart defects, in particular 5 patients were affected by AVCD-Tetralogy of Fallot. Recurrence of CHDs was concordant in 3 families and discordant in 5. Chromosome 
and CRELD1  gene analyses were negative in all individuals. GATA4  
gene analysis was performed by PCR, SSCP and direct sequencing. No mutation was identiﬁed in the GATA4 gene coding region. Our study 
does not support a pathogenetic role of GATA4 mutations in AVCD. 
Although GATA4 gene haploinsufﬁciency is considered responsible for 
cardiac septal defects, either in del8p syndrome and in some non-syndromic patients, present results suggest that GATA4 mutations 
are not a common cause of isolated AVCD, arguing genes, other than 
CRELD1  and GATA4, should be causally related to this defect.
P0790. Molecular studies of USHER 1 patients in France 
evidence a high genetic heterogeneity
A. F. Roux, V. Faugère, N. Pallares-Ruiz, A. Vielle, M. Claustres;  
Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
Usher syndrome is a recessive disorder associating hearing loss (HL) and retinitis pigmentosa (RP). Current classiﬁcation divides Usher syndrome in three distinct clinical types. Usher syndrome type 1 (USH1) is the most severe form characterized by profound congenital hearing loss, vestibular dysfunction and prepubertal onset of retinitis pigmentosa. To date 5 genes causing USH1 have been cloned: 
MYO7A, CDH23, PCDH15, USH1C and SANS.Because no speciﬁc phenotype can yet be related to either gene, it is still necessary to plan the screening of several genes before identifying the deleterious one(s). We therefore developed a two-step strategy to perform an extensive study of USH1 genes. In ﬁrst intention and when possible, we perform linkage studies with microsatellite markers neighboring the different USH1 genes to point the gene(s) to be screened. We then perform mutation analysis by using the Single Condition Ampliﬁcation/Internal primer method (SCAIP). The latter approach allows entire sequencing of a single gene with a single PCR condition in a reduced time. We screened several dozens of patients for MYO7A and CDH23. The study reveals known mutations for both genes as well as 17 new pathogenic mutations. Since no mutation could be identiﬁed in a number of patients, the analysis of the other USH1 genes is underway. Finally, the SCAIP method also identiﬁes a high number of SNPs distributed throughout the genes, thus permitting the building of complex haplotypes for several USH1 genes for each patient. These data will be integrated for further phenotype/genotype 
correlations.
P0791. Functional characterization of a novel sporadic mutation 
in Von Hippel Lindau (VHL) gene.
G. Merla, L. A. Muscarella, V. Formica, R. Barbano, B. Augello, L. Zelante, L. 
D'Agruma;  
Servizio di Genetica Medica - IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San 
Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy.
von Hippel Lindau disease (OMIM # 193300) is a heritable autosomal 
dominant cancer multisystem cancer syndrome that results from a germline mutation in the VHL gene. Germline mutations in the VHL gene lead to the development of several benign or malignant tumours and cysts in many organ systems. Principal lesions are retinal and 
CNS haemangioblastomas.In a screening for germline mutations of VHL patients we have identiﬁed a case of germline mosaicism in an affected individual by VHL syndrome without a family history of the disease. The nucleotide alteration consists of an 11bp tandem repeat, located in the VHL promoter region. Analysis of this altered region of the VHL promoter using a computer algorithm revealed the presence of an additional Sp1 and AP2-alfa binding sites.In order to characterize the potential Sp1 and AP2 binding sites and to investigate the functional consequences of the repeat we performed EMSA and transactivation assay. Moreover the levels of VHL mRNA have been assessed. The result of this analysis will be presented.P0792. Study of genetic risk factors for cardiovascular disease 
in the Iranian population by means of reverse-hybridization 
teststrips
C. Oberkanins1, S. H. Amini2, A. Ghamari3, K. Kahrizi3, H. Pühringer1, H. 
Najmabadi2,3;  
1ViennaLab Labordiagnostika GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Kariminejad/Najmabadi 
Genetic and Pathology Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetics Re -
search Center, Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences University, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
A number of genetic and environmental risk factors have been found or suspected to predispose to cardiovascular disease (CVD), the term collectively used for disorders of the heart and blood vessels. We have developed a reverse-hybridization assay (CVD StripAssay) for the rapid and simultaneous detection of twelve candidate CVD risk factors (Factor V Leiden, Factor V R2, Prothrombin G20210A, Factor XIII V34L, beta-Fibrinogen -455 G-A, PAI-1 4G/5G, GPIIIa L33P, MTHFR C677T, MTHFR A1298C, ACE Ins/Del, Apo B R3500Q, Apo E2/E3/E4). The test is based on multiplex PCR and hybridization to a teststrip presenting a parallel array of allele-speciﬁc oligonucleotide probes for each mutation. We have applied these teststrips to investigate the prevalence of CVD risk mutations among 208 asymptomatic Iranians from different regions and ethnic groups.The allele frequencies of mutant Factor V Leiden (1.2%) and Prothrombin G20210A (0.5%) in our cohort were below previously published ﬁgures on the population of Tehran (2.7% and 1.5%, respectively; Zeinali et al. 2000). Mutant MTHFR C677T (24.8%) and Factor XIII V34L (14.2%) occurred less frequently than among Europeans, but exceeded the much lower frequencies known from India and most of Asia. The prevalence of mutant MTHFR A1298C in our study population (41.8%), however, was remarkably high. Apo E2 (4.6%) and E4 (5.8%) alleles were observed in relatively low frequencies compared to population 
studies in Europe and the USA.Our comprehensive population data should represent a valuable basis for further investigation on the contributions of genetic CVD risk factors 
in Iran. (oberkanins@viennalab.co.at)
P0793. Prototype Genomic DNA-based Reference Materials 
for Fragile X and Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer 
Testing. On behalf of the Certiﬁed Reference Materials for 
Genetics (CRMGEN) project
E. E. Gillaspy1, J. Rice1, E. Byrne2, R. Hawkins2, G. Stacey2, D. Barton3, R. 
Elles1;  
1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Na-
tional Institute for Biological Standards and Control, London, United Kingdom, 
3Our Lady's Hospital for Sick Children, Dublin, Ireland.
The use of appropriate Reference Materials (RMs) to validate test 
equipment or methods is an important part of diagnostic systems however, currently no Certiﬁed Reference Materials (CRMs) are available for molecular genetic testing. The CRMGEN project (EC Contract: G6RD-CT-2001-00581) aims to develop CRMs for a range of diseases and by doing so, develop the methodology to produce CRMs for any molecular genetic test. Four formats of RMs are being investigated by the project’s producing partners: Cultured cell lines (Leuven), Recombinant DNA fragments (Leiden), PCR products (Dublin) and Genomic DNA (Manchester). Initially, Manchester has concentrated on developing RMs relevant to testing for Fragile X syndrome and Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC). Samples have been collected from 13 Fragile X and 6 HNPCC patients under informed consent. Stable cell lines have been established from these samples and stored at the National Institute for Biological Standards and Control (NIBSC). Six HNPCC and 5 of the Fragile X cell lines were selected for the development of prototype RMs. Four methods for large scale DNA extraction were developed and tested in ﬁeld trials. From the results, it was decided that a batched phenol-chloroform methodology would be used in future genomic DNA-based RM production. The 11 prototype RMs were fully characterised and distributed for ﬁeld trialling, in conjunction with the European Molecular Genetics Quality Network, to 54 Fragile X and 43 HNPCC testing laboratories. The results indicate that genomic DNA-based RMs 
perform well in a diagnostic laboratory setting.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics252
P0794. Clinical and biochemical characteristics in patients with 
mitochondrial T8993C/G mutations
E. Morava, R. Rodenburg, B. van den Heuvel, F. Hol, M. de Vries, L. Nijtmans, 
J. Smeitink;  
UMC Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Deﬁcient complex V activity has been reported in patients carrying the 
T8993G point mutation in the mitochondrial ATPase 6 gene. However, the effect of the T8993C mutation on complex V function in muscle has not yet been described. We retrospectively analyzed the biochemical, clinical and histological data of eleven patients, ﬁve of which carried the maternally inherited T8993C and six carrying the T8993G mutations. The percentage of heteroplasmy was higher than 95% in muscle and in blood. We compared the ATP production from pyruvate oxidation and the activity of complexes I-V measured in fresh muscle biopsy samples in the two patient groups. We also evaluated the assembly-process of complex V in muscle tissue. In nine patients a decreased ATP production was detected, and complex V was deﬁcient in all children. The activity of the respiratory enzyme complexes I-IV was normal in nine patients, whereas complex I and III were deﬁcient in two. All patients had an early clinical presentation with muscle hypotonia, severe extrapyramidal dysfunction and Leigh disease demonstrated by the cranial MRI. A slower clinical progression and more frequent senso-neural involvement were noted in the patient group carrying the T8993C mutation. No obvious difference was found in the biochemical parameters. We couldn’t ﬁnd any correlation between the degree of complex V deﬁciency and the severity of the phenotype. We conﬁrmed an assembly defect in our patients. This is the ﬁrst report of decreased activity and delayed assembly of complex V in patients with T8993C 
mutations measured in muscle tissue.
P0795. PABPN1 gene  point mutations associated with 
oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) and a novel 
mechanism for triplet repeat expansion.
D. O. Robinson1, S. P. Read1, A. Wills2, M. A. Farrell3;  
1Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, Wilts., United Kingdom, 
2Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 3Beaumont Hospital, 
Dublin, Ireland.
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is an autosomal dominant late onset neuromuscular degenerative disease characterised by proximal muscle weakness, ptosis and swallowing difﬁculty. The underlying cause is a triplet repeat expansion of 2 - 7 additional base triplets in a repeat sequence in exon 1 of the polyadenine binding protein nuclear 1 gene (PABPN1). This results in an increase in length of from 10 to 12 - 17 residues of a polyalanine tract in the PABPN1 protein and is associated with deposition of characteristic nuclear ﬁlament inclusions in skeletal muscle ﬁbres. PABPN1 is ubiquitously 
expressed and binds to the polyadenine tail of pre-mRNAs, being 
involved in regulation of their formation and length.The triplet repeat expansion mutation has been the only OPMD mutation documented to date, however we have identiﬁed two point mutations in PABPN1 associated with OPMD and an OPMD like 
phenotype. Both are miss-sense mutations close to the 3’ end of 
the PABPN1 polyalanine repeat sequence. In case A, who has the 
typical OPMD phenotype, a c.35G>C/ p.Gly12Ala mutation generates a polyalanine tract of 13 contiguous residues by the change of only a single base. This represents a previously undescribed mechanism of triplet repeat expansion. Cases B1 and B2 have the mutation c.50G>C / p.Arg17Pro mutation and an early onset OPMD like phenotype but 
with no evidence of intranuclear inclusion bodies.
P0796. In frame 21 bp exonic deletions in the PQBP1 X-linked 
mental retardation (XLMR) gene : pathogenic mutations or rare 
variants of uncertain effect ?
M. Cossee1, B. Demeer1, M. Antin1, B. Echenne2, S. Finck3, H. Dollfus4, P. Blan -
chet5, L. Vallee6, J. Mandel7;  
1Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, 
Strasbourg, France, 2Service de Neuropédiatrie, CHU de Montpellier, Montpel -
lier, France, 3Service de Pédiatrie, Hôpital de Haguenau, Haguenau, France, 
4Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, 
Strasbourg, France, 5Service de Pédiatrie II, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, 
France, 6Service de Neuropédiatrie, CHU de Lille, Lille, France, 7Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg,, Strasbourg, 
France.
Mutations in the PQBP1 gene, coding for the polyglutamine-binding protein 1, a putative transcription factor, have recently been identiﬁed in 8 families with syndromic or non syndromic X-linked mental retardation (XLMR). Clinical features frequently associated with the mental retardation are microcephaly and/or short stature and in a smaller proportion spasticity, small testes, anal atresia or stenosis, cardiac defects, ocular coloboma, cleft palate and other craniofacial abnormalities. The predominant mutations detected (5/8) affect a stretch of six AG dinucleotides in the polar-amino-acid-rich domain (PRD), causing frameshifts in the fourth coding exon. Further studies identiﬁed another deletion in exon 4, an insertion in exon 5, and a 
missense mutation in exon 3.We searched for PQBP1 exon 4 frameshifts in a cohort of mentally retarded males initially referred with a clinical description of at least one of the following criteria : microcephaly, short stature, spastic paraplegia or a family history compatible with XLMR; and also in a large cohort of mentally retarded males not selected for speciﬁc clinical features or familial history.We identiﬁed a novel frameshift mutation (a 23bp deletion) in two half-brothers presenting speciﬁc clinical features. We also performed a molecular prenatal diagnosis in this family.We additionally detected in three independent probands two different in frame deletions of 21bp, deleting one of 5 copies of an imperfect 7 aminoacid repeat. The nature of the mutations, the lack of consistent associated clinical features, and the borderline cognitive impairment phenotype showed by some patients, lead us to discuss their pathogenic signiﬁcance.
P0797. Complex I deﬁciency in Iranian multiple Sclerosis 
patients
F. Nabipoor , H. Hasani Komleh, M. Houshmand;  
National Institute for Genetic engineering and Bio, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an demyelinating disease of the central nervous system characterized by the morphological hallmarks of inﬂammation, demyelination and axonal loss. Until now, little attention has been paid to the contribution of mitochondrial respiratory chain enzyme activities to MS. In this study, kinetic analysis of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I enzyme (measured as NADH-ferricyanide reductase) on intact mitochondria isolated from fresh skeletal muscle in MS patients(n=10)and control subjects(n=11) was performed . Common deletion and deletion also was tested in mtDNA of MS patients. Our ﬁndings showed that complex I activity were signiﬁcantly reduced (P=0.007) in patients compared with control. Howere, we could not ﬁnd deletion in mtDNA of patients with MS. The presupposition of relationship between MS and mitochondrial disorder is due to predominant maternal transmission of MS in affected parent-child pairs, pathoaetiological role of respiratory chain dysfunction in multisystem disorder and important role of it in neurodegenerative disorders, a number of patients such as LHON or other mtDNA abnormality with developed neurological symptoms indistinguishable from MS and Similarity of clinical symptoms in mitochondrial disorders to those of MS . This study suggested that a biochemical defect in 
complex I activity may be involved in patogenesis of MS.
P0798. Molecular Diagnosis of the Classical Type of Ehlers-
Danlos Syndrome (EDS Type I/II)
K. Mayer1, I. Hausser2, H. Klein1;  
1Laboratory for Medical Genetics, Martinsried, Germany, 2Electron Microscopic 
Laboratory, Department of Dermatology, University Heidelberg, Germany.
Major diagnostic features of the classical EDS type are hyperextensible 
skin, tissue fragility with widened atrophic scars, and joint hypermobility. Approximately 50% of classic EDS cases result from abnormalities in type V collagen, a molecule that predominantly occurs as a heterotrimer of two a1 (V) and one a2 (V) chains encoded by the COL5A1 and COL5A2 genes. The clinical diagnosis of classic EDS can be strengthened by abnormal ultrastructural dermal architecture recognized by characteristic ﬁndings in electron microscopy.We report on the molecular analysis of 35 patients with the clinical diagnosis of classic EDS. Electron microscopy of a skin biopsy Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics253
preceeded molecular genetic analysis in 17 cases. Mutation screening 
of all coding exons of the COL5A1 and the COL5A2 gene by direct sequencing of leukocyte DNA has been ﬁnished in 22 patients, 11 of whom had additional ultrastructural ﬁndings. Most likely pathogenic mutations were identiﬁed in 10/22 patients (45%); in ﬁve patients transmission electron microscopy revealed typical composite collagen ﬁbrils with enlarged “ﬂower-like” cross sections and rope-like longitudinal sections. All mutations affect the COL5A1gene and none has been previously reported. Seven are translation terminating composed of four frameshift, two splice site and one nonsense mutation. Two missense changes affect a glycin residue and a conserved arginin residue in the triple-helical domain of the proa1 (V) chain, respectively. One patient carries a one amino acid in-frame deletion. Our detection rate of 45% is in accordance with previously reported molecular genetic studies 
and supports further genetic heterogeneity in classic EDS.
P0799. Novel and recurrent mutations in the ATM g ene in 
patients with classical ataxia-telangiectasia (AT)
A. De Luca1, M. Piane2, M. Magliozzi1, L. Sinibaldi1, I. Torrente1, G. Rizzo2, B. 
Dallapiccola1,2, L. Chessa2;  
1IRCCS-CSS, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy , 
2Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University of Rome “La 
Sapienza”, Rome, Italy.
The gene for ataxia-telangiectasia (MIM 208900 ), ATM, spans about 
150 kb of genomic DNA. ATM mutations are found along the entire 
gene, with no evidence of a mutational hot spots. We screened the ATM gene using an optimized denaturing high performance liquid 
chromatography (DHPLC) technique that detected all previously known mutations in PCR segments being analyzed. The screening was performed in 22 unrelated AT patients, and allowed us to identify 38 of the 44 expected mutations. Therefore, the efﬁciency of mutation detection by optimized DHPLC was approximately 86%. Sixteen (73%) of the investigated patients were compound heterozygous, and six (27%) were homozygous for an ATM mutation. Among the 38 mutations identiﬁed, we observed 6 nonsense alleles (16%) and 26 (68%) frameshift alleles, including 16 deletions, one insertion, 7 out-of-frame exon skipping events and one homozygous duplication. Thus, as many as 32 (84%) alleles caused, directly or indirectly, a premature termination codon (PTC). Two alleles (5%) caused in-frame exon skipping. In addition, 4 (11%) missense mutations were also observed. Mutations were scattered across the whole coding sequence of the ATM gene, and 13 of the mutations were found to be novel according to the ATM Mutation Database. For the three mutations [c.3576G>A (K1192K), c.3802delG and c.7517_7520delGAGA] recurrently detected we deﬁned the associated haplotypes in order to investigate whether they are ancestrally related or hot spots. The identiﬁcation of ATM 
gene 
mutations appears important for understanding the molecular basis of 
the disease, and is essential for diagnosis and genetic counseling.
P0800. Characterization of a fourth form of Autosomal Dominant 
Hypercholesterolemia in a French family
D. Allard1, M. Trillard1, M. Abifadel1,2, K. Ouguerram3, Y. Zair3, M. Devillers1, D. 
Erlich1, M. Krempf3, C. Junien1,4, J. P. Rabès1,4, C. Boileau1,4, M. Varret1, A. D. 
H. French Research Network5;  
1INSERM UR383, Paris, France, 2Faculté de Pharmacie, Université Saint-Jo -
seph, Beirut, Lebanon, 3INSERM UR539, Hôtel-Dieu, Nantes, France, 4Labora -
toire de Biochimie, d'Hormonologie et de Génétique Moléculaire, AP-HP, Am -
broise Paré, Boulogne, France, 5GIS-Institut des maladies rares, Paris, France.
Autosomal Dominant Hypercholesterolemia (ADH) is characterized by isolated elevation of LDL cholesterol and associated with high risk of premature cardiovascular complications. Over 1000 mutations in the 
LDLR  gene (Familial Hypercholesterolemia, FH) and 5 mutations in 
the APOB gene (Familial Defective Apolipoprotein B100) have been 
implicated. We recently reported further genetic heterogeneity related to missense mutations in the 
PCSK9 gene. We now report a large 
French ADH family in which involvement of the LDLR , APOB and 
PCSK9 genes was excluded. We named the pathology “HCHOLA4”. Our aim was to identify the disease-causing gene and to deﬁne the associated pathophysiology.A whole-genome scan, using 232 polymorphic microsatellite markers, located the 
HCHOLA4  gene at 16q22.1. Regional haplotype 
construction allowed identiﬁcation of a 5.9 cM critical interval between markers D16S3043 and D16S3018. Regional and functional candidate genes were tested by sequencing but no causal mutation was 
detected.In vivo kinetics of apolipoprotein B100-containing lipoproteins, conducted in 2 affected members, mainly showed substantial decrease in LDL catabolism compared to normocholesterolemic individuals. A Q-PCR analysis of SREBP2 (Sterol Responsive Element Binding Protein) and 2 of its target genes (
HMGCR , LDLR ) in EBV-transformed 
lymphoblasts of one affected member showed a huge decrease of expression versus normocholesterolemic an FH patients in standard 
culture conditions.In conclusion,
 we identiﬁed a French family with a fourth form of ADH 
linked to 16q22.1 whose LDL elevation is due to a substantial default in LDL catabolism and characterized by extremely low basal expression 
of SREBP2 , HMGCR  and LDLR  genes in lymphoblasts.
P0801. Rapid heteroduplex scanning of the GALT gene using 
dried blood spot DNA.
J. A. Harbour1, C. R. Ellington1, E. W. Naylor2, C. Saunders3, K. Muralidharan4, 
J. T. McKinney1, S. F. Dobrowolski1;  
1Idaho Technology, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 2Pediatrix Screening, 
Bridgeville, PA, United States, 3Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, 
United States, 4Emory Univeristy, Atlanta, GA, United States.
Classical galactosemia results from defects in galactose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase gene (GALT) and is identiﬁed by newborn screening. Screening utilizes the dried blood spot (DBS) to assay total galactose and/or GALT enzyme activity. Screening identiﬁes some carriers and some specimens with partial deﬁciencies (so-called D/G compound heterozygotes). Screening labs use DNA from DBS to assay common mutations but DBS is considered an inadequate source of DNA for comprehensive gene analysis. Two normal specimens and thirty-eight specimens testing beyond cut-offs in newborn screening were assayed over the GALT gene using dye-binding/high-resolution thermal denaturation with DNA from the newborn DBS. Exons were assayed as single ampliﬁcation products included coding and intron sequence critical to splicing. PCR included the dye LCGreen
TM. Post-
PCR dye-saturated product was melted in the HR-1TM instrument. 
Samples with aberrant melt-proﬁles were recovered for DNA sequencing. Nine classical galactosemia, 16 carriers, and 11 D/G compound heterozygotes were identiﬁed. No mutations were found in 2 specimens with elevated galactose and normal enzyme activity suggesting galactose epimerase deﬁciency. In one likely carrier no mutation was observed. The following mutations were observed: fs D39X (c17-18 del CC), ΔD97 (c289-291 del AAC), R67H, S135L, T138M, M142K, F171S, Q188R, S192N, L195P, R231C, Y251S, R263G, T284N, M298V, Y323C R333W, Q344K. Comprehensive analysis of GALT used 11ul of the 60ul of DNA obtained from a 3.2mm punch showing the DBS is useful for comprehensive gene analysis. The protocol including preparing DNA, PCR, melting, and preparing specimens with aberrant melting proﬁles for sequencing is completed 
in 4 hours.
P0802. Screening for Wilson Disease: 2nd tier molecular 
analysis of ATP7B
S. F. Dobrowolski1, J. T. McKinney1, C. R. Ellington1, J. A. Harbour1, J. Win -
ters2, S. Hahn2;  
1Idaho Technology, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 2Mayo Clinic, Roch -
ester, MN, United States.
Wilson Disease (WD, OMIM#277900) is an autosomal recessive 
disorder of copper metabolism secondary to mutations in the ATP7B gene. Presentation is characterized by hepatitis, cirrhosis, or neuropsychiatric symptoms. Early detection of WD averts irreversible tissue damage thus prospective screening is proposed using reduced ceruloplasmin as the biochemical genetic marker. Among candidate patients with low CP, there are no secondary biochemical or clinical markers, thus 2
nd tier evaluation of ATP7B is being investigated. 
Analysis of ATP7B applies dye-binding/high-resolution thermal denaturation to identify regions of sequence aberration to target DNA sequencing. Coding and critical splice site regions are ampliﬁed in the presence of the saturating dye LCGreen
TM Plus. High-resolution 
thermal denaturation of dye saturated ampliﬁcation product used the LightScanner
TM instrument. Normal proﬁles were established for Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics254
each fragment and those deviating from normal were recovered for 
sequence analysis. Among 16 patients, mutations were observed in exons 8-20, the most frequently observed were R778L and H1069Q. Other mutations identiﬁed include: M769I; A874V, c2697-2723 del IVKLVEEAQ; G988R, G1035V; L1083F, 3400 delC, I1148T, N1270S, Q1351X. Polymorphisms were observed in 11/16 specimens and include, R725R, L770L, K832R, R952K, T991T, V1140A, IVS12 -13 G>T, IVS18 +6 C>T. Ampliﬁcation of all regions uses a common PCR protocol and melting is performed in the PCR plate. Melting is not destructive and LCGreen Plus does not interfere with subsequent sequencing thus samples are recovered from the reaction plate for sequencing. Dye-binding/high-resolution thermal denaturation is a cost effective means to assay ATP7B in candidate patients identiﬁed 
by prospective screening using reduced ceruloplasmin.
P0803. Origin of de novo  KCNJ11  gene mutations causing 
neonatal diabetes
S. Ellard1,2, E. L. Edghill1, S. Flanagan1, A. L. Gloyn1, J. Rankin2, A. T. Hatter -
sley1;  
1Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Royal Devon & Exeter 
Hospital, Exeter, United Kingdom.
The KCNJ11 gene encodes the Kir6.2 subunit of the beta-cell ATP-
sensitive potassium channel. We have recently identiﬁed KCNJ11 
mutations in 23 families with neonatal diabetes. Nineteen (83%) of the probands are apparently sporadic cases. In two families a second generation was affected and microsatellite markers were used to determine the parental origin of the mutation. A third family includes two affected half-brothers whose unaffected father is presumed to be a germline mosaic. For 13 families DNA was available from parents and informative polymorphisms were present in 8. Allele speciﬁc PCR for a heterozygous polymorphism (E23K, A190A, I337V) or the mutation was used to amplify across the mutation or polymorphism and phase 
determined by sequencing.Seven mutations had arisen on the paternal allele and one was maternal in origin. There was no evidence of an association with advanced paternal age. Real-time PCR analysis of lymphocyte DNA found no evidence of somatic mosaicism in the father presumed to be a germline mosaic. The maternally derived KCNJ11 mutation showed 
a low level (2.8%) of somatic mosaicism, suggesting the likelihood of germline mosaicism. It is important to consider the possibility of germline mosaicism when counselling parents of an apparently 
sporadic case for recurrence risks.
P0804. Cyp21 gene analysis in 50 patients with 21-hydroxylase 
deﬁciency in Iran
H. A. Ramazani1, K. Kahrizi1, M. Razzaghiazar2, F. Saffari2, P. Koppens3, H. 
Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci -
ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Pediatrics, Erasmus MC/So -
phia, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase 
deﬁciency is one of the most common (1 in 10,000 to 1 in 15,000) autosomal recessive disorders. The aim of this study was to assess the frequencies of the eight most common mutations in the CYP21 gene in individuals with 21-hydroxylase deﬁciency. We applied allele speciﬁc polymerase chain reaction previously, as described by RC Wilson et al., to detect the eight most common mutations in the CYP21 gene. Fifty unrelated patients with symptoms of classical CAH (salt wasting or simple virilization) were studied. We could detect overall 66% of the mutations. The most frequent mutations were found to be I2G (29%) and an 8 bp deletion in exon 3 (10%). The frequency of other alleles was: I172N (8%), V281L (3%), exon 6 cluster (I236N, V237E, and M239K) (4%), Q318X (7%), R356W (5%), and we did not detect the P30L mutation in any of our patients. The frequency of mutations did not differ substantially from frequencies of other countries.
P0805. Genotype-Phenotype correlations of GJB2 mutations
K. Kahrizi1, M. Malekpour1, Y. Riazalhosseini1,2, A. Daneshi3, P. Majidpour3, H. 
Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular-Cellular Biology Depart -ment, Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of 
Otolaryngology, Rasoul Akram Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
In this study, we analyzed the genotype-phenotype correlations in the 
Iranian GJB2-related deaf population. Included in this study were 147 
patients who met the deﬁning criteria for autosomal recessive non-
syndromic hearing impairment. Of these, 95 patients (65%) were homozygous for the 35delG mutation and 25 patients (17%) carried the 35delG mutation in trans with another 
GJB2 mutation. The next two 
most prevalent mutations were W24X, present on 17 chromosomes (5.8%) and -3170G>A, present on 14 chromosomes (4.8%). In the entire group, severe-to-profound deafness was seen in 83.8% of the cases, including 92% of those homozygous for the 35delG mutation. Interestingly, mild hearing loss was found in a subject homozygous for 35delG, which is unusual. All persons segregating missense mutations, whether homo- or heterozygous, had severe-to-profound 
hearing loss.
P0806. Screening for CFTR mutations in Southern European 
Countries
M. Tzetis , E. Kanavakis;  
Athens University, Athens, Greece.
The gene for cystic ﬁbrosis was identiﬁed in 1989 and this together with the emerging technology for mutation detection heralded a new dawn for the diagnosis of the disease. Genotypically, the frequencies and types of mutations vary according to the geographic and ethnic origin of the population studied. A total of more than 1200 mutations have been identiﬁed worldwide with
 F508del, showing a North-to-South 
Europe decreasing frequency gradient (90-30%) while the percentage of non-F508del chromosomes associated with CF increases. Mutation screening is especially difﬁcult with commercially available kits in the Mediterranean region (≤75% of CF allele detection). For the Greek population 80 different mutations (20 speciﬁc to our population) account for 91% of CF genes generating 103 different genotypes. For the Spanish population more than 75 different mutations represent 90.2% of the CF alleles. The south of France shows allelic heterogeneity ranging from 75 mutations to about 30 accounting for 97.6% of CF alleles. In southern Italy 43 mutations detect 91.5% of CF mutated chromosomes. Identiﬁcation of the alleles that are common in the Mediterranean region will help in the design of speciﬁc assays. Whole gene scanning methodologies such as DGGE or DHPLC combined with sequencing are currently the methods of choice, but moving towards a more high-throughput array technology is desirable. The advantage of the micro-arrays is ﬂexibility in adding additional ethnic-speciﬁc mutations and the Nanogen NanoChip™ platform for which we have developed assays to cover >85% of CF alleles in the Greek population, offers such a possibility.
P0807. Contribution of GJB6 large deletion to the hereditary 
deafness genetic load in the Iranian population
P. Imanirad1,2, Y. Riazalhosseini1,2, M. Mohseni1, N. Bazazzadegan1, K. Kah -
rizi1, R. J. H. Smith3, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecualr-Cellular Biology Depart -
ment, Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolar -
yngology Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of 
Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States.
Mutations in the gene that encodes the gap-junction protein connexin 26 (
GJB2) at the DFNB1 locus on chromosome 13q12 are the major 
cause of autosomal recessive non-syndromic sensorineural deafness (ARNSD) in many different populations. A second gap-junction gene, 
GJB6, also localizes to the DFNB1 interval. Interestingly, the encoded protein connexin 30 is expressed in the same inner-ear structures as connexin 26 and both connexins are functionally related. The importance of 
GJB6 to normal hearing has been conﬁrmed by the 
identiﬁcation of a large deletion (Δ(GJB6-D13S1830)) involving the ﬁrst two exons and a part of third exon of 
GJB6 and a large region of 
the upstream sequence in persons with ARNSD. Homozygotes for this deletion and compound heterozygotes carrying Δ(GJB6-D13S1830) and a deafness-causing allele variant of 
GJB2 have severe-to-
profound congenital deafness. The aim of this study was to evaluate the contribution made by this deletion to the ARNSD genetic load in the Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics255
Iranian population. One hundred and ﬁfty four probands with ARNSD 
from various regions of the country were screened for this mutation using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) primers that ampliﬁed the breakpoint junctions of the deletion. Among them, one hundred and sixteen patients were deaf probands with normal 
GJB2 alleles and the 
remaining 38 were heterozygote for only one GJB2 mutation. None 
of patients screened for Δ(GJB6-D13S1830) was shown to carry this deletion, suggesting that this mutation is not a common cause of 
deafness in Iran.
P0808. Analysis of association of candidate gene 
polymorphisms with decreased bone mineral density
L. Selezneva , R. Khusainova, E. Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Osteoporosis is a complex disease characterized by decrease of bone mineral density (BMD) and a microarchitectural deterioration of bone structure, leading to a higher susceptibility to fractures. In recent years different studies have suggested a major genetic contribution to bone mass determination and to the development of osteoporosis. Several candidate genes were identiﬁed but the role of each in the development of osteoporosis is not clearly determined. We started to examine the association of candidate gene polymorphisms with decreased bone mineral density and osteoporotic fractures in patients from different ethnic groups from Bashkortostan. We examined the SpI polymorphism in the collagen type 1A1 (
COL1A1) gene, the FokI polymorphism in the 
vitamin D receptor ( VDR) gene, and the XbaI and PvuI polymorphisms 
in the estrogen receptor ( ER) gene in patients with osteoporosis and 
in a control group. Analysis of the SpI polymorphism in COL1A1  
revealed an increased frequency of the ss genotype (0.033) in patients with osteoporosis compared with controls (0.066); this difference was not statistically signiﬁcant (p>0.05). We have found association of ss genotype with osteoporosis (OR=1.2). We also have revealed signiﬁcant differences between Bashkirs and Russians (p=0.02714), and between Tatars and Bashkirs (0.00268). For the XbaI and PvuI polymorphisms in the 
ER gene we saw no signiﬁcant differences in 
the allele and genotypes frequencies in patients with osteoporosis in compared with healthy individuals (p>0.05). Thus, we can suggest that it is necessary to take into account the ethnicity of individuals in 
association studies.
P0809. An international network for genetic diagnostics GENDIA
P. J. Willems ;  
GENDIA, Antwerp, Belgium.
Molecular diagnostics for genetic diseases remains a challenging problem. For many diseases local tests are not available, or incomplete, expensive and slow. The most important bottlenecks for cost-effective molecular diagnostics are the rareness of genetic diseases in general and the private nature of most mutations. This precludes cost-effective 
set up of molecular diagnostics on a regional or even national level.To facilitate genetic diagnostics a worldwide network of diagnostic labs was organised, existing of many referral labs, 40 expert test labs, and 1 central lab that accepts all samples and issues all results. This network is called GENDIA (for GENetic DIAgnostics). GENDIA now offers more than 600 genetic tests (www.GENDIA.net), including 
molecular analysis of more than 400 genes.
P0810. Determination of Alpha Thalassemia mutations 
spectrumin Iranian population
A. R. Ghamari1, A. H. Taromchi1, M. Hasanzad1, H. Yang Law2, M. Neishabury3, 
M. H. Kariminejad1, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetics Service KK Woman's and Children's Hospi -
tal, Singapore, Singapore, 3Genetics Research Center the Social Welfare and 
Rehabilitation University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Alpha-thalassemia is the most common inherited hemoglobin disorder worldwide, it is caused by a variety of deletional and non-deletional α-globin mutations, leading to a reduction or complete absence of gene 
expression.It is observed in high frequencies throughout southeast Asia, India, the Middle East, parts of Africa and the Mediterranean area.In this study we have tested 421 Iranian individuals, randomly chosen from a pool of patients with low MCV, low MCH, normal or slightly reduced Hb levels, normal HbA2 .
Mutations were identiﬁed in 284 of cases; 166 were α3.7/αα (39.43%), 33 were α3.7/α3.7 (7.83%), 14 were Med/αα(3.32%), 4 were α3.7/α4.2(0.95%), one was α3.7/Med(0.23%), 22 were α4.2/αα (5.22%), one was α4.2/α4.2(0.23%), one was α4.2/Med(0.23%), 4 were α20.5/αα(0.95%),13 with point mutation αcsα/αα (3.09%), and also 14 cases had polyA mutations αPAα/αα (3.32%).We also found other mutations α(-5nt) α/αα, α-22α/αα(0.23%), α(+14) α/αPA and α(+14)α/αα in 7 cases.Two other cases had α14α/αα polymorphism that is the most common polymorphism and we also detected a novel mutation α(+14;Cd20)/αα in 2 cases(0.47%). In 137 individuals none of these mutations were found. Our study shows that α globin mutations were found in 66.75% of individuals that we have tested and the most common mutations of 
α-thalassemia are single or double α-globin gene deletions α3.7.
P0811. FLJ23451, A novel gene note expressed in the 2P16 
deletion syndrome
S. Buriakovsky , M. Rubinstein, R. Parvari;  
Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
We identiﬁed Bedouin patients presenting a unique recessively inherited syndrome, with broad clinical manifestations: cystinuria, mental & growth retardation, hypotonia, facial dysmorphism and mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction presenting as reduced activity of all mitochondrial encoded respiratory chain enzymatic complexes. Our previous study identiﬁed the molecular basis of this syndrome as a homozygous deletion of 179,311 bp on chromosome 2p16, and thus was subsequently named the 2p16 deletion syndrome. Further studies to deﬁne the transcription content of this interval showed that it includes 4 protein coding genes: type I cystinuria 
SLC3A1 , protein 
phosphatase 2Cβ , two unidentiﬁed genes KIAA0436 and FLJ23451 
and three transcripts without, or with very short, open reading frames.The FLJ23451 gene has its ﬁrst exon in the deletion and thus is not expressed in patient's cells. Bioinformatics investigation suggests that FLJ23451 belongs to a family of methyltranferases. It is highly conserved during evolution, ubiquitously expressed- including the tissues affected by the syndrome and our preliminary results suggest nuclear localization. We hypothesize that the absence of this gene in the patients may have a major contribution to the clinical presentation 
of the patients.
P0812. Growth retardation associated with iron-sulfur enzymes 
deﬁciency in frataxin deﬁcient stable murine ﬁbroblasts cell 
lines
N. Carelle1, H. Seznec1, A. Derré2, L. Reutenauer1, P. Rustin2, M. Koenig1, H. 
Puccio1;  
1IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 2Unité de Recherche sur les Handicaps Génétiques 
de l'Enfant, INSERM U393, Necker, Paris, France.
Friedreich ataxia (FRDA), the most common recessive ataxia, results 
from a generalized deﬁciency of mitochondrial and cytosolic iron-sulfur (Fe-S) protein activity due to a partial loss of function of frataxin, a mitochondrial protein involved in Fe-S cluster (ISC) biosynthesis. Oxidative stress has been proposed to be involved in the pathogenesis of FRDA, leading to the use of antioxidants for therapy. However, to this date, FRDA remains a devastating disease for which there is no 
cure.Our key objective is to ﬁnd an effective treatment for FRDA using cellular and mouse models that will then be transferred to the clinical research ﬁeld. Conditional knockout mice already exist but may be very expensive models for drug assay. Therefore, an initial screening should be undertaken ﬁrst in cellular models.The absence of spontaneous phenotype and the genetic heterogeneity in FRDA patient cell lines make them unsuitable for drug screening. We have recently developed a murine ﬁbroblast cell model based on antisense strategy using a ribozyme which shows highly reduced levels of frataxin reproducing the quantitative defect found in patients. These cell lines exhibit a proliferation defect associated with an ISC enzyme deﬁcit. This model is the ﬁrst stable cellular model for FRDA that shows spontaneous phenotype without exogenous oxidative 
insult, and is therefore a key model for drug screening.We therefore propose to screen a library of chemical compounds on this novel cellular model (using high-throughput screening technology) Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics256
in order to identify novel pharmacological compounds that may 
potentially work in combating the disease.
P0813. Hereditary ataxias - differential diagnosis and 
comorbidity
Z. Musova1, A. Zumrova1, M. Havlovicova1, A. Krepelova1, A. Bodayi1, J. 
Kraus1, R. Mazanec1, S. Krilova1, L. Appeltova1, T. Marikova1, M. Vyhnalek2, E. 
Havrdova3;  
1Neurogenetic centre of 2nd MF and Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 
2Department of neurology, 2nd MF and Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Repub -
lic, 3Department of neurology, 1st MF of Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
The hereditary ataxias are a group of genetic disorders characterized 
by slowly progressive incoordination of gait and often associated with poor coordination of hands, speech, and eye movements. The differential diagnosis of disorders that include ataxia now includes a new neurodegenerative disorder - the fragile X tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS). The symptoms are very similar: intention tremor and gait ataxia and/or mild parkinsonism, peripheral neuropathy, lower limb proximal muscle weakness, short-term memory loss, executive function deﬁcits, cognitive decline, and autonomic dysfunction.Potentially FXTAS could be a relatively frequent cause of adult onset progressive ataxia or tremor. According to the literature, the premutation, an expansion of 50 to 200 CGG repeats in the 
FMR1  
gene, has a prevalence in the general population of approximately 1 
per 700 men and 1 per 250 women.In the last ﬁve years we have created a patient register and DNA bank of more than 400 samples from probands with spinocerebellar symptomatology. We demonstrate our experience with diagnosis of spinocerebellar ataxias at the DNA level and note a possibility of comorbidity in a case of a patient with DNA-veriﬁed diagnosis of late-
onset Friedreich´s ataxia plus a premutation in the FMR1  gene.
Supported by the grant IGA MZ CR No NM/7405-3 and NR/8124-3
P0814. Study of genetic, epigenetic and expression events 
associated with MECP2 in patients with Rett syndrome: an 
attempt to validate MECP2 as a single underlying cause of Rett
E. Gak1,2, Y. Petel-Galil1,2, M. Vecsler1,2, I. Greenbaum1, B. Ben Zeev3;  
1Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba Medical Center, Tel 
Hashomer, Israel, 2Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 
Israel, 3Child Neurology Department, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, 
Israel.
Rett syndrome is a progressive neurodevelopmental X-linked disorder associated with mutations in MECP2 gene. In the course of our experience at the Central Rett Clinic at the Sheba Medical Center, offering clinical and molecular diagnoses of Rett and clinical follow-up, we have identiﬁed 70 classical and atypical patients. This entire cohort has been diagnosed under standardized phenotypic criteria and using molecular indicators of MECP2 deﬁciency including sequence analysis of MECP2 coding region and intron-exon junctions, MLPA deletion detection assay and evaluation of X chromosome inactivation.
 
Following, we identiﬁed 62 patients with known and novel mutations involving MECP2 coding region. In attempt to address the need of diagnosis of patients with clinical yet not molecular indication of Rett, we developed an alternative approach based on direct estimates of expression levels of the two MECP2 isoforms in peripheral blood. Thereby, we identiﬁed additional 5 patients with lower blood MECP2 expression that may indicate presence of mutations in the regulatory elements of MECP2 gene. Two of these patients were further detected with a novel splice site mutation involving the 2
nd alternatively spliced 
exon of MECP2 that potentially leads to an imbalance between the two MECP2 isoforms. Bioinformatic analysis of the non-coding MECP2 introns, 5'- and 3'-UTRs, revealed several highly conserved elements associated with RNA splicing or transcription mechanisms in other genes. We also detected MECP2 overexpression in several patients with missense mutations, which overlaps with recent ﬁndings of a neurodevelomental delay phenotype on the background of MECP2 
overexpression in a mouse animal model.P0815. Forteen year experience of prenatal diagnosis of 
Thalassemia in Iran
M. Parvin1, H. Imanian1, A. Ghamari1, F. Sahebjam1, R. Kariminejad1, A. Sama -
vat2, B. Modell3, M. H. Kariminejad1, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Center for Disease Control, Deputy for Non-com -
municable Disease, Genetics Department, Iranshahr jonoobi St., T ehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 3RF & UCMS Dept. of Primary Care & Population Sci -
ences, and UCL Centre for Health Informatics and Multiprofessional Education 
(CHIME), Holborn Union Building, Whittington Campus, Highate Hill, London, 
N19 5LW, UK, United Kingdom.
For fourteen years Iranian scientists have worked to develop a national 
thalassemia prevention program Historically abortion was considered unacceptable in Iran; however, intensive consultations led to the clerical approval of therapeutic abortion of cases with major type of β-thalassemia in 1997, and a nation-wide prevention program with screening, counseling and prenatal diagnosis networks has been developed. This paper reports the experience from one of the two national prenatal diagnosis reference laboratories. From 1990 to 2003 we performed a total of 906 prenatal diagnoses from 718 families at risk for thalassemia. Direct and indirect mutation detection methods were applied for all cases. In total, 22 mutations were tested routinely and an additional 30 rare mutations were identiﬁed. 208 fetuses were found to be normal, 215 fetuses were major, and 435 fetuses were trait. In 40 cases we only deﬁned one allele. We were unable to provide 8 cases with any diagnosis, corresponding to 0.9%. Our data supports the functionality of Iranian β-thalassemia prevention program. The success of this system in Iran as a multiethnic and Islamic-based country would mean that it might be applied as an adaptive system for 
neighboring and other Islamic countries.
P0816. Deletion of DMD  exon 16 is not associated with disease.
M. Schwartz, M. Dunø, J. Vissing;  
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD)is one of the most common inherited neuromuscular diseases, affecting 1 in 3,500 males. It is an X-linked disorder caused by mutations in the 
DMD gene. Covering 2.4 
Mb, DMD is one of the largest human genes. The gene has 79 exons 
encoding a 14kb mRNA. Mutations leading to a truncated protein cause the severe phenotype of DMD, whereas mutations retaining the mRNA reading frame cause the more benign phenotype of Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD). Knowing the exact mutation in a patient is therefore prognostic and an important part of the diagnostic tool of 
these diseases.By the traditional multiplex PCR one of our healthy male control DNA samples was found to harbour a deletion of exons 16 and 17 predicted to give rise to an out-of-frame mRNA. MLPA analysis indicated, however, only a deletion of exon 16. Closer analysis showed that the deletion covered part of intron 15, exon 16 and almost the entire intron 16. The person is completely healthy, has normal muscle morphology and creatine kinase level. The deletion was also present in DNA from a muscle biopsy, excluding mosaicism as an explanation for the phenotype. We conclude that a deletion of exon 16 of 
DMD does not 
interfere with the normal function of dystrophin.
P0817. Interleukin-1b gene and receptor antagonist gene 
polymorphisms in patients with multiple sclerosis
A. M. Mikhailova1, O. E. Mustaﬁna1, K. Z. Bahtyarova2, A. N. Aglyamova1, R. V. 
Magjanov2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa scientiﬁc center, Russian Academy 
of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkirian State Medical University, 
Ufa, Russian Federation.
This study was done to elucidate the effects of interleukin (IL-1) gene 
polymorphisms on multiple sclerosis (MS).We evaluated IL-1b (a C/T transition at -511in promotor) and (+3953 C/T in exon 5) and IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA) (a variable-number repeat in intron 2) gene polymorphisms in unrelated 114 patients of MS and 166 healthy controls. No signiﬁcant differences were observed in the allelic frequencies of the IL-1b promoter, IL-1b exon 5 and IL-1RA genes between patients with MS and healthy control subjects. But the frequencies IL-1b (-511) T/T genotype was higher in patient MS with optical breach then controls (38.46% vs. 21.08%; P=0.036; OR=2.33, Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics257
CI=1.11-4.92).
Knows, IL-1b (-511 C/T) gene polymorphisms may inﬂuence protein production. Were found the IL-1b gene polymorphisms to play a role in the development of clinical particularity MS. Further studies are necessary to determine the biological signiﬁcance of these ﬁndings in 
relation to susceptibility or severity of the disease.
P0818. Molecular screening of SRD5A2 gene on ambiguous 
genitalia patients in Taiwan
L. P. Tsai1, K. W. Chang2, Y. J. Lee3, D. M. Niu4, M. C. Chao5;  
1Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital, Hsintien, Taipei county, Taiwan Republic of 
China, 2Women's and Children's Hospital, Taipei City, Taipei, Taiwan Republic 
of China, 3Makay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 4Taipei 
Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan Republic of China, 5Kaohsiung Medi -
cal University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan Republic of China.
Background: Steroid 5α-reductase(SRD) reduces testosterone 
to dihydrotestosterone. The genital phenotype of SRD deﬁciency is heterogenous, ranging from complete female to sexual ambiguity, hypospadias with scrotal biﬁda, and isolated micropenis. Several different mutations leading to SRD deﬁciency have been identiﬁed in the 5α-reductase type 2 gene(SRD5A2). In order to understand the extent of SRD5A2 mutation in Taiwan, we analyzed SRD5A2 gene on XY patients with ambiguous genitalia.
Methods: Fifty-ﬁve XY patients with either complete female, sexual ambiguity, hypospadias with scrotal biﬁda, or isolated micropenis were enrolled in this study. The patients distributed from neonate to puberty teenager. Except twelve prepubertal patients refusing the HCG test, the others showed normal basal testosterone. Thirty-one had completed the HCG test. The coding region of SRD5A2 gene was ampliﬁed by PCR and followed by automatic sequencing. PCR-RFLP was used for mutation conﬁrmation.
Results: The analysis revealed three disease-causing mutations from 
six unrelated patients, including ﬁve homozygous (one G66R,one D95H and three R227E) and one heterozygous (R227E/?) males. The three cases of homozygous R227E and one homozygous D95H presented as micropenis. The rest two showed hypospadias with scrotal biﬁda. All parents denied consanguinity. We also noticed that the hot spot 
R227E accounted for the 7 out of 12 mutation loci.
Conclusion:  We found that SRD5A2 mutation might cause micropenis 
and hypospadias in Taiwan. Most patients showed homozygous mutation though no consanguinity was noted. One hot spot(R227E) was discovered. Further polymorphism study is needed to clarify the founder effect for R227E mutation in Taiwan.
P0819. Phenotype-genotype correlations in 11 Spanish RDH12 
mutated families
M. Baiget1, G. Utermann2, B. García-Sandoval3, G. Antinolo4, A. Queipo5, S. 
Bernal1, S. Borrego4, A. Gal6, A. Janecke7, C. Ayuso3, EsRetNet;  
1Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Innsbruck Medical 
University, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 4Hos-
pital Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain, 5Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 
6Hamburg University, Hamburg, Germany, 7Medical University, Innsbruck, Inns -
bruck, Austria.
INTRODUCTION: Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a group of hereditary disorders, which causes retinal dystrophy (RD) and leads to blindness. Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) is a congenital and severe form of RD. The RDH12 gene encodes a retinol-dehydrogenase, a protein of the visual cycle. Mutations in this gene are a cause of severe early-
onset RD.PATIENTS AND METHODS: 22 LCA and 311 unrelated Spanish RP (210 autosomal recessive and 101 sporadic) families were studied. They were ophthalmologically studied and classiﬁed into 3 categories: 149 severe, 95 moderate and 66 mild. The RDH12 gene mutation 
screening was performed by dHPLC followed by sequencing.RESULTS: Eleven mutated families were found. All of them were severe and early onset RD patients (1 LCA and 10 severe RP). Three mutations were only found among Spanish cases and 2 of them were recurrently seen. L99I (previously reported in a French LCA-family) was present in 5 families (3 homozygotes and 2 double heterozygotes) It was associated to 0-3yr onset RD with nistagmus, nictalopia, visual ﬁeld impairment and photophobia, followed by early blindness, characteristic fundus (granular black and white pigments and affected macula) and very early abolished ERG. T155I was found homozygously in 2 families. Affected patients showed early onset and severe RD with blindness before 40yrs. Four families were 
heterozygous for 4 mutations.CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that there are 3 founder Spanish mutations (L99I, T155I, c.102ins4) and RDH12 mutations are always associated with a severe RD phenotype, being responsible for 3-4% of 
early-onset RD in Spain.
P0820. Prevalence of two common mutations and Arylsulfatase-
A pseudodeﬁciency alleles in patients with metachromatic 
leukodystrophy in Egypt.
I. M. R. Hussein1, S. Youssef1, S. Hamid1, N. A.Meguid1, M. Barakat2;  
1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo Univer -
sity, Cairo, Egypt.
Metachromatic Leukodystrophy (MLD) is a neurodegenerative 
lysosomal storage disease resulting from deﬁciency of activity of the enzyme arylsulfatase A (ASA). 
Objective: To investigate the efﬁciency 
of some biochemical parameters in the diagnosis and to identify the molecular basis of MLD in Egyptian patients. A total of 52 patients presenting with clinical manifestations of MLD were studied using quantitative determination of leucocytic ASA, inorganic sulfates and sialic acid, their ages ranged between 1.5- 4 yrs. Mutations in the ASA gene were identiﬁed by PCR ampliﬁcation and restriction enzyme analysis using BstN1 for detection of splicing mutation at +1 in intron 2 (I) allele, Aci for missence mutation in exon 8, and Bsr1 (glycosylation) site and Rsa1 (poly A allele) for detection of pseudoalleles (P) . 
Results : 
A total of 16/52 (30.7%) were diagnosed as having ASA deﬁciency. Estimation of sulfates had no signiﬁcant value while sialic acid was signiﬁcantly higher in leucocytes of affected cases than controls. It was observed that (7/16) 43.8% of patients were homozygote for the (I) allele,6/16(37.5%) were double heterozygote for (I/P) alleles, none of the patients had the mutation at exon 8. Pseudodeﬁciency alleles were found in 9 (56%) of patients. The frequency of the poly A allele was 15.6%, and the glycosylation allele 12.5% among the patients’ studied 
alleles. Conclusion : A great variability was observed in ASA enzyme 
activity in patients with MLD and their parents. The combination of pseudodeﬁciency alleles with MLD can complicate interpretation of the 
results in families at risk.
P0821. Molecular Screening of β-Thalassaemia Mutations in Iran
M. Karimipour1, A. Moradmand1, M. T. Akbari1,2;  
1Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Depart -
ment of Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Tarbiat Modarres, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
We have characterized the ß-globin gene mutations in 1800 carriers 
of ß-thalassaemia and analyzed their regional distribution in Iran. The subjects were either the parents of affected thalassaemia patients or carrier couples identiﬁed following the national premarital preventive screening program. The majority of the carriers were from Mazandaran and Gilan in the Caspian Littoral in the North, Fars and Khuzistan in the South. Using the PCR-based allele-speciﬁc technique of ARMS the subjects were screened and the following alleles with 1% or greater frequency were detected in the following order: IVSII-1(G◊A), IVSI-5(G◊C), CD 36/37(-T),IVSI-1(G◊A), CD 8/9(+G), CD 44(-C), IVSI-110(G◊A), IVSI-25del, CD30(G◊C), CD 8(-AA), CD 39(C◊T), IVSII-745(C◊G), IVSI-6(T◊C). The frequency range was between 35.9% and 1% for the most frequent and least common mutations with almost 80% detection rate. The IVSII-1mutation was found in all population groups with varying frequencies. The other mutations also showed clustering with particular regions. To characterize the remaining 20%, the subjects were further investigated by DGGE and DNA sequencing. 
This approach has revealed 13 mutations so far .These are:CD 37/38/39(-GACCCAG), CD22/24(-AAGTTGG), CD 22(G◊T), CD 
5(-CT),
CD 25/26(+T), CD15(G◊), CD 82/83(-G), IVSI-130, IVSII-850(G◊T),-101(C◊T), IVSI-128(T◊G), -88(C◊T) and the novel mutation of -26(A◊C). This study shows that the underlying genetic determinants of ß-thalassaemia in Iran is very heterogeneous. The generation of this 
data was crucial in setting up of the prenatal diagnosis in Iran.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics258
P0822. A novel COX III deletion and D-Loop tandem duplications 
of the mitochondrial genome associated with rhabdomyolysis
R. Marotta1, J. Chin1, D. Kirby2, P. Kennedy3, S. Tombs4, M. Chiotis1, R. Kapsa4, 
M. Cook1, S. Collins1;  
1St. Vincent's Melbourne Neuromuscular Diagnostic Laboratory, Centre for 
Clinical Neurosciences and Neurological Research, 5th Floor Daly W ing, St. 
Vincent's Hospital, Fitzroy Victoria 3065, Australia, 2Mitochondrial Laboratory, 
Victorian Clinical Genetics Services and Murdoch Children's Institute 10th Floor 
Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville Victoria 3052, Australia, 3State Neuropa -
thology Laboratories, Level 3 Medical Building, Melbourne University , Parkville 
Victoria 3052, Australia, 4National Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Cen -
tre for Clinical Neurosciences and Neurological Research, 5th Floor Daly W ing, 
St. Vincent's Hospital, Fitzroy Victoria 3065, Australia.
The mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is replicated without proofreading 
and efﬁcient DNA repair mechanisms. With increased exposure to oxidative damage by reactive oxygen species and free radicals generated due to electron leakage of the respiratory chain, the DNA is subject to mutations. A vast number of point mutations and large-scale mtDNA rearrangements have been associated with a diversity of neuromuscular disorders and phenotypes. Rhabdomyolysis, the breakdown of myocytes resulting in the leakage of contents such as myoglobin into the blood and urine, has been associated with a number of mitochondrial DNA mutations including: tRNA
Leu(UUR) A3243G, 
G15059A , a 24 bp deletion in the cytochrome b gene, cytochrome 
c oxidase, COX I G5920A, COX II, a 15 bp deletion of COX III gene; 
and multiple mtDNA deletions resulting from nuclear defects. Short tandem duplications of the D-Loop region, the non-coding portion of mtDNA, have been associated with mutations in tRNAs or cytochrome 
b and along with large scale deletions are recognized as markers of early molecular events of the human aging process but have not been described in patient’s yonger than 30 years of age. Histochemical, , immunohistochemical, genetic analysis of mtDNA and western blot analysis was carried out on in a 27 year old patient with a single unprovoked episode of rhabdomyolysis. The muscle biopsy displayed prominent focal COX-negative muscle ﬁbres and a novel one base pair COX III deletion causing a premature stop codon and was associated with multiple D-Loop duplications suggesting a combined deleterious effect.
P0823. Frequency of GJB2 deafness in Lur population of Iran 
and one novel GJB2 deafness-causing variant
L. Abbasi Moheb1, M. Sepahvand2, K. Kahrizi1, C. Nishimura3, R. J. H. Smith3, 
H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Welfare Organization of Lorestan, 
Lorestan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolaryngology Research Labo -
ratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United 
States.
Mutations in the gene that encodes the gap-junction protein connexin 26 ,GJB2 gene, on chromosome 13q12 account for most autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness (ARNSD) in many world population. Over 90 different ARNSD-causing mutations in GJB2 have been reported, but 35delG mutation is the most frequent one in different populations. In this study, we assessed the contributions made by GJB2 mutations to the ARNSD genetic load in Lur population of Iran. This population mainly lives in west of Iran. The study group consists of ﬁfty three Lur probands suffering from ARNSD. The ﬁrst step was an allele-speciﬁc polymerase chain reaction (ASPCR) assay to screen all study participants for the 35delG mutation. All samples excluding 35delG homozygotes were analyzed by DHPLC and sequencing. Seven GJB2 deafness-causing variants were found including: 35delG, W24X, 314del14, V95M, -3170G>A, 512insAACG and 510insCGAA. Among them 35delG mutation was the most frequent one and the 510insCGAA is a novel deafness-causing mutation which has not been detected in other world populations. In addition to the abovementioned mutations, the V153I polymorphism was detected in three patients. Taken together, nine patients (16.9%) had two GJB2 deafness-causing alleles. Based on our results, we suggest that other genes are the major responsible for ARNSD in this population.P0824. MtDNA deletions in patient with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy-is there a causal relation?
M. Tesarova , D. Fornuskova, L. Cerna, H. Hansikova, L. Stiburek, J. Zeman;  
Dept. of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague 2, Czech 
Republic.
Within years 1995 - 2004, we have identiﬁed isolated or combined cytochrome c oxidase deﬁciency in 69 children (3 weeks till 16 years). Echocardiography revealed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in 25 of them. This group of patients is intensively studied on the molecular 
level.In proband with exercise intolerance, the hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was recognized at the age of 15 years. The results of histochemistry in endomyocardial biopsy (irregular decrease in COX activity) suggested the mitochondrial disorder caused by disturbance in mtDNA. Biochemical analysis in muscle biopsy of the patient revealed decreased activity and protein amount of complex IV and I. No mtDNA rearrangement was found in DNA isolated from muscle sample therefore mtDNA was sequenced and 2 mutations were found: 8348A>G and 12174C>T. Despite the 8348A>G mutation has been already associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Terasaki et al., 2001); we were not able to conﬁrm the pathogenicity of both mutations. The mutations were homoplasmic in all analysed tissues of the patient and in blood of his 7 maternal relatives. Analysis of the heart muscle obtained at autopsy revealed the presence of mtDNA rearrangements. MtDNA deletions were found also in autoptic muscle sample. These observations suggest worsening of the mtDNA quality during the course of the disease. To ﬁnd the cause of the mtDNA deletions observed in our patient, the analysis of genes involved in a process of mtDNA replication is necessary. Supported by GAUK41/2004/c, GAUK153/2004/c and IGA MZ NR 8065/3.
P0825. Genetic studies of the Iranian deaf population
H. Najmabadi1, C. Nishimura2, K. Kahrizi1, Y. Riazalhosseini1, M. Malekpour1, 
A. Daneshi3, M. Farhadi3, M. Mohseni1, N. Bazazzadegan1, A. Naghavi1, M. 
Avenarius2, S. Arzhangi1, M. K. Javan1, R. J. H. Smith2;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Re -
search Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa, 
IA, United States, 3Rasoul Akram Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
During last six years, probands from 1254 families with hearing loss have been referred to our center for genetic testing. In 13 persons, the following syndromic phenotypes were recognized: Usher, Familial Expansile Osteolysis (FEO), Meniere, Bilateral Enlarged Vestibular Aqueduct (EVA), Waardenburg, Oto-Palato-Digital, Gorlin, Pendred, Stickler syndrome and Kallmann.. In the remaining 1241 probands, the diagnosis of non-syndromic deafness was made. Pedigrees were consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance in 1163 probands who had consanguineous parents and other affected siblings, and autosomal dominant inheritance in ten persons. Three families segregated X-linked deafness. In 65 probands, no other affected relative could be identiﬁed - we classiﬁed these as simplex cases. 
GJB2 
mutation screening was complete in 1094 patients with presumed autosomal recessive deafness, initially by completing an allele speciﬁc polymerase chain reaction (ASPCR) to detect the 35delG mutation. Persons either negative or heterozygous for this mutation were analyzed by denaturing high performance liquid chromatography and direct sequencing. We found 
GJB2-related deafness in 167 of 1094 
familial cases (15.3%) and in 4 of 65 simplex cases (6.1%). Identiﬁed deafness-causing allele variants included: delE120, 167delT, R184P, 310del14, R32H, 314del14, 35delG, IVS1+1G>A, -3170G>A, R127H, W24X, R143W, E129K, 312del14, M93I, W77R, 8insT, 512insAACG, 510insCGAA, 507insAACG, 329delA, 363delC, Q80L. The last four are novel mutations, which have not been reported in other populations. Selected probands and families negative for deafness at the DFNB1 locus are beginning used to complete a genome-wide linkage analysis. In four of these families, the deafness-causing gene has been localized to speciﬁc chromosomal regions.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics259
P0826. Detection of Cystic Fibrosis mutations in echogenic 
bowel
M. Tzetis, A. Tsiamouri, A. Papatheodorou, K. Pouliou, E. Kanavakis;  
Athens University, Athens, Greece.
The presence of echogenic bowel detected on ultrasound investigation 
during the second trimester of pregnancy can be a normal variant and also associated with cystic ﬁbrosis, as well as a number of other disorders such as chromosome aneuploidy. We have investigated 91 cases of echogenic bowel and have detected cystic ﬁbrosis homozygosity in four of these (4.3%) with the following genotypes: F508del/L732X, F508del/574delA, F508del/F508del, F508del/G542X. In addition heterozygosity was observed in 15 cases (13.4%): 9 with F508del 2 with 621+1G>T and 1 case each for I148T, 2789+5G>A, R297Q and E822X. An additional ﬁnding was the presence of particular polymorphisms: 3 instances of 1716G/A (E528E), 2 of 2752-15G/C, 2 of R1162L and 1 of 4029A/G. Our data indicated that the prior risk of CF in a fetus with echogenic bowel for our population is 4.3% and the remaining risk of an heterozygous fetus having CF is between 10.3 
and 20%.Table 1: Summary of families tested and CF results
Both parents and/or 
fetus negative21
One parent carrier- 
fetus negative2I148T, F508del
One parent carrier- 
fetus not tested5621+3A>G, R75Q and 3 with F508del,
One parent carrier- 
fetus carrier7621+1G>T, I148T and 5 with F508del
Both parents carri -
ers- fetus affected4F508del/L732X, F508del/574delA, 
F508del/F508del, F508del/G542X
Fetus only tested- 
negative18
Fetus only tested- 
carrier8E822X; 2789+5G>A; 621+1G>T; 
R297Q; and 4 F508del
Couple only tested-
both negative26
TOTAL 914 homozygotes and 15 heterozygotes
P0827. Two novel CFTR gene mutations identiﬁed in cystic 
ﬁbrosis patients from Lithuania: can the 4171insCCTA mutation 
be associated with low sweat chloride level?
K. Končiūtė, A. Utkus, V. Kučinskas;  
Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, V ilnius Uni -
versity, Vilnius, Lithuania.
The spectrum and frequencies of CFTR gene mutations in cystic 
ﬁbrosis (CF) patients from Lithuania were investigated in the present study. CF patients were initially tested for F508del using PCR with oligonucleotide primers bridging the deletion. Subsequently they were screened for the presence of other mutations in all CFTR gene exons using DGGE and sequencing. Duplex PCR was applied to identify CFTRdele2,3 (21 kb). 47 patients with CF residing in Lithuania (94 CF 
chromosomes) were investigated.Twelve different CFTR gene mutations were identiﬁed: F508del (70.21%), R553X (4.26%), N1303K (4.26%), CFTRdele2,3 (3.19%), and single cases (1.06%) of W1282X, G314R, R1066H, 3667insTCAA, 574delA, 4006-4A>G, 794delC, and 4171insCCTA. Mutations on 9 CF chromosomes (9.6%) were not identiﬁed.Frameshift mutations 794delC and 4171insCCTA have not been described previously. Both patients having CFTR genotypes [F508del]+[794delC] and [F508del]+[4171insCCTA] had a moderate CF clinic with pancreatic insufﬁciency and pulmonary diseases. Sweat chloride concentration was estimated for these patients. Chloride concentration for a boy having [F508del]+[794delC] genotype was 107 mmol/L. Sweat chloride test was repeated ﬁvefold for 1 year old boy with [F508del]+[4171insCCTA] genotype, the estimated concentration 
was unusually low 4-9 mmol/L.In conclusion the applied PCR-based approach resulted in 12 different CFTR gene mutations in CF patients from Lithuania with the overall identiﬁcation rate of 90.4%. 4171insCCTA and 794delC mutations were novel. The patient having genotype [F508del]+[4171insCCTA] 
had unusually low sweat chloride level.P0828. Good news for potential DMD/BMD carriers - MLPA gives 
the answer
P. Hedvicakova1, K. Pavlikova1, T. Marikova1, E. Seemanova1, H. Stepankova2, 
A. Krepelova1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics,Second Medical School and Univer -
sity Hospital,Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Medi -
cal Genetics, Hospital Ceske Budejovice, Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic.
Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD/BMD) are common X-linked disorders with an incidence of 1 in 3500 live male births. Up to 1/3 of the cases are caused by de novo mutation, without any family history. About 60% of DMD patients have a deletion of at least one out of 79 exons of the large dystrophin gene. The identiﬁcation of female carriers has been difﬁcult, time consuming and not fully reliable till now.
Using multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA) we reinvestigated 14 women from 6 families with an isolated case of DMD. In two families the carrier status of three women at risk was conﬁrmed. Previously performed haplotype analysis was neither able to conﬁrm 
nor to exclude the risk of these women being carriers of the deletion.Besides, using MLPA we examined 5 suspected patients without a deletion, however we didn´t reveal any. We conﬁrmed a deletion in one exon with three patients (exon 43, 44 and 51, respectively). With one patient the deletion of exon 19 was found to cover exons 18 to 
30, in fact.We show an interesting case of a female proband with DMD manifestation, who has a deletion of exons 46-51. This deletion was 
inherited from her mother and was not passed on her children.We ﬁnd MLPA to be a helpful and sensitive method of uncovering the 
carrier status in families with a deletion in DMD gene.
Supported by Institutional Research Project 2005-2009
P0829. Molecular detection of nondeletional mutations in alpha 
thalassemic patiens by a DHPLC based assay
V. Guida1, A. Colosimo1,2, M. Fiorito1,3, F. Rafanelli1, M. Fichera4, E. Foglietta5, I. 
Bianco5, P. Grisanti5, M. I. Parodi6, G. Ivaldi6, B. Dallapiccola1,3;  
1IRCCS-CSS, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy , 
2Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, University of Teramo, 
Teramo, Italy, 3Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University 
of Rome “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 4Associazione Oasi Maria SS. ONLUS, 
Troina, Italy, 5Centro microcitemia ANMI-ONLUS, Rome, Italy, 6Human Genetic 
Laboratory, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy.
Alpha-Thalassemias (α-Thal) are inherited disorders of hemoglobin synthesis that arise from more than 80 different genetic alterations within the α-globin gene cluster in 16p13.3. The great majority of pathogenic mutations consist in large genomic deletions that involve either one or both α-globin genes (α1 and α2), while nondeletional mutations (including point mutations and deletions or insertions of few nucleotides) are responsible for only a minority of α-thalassemia 
phenotypes.We have developed a rapid and reliable method for the molecular detection of α-globin nondeletional defects using a denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC)-based assay. Subsequently, we have analyzed 70 Italian subjects, who resulted negative after a previous screening for the most common α-globin large genomic rearrangements, using our DHPLC method. The full genomic region of both α-globin genes were carefully ampliﬁed in four overlapping fragments and then subjected to DHPLC analysis. Overall, using the DHPLC-based method we have unambiguously identiﬁed both common and rare mutations, as well as neutral variants. The rapidity and reliability of this approach seem appropriate for a second-level molecular diagnosis of α-thalassemia carriers and/or patients that 
are negative for the most common deletional mutations.
P0830. Three novel mutations in CX32 gene detected by DHPLC 
mutation analysis
A. Patitucci1, A. Magariello1, A. L. Gabriele1, G. Peluso1, R. Mazzei1, F. L. 
Conforti1, T. Sprovieri1, C. Ungaro1, P. Valentino2, C. Rodolico3, A. Mazzeo3, A. 
Toscano3, M. Muglia1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, CNR, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of 
Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, 3Department of Neurol -
ogy, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
X-linked dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTX) is an inherited neuropathy caused by mutations affecting the gap junction protein beta Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics260
1 (GJB1) gene coding for the gap junction protein beta 1 (connexin32) 
located in the X-q13 region. In males symptoms begin in late childhood or adolescence and progress to moderate disability by the third decade of life. Female carriers are usually less severely affected than males at the same age. Over 250 different mutations in the GJB1 gene have been identiﬁed involving all portions of the Cx32 protein.We propose a mutational approach for the Cx32 gene based on denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC), a vary fast and sensitive method that minimizes diagnosis time and cost. We studied seven unrelated Italian cases diagnosed as probable CMT based on typical clinical features of distal wasting, hyporeﬂexia with distal sensory disturbance. In six patients a positive family history was present. We detected by DHPLC three novel (Ser49Phe, Ser128Leu, and Phe153Leu) and four known mutations (Tyr7Cys, Arg164Gln, Arg183Hys, Arg183Cys). All mutations segregated with the disease in the family, except the Ser49Phe mutation that is a de novo mutation. The three novel substitutions were yet unknown, but there were other amino acid changes reported at those amino acid positions. Both S49 and Phe153 occur in the extracellular domain of the Cx32, instead the Ser128Leu occurs in the intracellular domain; however all three mutations are also highly conserved in the GJB1 proteins among all mammalian species suggesting a functional role for the aminoacid at 
these positions.
P0831. Molecular analysis of candidate genes of LQT syndrome
J. Kadlecová1, T. Novotný2, R. Gaillyová1, Z. Schmidtová3, M. Šišáková2, O. 
Toman2, B. Semrád2;  
1University Hospital Brno, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Republic, 
2University Hospital Brno, Dept. of Cardiology, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Masaryk 
University Brno, Faculty of science, Brno, Czech Republic.
Understanding the molecular basis of cardiac channel activity has been of major interest in recent years. The
 Long QT syndrome (LQTS) 
is an inherited cardiac disorder in which ventricular tachyarrhytmias predispose affected individuals to syncope, seizures, and sudden death. Ventricular repolarization involves several distinct currents controlled by a number of different ion channels. The defect in any of these channel genes can result in altered repolarization leading to LQTS. Presently six different genetic loci are associated with LQTS: KCNQ1(11p15.5), KCNH2(7q35-36), SCN5A(3p21-24), Ankyrin-B(4q25-27), KCNE1(21q22.1-22.2) and KCNE2(21q22.1). Mutations in some other genes appear to be associated with LQTsyndrom. The candidate genes are SCN1B (β-subunit of I
Na), KCND3 (α-subunits of 
Kv4.3 of Ito1), CACNA1C (α-subunit of IcaL) and KCNJ2 gene (α-subunit 
of IK1).
We used single strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis to screen all exons of KCNQ1, KCNH2, KCNE1 genes and recently of SCN1B gene in group of unrelated Czech LQT patients. SSCP analyses 
were followed by sequency analyses of abberant conformers.DNA sequence analysis determined one frameshift mutation and seven missense mutations of KCNQ1 gene, four missense mutations of KCNH2. Some of them were novel. We also identiﬁed nine different single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in KCNQ1 and KCNH2 and three variants of introns in KCNH2 gene. The screening for mutations in 
the KCNE1 gene revealed rare amino acid variants G38S and D85N.However, functional studies of these determined sequence variants would be required to absolutely conﬁrm the pathogenic nature of these 
changesThis work is supported by grants IGA MZNA 7424-3 and NR/8063-3.
P0832. One Usher case, two genes, three mutations.
N. Pallares-Ruiz1, A. Vielle1, V. Faugère1, M. A. Delrue2, L. Larrieu1, A. Ard-El-
Moneim2, D. Lacombe2, M. Claustres1, A. F. Roux1;  
1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 
2Génétique Médicale, CHU Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France.
Usher syndrome type I (USH1) is manifested by profound congenital deafness, vestibular dysfunction and retinal degeneration beginning in childhood. Five USH1 genes have been identiﬁed (MYO7A, CDH23, USH1C, PCDH15, SANS). The proband is a twelve years old female, single child with non affected parents. At three months old, nystagmus was noticed and ophthalmic examination conﬁrmed the diagnosis of retinitis pigmentosa (RP). The age of walking was delayed until 18 months due to vestibular dysfunction. When she was 3 years old, profound deafness was diagnosed and cochlear implant surgery was performed. Molecular studies in the CDH23 identiﬁed two novel deleterious mutations. Segregation analysis showed that the two mutations were on different chromosomes and thus the proband presents the [c.6146_6153delTCAACAGC]+[IVS7-2A>C] genotype. Moreover, for epidemiologic purpose, systematic screening for the 2299delG mutation in the USH2A was performed. The child carries in addition to the CDH23 genotype the 2299delG mutation that was inherited from her mother. This mutation is common in Usher type 2 (moderate-to-severe deafness) but has also been described in autosomal recessive non-syndromic RP.Recently, digenic inheritance of USH1 phenotype in families with mutations in CDH23 and PCDH15 genes has been shown. This case study supports further that USH1 and USH2 arise from distinct pathogenic processes since no digenic effect is being observed in the mother who is double heterozygote for a CDH23 and USH2A mutation. However, the association of these three deleterious mutations localized in two Usher genes is likely to explain the severe RP phenotype 
described in this proband.
P0833. Characterization of Ozzy, a mouse model for Alagille 
syndrome
K. Vrijens1, S. Thys1, M. de Jeu2, A. Postnov3, L. Cox4, M. Pﬁster5, A. Zwijsen4, 
V. Van Hoof6, M. Müller5, N. De Clerck3, C. De Zeeuw2, G. Van Camp1, L. Van 
Laer1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk, Belgium, 
2Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 
3Department of Physics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Laboratory 
of Molecular Biology (CELGEN), University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5HNO 
Universitatsklinik, Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 6Department of 
Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium.
Ozzy originated from an ENU-mutagenesis program and was selected because of its headbobbing fenotype. We examined the vestibulo-ocular reﬂex (VOR) and the optokinetic reﬂex. Ozzy mice showed no VOR, indicating severe functional defects in the semicircular canals and ampullae. CT-scanning of the inner ears conﬁrmed these results showing narrowing and truncations of at least one of the semicircular canals and loss of the ampullae. Hearing abilities were tested using frequency-speciﬁc Auditory-evoked Brainstem Response, revealing a slight threshold increase for the middle frequencies. Linkage analysis localised the gene in an 8.7 cM region on chromosome 2, and a 499 T->A missence mutation was identiﬁed in Jag1, leading to a substitution of an evolutionary conserved tryptophane (Try167Arg). Mutations in the human homologue of Jag1 cause Alagille syndrome (AGS), an autosomal dominant disorder associated with liver, heart, eye and skeletal abnormalities, accompanied by a characteristic facies. Occasionally it affects other organ systems like the kidney or the hearing apparatus. Liver disease is the main diagnostic factor for AGS. Ozzy mice showed signiﬁcantly less interhepatic bile ducts than wild-type littermates (p=0.011). 20% of Ozzy mice showed dilation of the right ventricle in combination with an opening in the tricuspidal valve and aortic dextraposition, symptoms of the tetralogy of Fallot, the most common heart defect in AGS. No eye or vertebral abnormalities could be detected. Since Ozzy displays two of the major and one minor characteristic of AGS, we conclude that this mouse can be considered to be an animal model for Alagille syndrome.
P0834. Abnormal inheritance and phenotypic consequences 
of the A1555G mutation in a heteroplasmic family affected of 
nonsyndromic hearing loss
E. Ballana1, N. Govea2, R. de Cid1, J. Rosell3, X. Estivill1;  
1Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital son Dureta, 
Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 3Hospital Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
Most mitochondrial pathogenic mutations appear in heteroplasmy, 
being lethal the homoplasmic state. However, the A1555G mutation in the mitochondrial 12S rRNA gene, which has been associated with aminoglycoside-induced and nonsyndromic hearing loss, appears mostly in homoplasmy. Moreover, different clinical phenotypes have been associated with this mutation even in the absence of aminoglycoside exposure. We report here the identiﬁcation of a Spanish family with an abnormal inheritance pattern of the A1555G mutation in heteroplasmy. Mutation load of all available members have Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics261
been quantiﬁed using the pyrosequencing technology. As a result, we 
have observed a great variability in the mutation load of heteroplasmic A1555G carriers. The mutation load in the offspring of heteroplasmic mothers showed a tendency to reverse to homoplasmy after three generations. The study of genotype-phenotype suggests that there is a threshold in mutation load for manifestation of clinical symptoms. It is well known that in the case of heteroplasmy, different proportions of wild-type and mutant mtDNA accumulate in different tissues. Thus, we should consider that the estimation of mutation load obtained from peripheral blood might not reﬂect the real situation of heteroplasmy in the inner ear, and speculate that unaffected subjects that have the mutation have a high proportion of the normal 12S rRNA gene. In summary, this family provides evidence of the presence of a certain amount of wild-type mtDNA in subjects with the A1555G mutation, which could act as an additional modifying factor of the hearing phenotype in subjects carrying the mutation which show little hearing 
abnormalities.
P0835. Molecular analysis of the porphobilinogen deaminase 
gene in newly (2004) diagnozed Czech and Slovak acute 
intermittent porphyria patients: Report of three novel mutations
M. Hrdinka1, D. Ulbrichova1, E. Flachsova1, I. Mikula1, M. Bodnarova1, J. 
Prochazkova1, J. Saligova2, E. Silhanova3, H. Halamkova4, J. Zeman1, P. Mar -
tasek1;  
1Ist School of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 2University Hospital, Kosice, 
Slovakia, 3University Hospital, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 4Regional Hospital, 
Vyskov, Czech Republic.
Background: Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is autosomal dominant 
disorder caused by the partial deﬁciency of porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD; or hydroxymethylbilane synthase, HMBS; EC 4.3.1.8), the third enzyme in the heme biosynthetic pathway. It is manifested by life-threatening acute neurological attacks that can be provoked by various exogenic factors. Clinical expression is highly variable, and ~90% of AIP heterozygotes remain asymptomatic throughout life. To date, over 250 PBGD mutations have been identiﬁed.
Objective: To identify the molecular lesions in newly diagnozed (2004) 
Czech and Slovak AIP patients.Design and methods: Genomic DNA was isolated from members 
of seven unrelated AIP families from Czech and Slovak Republics, and mutation screening was performed by PCR and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). Subsequently, automated DNA sequencing was used to verify the mutated lesions. For each identiﬁed mutations, a restriction fragment lenght polymorphism (RFLP) assay was established, and a total of 36 individuals from seven families were 
analyzed to detect asymptomatic carriers.
Results: Eight mutations were identiﬁed, including three novel 
mutations (610 C>A, 675 delA, 966 insA), and ﬁve previously reported mutations (76 C>T, 77 G>A, 518 G>A, 771+1 G>T, 973 insG). This is the ﬁrst report of the 518 G>A mutation in the Czech and Slovak 
population.
Conclusions: Three novel mutations were identiﬁed in seven 
unrelated AIP families. These studies further emphasize the molecular heterogenity of AIP, and provide accurate detection of asymptomatic 
carriers.
(Supported by grant GAUK 10/2004/C)
P0836. Molecular characterization of hereditary spastic 
paraplegia (HSP) in Israel
A. Lossos1, S. Silverstein1, I. Lerer1, D. Abeliovich1, G. Stevanin2, A. Durr2, A. 
Brice2, O. Abramsky1, Z. Argov1, V. Meiner1;  
1Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Hopital Pitie-Salpetriere, 
Paris, France.
Background. Hereditary spastic paraplegia  (HSP) is a clinically 
and genetically heterogenous group of pure and complex forms with various genetic loci corresponding to autosomal dominant (AD) and autosomal recessive (AR) forms. The spectrum and frequency of HSP forms in Israel are currently unknown, although instances of unique 
and important syndromes have been reported.
Objective. To set up a clinical database and perform molecular characterization of HSP in Israel
Methods. 15 unrelated multiplex Israeli families with HSP formed the basis of the present study. The mode of inheritance was apparently AD in 9 families and AR in 6. Clinical diagnosis and patient ascertainment was established by the accepted criteria. Genotyping was performed on genomic DNA using PCR ampliﬁed polymorphic markers for the 3 most common AD (
SPG4 , SPG3A) and AR (SPG11) loci and 
ﬂuorescein-labeled primers. 
Results. As expected, AD-HSP mainly presented the pure clinical phenotype whereas AR-HSP patients manifested additional neurologic manifestations, such as mental retardation, peripheral neuropathy and thin corpus callosum observed in 3 families. Of the 10 informative families, 2 showed linkage to the 
SPG4 locus, 2 to the SPG3A, and 
2 to the SPG11. Mutational screening and studies with additional 
markers are in progress.
Conclusions . Despite the apparent referral bias, the observed 
proportion of AR-HSP forms seems important and may be related to the common preference of parental consanguinity. Molecular characterization of HSP is expected to enable better dissection of the various clinical syndromes allowing genotype-phenotype correlation 
and accurate genetic counseling to family members.
P0837. Increased Brain-Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF) 
plasma levels in eating disorders: a discordant sib-pair analysis
J. M. Mercader Bigas1, M. Ribases1, M. Gratacos1, A. Badia2, L. Jiménez2, R. 
Solano2, F. Fernandez-Aranda2, X. Estivill3;  
1Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 2Psychiatric Service, Ciutat 
Sanitaria Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain, 3Genes & Disease Program, Center for 
Genomic Regulation (CRG) and Pompeu Fabra University (UPF), Barcelona 
Biomedical Research Park (PRBB), Barcelona, Spain.
Murine model approaches and association studies have indicated that the Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene participates in the susceptibility to eating disorders (ED). The association of the BDNF gene with anorexia nervosa (AN) and bulimia nervosa (BN) and the generation Bdnf knock-out mice support that increased levels of BDNF in the central nervous system (CNS) could be involved in restricting food intake and in low body weight. Thus, we propose that ED are characterized by alterations in blood BDNF levels as a reﬂection of increased BDNF concentration in several regions of the CNS. To test this hypothesis we assessed the BDNF plasma levels in 50 discordant sib pairs with ED by using an Enzyme Linked Immunoassay System (BDNF Emax Immunassay System, Promega) and found that BDNF levels were signiﬁcantly higher in ED patients than in their unaffected sibs (mean 57.7 ng/ml 
vs mean 40.9 ng/ml; P = 0.004). No signiﬁcant 
differences were found between the different ED categories (AN and BN) or considering the purging and non-purging ED phenotypes. We also observed a negative correlation between Body Mass Index (BMI) and BDNF plasma levels (P = 0.015). These results give further physiological evidence for a role of this neurotrophic factor in AN and BN, and strongly argue for its involvement in eating behavior and body 
weight regulation.
P0838. The MEFV L110P-E148Q complex allele associated with 
an unusual presentation of familial Mediterranean fever
I. Bouchardy1, G. Laifer2, U. Eriksson3, M. A. Morris1;  
1Service of Medical Genetics, Dept. of Gynecology-Obstetrics, Geneva Uni -
versity Hospitals, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland, 2Div of Infective Diseases 
and Medicine A, Dep. of Internal Medicine, University Hospital,, 4031 Basle, 
Switzerland, 3Medicine A, Dep. of Internal Medicine, University Hospital, 4031 
Basle, Switzerland.
Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is caused by mutations in the MEFV gene. FMF presents typically as recurrent episodes of fever and polyserositis; amyloidosis is an important long-term complication. Genetic analysis is valuable in conﬁrming the diagnosis and assisting 
therapeutic decisions.We have tested 273 individuals by sequencing exons 2 and 10, followed by complete gene sequencing when appropriate, identifying one or two mutations in 93 (34%). Eleven distinct mutations have been found, most commonly M694V (51%), M680I (19%) and V726A (8%). 12% of patients were hetero- or homozygous for E148Q, which was initially considered as a low-penetrance mutation but which is now 
being “re-evaluated” as a non-pathogenic polymorphism.We describe a 23-year old Turkish woman with a short history of “sore throat”, fever, and abdominal pain that resulted in explorative laparoscopy. Following the intervention severe SIRS with rash, Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics262
arthralgia, and polyserositis with pleural effusions and ascites 
developed. After exclusion of infections and other rheumatic/autoimmune diseases, genetic diagnosis of FMF was requested and the patient identiﬁed as homozygous for both L110P and E148Q. 
Colchicine treatment was initiated, and the patient recovered.L110P has been previously reported in just 3 patients; in at least two, it was present in a complex allele with E148Q. The overall frequency of L110P cannot be reliably assessed at present, as many laboratories do not include it in their testing.We predict that L110P will be commonly found in cis with E148Q, and that attention is required to avoid falsely 
identifying heterozygotes as having “two mutant alleles”.
P0839. Functional analysis of a new human RUNX2  mutation 
found in a family with cleidocranial dysplasia
C. Puppin1, L. Pellizzari2, D. Fabbro2, G. Tell1, F. M. Santorelli3, G. Damante1,2;  
1Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Udine, Italy, 2Istituto di Ge -
netica - Azienda Policlinico Universitario a Gestione Diretta, Udine, Italy, 3Dipar -
timento di Genetica e Medicina Molecolare - IRCCS Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy.
Mutations of RUNX2  gene results in cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD), 
which is a dominantly inherited skeletal dysplasia characterized hypoplastic clavicles, large fontanelles, dental anomalies and delayed skeletal development. 
RUNX2 encodes for an osteoblast-speciﬁc 
transcription factor, which recognizes speciﬁc DNA sequences by the runt domain. Most of missense mutations described in CCD patients affect conserved residues of the runt domain, abolishing both the DNA-binding and transactivation functions and produce a classic CCD phenotype. We have recently found a novel c.574G>A 
RUNX2  
missense mutation present in affected members of a family with clinical diagnosis of classical CCD. This mutation causes the change of the glycine at position 192 in arginine (G192R), in the runt domain. A previous study describing mutations of neighbouring residues 190, 191 and 193 showed that missense mutations affecting these positions produced complete loss of both DNA-binding activity and in vitro transactivation. In this study, the molecular properties of this mutation have been investigated. In gel-retardation assay experiments, the DNA-binding activity of a bacterially-expressed runt domain bearing the G192R mutation is mildly reduced with respect to the wild-type protein. However, in cell transfection studies, using the osteocalcin as target promoter, the mutation completely abolished the activating properties of the protein. These results suggest that G192R mutation effect is only in part explained by impairment in DNA binding activity.
P0840. Pathogenic mutation (R1329H) or normal variant in 
Tuberous Sclerosis?
S. Kjaergaard1, N. Rendtorff1, M. Frödin2, L. Lavard3, M. Schwartz4, K. Bron -
dum-Nielsen1;  
1The Kennedy Institute-National Eye Clinic, Glostrup, Denmark, 2Biotech Re -
search and Innovation Centre, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Glostrup University 
Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark, 4Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Co -
penhagen, Denmark.
The diagnosis of Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC) is based on 
clinical ﬁndings. Two causative genes, TSC1 and TSC2, have been 
identiﬁed. Missense mutations are common in TSC2, and the difﬁculties 
in interpreting the signiﬁcance of this type of mutation are illustrated by a case referred to our molecular study of 65 TSC patients.
TSC1 and TSC2 mutation screening of a 4 y old boy with congenital 
astrocytoma identiﬁed a mutation, c.3986G>A; p.R1329H, in TSC2 . 
This missense mutation has previously been reported in a TSC patient and considered putatively pathogenic. However, the mutation was also found in our patient’s clinically normal mother. Hence, the R1329H 
mutation is more likely to be a normal variant.Clinical re-evaluation of our patient revealed that the astrocytoma was the anaplastic type and not the giant cell type, typically seen in TSC. Cerebral MRI did not show cortical tubera or subependymal glial noduli. Renal ultrasonography, echocardiography, eye and skin examination were normal. Conclusively, the patient did not fulﬁl the diagnostic criteria for TSC.Intriguingly, the functional studies of the corresponding tuberin mutant indicated modestly impaired growth repressing function. It can therefore be speculated that this missense mutation can give rise to abnormal cellular growth in limited tissues or a TSC phenotype depending on the 
genetic background.P0841. Results of molecular-genetic analyses in the group of 
probands with the Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes
G. Calounova1, A. Boday1, M. Havlovicova1, L. Apltova1, A. Zumrova2, A. Baxo -
va3, E. Silhanova4, K. Svetnicova5, P. Goetz1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd School of Medical, Charles Uni -
versity and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Pediatric Neu -
rology Clinic, 2nd School of Medical, Charles University and University Hospital 
Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st 
School of Medical, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of 
Medical Genetics, University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 5De-
partment of Medical Genetics, University Thomayer Hospital Prague, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
The Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes are two distinct 
multisystem disorders in the chromosomal region 15q11-q13, the genetic background of these disorders is complex and they are caused by absence of expression of the paternal (PWS) and maternal (AS) 
active genes.We analyzed 99 PWS and 86 AS suspected probands in our study. We applied following methods for investigation: microsatellite analysis (loci: LS6-CA (D15S113), GABRB3 and IR4-3R (D15S11)) with all patients, methylation analysis with 80 PWS or AS patients and FISH 
analysis with UPD suspected cases.We identiﬁed 29 of 99 (29 %) positive PWS probands with the following distribution: 20 deletions (69 %), 6 uniparental maternal heterodisomies (21 %), 2 uniparental maternal isodisomies (7 %). In 1 case, the absence of paternal 15q11-q13 region was excluded by STR analysis, but methylation analysis showed inadequate methylation 
pattern, identifying the imprinting mutation (3 %).We detected 20 of 86 (23 %) positive AS probands with the following distribution: 18 (90 %) deletion forms, 1 (5 %) uniparental paternal isodisomy and 1 trisomy of chromosome 15 (5 %). Besides, we detected a recombination between loci LS6-CA (D15S113) and GABR B3 in 1 suspected case with AS. This case is still being analyzed.Our results agree with other published data. Complex diagnostic 
approach allows reliable genetic prognosis for the patients.
This work was supported by grant GAUK61/2004
P0842. Genetic analysis of SLC12A3 gene of patients with 
Gitelman syndrom in the Czech Republic
M. Bromová1, R. Ryšavá2, J. Reiterová2, J. Štekrová1, M. Merta2, F. Votava2, V. 
Tesar2;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University, Prague 2, Czech 
Republic, 2Department of Nephrology, Charles University, Prague 2, Czech 
Republic.
To investigate the causes of inherited hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis assosiated with Gitelman syndrome, we have been searching for mutations in the 
SLC12A3  gene (thiazide-sensitive NaCl 
cotransporter). This inherited autosomal recessive renal disorder is linked with hypokalemic alkalosis, signiﬁcant hypomagnesemia and low urinary calcium, and is manifested usually after the age of six. DNA was isolated, ampliﬁed and analysed for mutation detection with SSCP and subsequent sequencing. 16 patients with characteristic clinical features - abnormal levels of speciﬁc ions in blood and urine 
(Mg2+, K+, Ca2+...) - have been collected from different regions of the 
Czech Republic.Genetic analysis revealed several novel mutations. One of the patients, a 30-year-old man, manifested in childhood hypokalemia and paresthesias of the upper extremities. He had a mild degree of mental retardation. Our laboratory tests conﬁrmed hypokalemia (2.2mmol/l), metabolic alkalosis (pH of blood 7.54, HCO
3- 37mmol/l), 
hypomagnesemia (0.41mmol/l) and hypochloremia (91mmol/l). The urinary excretion of calcium was decreased (2.33 mmol/24h). We also noted increased levels of plasma renin activity (PRA) and tubular dysfunction. Genetic analysis revealed the mutation c.1315G>A 
(p.Gly439Ser).Among other mutations found are c.1222A>C (p.Thr408Pro) and c.480dupC (p.Pro160fsX97). Mutation detection is still in progress for 
all of the 16 patients.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics263
P0843. A skewed X-inactivation mechanism could explain the 
severe hemophilia B feature of a 3-year old girl with a severe 
hemorrhagic diathesis.
R. Santacroce1, M. Schiavoni2, F. Sessa1, N. Ciavarella3, M. Margaglione1;  
1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Foggia, Italy, 2U.O.S. Coagulazione/Medicina 
Trasfusionale-Policlinico, Bari, Italy, 3UOS/Medicina Trasfusionale- Policlinico, 
Bari, Italy.
Hemophilia B is a X-linked inherited hemorrhagic disease resulting 
from deﬁciencies of blood coagulation factor IX. Usually hemophilia is transmitted by healthy heterozygous female carriers to affected males. Very rarely can a woman exhibit hemophilia B and the most common explanations for how this can happen include compound heterozygosity and skewed X-inactivation. Few, isolated case-reports exist, so that we ignore the frequency of hemophilia B in women and whether the clinical phenotype is the same of that encountered in males. Our experience regards a 3 year-old little girl suffering from a severe hemorrhagic diathesis. The ﬁrst bleeding was an apparently spontaneous hemarthrosis of the left knee, afterward she presented a large hematoma of left ilio-psoas muscle. Laboratory data showed a prolonged PTT (R=1.97, n.v. 0.9-1.2) and the dosage of F.IX <1% (n.v. 60-140%). No underlying diseases were found, an acquired inhibitor was excluded. The ﬁnal diagnosis was strictly ascribed to inherited severe hemophilia B. In both the episodes the patient needed substitutive treatment with recombinant F. IX concentrate, reaching the complete resolution of bleedings with a good clinical outcome.The sequence of the entire coding region of the F.IX gene and the exon-intron boundaries was done. We have identiﬁed a heterozygous C-to-T transition within the exon 6 leading to an Arg-to-Trp substitution at position 180. This mutation, described in several hemophiliacs B, was inherited from her mother. Since no further mutation was identiﬁed, we suggest that a skewed X-inactivation 
mechanism could be responsible for the disease.
P0844. Novel spastin mutations in two Italian patients with 
hereditary spastic paraplegia
A. Magariello1, A. Patitucci1, A. L. Gabriele1, T. Sprovieri1, R. Mazzei1, F. L. 
Conforti1, C. Ungaro1, G. Peluso1, M. Mancuso2, D. Branca3, U. Aguglia3, M. 
Muglia1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences -CNR-, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Department of 
Neurological Sciences, University Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 3Regional Epilepsy Center, 
A.O. Bianchi Melacrino Morelli, Reggio Calabria, Italy.
Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) comprise a genetically and clinically heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by progressive spasticity and hyperreﬂexia of the lower limbs. Autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia linked to chromosome 2p (SPG4) is the most common form of HSP. It is caused by mutations in the SPG4 gene encoding spastin, a member of the AAA protein family of ATPases. Over 100 spastin mutations including missense, nonsense and splice-site point mutations, as well as little insertions and deletions have been described. A mutational screening of spastin gene by Denaturing High Performance Liquid Chromatography (DHPLC) on Italian patients diagnosed as probable HSP revealed two novel mutations in exon10: a missense mutation C1429T and a one base pair insertion (1406insT). The C1429T missense mutation replaces a proline at position 435 with leucine (P435L) and was not found in 100 normal chromosomes. The one base pair insertion (1406insT) leads to frame shift (aa 427-441) and premature termination (442stop codon); it produces a truncated spastin protein lacking the ATPase domain , the AAA cassette region, and one of two leucine zipper domain. Both mutations could impair the spastin function through either a dominant negative effect on the wild-type spastin or by a loss of function of the 
mutated protein.
P0845. Molecular studies of ORF15-RPGR in French patients: 
advantages of the PTT test approach.
V. Faugère1, C. Saquet1, S. Tuffery-Giraud1, C. Hamel2, M. Claustres1, A. F. 
Roux1;  
1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 2Ser-
vice d'Ophtalmologie Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
Among the various forms of inheritance, X-linked RP (XLRP) represents the severe form with an early age of onset of the disease and rapid progression. Of the ﬁve loci mapped on the X chromosome, retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator (RPGR), represents the major gene as it accounts for 70-90% of XLRP. The majority of the mutations is clustered in an alternative 3' terminal exon, ORF15, that represents the major splice variant of the transcript. Molecular studies of ORF15 is known to be technically challenging because of its highly repetitive sequence. To avoid systematic difﬁcult sequencing and since all the mutations described in this exon lead to premature termination of translation, we have investigated the efﬁciency of the Protein Truncation Test (PTT) as a scanning method.The size (1,7Kb) of the ORF15 exon allows working on genomic DNA directly. After in vitro transcription and translation, the translated proteins are separated by SDS-PAGE and autoradiography is performed.The existence of abnormal pattern migration, compared to a wildtype peptide, identiﬁes a translation terminating protein. ORF15 exon sequencing is performed whith multiple internal primers to conﬁrm 
the presence of a mutation.We show that a PTT pattern is speciﬁc of a premature translation termination as in our cohort we found that 10 different mutations, leading to 6 different premature STOP codon, are associated to 6 different PTT pattern. Because a PTT pattern is so far speciﬁc of a premature STOP codon, therefore one can limit the sequencing effort 
to a restricted portion of the exon.
P0846. Molecular diagnosis of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease : 
strategy reﬁnement and results of the genetic exploration of a 
series of 200 patients in Marseille.
R. Bernard1,2, A. De Sandre Giovannoli1,2, N. Martini1, A. Boyer1, C. Pécheux1, 
N. Lévy1,2;  
1Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d’enfants de la Timone, Mar -
seille, France, 2Inserm U491 Faculté de Médecine de la Timone, Marseille, 
France.
Hereditary sensitive and motor peripheral neuropathies also called 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) constitute a frequent demand for genetic testing. This group of pathologies is characterised by its genetic heterogeneity. All modes of inheritance have been reported, and to date more than 20 genes have been identiﬁed as mutated in CMT, while some others are still only localized, making the classiﬁcation complex and constantly evolving. While electrophysiological criteria only allow distinction between demyelinating (CMT1), axonal (CMT2) or intermediate neuropathies, clinical history can sometimes orientate the molecular explorations but rarely allows focusing on one particular gene. Furthermore, there is now evidence that several of the identiﬁed genes are involved in axonal as well as in demyelinating forms (e.g. 
P0), and/or in dominant as well as recessive CMT (e.g. P0, EGR2 ).
In this context, deﬁning a molecular strategy for genetic testing has become a real challenge that our laboratory is facing since 1997. According to recent data we explore at present 10 different genes of CMT: 
PMP22 , P0, LITAF , EGR2 , GJB1 , MTMR2 , GDAP1 , NDRG1 , 
MFN2 and LMNA. Among these genes, some are explored in particular ethnic background situations (e.g. 
NDRG1) and/or in case of associated 
evocative clinical features (e.g. LMNA). The mutation frequency of 
newly identiﬁed genes (e.g. MFN2) remains to be determined. We 
wish to present here our strategies in molecular exploration of CMT patients, and the results obtained on 200 patients included in such a 
genetic testing in our laboratory in Marseille.
P0847. Mitochondrial content reﬂects oocyte variability and 
fertilization outcome
T. Almeida Santos1,2, S. El Shourbagy3, J. St John3;  
1Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital da Universidade de Coimbra, Portugal, 
2Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 3The 
Mitochondrial and Reproductive Genetics Group, The Medical School, The 
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TJ, UK., Birmingham, United 
Kingdom.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the content of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in oocytes from a range of patients with fertilization success and failure. DESIGN: Analysis of the mtDNA content in fertilized and unfertilized oocytes and embryos using real time PCR. SETTING: University hospital infertility and research center. PATIENT(S): Fifty-four women seeking infertility treatment. INTERVENTIONS: None. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: 142 fertilized and unfertilized oocytes were classiﬁed into three main groups. Group I consisted of 35 Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics264
fertilized oocytes from 21 patients; Group II 65 unfertilized oocytes 
from 36 patients; and Group III 42 degenerate oocytes from 23 patients. MtDNA content was determined by SYBR Green real time PCR based assay. RESULTS: The mean mtDNA copy number for the fertilized oocytes was 250,454 whilst for the unfertilized group this was 163,698 (p<0.002). There were signiﬁcant differences for mtDNA copy number between the male factor and female factor infertility unfertilized oocytes (p<0.02) and for the unexplained infertility with female factor infertility groups (p<0.005). The mean copy number for the degenerate oocyte group was 44,629, which was signiﬁcantly different to the other subdivisions in this group. CONCLUSIONS: It is evident that mtDNA content is critical to fertilization outcome and serves as an important 
maker of oocyte quality explaining some cases of fertilization failure.
P0848. PDS gene ( SLC26A4 ) is frequently mutated in non 
syndromic hearing loss with inner ear malformation DFNB4.
S. Albert1, H. Blons2, F. Denoyelle1, D. Feldmann3, L. Jonnard2, B. Delobel4, 
H. Journel5, H. Dollfus6, A. David7, V. Drouin-Garraud8, C. Goizet9, C. Francan -
net10, F. Fellmann11, J. Vigneron12, C. Petit13, E. N. Garabédian1, R. Couderc3, 
S. Marlin14;  
1Serv ORL et Chir Cervico-Faciale, Inserm U587, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, 
Paris, France, 2Lab. Biochimie, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 3Lab. 
Biochimie, Inserm U587, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France, 4Centre 
Genet, Hôp St Antoine,, Lille, France, 5Unit Genet, CHR, Vannes, France, 6Serv 
Genet Med, Hôp Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 7Serv Genet, Hôtel Dieu, 
Nantes, France, 8Serv Genet, Hôp C Nicolle, Rouen, France, 9Unit Genet Med, 
Hôp Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 10Unit Genet, Hôtel Dieu, Clermont Ferrand, 
France, 11Serv Cytogenet, Hôp St Jacques, Besançon, France, 12Mater Reg A 
Pinard, Nancy, France, 13Inserm U587, Inst Pasteur, Paris, France, 14Unit Genet 
Med, Inserm U587, Hôp A Trousseau, AP-HP, Paris, France.
Sensorineural hearing loss HL is the most frequent sensory deﬁcit of childhood, and is of genetic origin in up to 75% of cases. It has been shown that mutations of the 
SLC26A4  (PDS) gene were involved either in 
syndromic deafness characterized by congenital sensorineural hearing loss and goitre (Pendred’s syndrome), as well as in congenital isolated deafness (DFNB4). While the prevalence of 
SLC26A4  mutations in 
Pendred’s syndrome is clearly established, it remains to be studied in DFNB4. In this report, 112 patients from 103 unrelated families, with NSHL and inner ear malformation, were genotyped for 
SLC26A4  using 
DHPLC molecular screening and sequencing. Eighty-eight allelic mutations were observed in 103 unrelated families, of which eighteen have never been reported. Most mutations were found in exons 6, 10, 16, 19 and 14, and many of these have already been described in Pendred’s syndrome. The prevalence of 
SLC26A4  mutations was 
36.9% (38/103), with compound heterozygosity in 19.4% (20/103), while one patient was homozygous. All patients included in this series had documented deafness (age of onset, severity, type, evolution status), associated with inner ear malformation (enlarged vestibular aqueduct, cochlear dysplasia) and without any evidence of syndromic disease. Among patients with 
SLC26A4  mutations, deafness was 
more severe and ﬂuctuated more than in patients with no mutation (p<0.05). In conclusion, the incidence of 
SLC26A4 mutations is high in 
patients with isolated deafness and inner ear malformation and could represent up to 6% of NSHL. Therefore, deaf children with inner ear 
malformation should undergo SLC26A4  molecular screening.
P0849. Delineation of the candidate region for mental retardation 
in subtelomeric 1q deletions
L. Rooms1, E. Reyniers1, Y. van Bever1, A. Laridon2, F. Kooy1;  
1University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2University Hospital Antwerp, Ede -
gem, Belgium.
Subtelomeric deletions of chromosome 1q have been reported in several screening studies of mentally handicapped. We identiﬁed a patient with a de novo subtelomeric 1q deletion of approximately 
8Mb.To increase our insights in the mechanisms responsible for these subtelomeric rearrangements, we are trying to identify the breakpoint sequences of our subtelomeric deletions. Currently, the breakpoint region for our 1q patient was reﬁned to a 18 Kb XmnI fragment close to the RGS7 gene. The RGS7 gene, a regulator of G protein signaling, seemed a strong candidate gene for the mental handicap as this neuron speciﬁc gene is primarily expressed in brain tissue and plays a putative role in synaptic vesicle exocytosis. However, patients in two separate families have been reported with an interstitial deletion taking away RGS7 and at least ﬁve other genes without developmental delay or even mild dysmorphic features. This suggests that genes in the most distal 6 Mb to the telomere are associated with mental retardation. The most distal 1.5 Mb contain predominantly putative genes and/or pseudogenes resembling olfactory receptors, characteristic for many other chromosome ends. Thus, the genes between the olfactory receptor cluster and the deletion may be responsible for the clinical phenotype. This region spanning 4.5 Mb, contains 17 known genes including 5 zinc ﬁngers: ZNF496, ZNF124, SBZF3, SMYD3 and ZNF238. Interestingly, related zinc ﬁnger genes have been implicated 
in other mental retardation disorders.
P0850. BBS4 interacts with dynactin 1 in a manner compatible 
with its intracellular transport by the dynein/dynactin complex
J. Hill , A. J. Ross, H. May-Simera, P. L. Beales;  
Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom.
Dynactin 1, in concert with dynein and other complexed proteins, e.g. dynamitin, mediates retrograde transport of intracellular protein cargoes along the microtubule cytoskeleton. We have shown previously that wild-type BBS4, the protein product of a gene mutated in Bardet-Biedl syndrome, interacts with full-length dynactin 1. In this study, dynactin 1 deletion constructs were made and their interaction with BBS4 was examined using both immunoprecipitation and cellular localisation studies. By immunoprecipitation, it was found that BBS4 interacts with the C-terminal portion, amino acids 879-1278, of dynactin 1. Deletion constructs of dynactin 1 consisting only of amino acid residues from within this region formed discrete spherical accumulations when transfected into 3T3 cells. BBS4-GFP, usually centrosomally localised, became aberrantly localised in the presence of the C-terminal dynactin deletion constructs, often colocalising with the cytoplasmic accumulations of the truncated dynactin 1. The previously characterised cargo-binding region of dynactin 1 to which BBS4 binds is distinct from the microtubule (amino acids 1-150) and dynein intermediate chain (amino acids 100-811) binding domains. The results shown here indicate that BBS4 binding of dynactin 1 is compatible with its transport by the dynactin/dynein complex. These ﬁndings support the previously discussed putative role of BBS4 as an adaptor protein for the transport of other centrosomally destined 
cargoes, such as pericentriolar material 1.
P0851. A Wilson disease patient homozygous for the Met645Arg 
mutation. Genotype-phenotype correlations.
E. Margarit1, R. Queralt1, M. Bruguera1, I. Marzana2, C. de la Riva2, F. Ballesta1;  
1Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital San Eloy, Barakaldo, Spain.
Wilson disease is an autosomal recessive disorder affecting copper transport, resulting in intracellular copper accumulation that produces hepatic and/or neurological damage. Molecular analyses of the ATP7B gene in Wilson disease patients have identiﬁed more than 200 different alterations. Our previous results in molecular diagnosis of Spanish patients showed a high allelic heterogeneity, what makes difﬁcult genotype-phenotype correlations in our population. We have now identiﬁed a patient homozygous for the Met645Arg mutation. Despite the high frequency of this particular alteration in the Spanish population, this is the ﬁrst carrier of Met645Arg in both alleles. The patient was casually diagnosed following a routine clinical screening when he was 52 years old. Minimal alterations in the hepatic biochemical values led to additional analyses. Low serum ceruloplasmine, low serum copper levels and raised copper urinary elimination after penicillamine were found, suggesting a possible Wilson disease. SSCP analysis of the ATP7B gene was performed, and sequencing of the shifted exons revealed a T1934G substitution (exon 6) in both alleles. Considering the low clinical affectation of this patient, we suggest that Met645Arg is a mild mutation and that other individuals homozygous for this mutation might be unnoticed and misdiagnosed. Low clinical alteration would be consistent with the position of the Met645Arg substitution in the ATP7B protein, between the sixth copper-binding and the ﬁrst transmembrane domains, a region not essential for the protein function although it can 
impair copper transport.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics265
P0852. Polymorphisms of RET gene involved in aetiology of 
Hirschsprung disease
R. Smigiel , A. Lebioda, D. Patkowski, R. Slęzak, J. Czernik, T. Dobosz;  
Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.
Hirschsprung disease (Hd) is a congenital disorder, characterized by 
the absence of intestinal ganglion cells. Various genes are included in aetiology of Hirschsprung disease. Diverse models of inheritance, co-existence of genetic disorders and chromosomal aberrations and involvement of various genes conﬁrm genetic heterogeneity of Hd. It seems that 
RET gene plays the most important role in its aetiology. 
There are a variety of mutations showed in this gene resulting in a clinical heterogeneity. Recent advances showed that variants of 
RET 
polymorphisms are over- or under-represented in Hd populations.
The aim of the study was to analyse single nucleotide polimorphisms 
of RET gene in several exons. To test how the Hd phenotype may 
be affected by the presence of genetic variants, we compared the molecular results with clinical and long-term folow-up data. The study group comprised 120 Polish patients. Molecular analyses were performed in 50 cases. Only 4 investigated patients with Hd have a family history. We found a short segment of aganglionic gut in 64%, ultra-short segment in 16% and long-segment in 20%. The
 135A and 
1296A and 2712G RET variants have been shown to be strongly 
associated with the Hd phenotype. These data suggest a role for RET 
polimorphisms variant in the aetiology of Hd. In nearest future, the genetic tests could determine the severity of clinical picture of Hd and the risk of Hd patients family.
P0853. Asymptomatic hyperCKemia in a case of Danon disease 
due to a missense mutation in Lamp-2  gene
O. Musumeci1, C. Rodolico1, I. Nishino2, G. Di Guardo3, M. Aguennouz1, A. 
Migliorato1, C. Messina1, G. Vita1, A. Toscano1;  
1Dept. of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anesthesiology, University of Mes -
sina, Italy, 2Dept. of Neuromuscular Research National Istitute of Neuroscience, 
Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan, 3Dept. of Cardiology, Ospedale Garibaldi, Catania, Italy.
Primary lysosome-associated membrane protein-2 (LAMP-2) deﬁciency is an X-linked disease, characterized by the clinical triad of cardiomyopathy, vacuolar myopathy and mental retardation, previously known as Danon disease. Mutations of 
lamp-2  gene have 
been reported so far in about 20 patients, one of whom was Italian. We describe herein a 23 year-old man with a Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome and a non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. He was admitted to our department because, in several occasions, blood tests revealed persistently increased serum CK (max 783 IU/L, n.v. <200). A muscle biopsy revealed a vacuolar myopathy with mild glycogen storage and immunohystochemical studies detected LAMP-2 deﬁciency. A new nucleotide substitution (T961C) on exon 8 of 
lamp-
2 gene was identiﬁed as responsible of the protein deﬁciency. This is a new Italian case with persistent hyperCKemia, exercise intolerance and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy but with no muscle weakness or mental impairment. Different mutations have been described, but almost all of them determined a truncated not functional protein. In our case the patient harboured a missense mutation so far never described. We suggest that LAMP-2 deﬁciency has to be included among the causes of asymptomatic hyperCKemia, especially in patients with arrhytmias 
or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
P0854. The relationship between the SMN protein expression 
level in ﬁbroblasts and the clinical phenotype of SMA patients
M. Milewski1, M. Jedrzejowska2, M. Jurek1, D. Sielska1, J. Borkowska2, I. Haus -
manowa-Petrusewicz2;  
1Cell Biology Laboratory, Medical Genetics Dept., Institute of Mother and Child, 
Warsaw, Poland, 2Neuromuscular Unit, Medical Research Center, Warsaw, 
Poland.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by the loss of motor neurons of the spinal cord. Several SMA forms (types I-IV) have been distinguished on the basis of disease severity and the age of onset. The disease-causing mutations in the 
SMN1 gene are thought to affect the level of functional SMN protein. However, although the SMN protein expression level is drastically reduced in ﬁbroblasts of the most severely affected type I patients, similar reduction in type II-IV patients remains a matter of controversy. We examined the protein level in ﬁbroblasts isolated from 27 patients with different forms of SMA. The Western blot analysis showed that the SMN protein level in affected individuals was reduced by 97.1% in a type I patient, 46 ± 15.6% in type II patients (n=5), 32.7 ± 21.6% in type IIIa patients (n=11), 20.8 ± 16.8% in type IIIb patients (n=9) and 11.3% in a type IV patient. These differences were statistically signiﬁcant for types I and II, but not for types III and IV patients. Additionally, there was certain overlap between the normal range of expression level and the levels detected in type II-IV patients. Together, these results suggest that tissue-speciﬁc regulation of SMN expression in affected cells (motor neurons) as well as other factors may additionally 
contribute to the observed diversity in clinical manifestation of SMA.Supported by the State Committee for Scientiﬁc Research grant 2 
P05E 007 27 and the Polpharma grant 201/II/2003.
P0855. Mutation analysis of the MECP2  gene in Czech, Slovak 
and Ukrainian patients with Rett syndrome
D. Zahorakova1, R. Rosipal1, J. Hadac2, N. Misovicova3, A. Zumrova4, V. Bz -
duch5, J. Zeman1, P. Martasek1;  
11st School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2De-
partment of Child Neurology, Thomayer University Hospital, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Martin University Hospital, Martin, 
Slovakia, 4Department of Child Neurology, University Hospital Motol, Prague, 
Czech Republic, 5Department of Pediatrics, Commenius University Hospital, 
Bratislava, Slovakia.
Background: Rett syndrome (RTT), is a severe X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder affecting 1/10,000-15,000 females. It is caused by mainly de novo mutations in the 
MECP2 gene. Its product 
methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) binds speciﬁcally to methylated DNA and plays an important role in gene silencing. Mutations in 
MECP2 lead to decrease/loss of MeCP2 function. To date, more than 200 mutations have been identiﬁed in 
MECP2 including missense, 
nonsense, deletions and insertions. We report mutation analysis of 85 girls with RTT from Czech Republic, Slovakia and Ukraine.Matherials and methods: Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood lymphocytes and used to amplify coding sequence and exon/intron borders of 
MECP2 gene. PCR products were examined by 
automated DNA sequencing and RFLP.
Results: The analysis revealed 24 different mutations in 54 sporadic patients (63.5%). Two of them have not been previously published: L108H and P388S. The frequency of mutation T158M compared to other databases (e.g. RettBASE 9.25%) has been much more higher in our patients (20%) and further investigations will show whether this 
mutation is prevalent in the Slavonic population.
Conclusions:  Our results show molecular heterogeneity in patients 
with RTT, facilitate the molecular diagnosis of RTT in the Slavonic population, and provide insight into the molecular pathology of R TT.
Supported by grant GAUK8/04.
P0856. Molecular diagnosis of dysferlinopathies in a clinical 
setting and report of novel DYSF  mutations
M. Krahn1, K. Nguyen1, R. Bernard1, G. Bassez2, V. Labelle1, D. Figarella-
Branger3, J. Pouget4, E. H. Hammouda5, R. Ben-Yaou6, C. Béroud7, A. Urtiz -
berea5, B. Eymard2, F. Leturcq8, N. Lévy1,9;  
1Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d'enfants de la Timone, Mar -
seille, France, 2Institut de Myologie, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, 
France, 3Laboratoire d'Anatomopathologie, Hôpital Timone, Marseille, France, 
4Service de Neurologie, Hôpital Timone, Marseille, France, 5AFM et Généthon, 
Evry, France, 6Institut de Myologie, Inserm U582, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-
Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 7Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de 
Génétique Humaine, Montpellier, France, 8Laboratoire de Biochimie Génétique, 
Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 9Inserm U491 : "Génétique Médicale et Dével -
oppement", Faculté de, Marseille, France.
Dysferlinopathies belong to the heterogeneous group of autosomal recessive muscular dystrophies. Mutations in the gene encoding dysferlin (
DYSF) lead to distinct phenotypes, mainly Limb Girdle 
Muscular Dystrophy type 2B (LGMD2B) and Miyoshi myopathy (MM).Due to the clinical heterogeneity, initial Dysferlin protein analysis on muscle sample is essential to orientate diagnosis. However, diagnosis should be conﬁrmed by molecular analysis of the 
DYSF  gene.
The large size of the DYSF gene (> 150 kbp, 55 exons) makes this a 
challenging task on a routine basis. Methods for mutation screening 
are particularly useful in this regard.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics266
Here, we report the results of mutational screening in a cohort of 
LGMD2B and MM patients, identiﬁed using SSCP and/or DHPLC analysis, and subsequent sequencing of detected variants, in a routine 
diagnostic setting.In 31 unrelated patients, molecular analysis conﬁrmed the diagnosis of primary Dysferlinopathy. 12 of these patients carry an homozygous deleterious mutation, while 19 patients are compound heterozygotes. Furthermore, one mutation was identiﬁed in 18 patients, without identiﬁcation of a second deleterious allele. Complementary analysis 
is still ongoing for these patients.Most of the identiﬁed mutations have not been reported before, and are predicted to produce a truncated protein (38%) or one amino-acid 
substitution (52%).We did not ﬁnd evidence for genotype-phenotype correlations. All genetic and phenotypic data were compiled in a newly created database, the “Universal Dysferlin Mutations Database“ (UDMD). This database compiles all mutations, either novel or previously reported in 
the literature, as well as all polymorphisms known in the DYSF gene.
P0857. Characterization of a balanced X/autosomal translocation 
in a female patient displaying a Rett-like phenotype
M. Morleo1, D. Iaconis1, D. Chitayat2, F. Mari3, F. Ariani3, R. Caselli3, A. Renieri3, 
B. Franco1;  
1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy, 2The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Medical Genetics, Dept. Mol. Biol., Uni -
versity of Siena, Siena, Italy.
We report the study of a female patient with an apparently de novo balanced X/autosomal translocation between the short arm of the X chromosome and the long arm of chromosome 20. This patient developed at 15 months severe infantile spasms which have been refractory to therapy. The ﬁrst 6-8 months of development were normal but subsequently her development slowed and she now displays a profound developmental delay.Cytogenetic characterization using ﬂuorescent in situ hybridization showed disruption of an unknown transcript in Xp11.The pattern of expression of this transcript was evaluated by RNA in situ hybridization on sections from murine embryos at different developmental stages (E12.5-E14.5-E16.5 and P0). Our preliminary study revealed expression of this transcript in the olfactory bulb, the cerebral cortex, the cerebellum, the hippocampus, and the spinal 
cord.Considering that the phenotype observed in the patient, closely resembles the phenotype described in Rett syndrome (RTT), we decided to evaluate this gene as a candidate for RTT. Mutation analysis is ongoing in a cohort of 40 cases who had been diagnosed with classical RTT syndrome or with a variant of RTT. Mutations in the methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2), the major gene of RTT, and the cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 gene (CDKL5), responsible for early seazure variant of RTT have both been excluded in this cohort 
of patients.Data will be presented on the complete characterization of this 
transcript.
P0858. Genetic analysis of the coagulation factor VIII and IX 
genes in Hungarian patients with haemophilia
A. Bors, H. Andrikovics, A. Szilvási, A. Fehér, L. Nemes, A. Tordai;  
National Medical Center, Budapest, Hungary.
Haemophilia A (HA) and haemophilia B (HB) are common X-linked bleeding disorders resulting from the inherited deﬁciency of coagulation factors VIII (fVIII) and IX (fIX), respectively. Female relatives of patients with haemophilia may be carriers and many of them request carrier status determination. Previously, large gene inversion detection in HA patients and linkage analysis using intragenic polymorphisms in HB and in inversion-negative HA patients were used for carrier and prenatal diagnosis in our laboratory, but in some cases linkage analysis had limitations. A high number of different mutations can be identiﬁed by direct sequencing of the fVIII and fIX genes, which is now the preferred method for genetic counseling. The aim of our study was to identify the disease causing mutations in 15 severe HA-patients with no intron inversions and in 20 Hungarian HB-patients by sequencing the promoter and the exons with ﬂanking regions of the fVIII and fIX genes and to provide precise carrier status determination in the affected families. To date the sequencing of exons 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 13 of fVIII gene was completed. We found three novel point mutations (Lys48Gln, Trp68STOP, His256Arg) and one published missense mutation in fVIII gene. Among 20 HB-patients, the entire coding region was sequenced and one novel (Asp64Val) and 17 published fIX gene mutations were found. This new mutation was detected in two unrelated Hungarian families. Our results further conﬁrm, that HA and HB can be caused by 
a wide variety of point mutations.
P0859. HMG-Box deletion of the SRY gene in two sisters with 
46XY gonadal dysgenesis
A. Galani1, A. Galla2, C. Sofocleous1, G. C. Hadjiathanasiou3, H. V. Kosmidis4, 
I. Giannatou2, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, A. Mavrou1;  
1Medical Genetics, Athens University, "Aghia Sophia" Childrens' Hospital, 
Athens, Greece, 2Genetics Unit, 2nd Dept of Pediatrics School of Medicine,, 
Athens, Greece, 3Department of Endocrinology, "P. & A. Kyriakou" Childrens' 
Hospital, Athens, Greece, 4Oncology Department, "P. & A. Kyriakou" Childrens' 
Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Mutations in the SRY gene, which is involved in human sex determination, 
result in XY sex reversal and pure gonadal dysgenesis.We report on a familial case of 46 XY pure gonadal dysgenesis in two sisters, 12 and 13 years old, which was fortuitously detected after the development of dysgerminoma and gonadoblastoma in the younger one, at the age of 11 years old. The tumor originated from the right gonad which was surgically removed. The left gonad and the tubes were not removed at this time. Both sisters present unambiguous female external genitalia, normal size of uterus and streak gonads. Hormonal studies are consistent with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. The 
oldest sister remains asymptomatic.
Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood 
lymphocytes of both individuals. Molecular analysis of Y chromosome was performed by PCR ampliﬁcation of the SRY and ZFY loci as well as the AZF region.
Results: A deletion within the SRY gene which includes the HMG-box 
was revealed in both sisters.
Conclusions: Molecular analysis is consistent with the diagnosis of 
pure gonadal dysgenesis. The remaining ovary of the youngest sister was removed due to the high risk of developing a new tumor and gonadoblastoma was histopathologically conﬁrmed in the removed gonad. Bilateral gonadectomy was recommended to the oldest asymptomatic sister in order to avoid the development of a gonad 
tumor in the future.Since the deletion is detected in both patients the case is characterized as familial and the possibility o paternal gametic mosaicism should be 
considered.
P0860. Molecular-genetic study of Russian PKU patients
A. Anichkina, N. Galeeva, S. Tverskaya, A. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Phenylketonuria is an autosomal recessive human genetic disease caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. To date more than 400 mutations have been described. This disease is 
associated with severe mental retardation.We studied 296 PKU patients from different Russian regions. For screening of 8 most frequent mutations in exons 3, 5, 7, 11 and 12 of the PAH gene a multiplex system for ACRS PCR analysis was 
developed. This system detected 78.3% mutations in our patients. For other PKU chromosomes PCR-SSCP analysis of all PAH exons 
and intron/exon junctions with sequence analysis of fragments with altered electrophoretic mobility was performed. We have revealed 28 different mutations, including 4 novel mutations (I421N, G256D, Ala132Val, del865-872nt) that represent 86.8% of all defective chromosomes. Two patients from our group have three mutations in their genotype. One of them has R408W on one chromosome and (IVS10-14c->g+ IVS 11+1g->c) in 
cis on the other; the other patient 
has P281L on one chromosome and (A132V +del865-872nt) in cis 
on the other. Our approach failed to reveal any PAH mutations on 78 
PKU chromosomes (13.2%). This group includes 60 chromosomes in patients with one conﬁrmed mutation. In 9 PKU patients we have not found any mutations in the PAH gene and suppose that they may 
have a disorder in the 
QDPR gene. Investigations of this gene are in 
progress now.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics267
P0861. Cryptic genomic rearrangements in Beckwith-
Wiedemann patients.
S. Russo1, P. Finelli1, S. Ferraiuolo1, F. Cavalleri1, F. Cogliati1, A. Gessi1, M. 
Recalcati1, M. Tibiletti2, L. Zoccante3, M. Bonati1, L. Larizza1,4;  
1Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Cusano Milanino (MI), Italy, 2Insubria University, 
Varese, Italy, 3Policlinico G. Rossi, Verona, Italy, 4Biology and Genetics Dept 
- University of Milan, Milano, Italy.
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS; MIM 130650) is a 
developmental disorder, characterized by prenatal and postnatal overgrowth, macroglossia and anterior abdominal wall defects. The etiology involves genetic and epigenetic alterations affecting the 11p15 region, which is organised into two imprinted domains under the control of DMR1, 4Kb distal to 5’H19, and DMR2 in KVLQT1 IVS10. Only 2% of BWS patients were found to carry cytogenetics abnormalities. A cohort of 60 BWS patients was investigated for the most common pathogenetic mechanisms: 11p15 mosaic paternal UPD and defects in methylation pattern of the imprinted H19 and LIT1. Microsatellite segregation analysis, carried out to search 11patUPD, showed in two patients a proﬁle compatible with the presence of cytogenetic 
rearrangements.FISH analysis conﬁrmed that the ﬁrst case, trisomic for D11S318 and showing both paternal methylated alleles at H19, carries de novo dup(11)(p15.5p15.5), likely resulting from unequal recombination at meiosis I in paternal gametogenesis. The second patient carried a der(21)t(11;21)(11p15.4;q22.3) originated from missegregation of a cryptic paternal translocation. An additional patient referred to have Wolf syndrome with unusual heigth was shown to carry a t(4;11)der(p16.3;p15.4) and characterised by FISH analysis. Interestingly, reﬁned breakpoint mapping evidenced that both translocations affecting 11p15.4 are mediated by segmental 
duplications.
P0862. Connexin 26 mutation 35delG in nonsyndromic 
sensorineural hearing loss in Latvia: preliminary ﬁndings
O. Olhovaya1, N. Pronina1, I. Balode1, S. Kuske2, A. Krumina3, R. Lugovska1;  
1Latvian State Medical Genetics centre; Latvian State Childrens` Hospital 
"Gailezers", Riga, Latvia, 2Latvian Childrens` Hearing centre, Riga, Latvia, 
3Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia.
Congenital profound hearing impairment affects about one in 1,000 
neonates; half of these cases are due to genetic factors. Approximately 80% of all hereditary deafness cases are classiﬁed as nonsyndromic and recessive. So far 46 genes that, if mutated, result in nonsyndromic recessive hearing loss have been identiﬁed. Mutations in 
GJB2 gene, 
which encodes a gap-junction beta-2 protein (connexin 26), are the main cause of nonsyndromic sensorineural autosomal recessive deafness. Connexin 26 is a transmembrane protein that forms intracellular channels known as connexons. These channels regulate cell metabolism, differentiation, and the transmission of the electrical impulses. The 35delG mutation is the most common mutation in the 
GJB2  gene in many populations.
In Latvia there were registered 1613 children with hearing impairments in May 2004 and every year about 150 more are born. We obtained DNA samples from patients with nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss and their relatives. During the period from December 2003 till May 2004 19 patients were screened for 35delG mutation, 13 (68%) are heterozygous for this mutation. One patient (5%) has genotype 35delG/N or 35delG/X, where X is unknown mutation, possibly he is a compound heterozygote. For 5 patients (26%) there was no 35delG mutation found. Eight from 14 relatives of the screened patients found to be heterozygous for the searched mutation. We are planning to continue 35delG screening as well as to analyze heterozygotes and 35delG unaffected patients by direct sequencing to reveal full spectrum 
of mutation in GJB2  in Latvian patients.
P0863. Characterization of novel mutations in the CYP1B1 gene 
in Mexican patients with primary congenital glaucoma
O. M. Messina1, L. M. Gonzalez2, I. Babayan3, S. A. C. Cuevas3;  
1Servicio de Oftalmologia, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D,.F ., Mexico, 
2Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D,.F., Mexico, 3Hospital General de 
Mexico, Facultad de Medicina, UNAM, Mexico, D,.F., Mexico.
Mutations and polymorphisms have been identiﬁed in the CYP1B1 gene, while mutations that affect the conserved core structures of cytochrome P4501B1 result in primary congenital glaucoma, mutations in other regions hold the potential to deﬁne differences in the estrogen metabolism. In the present study, we analyzed the CYP1B1 gene in Mexican patients with primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) and described four novel mutations and a novel allele variant of the CYP1B12 gene. Sample included 12 non-related cases with PCG. Analysis of coding regions of the CYP1B1 was performed through PCR and DNA sequencing analysis from genomic DNA. Molecular analysis of the CYP1B1 gene showed the following molecular defects: 1) a novel single base pair deletion within codon 370 (1454delC); 2) a novel single base pair deletion within codon 277 (1176delT) 3) a novel single base pair deletion within codon 179 (880delG); 4) a duplication (or insertion) of ten base pairs within codon 404 (1556dupATGCCACCAC) and a novel polymorphic variant of the cytochrome P4501B1 with six single nucleotide polymorphisms. We observed that deletions and insertions are the principal molecular defects of the CYP1B1 gene in PCG in Mexican population, it has important implications in diagnosis 
and genetic counseling of this population.
P0864. Mutation analysis in the DCX gene conﬁrms the high 
prevalence of mosaicism as a cause of subcortical band 
heterotopia / double cortex syndrome
D. J. Morris-Rosendahl1, S. Ravaglia2, G. Uyanik3, L. Mainberger1, A. de la 
Guardia1, U. Moog4, J. Kohlhase1;  
1Institute for Human Genetics, Freiburg, Germany, 2Institute of Neurology, 
University of Pavia, Italy, 3Department of Neurology, University of Regensburg, 
Germany, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.
Mutations in the X-linked gene doublecortin (DCX) are the cause of X-linked lissencephaly in males and X-linked subcortical band heterotopia (SBH, double cortex syndrome) in females. We have performed mutation analysis in the DCX gene in 19 patients (15 females, 4 males)with double cortex syndrome, by sequencing the entire coding region to look for small intragenic mutations and performing Southern blotting to look for larger deletions or duplications. We have found small intragenic mutations in 6 of the female patients, and in one male patient. 3 of the mutations are new: two missense mutations in exon 4 (N60D and T88R) and a 3 bp deletion in exon 5 (c.648-650delAGA) which leads to the deletion of a lysine residue. The previously described mutation, c.684-685delCT was found to be heterozygous in a 51-year old male patient with SBH. The patient had no family history of lissencephaly and sequence analysis in both his parents and healthy brother and sister did not reveal the DCX mutation. The possibility of an extra X chromosome was eliminated via chromosome and FISH analysis. The inheritance of a single X chromosome from the patient’s mother was demonstrated via fragment analysis of the CAG repeat in the HUMARA gene on Xq11-q12. The most likely conclusion is that the patient is mosaic for the c.684-685delCT mutation. Somatic mosaicism has previously been reported in 4 male patients with double cortex syndrome, and although a relatively rare event, should not be 
overlooked as a possible cause in males with a similar phenotype.
P0865. The 2P16 deletion syndrome: Characterization of the 
trancription content
I. Alshafee, Y. Gonen, S. Buriakovsky, D. Abu Hani, E. Hershkovitz, R. Parvari;  
Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
The vast majority of small deletions syndromes, involving several genes, are caused by haploinsufﬁciency of one or several genes and are transmitted as dominant traits. We have previously identiﬁed patients originating from an extended family presenting a unique syndrome, inherited in a recessive mode, consisting of cystinuria, neonatal seizures, hypotonia, severe somatic and developmental delay, facial dysmorphism, and lactic acidemia. Reduced activity of all the respiratory chain enzymatic complexes that are encoded in the mitochondria was found in muscle biopsy specimens of the patients examined. The molecular basis of this disorder is a homozygous deletion of 179,311 bp on chromosome 2p16, which includes the type I cystinuria gene  SLC3A1 , the protein phosphatase 2C beta gene, an 
unidentiﬁed gene (KIAA 0436 ) and several ESTs. We now present 
the transcription content of this region: Each of the three previously reported genes encodes multiple, previously unidentiﬁed, splice variants. In addition two transcripts with no open reading frame and Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics268
a short, predicted gene, that encodes a putative protein of 67 a.a. not 
similar to any other protein are encoded in the region. The ﬁrst exon of an additional gene (
FLJ23451 ) is encoded in the deleted region 
and the gene is not expressed in the patients. The absence of the deleted genes cause the speciﬁc clinical phenotype observed in the 
2p16 patients.
P0866. Inheritance of novel LMNA  and ZMPSTE24  mutations 
associated to segmental ageing syndromes.
A. De Sandre-Giovannoli1, C. Navarro2, A. Boyer1, I. Boccaccio2, P. S. Jouk3, 
A. Hadjian4, J. L. Alessandri5, S. Hadj-Rabia6, R. Bernard1, N. Lévy1,2;  
1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Département de Génétique Médicale, 
Hôpital d'Enfants la Timone, Marseille, France, 2INSERM U491, Génétique 
Médicale et Développement, Faculté de Médecine la Timone, Marseille, 
France, 3Service de Génétique, CHU Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 4Enzymolo -
gie/DBPC, CHU Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 5Service de Néonatologie, Centre 
Hospitalier Départemental Félix Guyon, Saint-Denis, Reunion, 6Service de 
Dermatologie, Groupe Hospitalier Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
Several segmental progeroid disorders are due to mutations of at least two genes, 
LMNA and ZMPSTE24, respectively encoding Lamins A/C, 
ubiquitous and multifunctional nuclear proteins, and a metalloprotease involved in post-traductional Prelamin A processing. In the absence of mature Lamin A with accumulation of Prelamin A, or in the presence of truncated Lamin A forms, segmental progeroid syndromes seem to develop. We report here three familial cases of segmental progeroid syndromes carrying mono-, di- or tri-allelic inherited mutations. In one consanguineous family, two sibs were affected with progeria associated to neonatal signs. Only a retrospective study was possible, since no biological material was available from the affected sibs. The parents carried both a heterozygous 
ZMPSTE24 c.1053_1055del 
and the mother carried in addition a heterozygous LMNA c.1643G>A 
(p.R545H). We infer that the two affected sibs carried the homozygous 
ZMPSTE24 deletion  and the heterozygous LMNA substitution. In 
another consanguineous family, the index case, affected with neonatal progeria, inherited from the father and the mother respectively, heterozygous IVS8+6T>G and Lamin A-speciﬁc c.1961_1962insG. Western Blot studies from ﬁbroblast cultures showed a reduction of Lamin A levels. A third patient, affected as his father with a localised form of acrogeria, carried a novel heterozygous 
LMNA substitution, 
c.1771T>A (p.C591S), speciﬁcally affecting as well Lamin A. These results conﬁrm a major involvement of Lamins A/C and functionally related proteins in segmental progeroid disorders, predicting the existence of a much larger series of allelic disorders, and underscore the need to expand molecular and functional explorations on affected 
patients.
P0867. Detection of a new complex allele associated with HFE 1 
hereditary haemochromatosis
s. pissard1, M. Coulhon2, M. Lefebvre2, C. Fourcade2, P. Genêt2, D. Duchassa -
ing2, F. Dupradeau3, M. Goossens1, J. Rochette3;  
1INSERM -AP-HP, Creteil, France, 2CH Victor Dupouy, Argenteuil, France, 
3UPRES EA 2629 et Unité INERIS, Amiens, France.
The majority of type 1 haemochromatosis (HH) patients in North of France are homozygous for the missense mutation 845C à A (C282Y) in the HFE gene . About 5% of patients are compound heterozygotes for C282Y and a second common missense mutation 187CàG (H63D). The effect of this second allele is much less severe than the C282Y mutation as it does not prevent the cell surface localization of the HFE protein. Depending on the population studied, from 4 to 35 % of patients presenting with the HH phenotype carry only a unique C282Y or H63D allele or none at all. HH in such patients suggests genetic and/or allelic heterogeneity. Indeed, rare HFE gene mutations have been documented that are mostly only associated with haemochromatosis when found in conjunction with either H63D or C282Y.In a patient presenting with iron overload (ferritin 1900 mg/L ; transferrin saturation 94%) we ﬁrst identiﬁed a new missense mutation : G43D which was shown to segregate within the family with the allele also carrying the H63D mutation. The association of the G43D mutation in cis-combination with H63D mutation produces a complex allele with both the mutations in the same protein domain. Molecular modelling studies were in favour of a destabilizing effect of the G43D mutation within the a1 domain of the HFE protein. We conclude that the G43D/H63D complex allele has consequences as severe as that of the C282Y allele and thus that G43D-H63D/C282Y genotype is responsible for 
the disease
P0868. Molecular analysis of myotonic dystrophies DM1 and 
DM2 in Czech Republic.
J. Kraus1, Z. Musova2, R. Mazanec3, T. Marikova2, A. Boday2, M. Havlovicova2, 
M. Malikova2, M. Mares4, M. Bohm5, V. Matousek6, A. Krepelova2;  
1Department of Child Neurology, Charles University - 2nd Medical Faculty, 
Prague 5, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd 
Medical Faculty and University Hospital, Charles University, Prague 5, Czech 
Republic, 3Department of Neurology, Charles University - 2nd Medical Faculty, 
Prague 5, Czech Republic, 4Department of Neurology, University Hospital Brno, 
Brno, Czech Republic, 5Department of Neurology, Hospital Karvina, Karvina, 
Czech Republic, 6Department of Neurology, University Hospital Plzen, Plzen, 
Czech Republic.
Myotonic dystrophies are the most common form of adult muscular dystrophy with estimated incidence of 1/8000. It can be caused by a mutation on either chromosome 19q13 (DM1) or 3q21 (DM2/PROMM). The DM1 is caused by an unstable CTG repeat expansion in the 3´untranslated region of the dystrophia myotonica-protein kinase gene (DMPK) and DM2 is caused by a CCTG expansion in intron 1 of the zinc ﬁnger protein 9 (ZNF9) gene.We present a cohort of 426 patients with the myotonic dystrophy. We conﬁrmed the diagnosis DM1 by the molecular genetic analysis in the 121 patients (53 families). DM1 negative patients (142) were already tested for the DM2 mutation. The DM2 diagnosis was excluded in 128 of them and 6 patients (5 families) had an CCTG expansion in ZNF9 gene. We also found a patient with suspected myotonia and with a premutation and another patient with the myotonic dystrophy diagnosis who has both alleles of DMPK gene expanded with the different number of CTG repeats.Supported by project IGA MZ 8052-3 and Institutional Research 
Project 2005-2009.
P0869. Our ﬁrst experience in preimplantation genetic diagnosis
I. Valášková1, J. Kadlecová1, P. Kuglík1,2, I. Slámová1, R. Gaillyová1;  
1University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk University, Faculty 
of Science, Brno, Czech Republic.
Prevention of the birth of affected children in couples at risk for transmitting a genetic disorder is currently based on population screening and prenatal diagnosis, followed by termination of affected pregnancies. However, this is the most sensitive problem in the control of genetic disease, which is incompatible with life or not tolerated in 
populations and ethnic groups.Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is a principally new approach for the prevention of genetic disorders, which allows the selection of unaffected IVF embryos for establishing pregnancies in couples at risk. PGD may be achieved by testing female gametes (polar body analysis), blastomeres from cleavage stage embryos, or blastocysts. PGD can be applied for monogenic disorders or chromosomal abnormalities, using diagnostic protocols based on the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or ﬂuorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH), respectively.Our genetic centre at present concentrates on chromosomal abnormalities, while also on genotyping for single-gene disorders. 
Genetic analyses are performed on biopsied blastomeres .PGD of chromosomal abnormalities is applied in patients with repeated IVF failures or spontaneous abortions. This application is essentially a screening procedure to detect aneuploidies/polyploidies or translocations most commonly observed postnatally or in spontaneus 
abortions.We optimise the ﬁrst PCR based PGD protocol for genotyping of Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Regulator (CFTR) gene with focusing on several inherent difﬁculties associated with single cell DNA ampliﬁcations including potential sample contamination, total PCR failure and allelic drop out. These difﬁculties should be minimised for 
any PGD PCR protocol before clinical application.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics269
P0870. A novel exonic mutation triggers mRNA degradation in a 
GM1 gangliosidosis patient
R. Santamaria1, A. Chabás2, D. Grinberg1, L. Vilageliu1;  
1Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital Clínic, Corporació 
Sanitària Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.
GM1 gangliosidosis is a lysosomal storage disease caused by a 
hereditary deﬁciency of lysosomal acid beta-galactosidase noted by 
visceromegaly and neurologic symptoms.Three major clinical phenotypes are distinguished in GM1 
gangliosidosis: infantile, juvenile and adult.A mutational analysis in a large cohort of GM1 Spanish patients was performed. Here we present the characterization of a novel mutation found in an infantile patient. After completely sequencing the cDNA of the patient, only one mutation (c.1491G>T; p.G481X) was found. To identify the second mutation, the genomic DNA was sequenced. The nucleotide substitution (c.952C>T), in exon 8, was found. The fact that this substitution appeared in the genomic DNA but not in the cDNA suggested that the change could trigger the degradation of the mRNA by nonsense mediated decay (NMD), a mechanism that clears 
mRNAs containing premature termination codons (PTC).Skin ﬁbroblasts of the patient were cultured with cycloheximide (CHX), a known inhibitor of protein synthesis and of NMD. The sequencing of the cDNA from the treated ﬁbroblasts revealed the presence of an additional transcript. It contained a deletion of the last 14 bp of exon 8 resulting in the generation of a PTC that elicits NMD on the novel transcript. The c.952C>T mutation in exon 8 is in fact a splicing mutation that affects the normal splicing by creating a novel 5’ donor splice site with a higher splice site score than the usual one. A minigene assay was also used to conﬁrm the results.
P0871. A new mutation causing multiple sulfatase deﬁciency
A. Diaz-Font1, R. Santamaria1, A. Chabás2, M. Coll2, N. Chamoles3, L. Vilage -
liu1, D. Grinberg1;  
1Departament de Genètica, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital Clínic, Corporació 
Sanitària Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 3Fundación para el estudio de las enferme -
dades neurometabólicas, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Multiple sulfatase deﬁciency (MSD) is a rare autosomal recessively inherited lysosomal storage disorder characterized by the accumulation of sulphated lipids and carbohydrates. The disorder combines features of metachromatic leukodystrophy and of mucopolysaccharidosis. Increased amounts of acid mucopolysaccharides are found in several tissues. The defect in this disorder involves a posttranslational process, common to 7 or more sulfatases (Rommerskirch et al., 1992) and decrease the capacity of a process that renders sulfatases enzymatically active or prevents their premature inactivation. C-alpha-formylglycine (FGly), the catalytic residue in the active site of eukaryotic sulfatases, is posttranslationally generated from a cysteine in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The 
SUMF1 gene encodes FGly-
generating enzyme (FGE) and is mutated in MSD. Dierks et al. (2003) and Cosma et al. (2003) identiﬁed several mutations in the 
SUMF1  
gene in patients with MSD.Here we present the mutation analysis of 3 MSD patients, two from Spain and one from Argentina. The ﬁrst patient (MSD1) is homozygous for a 463T>C substitution (S155P) and the second patient (MSD2) is homozygous for a 1033C>T substitution (A345C). These two mutations were previously described by Cosma et al. (2003). The third patient (MSD3) is homozygous for a novel mutation, IVS7+5 G>T, which affects the splice donor site of intron 7. Since no sample from this patient was available, we used a minigene approach to analyse the change and conﬁrmed that it produced an aberrant splicing.
P0872. Characterization of CREBBP deletions in Rubinstein-
Taybi patients using array-CGH
M. Stef1, I. Burgelin1, B. Mardirossian1, M. Delrue1,2, I. Coupry1, M. Marche1, F. 
Bonnet-Dorion1,3, P. Gorry1,3, M. Longy1,3, D. Lacombe1,2, B. Arveiler1,2;  
1University Victor Segalen Bordeaux2, Bordeaux, France, 2CHU de Bordeaux, 
Bordeaux, France, 3Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France.
The Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) is a rare autosomal dominant 
disease that is associated in 10-15% of cases with 16p13.3 microdeletions, all involving the CREB-Binding Protein gene (CREBBP). Various techniques used so far to identify these deletions (FISH, microsatellite analysis or quantitative PCR) all suffer from several drawbacks. Due to the high heterogeneity of deletions in terms of both size and location inside the gene, array-CGH seems to be a very appropriate technique to analyse CREBBP deletions. We therefore constructed a microarray carrying various types of genomic resources derived from the 16p13.3 region, including 7 BACs and 35 cosmids (spanning 2 Mb). In order to visualize deletions as small as 10-20 kb, a set of 28 low molecular weight probes (800-1500 bp) was also designed, that are spread along the CREBBP gene at an average 
density of one clone every 6 kb.In the present study we show that this microarray was able to visualize all previously known deletions and to reﬁne the position of the deletion breakpoints in some cases. We also demonstrated that targets as small as 1000 bp can be used efﬁciently to detect heterozygous deletions. This constitutes the ﬁrst example of the use of this kind of small targets for a region- or gene-speciﬁc microarray as a tool for deletion identiﬁcation in a genetic disease, and paves the way for a wider use of the technique as a diagnostic tool, especially since a high 
level of resolution can be attained.
P0873. Variability of disorders caused by mutations in LMNA 
gene
A. Chukhrova1, G. Rudenskaya1, S. Tverskaya1, H. Zaklyazminskaya1, O. 
Strakhova2, H. Dadali1, A. Polyakov1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute 
of Pediatrics and Child Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation.
LMNA gene encoding two proteins, lamins A and C, is responsible 
for about ﬁfteen various disorders named laminopathies. We have studied 87 unrelated families with different laminopathies including Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD), myodystrophy with cardiomyopathy, dilated cardiomyopathy type 1A (DCM), autosomal recessive congenital polyneuropathy, limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD), progeria, lipodystrophy. A search of LMNA gene mutations 
and polymorphisms was performed by SSCP method with follow sequencing. We have found eight different missense mutations (Asp47His, Gly232Arg, Arg249Gln, Arg541His, Ala350Pro, Asn459Tyr, Gly635Asp, delLys261+ins15bp) in nine families. Fore families presented autosomal dominant EDMD including one with atypical severe course. In one case LGMD type 1B was diagnosed. Three families had DCM, including atypical early variant in one. Autosomal recessive congenital polyneuropathy in two sibs being different from HMSN type 2B1 may present a novel, previously undescribed phenotype. Seven found mutations were novel. Arg249Gln mutation previously described in three unrelated patients with typical EDMD was detected in two unrelated families with different clinical phenotypes, namely LGMD type 1B and mild EDMD. This fact points to existence of relatively frequent LMNA mutations and also to a role 
of some modifying factors in phenotype formation. Also we have found seven different polymorphisms in the coding region of LMNA 
gene. 
Two undescribed polymorphisms, G824A and G1973A, don’t lead to aminoacid substitution but may cause the alternative splice site formation according to computer programme predicted exon-intronic gene structure. The population frequency of these polymorphisms is studied now.This work was support in part by grant RFBR 03-04-49311a
P0874. Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) 
deﬁciency: Biochemical and mutation analysis in Latvia
Z. Muceniece, Z. Krumina, P. Vevere, N. Pronina, R. Lugovska;  
Latvian State Medical Genetic Centre, Children`s Hospital "Gailezers", Riga, 
Latvia.
Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) deﬁciency is 
an autosomal recessive disorder of mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation (MIM# 143450). The LCHAD enzyme is part of the mitochondrial trifunctional protein (MTP). A common point mutation 1528 G>C (E510Q) in the gene coding for the α-subunit of the MTP harbouring 
LCHAD activity is found in 87%-90% of the alleles of patients.We have two conﬁrmed cases of LCHADD in our centre. Both were conﬁrmed with the kind help of colleagues abroad - Prof. Sass (Metabolic Unit, University Children`s Hospital Freiburg), Prof. Zschocke (Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg), Dr. Huijmans (Erasmus University, Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics270
Rotterdam).
Case 1 was diagnosed using biochemical methods in the Netherlands, mutation analysis was performed in the Latvian State Medical Genetics Centre (LSMGC) at the end of 2004. Case 2 was screened biochemically in the LSMGC, the diagnosis of LCHADD was conﬁrmed with biochemical analysis and mutation analysis in Germany. Mutation analysis for parents of both LCHADD patients was performed in our 
centre.During biochemical screening for organic acid analysis by gas chromatography (GC) for LCHADD patient C6-C10 dicarboxylic aciduria was found (adipic acid↑, suberic acid↑, sebacic acid↑) in our laboratory. The results of organic acid screening in urine had led us to 
a diagnosis of defects in fatty acid beta-oxidation.The molecular studies revealed that both of our patients are homozygous for the 1528 G>C mutation. PCR-RFLP was used for mutation analysis. We suggest that mutation analysis for common 1528 G>C mutation should be performed for patients with positive 
biochemical screening.
P0875. Abnormal microvilli function in autosomal dominant 
hearing loss due to mutations in the espin (ESPN) gene
F. Donaudy ;  
TIGEM-Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy.
Espins represent a family of multifunctional actin cytoskeletal regulatory proteins with the potential to differentially inﬂuence the organization, dimensions, dynamics, of the actin ﬁlament-rich, microvillus-type specializations that mediate sensory transduction in various mechanosensory and chemosensory cells ;they are associated with the parallel actin bundles of hair cell stereocilia The espin COOH-terminal peptide, which contains the 116-amino acid actin-bundling module, is necessary and sufﬁcient for the microvillar lengthening activity. This ability to increase microvillar length in transfected epithelial cells has led to the hypothesis that espins play an essential role in determining the length of hair cell stereocilia In support of this hypothesis, espin protein level is correlated with stereocilium; a recessive mutation in the espin gene has been detected in the jerker mouse and causes deafness and vestibular dysfunction and hair cell degeneration. More recently ESPN mutations have been described in two families affected by autosomal recessive hearing loss and vestibular areﬂexia. Here, we report the identiﬁcation of 4 additional ESPN mutations in patients affected by autosomal dominant hearing loss. To determine whether ESPN mutated alleles affected the biological activity of the corresponding espin proteins in vivo, we investigated their ability to target and elongate the parallel actin bundles of brush border microvilli in transfected LLC-PK1-CL4 epithelial cells. For three mutated alleles clear abnormalities in microvillar length or distribution were obtained. These ﬁndings further strengthen the causative role of the espin gene in nonsyndromic hearing loss and add new insights in our knowledge 
on ESPN activity in the hearing system.
P0876. Rare and frequent sequence variation in PKAN and the 
correlation with neurodegeneration
M. Ebhardt1, K. Hörtnagel1, E. Botz1, B. Garavaglia2, J. Seeger3, N. Nardocci2, 
M. Schülke4, I. Novacovic5, T. Kmiec6, A. Weindl7, T. Mayer7, E. Löhmussar1, J. 
Müller1, H. Prokisch1,7, T. Klopstock8, T. Meitinger1,7;  
1GSF Research Centre for Environment and Health, Neuherberg, Germany, 
2National Neurological Institute "Carlo Besta", Milan, Italy, 3German Clinic for 
Diagnostics, Wiesbaden, Germany, 4Charity, Virchow University Hospital, Ber -
lin, Germany, 5School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia and 
Montenegro, 6Pomnik-Centrum Zdrowia Dziecka, Warszawa, Poland, 7Techni -
cal University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 8Klinikum Großhadern, Ludwigs-
Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
Panthotenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration is a very rare autosomal recessive enzyme deﬁciency. The disorder is characterized by a progressive loss of neurons mainly affecting cells in the basal ganglia and the eye. Both missense and nonsense mutations have been described in the hPKAN2 gene, one of the four highly homologous kinases which are predicted to catalyse the ﬁrst step on CoA-biosynthesis. Recently, we have shown that an alternative PKAN2 transcript is coding for a mitochondrial isoform of the enzyme. In an attempt to improve the mutation detection rate and to predict the activity of the enzyme, we now determined both rare and frequent variants in 80 patients with a clinic diagnosis PKAN and in a sample 
of 800 controls.Apart from missense and nonsense mutations, we also found a small proportion (5%) of deletions. There was no one to one correlation between PKAN2 mutations and the radiological sign of an “eye of tiger” as repeatedly reported in the literature. No mutation was detected in 35% of cases which strongly argues for non-allelic heterogeneity of the disorder. Mainly the age of onset, but to a lesser extent the course of the disease is negatively correlated with the rest activity of the mitochondrial PKAN2 isoform. The PANK2 activity was predicted from 
a completation assay in E. coli.A coding polymorphism in exon 1 shows a markedly reduced activity and is found to be heterozygote (50/800) and homozygote (7/800) in the general population with potential consequences for therapeutic 
options provided by substrate supplementation.
P0877. A CYP21B/CYP21P  chimeric molecule  as a possible 
cause of nonclassical form of Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
N. S. Osinovskaya, T. E. Ivaschenko, E. L. Soboleva;  
Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a monogenic autosomal recessive disorder; deﬁciency of 21-hydroxylase (21OH) accounts for 90-95% of cases. The structural gene (
CYP21B) for 21OH is in the HLA 
class III region on the short arm of chromosome 6 (6p21.3), as also is the pseudogene (
CYP21P). This region of the genome is subject to 
unequal crossover events and gene conversions because of the high homology and tandem-repeat organization of both genes. The region between intron 2 and the 3’end of exon 3 in 
CYP21 is considered as a 
hotspot for recombination and microconversion.We previously reported that a novel 
CYP21B/21P  hybrid gene was 
found at the 6p21.3 locus. It is characterized by a junction site after exon 8 and differs from the normal 
CYP21 gene in its 3’-region, which 
corresponds to the CYP21P  pseudogene.
Using PCR we analyzed the frequency of CYP21B/21P  and 
CYP21P/21B  hybrid genes in 33 unrelated Russian CAH patients 
with nonclassical forms of CAH-21OH deﬁciency, in 19 patients with 
idiopathic androgenization and in 29 controls.The frequencies of both genes in the patients with nonclassical CAH (32% and 12% respectively) and with idiopathic androgenization (16% and 3% respectively) were signiﬁcantly higher than in the controls 
(3.5% and 0% respectively (p<0.05)).A chimeric 
CYP21B/21P  gene might be suggested as a feasible 
cause of the nonclassical form of CAH. The patients with idiopathic androgenization, possessing this gene might be considered as having 
a nonclassical form of CAH.
P0878. Molecular characterization of a t(2;6) balanced 
translocation associated with complex phenotype and leading to 
the truncation of the TCBA1 gene
R. Bocciardi1, R. Giorda2, V. Marigo3, P. Zordan1, D. Monatanaro3, S. Gimelli1, 
M. Seri4, M. Lerone1, R. Roberto1,5, G. Gimelli1;  
1G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 2IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Bosisio Parini 
(LC), Italy, 3TIGEM, Napoli, Italy, 4University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5Dept. 
of Pediatrics, University of Genoa - Genoa, Italy.
Molecular characterization of chromosome rearrangements associated with abnormal phenotypes has often provided crucial clues for the positional identiﬁcation of disease-associated genes. In several cases, these rearrangements may be associated with a variety of different phenotypes, thus establishing a genotype-phenotype correlation might be quite complex. Nevertheless, the molecular characterization of the rearrangement remains of help either in providing tools for diagnosis, or for the prognosis or ﬁnally in establishing a gene to function relationship. We have recently investigated a de novo balanced translocation t(2;6)(q24.3;q22.31) found in a patient with a complex phenotype. The major clinical ﬁnding was an epileptic encephalopathy associated with cerebral atrophy involving the periventricular white matter, spastic tetraparesis and severe psychomotor retardation. The molecular characterization of this translocation showed that the truncation of the TCBA1 gene on 6q had occurred. We found that this gene is transcribed in different splice variants and is highly speciﬁc for the central nervous system. TCBA1 does not show any similarity Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics271
with other known genes and its function is unknown. However, it 
appears to be well conserved among species and we were able to infer the sequence of a putative mouse homologue of TCBA1. This allowed us to perform a more detailed expression study in mouse thus conﬁrming its speciﬁcity for the nervous system. This is of particular interest because it suggests that TCBA1 could be correlated with the neurological phenotype of our patient and possibly mutated in genetic 
diseases with a similar neurological phenotype.
P0879. MBL2 genotypes and the risk of premature birth
W. M. Schmidt1, G. Mitterer2, W. Maurer3, O. A. Bodamer3;  
1Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria, 2VBC-GENOMICS Bioscience Research, Vienna, Austria, 3Children's 
Hospital, University Hospital Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
Allelic variants in the mannose-binding lectin 2 (MBL2) gene are associated with increased risk of infections in newborns or immune deﬁcient patients. Recently, women if carriers of the common codon 54 variant were found to have a higher risk of preterm delivery. Here, we evaluated if the genotype of the child might contribute to the risk of premature birth. By applying an on-chip PCR genotyping method, suitable for the simultaneous detection of common variants (codons 52, 54, and 57; promoter -551 and -220), we tested 204 genomic DNA samples, isolated from blood spots on Guthrie cards. The panel of polymorphisms allowed the exact assignment of genotypes to either MBL wild-type (A), MBL-deﬁcient (0), or low MBL-producing haplotypes (LXA). The MBL2 genotype of children born before the 35th week of gestation (n=102) was compared to a that of a term birth control group (n=102). The codon 52 variant was signiﬁcantly overrepresented in the group of preterm birth (prevalence of variant allele = 11% vs. 5%), whereas the codon 54 polymorphism was not (12% in both groups). The rare codon 57 polymorphism was also more common in the case group (2% vs. 1%). Furthermore, a biochemical phenotype of potentially low MBL levels assigned to the 0/0, XA/0, and XA/XA haplotypes was also signiﬁcantly more frequent in the group of premature birth compared to the controls (22.5% vs. 9.8%). Our results suggest that the MBL2 genotype of the unborn child might contribute to the risk of premature delivery.
P0880. Predominance of splicing mutations in the central 
Fanconi anemia gene FANCD2
R. Kalb1, K. Neveling1, H. Hoehn1, R. Vervenne2, E. Velleuer3, J. de Winter2, J. 
Surralles4, E. Callen4, A. Auerbach5, H. Joenje2, H. Hanenberg3, D. Schindler1;  
1University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 2Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands, 3University of Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany, 4Universi -
tat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 5Rockefeller University, NY, NY, 
United States.
Fanconi anemia (FA) is a recessive genetic instability disorder 
characterized by congenital abnormalities, bone-marrow failure, sensitivity to crosslinking agents, and cancer susceptibility. To date, nine FANC genes have been identiﬁed which interact in the recognition and repair of DNA-damage. We screened FA patients excluded from complementation groups FA-A, -C, D1, E, F, G or L for mutations in FANCD2, the central effector protein of the FA/BRCA pathway. Even though mutation analysis of FANCD2 is complicated by the presence of pseudogene regions, we identiﬁed biallelic FANCD2 mutations in 25 of 26 patients. The predominant types of mutations result in aberrant splicing causing exon skipping, exonisation of intronic sequence, activation of cryptic and creation of new 3´ splice sites. Exon 22 skipping caused by two different base substitutions in the polypyrimidine tract of the splice acceptor was prevalent in patients of German and Turkish origin. Three other patients showed skipping of exon 5 caused by insertion of an Alu repeat into the preceding intron sequence. Except for 36 missing nucleotides (1 to 36), the inserted Alu element was identical with Yb9. The mutation in the newly created donor sequence causes a change of donor strength from low to high complementarity, and thus in the recognition of a new exon. Among the 9 known FA genes, only FANCD2 shows this high prevalence of 
splicing mutations.P0881. Preliminary data suggest that mutations in the CgRP 
pathway are not involved in human sporadic cryptorchidism
D. Zuccarello1,2, E. Morini2, S. Douzgou2, A. Ferlin1, A. Pizzuti2,3, C. D. Salpi -
etro4, C. Foresta1, B. Dallapiccola2,3;  
1Department of Histology, Microbiology, and Medical Biotechnologies, Padova, 
Italy, 2Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, University La Sapi -
enza, Roma, Italy, 3IRCCS-CSS San Giovanni Rotondo, CSS-Mendel, Roma, 
Italy, 4Pediatric Immunology and Genetics Operative Unit, University Hospital, 
Messina, Italy.
In testicular descent to the scrotum, a multistep process, many anatomical and hormonal factors play a role. Cryptorchidism occurs in about 1-2% of males and may cause secondary degeneration of the testes. Animal models have shown that abnormalities, in the calcitonin generelated peptide (CgRP) activity, could be relevant in the pathogenesis of cryptorchidism. We performed a mutation screening by PCR exon ampliﬁcation, single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) and sequencing in four candidate genes, CgRPs (αCgRP, βCgRP), their receptor (CgRPR) and the receptor component protein (CGRP-RCP), in 90 selected cases of idiopathic unilateral or bilateral cryptorchidism. Mutation screening of the coding regions and intron-exon boundaries revealed some polymorphic variants but no pathogenic sequence changes. These preliminary data suggest that 
these genes are not major factors for cryptorchidism in humans.
P0882. Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene in Ashkenazi 
patients with Parkinson's disease: genotype-phenotype 
correlation analysis.
R. Gershoni-Baruch, J. Aharon-Peretz, H. Rosenbaum;  
Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel.
Background: Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene have been recently identiﬁed as contributory to parkinson's disease (PD), in Ashkenazi Jews. The objective of the present study was to evaluate whether the clinical characteristics of PD patients, carriers of a GBA mutation differ from those of non-carriers.
Methods: A clinic-based case series of 137 Ashkenazi patients with 
idiopathic Parkinson disease was screened for the six most common GBA mutations (N370S, L444P, 84GG, IVS+1, V394L, R496H) found in Ashkenazi Jews. Family history, demographic and clinical data were 
obtained using structured questionnaires.  
Results: Thirty-seven (27%, 95% conﬁdence interval 19.6-34.4%) of the Ashkenazi PD patients carried a mutated GBA allele. Altogether, 26 N370S heterozygotes, 5 N370S homozygotes, two R496H heterozygote and four 84GG heterozygotes were identiﬁed. All PD patients had an initial favorable response to dopaminergic agonists or L-Dopa. GD carriers did not differ from non-carriers with regard to age of disease onset (mean age of disease onset 60.29+13.65 years and 63.15+11.4 years, respectively), gender, family history of PD in a ﬁrst-degree relative, initial motor manifestations or initial response to levodopa or dopaminergic agonists. Patients with a family history of PD, either GBA carriers or non-carriers, had a signiﬁcant earlier age of onset (57.08+ 10.57 vs. 62.56+11.22 years, p=0.01). 
Conclusions:  Sporadic PD patients who carry a GBA mutation 
manifested typical PD and did not differ clinically from PD patients who did not carry a GBA mutation.
P0883. Usefullness of quantitative techniques using PCR to 
assess small genomic rearrangements : example of the Golli-
MBP  locus study in hypomyelinating leukodystrophies (HL)
C. Vaurs-Barriere1, M. Bonnet-Dupeyron1,2, P. Combes1, F. Gauthier-Barich -
ard1, P. Vago2, O. Boespﬂug-Tanguy1;  
1INSERM UMR384, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2Cytogenetics Laboratory, Cler -
mont-Ferrand, France.
Leukodystrophies represent a heterogeneous group of rare inherited disorders that involve primarily the white matter of the central nervous system (CNS). The proteolipoprotein (
PLP) gene is implicated in X-
linked HL. However, only 50% of HL are associated to PLP mutation 
and as both males and females present HL other gene(s) may be 
implicated in this disease.The myelin basic protein (
MBP) gene, localized on chromosome 18q, 
is included in a gene structure called Golli-MBP complex and encodes 
for the second most important class of CNS myelin proteins. As Mbp 
rearrangements have been found in spontaneous dysmyelinating Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics272
murin mutants and as patients with a 18q deletion syndrome displayed 
abnormal myelination pattern on MRI, we looked for Golli-MBP  
rearrangements in 195 HL without PLP mutation.As preliminary results obtained by FISH in a pre-screening step led us to think that duplication in a mosaic form may exist, we adapted the Multiplex Ampliﬁable Probe Hybridization (MAPH) and the Quantitative Mutiplex PCR of Short Fluorescent fragments (QMPSF) techniques to 
quantify Golli-MBP copy number in our large cohort. The 3 “suspected” 
duplications could not be conﬁrmed by both PCR-based techniques (eventhough their sensitivity to detect a mosaicism), neither by FISH using a different labeling protocol. In the 185 remaining patients no duplication nor deletion was found. This work highlights the difﬁculty to use FISH for rearrangement detection (particularly duplications) and allowed us to compare advantages and disadvantages between QMPSF and MAPH. Finally, rearrangements at the 
Golli-MBP locus 
seem not involved in the etiology of HL.
P0884. Shox2 acts upstream of Bmp4 in regulation of sinus 
venosus and venous valve development
R. J. Blaschke1, S. Kuijper2, A. Hubert1, S. Just1, K. Anastassiadis3, J. Spitzer1, 
H. Schöler4, J. Korving2, H. Feitsma2, W. Rottbauer1, L. J. Wisse5, A. C. Gitten -
berger-de Groot5, F. Meijlink2, G. Rappold1;  
1University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Hubrecht Laboratory, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands, 3TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 4Max-Planck-Institute of 
Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany, 5Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands.
The striking expression pattern of the homeodomain transcription 
factor SHOX2 in the heart of human and mouse embryos suggests its 
involvement in the early stages of heart development. We have created a null allele of the 
Shox2 gene by targeted mutation and here report 
on fatal heart malformations in Shox2 homozygous mutant embryos. 
Shox2-/- mouse embryos exhibit retarded development of the sinus 
venosus region, lack the sinoatrial valves, and develop atrial dilation and thoracic oedema. They die from heart failure between embryonic day 11 and 13. In situ hybridization revealed a dramatic down regulation 
of Bmp4 expression in the myocardial wall of the sinus venosus and in 
the proepicardial organ. These observations demonstrate an essential function of 
Shox2 upstream of Bmp4 in the development of the inﬂow 
tract region and for the ﬁrst time demonstrate an indispensable role of the sinus venosus and the venous valves in development of the inﬂow 
tract region.
P0885. Screening for mutations in the whole coding regions of 
ACVRL1 and ENG genes in a group of 88 Italian patients affected 
with Hereditary Haemorrhagic Telangiectasia.
C. Olivieri1, E. Buscarini2, C. Valacca1, A. Pilotto3, F. Pagella4, L. Semino4, S. 
Corno4, M. Grosso5, G. Pongiglione6, A. Zambelli2, E. Mira4, C. Danesino1,7;  
1Medical Genetics, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2Unità Operativa di 
Gastroenterologia, Ospedale Maggiore, Crema (CR), Italy, 3Anatomia Pato -
logica, IRCCS "S.Matteo", Pavia, Italy, 4Clinica Otorinolaringoiatrica, IRCCS 
"S.Matteo", Pavia, Italy, 5Radiology Department, Hospital of Cuneo, Cuneo, 
Italy, 6Paediatric Cardiology Department, Hospital Gaslini, Genova, Italy , 7Ge-
netica Medica, IRCCS Policlinico “S. Matteo”, Pavia, Italy.
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) (OMIM#187300) is an 
autosomal dominant vascular dysplasia leading to telangiectases of skin, mucosa (frequent complications are epistaxes and gastrointestinal bleeding), and visceral arteriovenous malformations (principally in lung, liver, and brain). Two genes have been so far identiﬁed to cause HHT if mutated: 
ENG (OMIM#131195, chromosome 9q34.1), a type III 
TGF-beta receptor; ACVRL1  (OMIM#601284, chromosome 12q11-14) 
a TGF-beta receptor Type I. Wallace and Shovlin in 2000 excluded both genes in a HHT family and demonstrated the existence of a third HHT locus. More recently, Gallione et al. (2004) described a combined syndrome of juvenile polyposis and HHT associated with mutations in 
SMAD4.The collaboration between three Italian HHT centers let us collect more than 530 DNA samples from HHT Patients and their relatives. We have more than 150 different families from all Italian regions.We have screened for mutation by SSCP and/or dHPLC the entire coding region of ACVRL1 and ENG in 88 index cases, each one from different families, who were deﬁnitely affected with HHT, according to 
the Curaçao diagnostic criteria.We found mutations in 51 subjects (57.96%); 32 of them (62,75%) were mutated in ACVRL1 gene, 19 (37,25%) in ENG. We found 26 different mutations in ACVRL1 and 17 in ENG.7/32 subject are carriers of mutations in ACVRL1 never reported by other groups. The same observation can be made for 15/19 ENG 
mutated patients.We compared the distribution of mutations along the two genes with 
similar European reports.
P0886. Non Muscle Myosin Heavy Chain II A and II B interact and 
co-localize in living cells: relevance for MYH9-related diseases
M. Marini1, M. Bruschi1, A. Pecci2, R. Romagnoli3, L. Musante1, G. Candiano1, 
G. Ghiggeri1, C. Balduini2, M. Seri4, R. Ravazzolo1;  
1G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 2University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3University 
of Siena, Siena, Italy, 4University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
Myosins of class II constitute part of a superfamily of several classes of proteins expressed in almost all eukaryotic cell types. For class II nonmuscle myosin heavy chains (NMMHCs), three genes, MYH9, MYH10 and MYH14, encoding for NMMHC-A, -B, and -C isoforms, are respectively located on chromosomes 22q12.3, 17p13.3, 19q13.3. Functional studies and knock-out mice on the A and B isoforms, reported differences in their biological properties, suggesting that they might play different biological roles.Heterozygous mutations of MYH9 cause a complex disorder named MYH9-related disease, characterized by a combination of different symptoms: platelet macrocytosis, thrombocytopenia and leukocyte inclusions, variously associated with sensorineural hearing loss, cataracts and glomerulonephritis. No genotype-phenotype correlation 
is reported.In accordance with the clinical picture, NMMHC-A is expressed in platelets, leukocytes, kidney, and cochlea.A still unresolved problem in MYH9-relate desease, is its remarkable symptomatic variability. One hypothesis is that it derives from the joint effect of MYH9 mutations and additional factors, such as polymorphic 
variants of proteins interacting with NMMHC-A.These results describe the interaction between NMMHC-A and NMMHC-B, discovered by a yeast two hybrid screening and conﬁrmed 
by co-immunoprecipitation experiments.Analysis by confocal microscopy in different cell types showed complete matching of NMMHC-A and NMMHC-B signals in cultured renal podocytes and native bone marrow erythroblasts, whereas partial matching was observed in skin ﬁbroblasts and cultured tubular 
epithelial cells.This study provides direct evidences that NMMHC-A and -B interact in vivo by their C-terminal tail region suggesting functional relevance 
both in physiological and pathological conditions.
P0887. New mutations and a grey zone of CAG repeats in 
Huntington disease.
A. Sulek1, W. Krysa1, D. Hoffman-Zacharska1,2, E. Zdzienicka1, J. Zaremba1;  
1Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Mother and 
Child, Warsaw, Poland.
Huntington disease (HD) is one of the group of the neurodegenerative disorders caused by CAG repeats expansion. The main clinical features of this disease are involuntary movements, speech and gait disturbances as well as depression, cognitive decline and dementia. The dynamic mutations may lead to increasing of the CAG repeats number form one generation to another, simultaneously worsening the progression of the disease and decreasing the age of onset. The frequency of HD is estimated for caucasian population for 1: 10.000. The occurrence of new mutation probably depends on the upper non-pathological range of the CAG repeats beacuse it is known that large normal alleles are prone to expansions. Moreover, the range of 36-39 CAG repeats seems to involve incomplete penetrance of the mutated 
gene.The aim of our study was to ﬁnd families with new mutations in 
IT15 
gene. First, we analysed the polymorphic CAG tract within IT15 
gene and established the normal range for Polish control group (200 chromosomes): 9 to 32 CAG. Then we examined 584 patients of 520 pedigrees with conﬁrmed HD. Here we present two families with conﬁrmed presence of the new mutation and 12 families in whom the 
grey zone of 36-39 CAG repeats was documented.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics273
P0888. Identiﬁcation of two mutations in CLC-1 gene in patients 
with hereditary myotonia
J. Kuropatkina1, V. Fedotov2, S. Tverskaya1, A. Polyakov1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Diag-
nostic Centre, Voronezh, Russian Federation.
Non-dystrophic myotonia congenita is an inherited disorder of the 
skeletal muscle characterized by a delayed muscle relaxation after contraction. Myotonia congenita may be inherited in an autosomal dominant (Thomsen disease) or recessive (Becker disease) manner. The recessive form of myotonia is more frequent and more severe than the dominant one. The both forms of myotonia congenita are caused by mutations in the gene of a skeletal muscle chloride channel (CLC-1) which is located on chromosome 7q35. CLC-1 is important for the normal repolarization of muscular cells membrane. The loss of its function result to the plasma membrane is hyperexcitable and leads to the typical `myotonic runs' which are seen in electromyograms of patients with myotonia. The study group consisted of 37 families which were mainly from Voronegsky region. In this account 30 probands had clinical diagnosis of Tomsen disease and 7 ones were with Becker disease. We have investigated coding sequencing with exon-intron junction fragments of the CLC-1 gene by PCR-SSCP analyses with follow sequencing of the fragments with alteration of the electroforetic motility. To now we have revieled heterozygous Thr268Met mutation from the proband with Tomsen myotonia which is published in CLC-1 data based. In armenian family with Becker myotonia we have detected novel mutation Pro342Ser in homozygous. Probably this mutation has armenian origin. The investigation is in process now.
P0889. The importance of non - invasive genetic analysis in the 
initial diagnostics of Alport syndrome
G. Berginc1, M. Šlajpah1, A. Meglič2, P. Furlan3, D. Glavač1;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology, Medical Faculty, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Pediatric Nephrology Department, Children's Hospital, 
University Medical Center, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Department of Nephrology, 
General Hospital Novo mesto, Novo mesto, Slovenia.
Alport syndrome is a hereditary disease, characterized by progressive 
hematuric nephritis with structural changes of glomerular basement membrane, frequently associated with sensorineural hearing loss. Major changes in glomerular basement mebrane are associated with mutations in 
Col4a5  which encodes for α5 collagen chain. The disease 
was also associated with Col4a3  and Col4a4 . Alport syndome has 
therefore been subdivided into different types: X-linked Col4a5  (~85% 
cases) and autosomal recessive Col4a3  or Col4a4  disease (~15%). 
X-linked form is always symptomatic and more severe in affected males (homozygotes). In autosomal recessive form only homozygotes 
(males, females) develop a progressive disease.DNA was extracted from peripheral blood of ﬁve children aged 10 months to four years. 
Col4a3 , Col4a4  and Col4a5  were ampliﬁed in 
PCR and analyzed using single stranded comformation analysis and sequenced on ABI PRISM 310 Genetic Analayzer. Clinical data were obtained from clinitian who performed precise urine, hearing and 
ocular examination.Three novel mutations, G198E, G3189D, and G669R, were detected 
in Col4a5 . We assume their pathogenic effect due to glycine key 
structural role in collagen protein.In our study we have demonstrated that non-invasive genetic method is a powerful tool in early and precise diagnosis of the disease, specially in young patients. Diagnosis of Alport syndrome in children is not appearent, because the clinical presentation may not always meet proposed strict diagnostic criteria. Screening of three important disease genes (
Col4a3 , Col4a4 , Col4a5 ) in association with clinical 
data provide sufﬁcient information for correct diagnosis, therefore 
generally accepted invasive approaches can be avoided.
P0890. Functional characterization of polymorphic variants in 
the Osteopontin promoter and their association with diabetic 
nephropathy
F. Giacopelli1, R. Marciano1, M. Gandolfo2, G. Garibotto2, R. Ravazzolo1;  
1G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 2University of Genova, Genova, Italy.
Osteopontin (OPN) displays several functions in different physiological and pathological processes: bone remodeling, cell-mediated immunity, tissue remodeling during inﬂammatory processes, tumor cell metastasis. Overexpression of OPN is the main ﬁnding in affected 
tissues.Our previous work to understand molecular mechanisms underlying regulation of transcription of human OPN gene lead us to identify and evaluate common variants with functional effect on transcription in the promoter region. We are now investigating the effect of TGFb, an important mediator of inﬂammatory and immune processes on the OPN promoter and its different haplotype combinations. We describe here an inhibitory effect of TGFb on the OPN promoter: co-transfection experiments showed that TGFb downregulation was mediated by its intracellular mediator SMAD3; no differential response on constructs differing for the variant at -66 in the SP1 site was observed, while this 
needs to be evaluated for the other sites.Since both OPN and TGFb are involved in diabetic nephropathy, we carried out an association study in a group of type 2 diabetic patients (112), with and without nephropathy, in which promoter variants, including one at -1747 in a putative SMAD3 binding site, were evaluated for allele frequency in the two diabetic subgroups. We found a signiﬁcantly different allele frequency of the -1747 variant in diabetic 
patients with nephropathy compared to non nephropathic (P=0. 015).These results suggest that OPN promoter polymorphisms affect the gene transcription rate and one of them, located in a target site for the TGFb signaling pathway, is associated with susceptibility to diabetic nephropathy.
P0891. The correlation between insertion in the promoter region 
of the UGT1 gene and the intolerance of some xenobiotics.
A. Polyakov1, J. Kuropatkina1, A. Karabanov2, I. Shulyatiev3, S. Tverskaya1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Re-
search Centre for Neurology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Research Centre 
for Gastroenterology, Moscow, Russian Federation.
The UGT1 gene, which is located on chromosome 2q37, encodes 
uridine diphosphate glycosyl transferase 1. This enzyme catalyzes the transformation indirect to direct bilirubin in hepatocytes by conjugation with glycuronic acid. Mutations in the 
UGT1 gene result in Gilbert 
syndrome which is characterized by low activity of the enzyme. In patients with Gilbert syndrome use of some drugs leads to an increase of the indirect bilirubin level. The most frequent genetic defect in Gilbert syndrome is a dinucleotide insertion in a TA repeat A(TA)
6TAA in the 
promoter region of the UGT1 gene, in homozygous or heterozygous 
state. In our work we have investigated the correlation between intolerance to medicine for the treatment of Parkinson disease and the presence of the defect in the promoter region of the 
UGT1 gene. We 
have studied 17 patients with extrapyramidal abnormalities who had raised levels of the indirect bilirubin fraction and suffered from iatrogenic hepatitis. We found out that 14 of the 17 patients had the A(TA)
7TAA 
insertion. Eight patients were homozygous and 6 were heterozygous. The presence of 7 TA repeats in the promoter region of the 
UGT1  
gene leads to a decrease of the enzyme’s activity and this result in 
disturbance of metabolism of xenobiotics with drug intolerance
P0892. Prevalence of SLC22A4  and RUNX  susceptibility SNPs in 
rheumatoid arthritis patients
G. C. Talián1, B. Kovács1, V. Cserép1, J. Bene1, K. Komlósi1, V. Havasi1, L. 
Czirják2, B. Melegh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, 
Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, University of 
Pécs, Pécs, Hungary.
Rheumatoid arthritis is a polygenic inﬂammatory desease of the joints. A recent study (Tokuhiro et al, Nature Genetics 2003;35:341) suggested involvement of two SNPs as susceptibility factors for the disease: one of them is an intronic polymorphism, called SLC2F2 (C6,607T change in the ﬁrst intron of the gene) in the gene coding for the OCTN1 organic cation transporter, the low activity carnitine transporter. This nucleotide position is located within a recognition site for the transcription factor RUNX. The second polymorphism is in the 
RUNX gene (G24658C 
transversion in the 6th intron). With speciﬁc PCR/RFLP methods we investigated the distribution of these two SNPs in Hungarian patients with rheumatoid arthritis (n=209) and in healthy controls (n=217); in addition we determined the plasma carnitine ester proﬁles by ESI tandem mass spectrometry in the same groups. The allele frequencies of the SNPs did not differ from each other comparing the rheumatoid Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics274
arthritis vs. the control groups. The allele frequencies of the Japanese 
population, as referenced in the original article, signiﬁcantly differed from that found in the Hungarian subjects. The carnitine ester proﬁles did not exihibit genotype dependent changes, either in the patients with arthritis or in the control persons. These result strongly suggest that the above SNPs do not mean real susceptibility factors for the 
rheumatoid arthritis in the Hungarian population.
P0893. Alteration of DNA binding, dimerisation and nuclear 
translocation of SHOX homeodomain mutations identiﬁed in idiopathic short stature and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis
K. U. Schneider1, A. Marchini1, N. Sabherwal1, R. Röth1, B. Niesler1, T. Mart -
tila1, R. J. Blaschke1, M. Lawson2, M. Dumic3, G. Rappold1;  
1University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Childrens Hospital of Eastern 
Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 3University Hospital Zagreb-Rebro, Zagreb, 
Croatia.
Haploinsufﬁciency of the short stature homeobox gene SHOX has 
been found in patients with idiopathic short stature and Leri-Weill 
dyschondrosteosis. In addition to complete gene deletions and nonsense mutations, several missense mutations have been identiﬁed in both patient groups leading to amino acid substitutions in the SHOX protein. The majority of missense mutations were found to accumulate in the region encoding the highly conserved homeodomain of the paired-like type. In this report, we investigated nine different amino acid exchanges in the homeodomain of SHOX patients with idiopathic short stature and Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis. We were able show that these mutations cause an alteration of the biological function of SHOX by loss of DNA binding, reduced dimerisation ability and/or impaired nuclear translocation. Additionally, one of the mutations (p.R153L) is defective in transcriptional activation even though it is still able to bind to DNA, dimerise and translocate to the nucleus. Thus, we demonstrate that single missense mutations in the homeodomain fundamentally impair SHOX key functions, thereby leading to the phenotype observed in patients with Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and 
idiopathic short stature.
P0894. Acid CID Alpha Glucosidase Gene: Identiﬁcation and 
functional characterization of 12 novel alleles causing the 
juvenile-adult form of glicogen storage disease type II
A. L. E. Montalvo1, M. Filocamo2, A. Dardis1, M. Stroppiano2, M. Donna -
rumma2, C. Danesino3, L. Merlini4, G. Parenti5, R. Addobbati1, B. Bembi1, M. G. 
Pittis1;  
1Unità di Malattie Metaboliche,IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Laboratorio 
Diagnosi Pre - Postnatale Malattie Metaboliche IRCCS,G. Gaslini, Genova, 
Italy, 3Università degli Studi di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 4Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 
Bologna, Italy, 5Università Federico II, Napoli, Italy.
Glycogen Storage Disease type II (GSDII) is an autosomal recessive 
inherited disorder in which deﬁciency of acid alpha glucosidase (GAA) results in impaired glycogen degradation that acuumulates within 
lysosomes.Patients have been traditionally classiﬁed, according to disease onset, as infantile, juvenile and adult form. Clinical as well as biochemical heterogeneity have been described in GSDII: the infantile form is the most severe subtype characterized by absent o nearly absent enzymatic activity, progressive muscle weakness and severe cardiac involvement. Juvenile GSDII is associated whith reduced enzymatic activity and glycogen storage is generally limitated to skeletal muscle. The adult form has clinical signs similar to the juvenile form but residual enzyme activity is higher and miopathy has a slower progression, 
generally without cardiac involvement.The GAA gene localizes to human chromosome 17q23; the enzyme is synthesized as an inactive precursor of 110 kDa which is transported to the lysosomal compartment where it is processed into the fully active forms of 76 and 70 kDa. More than 120 mutations in the GAA gene have been described up to date (http://www.eur.nl/FGG/CH1/
pompe/).We analyzed the GAA gene in 27 unrelated patients affected of juvenile-adult GSDII. Twelve novel mutant alleles were identiﬁed due to 13 novel mutations, two being in-
cis, on a complex allele. As 
expected, the IVS1 (-13 T/G) was the most frequent mutation among 
this group.Functional characterization of the missense mutations was performed using a human GAA deﬁcient cell line. All mutant proteins remained as the 110kD precursor expressing no enzyme activity.
P0895. Clinical features of infertile men with androgen receptor 
mutations and identiﬁcation of seven novel mutations
A. Ferlin , C. Vinanzi, D. Zuccarello, F. Ganz, P. Dabrilli, L. Bartoloni, A. Garolla, 
C. Foresta;  
University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
Mutations in the androgen receptor (AR) gene cause a variety 
of defects related to androgen insensitivity with the less severe phenotype represented by male infertility. However, few studies have analysed the prevalence of AR gene mutations in male infertility and a genotype-phenotype relation is still unclear. We screened for AR gene mutation by sequencing 1517 oligozoospermic men. Of them, 492 were azoospermic, 849 severely oligozoospermic (sperm count < 5 mil/mL), and 176 moderately oligozoospermic (5-10 mil/mL). Clinical evaluation of patients with AR gene mutations included determination of FSH, LH, T and oestradiol, and the androgen sensitivity index (ASI) was calculated. These data were compared to 425 of the 1517 subjects without AR gene mutations and with 310 normozoospermic controls. We found 20 mutations leading to aminoacid changes in 26 of 1517 patients (1.7%), with a similar prevalence in azoospermia, severe oligozoospermia, and moderate oligozoospermia. Of the 20 mutations, 7 represent novel mutations. With respect to idiopathic patients, men with AR gene mutations have lower sperm count 
(2.2+2.8 vs 3.9 +2.6 mil/mL, P<0.01), lower ejaculate volume (2.3 +1.2 
vs 3.2 +1.5 mL, P<0.01), higher T levels (23.8 +7.8 vs 15.4 +4.8 nmol/
L, P<0.001), higher oestradiol levels (80.3 +27.8 vs 66.1 +29.0 pmol/
L, P<0.05), and higher ASI (204.5 +273.0 vs 96.2 +50.1 IU x nmol/L2, 
P<0.001). However individual hormonal data cannot distinguish men with and without AR gene mutations. Also clinical manifestations of AR mutations are not unique: two men had cryptorchidism, one had cryptorchidism and hypospadias, and one had gynecomastia, whereas 
22 men had only spermatogenic impairment.
P0896. Screening for mutations in the GTPase mitofusin 2 that 
cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type 2A
O. Schagina , H. Dadali, A. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy (CMT) comprises a genetically 
heterogeneous group of hereditary neuromuscular diseases with a similar clinical picture. Now some disease-causing genes have been identiﬁed for the axonal variant of autosomal dominant CMT or 
CMT2.Recently the 
MFN2 gene has been identiﬁed as the cause of Charcot-
Marie-Tooth neuropathy 2A. Fibers of mitofusins, which reside at the outer mitochondrial membrane, determine the mitochondrial network architecture by fusion of mitochondria. MFN2 is involved in apoptosis by colocalization with the proapoptotic protein Bax, and it is essential 
for embryonic development.In 57 families with CMT2 and a classic clinical phenotype we undertook mutation screening by SSCP (single-strand conformation polymorphism); variants were characterized by bidirectional sequencing 
of the coding region of the MFN2  gene.
In two families we found two new mutations Arg94Trp and Val705Ile in exons 4 and 18. In four families we found the previously described mutation Arg94Gln in the fourth exon. Results of our research conﬁrm that mutations in the MFN2 gene are the cause of CMT2A. The majority of the mutations were in exon four, related to the GTPase domain.This work was support in part by President's RF grant MD-
2456.2004.4
P0897. Molecular consequences of MTM1  mutations in X-linked 
myotubular myopathy muscle
D. Sanoudou1,2, A. Buj-Bello3, C. R. Pierson2, K. T. Tomczak2, T. I. Burleson2, J. 
Laporte3, J. Mandel3, A. H. Beggs2;  
1Foundation of Biomedical Research, Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, 
2Genomics Program, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
United States, 3Institut de Genetique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, 
Illkirch Cedex, France.
X-linked myotubular myopathy (XLMTM), caused by MTM1 mutations, 
is one of the more severe congenital myopathies. Clinically, patients Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics275
present at birth with generalized weakness and hypotonia leading 
to respiratory distress, major feeding difﬁculties, and often death in infancy or early childhood. Pathologically, myoﬁbers are hypotrophied and a high proportion has central nuclei. 
MTM1 codes for a lipid 
phosphatase called myotubularin, but the molecular impact of its loss 
in XLMTM pathogenesis remains unknown.Using Affymetrix whole genome arrays, skeletal muscle samples from 7 XLMTM patients (with 
MTM1 mutations) versus 7 age-matched 
unaffected individuals, and 5 Mtm1 knockout (KO) mice versus 5 wild 
type mice were analyzed. Data were processed by a combination of bioinformatic approaches including Signiﬁcance Analysis of Microarrays (thresholds: fold
>2 and <5% false discovery rate) and geometric fold 
change analysis.The molecular consequences of 
MTM1 mutations were mostly 
consistent across both species and involved over-expression of genes related to cell surface receptor linked- and intracellular- signalling, cell proliferation, muscle development, transcription and phosphate metabolism. Collectively, these data support alterations in extracellular signalling potentially affecting muscle function, a highly active transcriptional response and ongoing muscle regeneration. The numerous alterations observed at the protein synthesis, modiﬁcation and more importantly at the vesicle transport level will enable a better characterization of the MTM1 role in intracellular events such as endosome trafﬁcking.These data shed light on the molecular pathways involved in XLMTM pathogenesis and further validate the 
Mtm1-KO mouse as a disease 
model for future molecular and therapeutic target studies.
P0898. Mitochondrial disease in infant: clinical course and 
differential diagnostics. Case report.
K. Joost1, H. Põder1, R. Zordania1, K. Korjus1, A. Piirsoo2, T. Laht3, K. Õunap4;  
1Tallinn Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia, 
3Tallinn Technical University, Tallinn, Estonia, 4Tartu University Children`s Clinic, 
Tartu, Estonia.
Girl at the age of 1 month was hospitalized due to the respiratory distress, failure to thrive and muscular hypotonia. After the birth persistant ketotic hypoglycaemia was reported during 1st week of life. Clinically she presented: respiratory distress, severe hypotonia, slightly dysmorphic phenotype with myopathic face. Biochemical analyses revealed progressive lactic acidosis (up to 9,1 mmol/l). In differential diagnoses several metabolic and genetic conditions were considered: galactosaemia, fatty acid oxidation defects, spinal muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy, Prader-Willi syndrome, congenital hypopituitarism. Due to the clinical problems and progressive lactic acidosis mitochondrial myopathy was suspected and the diagnoses was conﬁrmed by muscle biopsy.Paper discusses differential diagnostic difﬁculties and the effect of supportive treatment to the course of mitochondrial mypopathy in 
infant.
P0899. Mucopolysaccharidoses in Russia
E. Y. Voskoboeva ;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation.
The mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) in Russian population are on the decrease in the next order: MPSII -> MPSI -> MPSIII ->MPSVI ->MPSIV-> MPSVII. The DNA-diagnosis for MPSII (the iduronate-2-sulfatase gene), MPSI (the α-L-iduronidase gene) and MPSIIIA (the heparan-N-sulfatase gene) was developed. 62 patients with MPSII were investigated. Only 7% of mutant alleles detected were major structural alterations, other mutations were point mutations, small deletions and splice mutations. The known hot-spot mutations in IDS gene in codon 88, codon 274, codon 468 account for 7%, 7% and 10,5%, respectively. Twenty mutations found were novel ones. 55 patients with MPSI were analyzed for mutant alleles. The most frequent mutation in Russian population is Q70X. The Q70X accounts for 52,7 %, that is similar with results in Scandinavian population (62%). Both the W402X mutation and the Q380R mutation account for 4,6 %. Nine mutations were new ones. 13 patients with Sanﬁlippo
 type IIIA were investigated. The 
genotypes of six patients were fully determined. Two patients were homozygotes for C74R and two were genetic compounds C74R/K245H. One patient was homozygote for del1135G. Three mutations were found in sixth MPSIIIA patient: S73I, P230L and T139I. The novel mutations S73I and P230L were inherited from the father. The proving their functional consequence on heparan-N-sulfatase activity must be studied. The polymorphisms R456H, ins5 c->t+17 and G198G in the heparan-N-sulfatase gene were also detected. Successful prenatal diagnostics for different types of MPS and carrier detection for MPSII 
was performed using DNA-analysis results.
P0900. MLPA technology: low cost, high throughput substitute 
for multiFISH technology in routine screening of telomeric 
rearrangements
S. Drunat, O. Dupuy, A. Aboura, C. Baumann, J. Elion, A. Verloes;  
AP-HP, Paris, France.
Cryptic telomeric rearrangements (CTR) are found in 5 % of patients with idiopathic mental retardation (MR) or Multiple Congenital Anomalies/MR syndromes, and apparently normal karyotype. Despite its clinical relevance, multiFISH screening remains difﬁcult to apply widely, because kits are expensive and methodology extremely time consuming. Clinical preselection criteria as De Vries scale are 
unsatisfying.Multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA) is a highly sensitive and rapid alternative to multiFISH. It can be used on any DNA source (blood, amniocytes, CVS, parafﬁn-embedded tissue
…) 
We used 2 commercial sets of probes, the SALSA P019 combined to P020 and the P036 human telomere MLPA kits (MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands) to assay retrospectively patients with known dup/del syndromes, and to test a group of more than 100 systematically collected patients referred for evaluation of MR or autism. In parallel, we performed multiFISH “à-la-carte” in those with evocative phenotype or familial history, in order to evaluate how often a CTR would have been missed using a non systematic, clinically driven practice. In all cases with abnormal/dubious MLPA, conﬁrmatory FISHing was performed. Preliminary results are extremely convincing. Detailed results of this 
ongoing study will be presented.Conclusion: subtelomeric MLPA screening can be done without preselection, and appears to be cost-effective, time saving, and clinically rewarding, as some of the positive patients would not have been selected on clinical grounds for multiFISH. Moreover, the drastic reduction in FISH-based screening demand allows buzy diagnostic laboratories to re-affect time to reﬁning the cytogenetics/molecular deﬁnition of “positive” cases.
P0901. Molecular genetic analysis of X-linked severe combined 
immunodeﬁciency in two Russian families
I. Sermyagina1, I. Kondratenko2, S. Tverskaya1, A. Polyakov1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian 
Children Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation.
X-linked severe combined immunodeﬁciency (X-SCID) is a rare, 
life-threatening immune disorder, caused by mutations in the gene encoding the gamma subunit of the interleukin-2 receptor (IL2RG). The gamma-c chain is shared by 5 interleukin receptor complexes: IL2, IL4, IL7, IL9, and IL15. This disease characterized by a block in early T-,B-,NK-cell differentiation, agammaglobulinemia, lymphocytopenia, thymus atrophy, vulnerability to different infections and early death.IL2RG gene mapped to Xq13.1 contains 8 exons and 7 introns and 
spans approximately 4.2 kb.We have found two different IL2RG gene mutations in the two patients with X-linked combined immunodeﬁciency. In the ﬁrst case a novel 9-nucleotide insertion in 6 exon (823nt ins9bp) was detected by the direct sequencing analysis and PCR-RFLP. In the second case we found a unique splice cite mutation (IVS5 as-2nt a->g) in 5 intron of IL2RG gene. Both patient's mothers were heterozygous for found mutations. The prenatal diagnosis of X-SCID and determination of heterozygous carrier for proband's maternal aunt were carried out for the ﬁrst family. We have worked out the direct mutation analysis for the IL2RG gene and have identiﬁed two speciﬁc mutations in the families with X-SCIDMolecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics276
P0902. Functional consequences of NSDHL mutations in CHILD 
syndrome
L. Leveleki1, P. Rölle1, J. Riemann1, A. König2, D. Bornholdt1, M. Debus1, R. 
Happle2, K. Grzeschik1;  
1Philipps-Universität Marburg, Zentrum für Humangenetik, Germany, 2Philipps-
Universität Marburg, Klinik für Dermatologie und Allergologie, Germany.
Mutations in the gene NSDHL (NAD(P)H steroid dehydrogenase-like 
protein) encoding a 3ß-hydroxy-steroid dehydrogenase functioning in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway are associated with CHILD syndrome (Congenital Hemidysplasia with Ichthyosiform Nevus and Limb Defects), an X-linked dominant, male-lethal trait characterized by an inﬂammatory nevus that usually shows striking lateralization with strict midline demarcation as well as ipsilateral hypoplasia of the body.The phenotype appears to be caused by loss of function because it can be associated with nonsense- and missense mutations as well as with deletions eliminating several exons or the complete gene. Highly conserved amino acids of NSDHL located outside the predicted domains that are essential for the enzymatic activity (co-factor binding site, catalytically active site, transmembrane helix) may pinpoint 
positions of potential functional importance.We generated by mutagenesis human NSDHL transgenes reﬂecting missense-mutations observed in CHILD patients or having altered other potentially functionally important sites. GFP-NSDHL fusion protein constructs with wild type or mutated NSDHL were transiently expressed in different cell lines. By associating the localization of GFP-NSDHL with cellular compartments (identiﬁed by immunohistochemistry) we demonstrate that the wild type protein primarily localises to the surface of lipid storage droplets (LDs) and to the ER. In contrast, expression of most of the mutant NSDHL variants results in altered subcellular 
organisation and disturbed localization of the protein.Complementation analysis by transfer of mutated human NSDHL into the erg26ts yeast strain, which is mutated in the orthologous gene, ERG26, suggests functional differences between mutants, which are not reﬂected in the human phenotype.
P0903. Investigation for intragenic rearrangements of the PLP1  
gene in patients with dysmyelinating leukodystrophies using 
MAPH
P. Combes ;  
INSERM U384, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
PLP1 is known to be mutated in the X-linked myelination disorders, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease (PMD) and Spastic Paraplegia type 2 (SPG2). The most common 
PLP1 mutation in PMD is a large 
duplication including the whole gene, whereas large deletions and punctual mutations can be responsible for PMD or SPG2 phenotypes.Semi quantitative PCR (only on 1 or 2 exons) is largely used to quantify 
PLP1 gene copy number; looking only for large rearrangements. In the aim to search for small intragenic 
PLP1 rearrangements in patients 
presenting classical forms of PMD or SPG and not diagnosed as 
PLP1 mutated, we developed the MAPH (Multiplex Ampliﬁable Probe Hybridization) technique using 13 
PLP1 probes (2 promoter, 4 intronic 
and 7 exonic regions probes). This technique relies on the quantitative recovery and ampliﬁcation of nucleic probes after hybridization to 
immobilized DNA.In a ﬁrst approach, DNAs from 66 patients and 22 carrier mothers already diagnosed with duplications have been used to validate the technique and have shown that all duplications encompass the entire 
PLP1  gene.
Then, a total of 250 patients presenting with dysmyelinating leukodystrophies (including PMD or SPG like phenotypes) were screened. Whereas no duplications could be detected, two partial deletions of 
PLP1 were identiﬁed. One deletion involves the 5’ part 
of the gene (promoter to part of intron 1); the other one is a 3’ gene 
deletion (exon 6 to 7).MAPH is a powerful and cost effective tool to screen cohorts of patients 
for small intragenic or large genomic rearrangements.P0904. Polyadenylation signal site mutation in a boy with X-
linked Severe Combined Immunodeﬁciency
V. L. Aldridge1, K. C. Gilmour1, B. Gaspar1, A. Coffey2, G. Norbury1;  
1Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2Genome Research 
Limited, Hinxton, United Kingdom.
The X-linked recessive form of Severe Combined Immunodeﬁciency 
(X-SCID) is characterised by a complete absence of both humoral and cell-mediated immunity and classically presents with no T cells or natural-killer (NK) cells. X-SCID is caused by defects in the common gamma chain of the interleukin -2,-4,-7,-9 and -15 receptors (IL2RG or IL2Rγc). The gene consists of eight coding exons and mutations are generally family speciﬁc.We report on a 4 month old boy who presented with a clinical XSCID phenotype and abnormal gamma chain protein expression. However, following a sequencing screen of the eight exons and exon/intron boundaries no disease-causing mutation was identiﬁed. X-inactivation analysis in the proband’s mother showed she was highly likely to be a carrier of an IL2RG gene defect. Linkage analysis using X-inactivation markers showed the proband had inherited the X-chromosome found to be inactive (methylated) in his mother’s T cells. These factors increase the likelihood that an unidentiﬁed mutation affecting the IL2RG gene was responsible for the clinical phenotype. PCR analysis showed the genomic sequence was uninterrupted and that genomic rearrangement was unlikely. Promoter and intronic sequence analysis at Genome Research Limited, Hinxton, revealed a mutation in the polyadenylation signal site of the IL2RG gene. This case report has identiﬁed the limitations of exon screening in molecular diagnostics and has highlighted a mutation affecting primary RNA transcript processing 
which leads to a clinical phenotype.
P0905. Association of partial AZFc region deletions with 
spermatogenic impairment and male infertility
B. Arredi, A. Ferlin, A. Tessari, E. Salata, R. Selice, C. Foresta;  
Department of Histology, Microbiology, and Medical Biotechnologies, Padova, 
Italy.
Complete deletions of AZFc in distal Yq represent the most frequent 
molecular genetic cause of severe male infertility. They are caused by intrachromosomal homologous recombination between amplicons -large, nearly identical repeats- and are found in 5-10% of azoospermia and severe oligozoospermia. Homologous recombination may also generate different deletions of part of AZFc, but their contribution to spermatogenic impairment has not been conﬁrmed. We analysed the prevalence and characteristics of different partial AZFc deletions and their association with spermatogenic failure. We studied 337 infertile men and 263 normozoospermic fertile men, by AZFc-speciﬁc STSs (allowing to detect partial deletions within AZFc) and DAZ-speciﬁc single-nucleotide variants (allowing to detect the DAZ gene copy number). We identiﬁed 18 cases of partial AZFc deletions in the infertile group (5.3%) and one case in the control group (0.4%). Seventeen deletions had the “gr/gr” pattern, one the “b2/b3” pattern, and one represented a novel deletion with breakpoints in b3 and b4 amplicons. Partial AZFc deletions were associated with different spermatogenic phenotype ranging from complete azoospermia to only moderate oligozoospermia. Analysis of DAZ gene copy suggested that the contribution of the different deletions to male infertility varies: only partial AZFc deletions removing DAZ1/DAZ2 seem to represent risk factor for male infertility, whereas deletions removing DAZ3/DAZ4 may have no or little effect on fertility. Although men with partial AZFc deletion may naturally conceive, in vitro fertilising techniques may transmit the mutation on to the male children and the reintroduction of 
these partial deletions into the population is of concern.
P0906. Screening for two susceptibility-associated 
polymorphisms of OCTN carnitine transporter in Crohn-desease 
patients
V. Havasi1, J. Bene1, K. Komlósi1, B. Gasztonyi2, G. C. Talián1, V. Cserép1, B. 
Kovács1, G. Mózsik2, B. Melegh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, 
Pécs, Hungary, 21st Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pécs, Pécs, 
Hungary.
Crohn-desease is a chronic inﬂammatory illness of the gastrointestinal tract. Previous data showed that, in addition to the well-known NOD Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics277
mutations, polymorphisms of the 5q31 chromosome region can be in 
connection with an elevated risk for the desease (Rioux et al., Nat Genet 2003;29:223). Recent studies indicated that allelic variants C1672T in the 9. exon of 
SLC22A4  gene and G-207C in the promoter of the 
SLC22A5  gene are susceptibility factors for Crohn-desease (Peltekova 
et al., Nat Genet 2004;36:471). The two rare alleles show a high linkage disequilibrium and make up a haplotype (TC) which was found to be signiﬁcantly more frequent in patients than in the healthy controls. With direct sequencing of these two polymorphisms we investigated the prevalence of the haplotypes in a group of patients with Crohn-desease. Furthermore, we analyzed the carnitine-ester proﬁle in the serum samples of these persons with ESI tandem mass spectrometry. Comparing the results of 53 patients and 50 healthy controls we found that the allele frequencies of the both polymorphisms signiﬁcantly differ from those described in the above referenced original article and it was the case also for the linkage data. In the carnitine-ester proﬁle of patients whose small intestine was affected a shift was detectable in the serum level of C2, C4, C5, C5:1 and C6 acil-carnitines when compared to controls. These results indicate that the carnitine system can be involved in the Crohn-desease primarily or secondarily.
P0907. Prevalent mutations in the SURF1 gene of patients with 
Leigh Syndrome of Russian origin.
E. Y. Zakharova1, E. Y. Voskoboeva1, P. G. Barsukova1, E. S. Il'ina2, S. My -
hailova2, I. V. Fedonuk2;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
2Russian Child Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Leigh syndrome (LS) is one of the most frequent forms of mitochondrial diseases in infancy and childhood. Typical presentations of LS are in the ﬁrst year of life, with failure to thrive, psychomotor regression, ataxia, signs of brainstem dysfunction, and peripheral neuropathy. Etiologies of LS include both mitochondrial and nuclear DNA defects. Mutations in SURF1 have been shown to be an important cause of LS with cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deﬁciency. The human SURF1 gene encodes a protein localized in the inner mitochondrial membrane and is thought to be involved in the biogenesis of the cytochrome c oxidase complex. We found 4 different mutations in SURF1 gene in 10 of our patients with LS. All of mutations have already been described: 312_321del311_312insAT, InsT868, DelCT845, insCTGC588. Spectrum of mutations in this gene is slightly different from other European patients in which mutation 312_321del311_312insAT is more common.In Russian patients with LS the most frequent mutation is 845delCT (accounts for 65% of mutant alleles) that is close to the frequency of 
this mutation found in Polish patients (66%).We found association between mutation 845delCT and SNP detected in the middle of intron 1 of SURF1 gene (IVS1+56C>T). All patients presented both the 845delCT mutation and the IVS1+56C>T polymorphism.The SNP was absent in 50 control samples.
P0908. Recombination hotspot in the vicinity of the SHOX  gene 
deﬁnes a common genetic cause for short stature
K. U. Schneider1, N. Sabherwal1, K. Jantz1, N. Muncke1, W. F. Blum2, G. B. 
Cutler Jr.3, G. Rappold1;  
1University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Lilly Research Laboratories, 
Giessen, Germany, 3Lilly Research Laboratories, Indianapolis, IN, United 
States.
Aside from the inﬂuence exerted by environmental and internal factors, growth is orchestrated by a large number of different genes. One of 
them, SHOX, is believed to play a major role since defects in this 
homeobox-containing short stature gene on the sex chromosomes lead to syndromal (Léri-Weill, Langer and Turner syndrome) or idiopathic short stature. We have analysed 118 independent patients with Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and 1,500 patients with idiopathic short stature for deletions encompassing 
SHOX. Deletions were detected 
in 34% of the patients with Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and 2% of the patients with idiopathic short stature. For 27 patients with Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis and 6 with idiopathic short stature, detailed deletion mapping was carried out. Analysis was performed by PCR using pseudoautosomal polymorphic markers and ﬂuorescence in situ
 
hybridisation using cosmid clones. Here we show that the identiﬁed deletions vary in size, yet the vast majority of patients share a distinct deletion breakpoint. This breakpoint region is characterised by locus-speciﬁc low copy repeats and a high preponderance of Alu and LTR sequences, which create a recurrent deletion breakpoint that occurs in more than 1% of 
all short individuals. It also represents one of the most 
frequent deletion breakpoints leading to disease.
P0909. Novel CAPN3 mutations identiﬁed in a routine diagnostic 
setting for LGMD patients
C. Pécheux1, M. Krahn1, R. Bernard1, E. H. Hammouda2, A. Urtizberea2, F. 
Leturcq3, N. Lévy1,4, the French Network on LGMD;  
1Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d'enfants de la Timone, Mar -
seille, France, 2AFM et Généthon, Evry, France, 3Laboratoire de Biochimie 
Génétique, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 4Inserm U491 : "Génétique Médicale 
et Développement", Faculté de, Marseille, France.
Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophies (LGMD) constitute a genetically and clinically heterogeneous group of autosomal dominant (LGMD1) or recessive (LGMD2) inheritance. LGMD2A is caused by mutations in the gene encoding Calpain-3 (
CAPN3, 15q15.1-q21.1 ), a muscle-
speciﬁc non-lysosomal protease.LGMD2A is estimated to account for 10 to 30% of recessive LGMDs. It is the most prevalent form of LGMD and requires proper settings for diagnosis in affected patients.As there is a high clinical variability of the phenotype, Calpain-3 protein analysis on muscle samples is performed at ﬁrst instance to guide diagnosis. However, diagnosis has to be conﬁrmed by molecular analysis of the 
CAPN3 gene. The large size of the CAPN3 gene 
(> 45kbp, 24 exons) and the increasing number of reported allelic variants is technically challenging. Methods for mutation screening are 
particularly adapted to this task.Here, we report a study of 
CAPN3 mutations in a cohort of LGMD 
patients, identiﬁed using SSCP and/or DHPLC mutation screening, and 
subsequent sequencing of detected variants, in our clinical setting.Using this strategy, at least one constitutive deleterious mutation was evidenced in 28 out of 39 included patients. A total of 45 mutations was identiﬁed, most of them being missense mutations (38%), or out of frame deletions and/or insertions with consequent frame shifting (31%). Among these mutations found in our series, 13 have not been 
reported before in the literature.Diagnosis of LGMD2A could be conﬁrmed in 17 out of 39 patients, by 
identifying two constitutive pathogenic mutations.
P0910. Functional characterization of 14 SMPD1 mutations 
identiﬁed in Italian patients affected with NPD type B
A. Dardis1, Z. Stefania1, M. Nevjyel1, R. Addobbati1, M. Filocamo2, B. Bembi1, 
M. G. Pittis1;  
1Unità di Malattie Metaboliche,IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Laboratorio 
Diagnosi Pre-Postnatale Malattie Metaboliche,IRCCS,G.Gaslini, Genova, Italy .
Niemann Pick disease (NPD) is an autosomal recessive lysosomal 
storage disorder caused by the deﬁcient activity of acid sphingomyelinase due to mutations in the SMPD1 gene. The disease has been divided into 2 different phenotypes: type A is a severe neurodegenerative disorder while type B is a non-neuronopathic disorder. However, the clinical course of type B NPD patients is quite heterogeneous. While some mildly affected patients can present a normal life-span several patients present with an intermediate phenotype characterized by mild neurological involvement. In the present study we characterized by transient expression in COS-1 cells three novel mutations, p.V130A, p.V557fsX18 and p.D563Y found in two NP type B patients and other 11 SMPD1 mutations previously reported: p.M1_W32del, p.W32X, p.G34fsX42, pL103P, p.P189fsX1, p.P192fsX14, p.L225P, p.W244C, p.A281T, p.R600H, p.R600P. Eight ASM mutants, p.W32X, p.G34fsX42, p.P189fsX1, p.P192fs14, p.L225P, p.W244C, p.A281T, p.P557fsX18 had no signiﬁcant enzyme activity. In contrast, mutations p.M1_W32del, pL103P, p.V130A, p.D563Y, p.R600H, p.R600P expressed ASM enzymes with activities that range from 4.14 % to 28.4% of those obtained with wild type. Western blot analysis showed that p.L103P, p.V130A, p.L225P, p.W244C, p.A281T, p.D563Y, p.R600H and p.R600P mutants express ASM protein at levels comparable to that found in wild-type transfected cells. No immunoreactive protein was detected in cells transfected with p.M1_W32del, p.W32X, p.G34fsX42, p.P189fsX1 and p.P192fs14 mutants. A smaller band was detected in cells transfected with p.V557fsX18 mutant, consistent with a presence of a premature termination codon. These ﬁndings provided valuable Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics278
insights into the molecular basis of the NPB phenotype variability .
P0911. Dominant LMNA or recessive ZMPSTE24 mutations 
lead to Restrictive Dermopathy, and nuclear accumulation of truncated or normal lamin A precursors
C. L. Navarro1, J. Cadianos2, A. De Sandre-Giovannoli3, S. Courrier4, A. Boy -
er3, I. Boccaccio1, R. C. M. Hennekam5, P. Cau1, R. Bernard3, C. López Otin2, C. 
Badens3,4, N. Lévy1,3;  
1Inserm U491, Faculté de Médecine de Marseille, Marseille, France, 2Departa -
mento de Bioquimica y Biologia Molecular, Instituto Universitario de Oncologia, 
Universidad de Oviedo, Spain, 3Département de génétique médicale, Hôpital 
d'enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 4Centre d'Enseignement et de 
Recherches en Génétique Médicale, Faculté de médecine, Marseille, France, 
5Department of Pediatrics and Clinical genetics, Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Restrictive Dermopathy (RD) is characterized by intrauterine growth 
retardation, tight and rigid skin with prominent superﬁcial vessels, bone mineralization defects, dysplastic clavicles, arthrogryposis and early neonatal death. In two patients affected with RD, we recently reported two different heterozygous splicing mutations in the LMNA gene, leading to the complete or, as commonly reported in Progeria, partial loss of exon 11. In other patients, a c.1085_1086insT insertion leading to a premature termination codon was identiﬁed in a T stretch in ZMPSTE24 encoding an endoprotease essential for Lamin A maturation. Known autosomal recessive inheritance of RD suggested a 2nd molecular defect was missing. We have explored ten RD patients; 8 of them are either homozygous or compound heterozygous for ZMPSTE24 mutations. All carry the c.1085_1086insT insertion as a common mutation, seven of them being homozygous for this defect although some were previously interpreted as heterozygous due to a sequence instability within the T stretch, leading to a pseudo-frameshift aspect. A large genomic deletion covering exons 3, 4 and 5, was also found as 2nd mutation in one case. Proteic studies showed complete loss of ZMPSTE24 and Lamin A expression, together with prelamin A expression and accumulation in all patients, including those for which the second ZMPSTE24 mutation is not yet identiﬁed. Thus, RD is a primary or secondary laminopathy, due to dominant de novo LMNA mutations or recessive ZMPSTE24 mutations most of them lying in a hotspot. The accumulation of truncated or normal length prelamin A is, 
however a common pathophysiological mechanism.
P0912. Cytochrome P450 CYP2C9 polymorphism in Turkish 
epileptic patients
A. E. Özkaynakci1, A. I. Guney2, C. Ozkara3, D. Sevinc4, A. Kocer5, R. Aker6, F. 
Onat1, H. Ozyurt Bayraktar5;  
1Marmara University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pharmacology , Istan -
bul, Turkey, 2Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 
Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3İstanbul University, Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medi -
cine, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Maltepe University Faculty of Medicine Department of 
Medical Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Kartal State Hospital, Depart -
ment of Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, 
Department of Pharmacology, Istanbul, Turkey.
Cytochrome P450 CYP2C9 is a major enzyme that metabolize different clinically important drugs which include the anticonvulsant phenytoin. In this study the frequency of CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 allelic variants associated with phenytoin clearance were examined in Turkish epileptic patients who had received chronic phenytoin treatment. The patient group was selected according to the abnormal clinical response at usual dosage regimens and the allelic variants were studied by polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length polymorphism. The frequencies of CYP2C9 genotypes in the study group were 78.78%, 12.12%, 6.06%, 3.03% for CYP2C9*1/1, CYP2C9*1/2, CYP2C9*1/3 and CYP2C9*2/3 respectively. Although it is not statistically signiﬁcant, all allelic variants found to be associated with reduced catalytic activity compared to wild-type with respect to mean phenytoin serum concentrations at 12h after dosage. The results show that there is a strong correlation between CYP2C9 genotypes and phenytoin dose requirement. It is suggested that the CYP2C9 genotyping can be used routinely to obtain efﬁcient phenytoin therapy and to lower the risk of concentration dependent intoxications 
of phenytoin in mutated carriers.P0913. Peculiarities of the primary structure of ﬁbrillogenic 
proteins
V. V. Egorov , K. V. Solovyov;  
Institute for Experimental Medicine, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
One of the proteins which can cause primary amyloidosis is transthyretin (TTR). Deposition of TTR ﬁbrills in tissues leads to diferrent pathological conditions such as familial polyneuropathy, cardiomiopathy and senile systemic amyloidosis. This work is devoted to the elucidation of the common principles of protein ﬁbrillogenesis and to identifying the TTR molecular regions which are responsible for ﬁbril formation. We analysed the primary structure of some ﬁbrillogenic proteins and peptides: TTR, phage T4 lysozyme peptide (T4LP), peptide from Aβ (AP), human α lactalbumin (ALH) and ovalysozyme (LYZ) with a number of computer methods. We found that T4LP and AP have identical and similar aminoacid residues at an equal distance from one residue in both directions. Similar symmetry was also discovered on the C- terminus of the TTR sequence and in β-domains of LYZ and LAH. X-ray structure analysis of these proteins showed that residues before the symmetry center form β-sheet hydrogen bonds, however symmetrical residues don’t take part in the β-sheet interaction, but are sterically able to form intermolecular hydrogen bonds. The most amyloidogenic recombinant mutant human TTR (L55P) was obtained from a bacterial system. We found that TTR variant which was puriﬁed without protease inhibitors does not support ﬁbrillogenesis. We show that there was proteolysis of the terminal part of every TTR subunit. By contrast, TTR puriﬁed in the presence of protease inhibitors formed ﬁbrills over several hours. We suppose that the “restricted” protein can’t form ﬁbrills under any conditions because of loss of the symmetrical 
part.
P0914. Screening for genetic alterations in PRNP gene of six 
different populations with determination of codon 129 genotype 
- a multicentre study
M. Stražišar1, S. Smerkolj1, H. Brauch2, G. Evfremov3, M. Macek jr.4, I. Medica5, 
R. Terzić6, D. Glavač1;  
1Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology, Medical Faculty, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharma -
cology, Stuttgart, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Center, Skopje, 
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 4Cystic Fibrosis Center, Institute 
of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University Prague-2 School of Medi -
cine, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Outpatient Paediatric Clinic Pula, Pula, Croatia, 
6Department of Biology and Genetics, Medical School Tuzla, Tuzla, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina.
The codon 129 genotype of PRNP gene is known to be a susceptibility 
factor for sCJD. Comparison of codon 129 genotypes reveals heterogeneity among different populations and can give some information concerning population patterns. We show data for six 
European populations.DNA was extracted from blood of six groups: Germans, Slovenians, Czechs, Croatians, Macedonians and Bosnians and ampliﬁed 
PRNP  
coding region with PCR. Screening was performed with single stranded conformation analysis (SSCA). Samples, which formed SSCA patterns differently from majority, were sequenced.We determined the proportion of alternative genotypes in each 
population.
Tested populations M % M/V % V %
Macedonian 55,2 35,8 9,0
German 48,7 43,2 8,1
Slovenian 46,8 41,1 12,1
Czech 43,2 51,6 5,3
Bosnian 40,5 48,6 10,8
Croatian 38,5 47,7 13,8
Table: Percent of codon 129 genotypes in screened populationsWe discovered 6 different SNPs and a 24 bp R3-4 type deletion.Our results of codon 129 genotyping are not in accordance with already established east-west gradient. Croatian have lower and German higher proportion of M/M genotype than expected. Populations from former Yugoslavia differ in M/M more than in V/V genotype. Macedonian population differs from other screened populations from former Yugoslavia. Geographical distance, migrations concerning Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics279
work and former war in the Balkans caused mixing of populations to 
different extent. All cases of sCJD conﬁrmed in our laboratory were methionine homozygote, suggesting high risk for population with high genotype M/M frequency.
P0915. The molecular genetic cause of osteopetrosis in 
Chuvashia
E. Bliznetz1, S. Tverskaya1, R. Zinchenko1, A. Kirillov2, E. Ginter1, A. Polyakov1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Chil-
dren Republican Hospital, Cheboksari, Russian Federation.
Infantile malignant osteopetrosis is a rare autosomal recessive congenital disease characterised by failure of osteoclasts to resorb bones during their growth and development. The main features are severe anemia beginning in early infancy or in fetal life, hepatosplenomegaly, progressive blindness and deafness. Autosomal recessive osteopetrosis is genetically heterogeneous. All known genes are necessary for normal functioning of osteoclasts. One of the known genes is 
TCIRG1, which maps to 11q13.4-13.5. It encodes an 
osteoclast speciﬁc subunit of the vacuolar H+-ATPase proton pump.
Our group investigated autosomal recessive osteopetrosis in 8 families from Chuvashia where the frequency of this disease is unusually high (1 affected per 3900 newborns by date of epidemiological study), probably due to a founder effect.We have mapped this disease to the 
TCIRG1 gene region (the most 
probable candidate gene) by analysing 4 polymorphic markers in this region. All affected probands are homozygous for all 4 markers and have an identical haplotype. All their healthy parents are heterozygous carriers for this haplotype; any other healthy relatives are not 
homozygous for this haplotype.We then identiﬁed a new splice site mutation in 
TCIRG1 by direct DNA 
sequencing of PCR-ampliﬁed exons and exon-intron junctions: all 
probands were homozygous and all parents were heterozygous.By RFLP analysis we investigated the presence of the mutation in 327 healthy Chuvashians. The frequency of heterozygous carriers of the 
mutation was 3.4%.This work was support in part by RHF grant 04-01-00262a and RFBR 
grant 04-04-48077
P0916. Tracking the roots of human mental retardation: 
cognitive impairments in Gdi1 knockout mice are associated 
with anomalous synaptic vesicles.
P. D'Adamo1, F. Cardone1, A. Sirri1, V. Meskenaite2, H. Lipp3, D. Toniolo1;  
1DIBIT-HSR, Milano, Italy, 2University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3University 
of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
X-linked non-speciﬁc mental retardation (XLMR) is a common genetic disorder characterized by mental handicap as the only clinical symptom. Among the genes identiﬁed is GDI1, which encodes one of the proteins controlling the activity of the small GTPases of the Rab family, involved in intracellular trafﬁcking. A Gdi1 KO mice was investigated. Lack of Gdi1 altered availability and brain subcellular distribution of a subset of Rab GTPases (Rab3C, 4, 5 and 11) and caused hippocampus dependent deﬁcits in short term memory formation. Electrophysiological analysis suggested depletion of the SV pool. Learning deﬁcit due to impaired ability in CS-US pairing association in the trace fear conditioning test, was present when the inter trial intervals (ITI) between each pairing were short. By increasing the ITI, mutants were able to associate CS-US, further suggesting that mass training may eventually cause depletion of the SV pool, and that during a longer ITI, the KO mice could restore the SV pool for efﬁcient memory formation and processing. Finally, EM analysis conﬁrmed that the SV reserve pool was reduced in the KO, and showed that the defect was detectable at P10. In conclusion, our data demonstrated that lack of Gdi1 is responsible for alterations of synaptic vesicle biogenesis and for a number of direct and indirect changes in the hippocampus important for cognitive functions. Expression proﬁles of adult hippocampus of KO and WT mice were analyzed and a number of variations associated with the mutation and possibly involved in the 
cognitive impairments are under investigation.P0917. Search for mitochondrial DNA T4,291C mutation in 
Hungarian metabolic syndrome patients
K. Z. Horvatovich1, L. Magyari1, A. Maász1, G. C. Talián1, M. Tamaskó2, B. 
Laczy2, I. Wittmann2, B. Melegh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, 
Pécs, Hungary, 22nd Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pécs, Pécs, 
Hungary.
Metabolic syndrome affects a very great percentage of the human population and is characterized by hypertension, diabetes, insulin resistance, hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, hypomagnesemia, and obesity. In a recent study (Wilson et al, Science 2004;306:1190) hypercholesterinemia, hypomagnesemia and hypertension were shown to be transmitted on the maternal lineage in a large family. Homoplastic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) T4,291C transition was detected which ultimately led to the Ile-tRNA gene mutation characterized by replacing the uridine by cytidine immediately at the 5’ position neighboring to the anticodon sequence. No data have been presented in the literature on the prevalence rate of this mutation. Using a simple PCR/RFLP assay developed for detection of the mtDNA variant coding for this mutation we genotyped 246 Hungarian patients with metabolic syndrome. We could not detect the pathologic mtDNA variant in any of our patients suggesting that this variant is not frequent in the Hungarian metabolic syndrome population, and routine 
screening is not recommended.
P0918. A second frame-shift mutation conﬁrms the involvement 
of MECP2  exon 1 in Rett syndrome
I. Moix1, A. Bottani1, J. P. Rathgeb2, C. Hinard1, M. A. Morris1;  
1Service of Medical Genetics, Dept. of Gynecology-Obstetrics, Geneva Uni -
versity Hospitals, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland, 2Pediatric Practice, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
Rett syndrome (RS) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder affecting almost exclusively females and classically characterized by progressive loss of intellectual functioning, motor skills and language with development of stereotypic hand movements. RS is now recognized as one of the most common causes of severe mental 
retardation in females.In our diagnostic laboratory we have analysed a consecutive series of 86 patients with clinical suspicion of RS by PCR-SSCA of 
MECP2  
exons 2, 3 and 4. Mutations were detected in 13/86 (15%).Recently a new 
MECP2 transcript comprising exons 1, 3 and 4 
(MECP2B) was discovered (Mnatzakanian et al. 2004). The authors identiﬁed two exon 1 mutations in 19 typical RS patients with no known 
mutations in exons 2-4.We reanalysed the 73 patients in whom no mutation had been identiﬁed in exons 2, 3 and 4, by direct sequence analysis of exon 1 and its ﬂanking sequences. A single mutation was identiﬁed.The patient, a 12-year old girl with RS, was heterozygous for an 8 base-pair deletion leading to a predicted premature stop codon at position 38; the mutation is coded 
MECP2B c.52_59delGAGGAGAG 
(p.Glu18_Arg20delfsX38). The mutation was de novo .
This mutation conﬁrms the clinical signiﬁcance of MECP2 exon 1. 
We suggest that complete MECP2 genetic diagnostic work-up must 
include exon 1 in both mutation and deletion screening.
P0919. Polymorphisms in the IL-4 and IL-4 receptor alpha chain 
genes and atopic bronchial asthma in North-West of Russia
S. V. Mogilina1, E. M. Ugleva2, N. V. Kelembet2, T. E. Ivaschenko1, V. S. Ba -
ranov1;  
1Ott's Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Fed -
eration, 2Institute of Pulmonology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Background: Interleukin-4, a pleiotropic cytokine with 
immunomodulator functions, is involved in the upregulation of IgE 
production characteristic of atopic bronchial asthma (ABA). IL-4 by binding to its receptor (IL-4R) is essential for the development of airway inﬂamation present in asthma.
Objective: To investigate the role of two polimorphisms C-590T (IL-4) and Q576R (IL-4Rα) conferring susceptibility to the development of 
ABA.
Methods: The genetic polymorphisms of IL-4 and IL-4Rα chain genes were studied by PCR-RFLP analysis in two groups of Russian women: pregnant women with ABA (102 individuals) and healthy females (69). Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics280
Results: The distribution of genotypes and alleles of the Q576R 
polymorphism in the IL-4Rα gene were not signiﬁcantly different 
between two studied groups. In contrast, we have found signiﬁcant different between patients and the control group in the distribution of genotypes for C-590T polymorphism of the IL-4 gene. The frequency of carriers - 590 T allele of IL-4 gene was signiﬁcantly higher in asthma patients compared to control group (47% and 31% accordingly, p<0,05; 
OR=1,9; 95% CI=1,0-3,6).
Conclusion:  The results suggest, that polymorphism in the IL-4 might 
play a role conferring to susceptibility of asthma, and that IL-4Rα polymorphism is not associated with ABA in Russian population.
P0920. The results of molecular genetic analysis in Russian 
azoospermic and oligozoospermic men
T. Beskorovainaya , A. Chukhrova, V. Chernykh, S. Tverskaya, A. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Many genetic factors had found to lead to male infertility. Besides chromosome aberrations major genetic causes of azoospermia and severe oligozoospermia are microdeletions of the Y chromosome (regions AZFa, AZFb, and AZFc) and 
CFTR gene mutations. We have 
examined 290 men with azoospermia and oligozoospermia diagnosed by sperm analysis. Molecular investigation was carried out on leucocyte DNA by analyzing SRYand ZFX/ZFY gene fragments and seven Yq-speciﬁc STSs: sY84, sY86, sY615, sY127, sY134, sY254, sY255 in multiplex PCR. Samples without deletions were analyzed for partial deletions of the AZFc region in another multiplex PCR, which included 6 STSs: sY1192, sY1197, sY1125, sY1206, sY1291, sY142. The group was also tested for 11 CFTR gene mutations (del21kb, delF508, 
delI507,  1677delTA, 2143delT, 2184insA, 394delTT, 3821DelT, G542X, 
W1282X, N1303K) and IVS8 poly (T) variants.AZF deletions have been found in 33 cases: 2 deletions in AZFa, 6 in AZFb+c, and 25 in the AZFc region. Five partial deletions of the AZFc region (del sY1192- 4 cases, del sY1197 - 1 case) have also been found in a group of 50 men without complete AZF deletions. The frequencies of Y-microdeletions in azoospermic and severe oligozoospermic men were about 12% and 8%, respectively. Six CFTR gene mutations in heterozygous state (del21kb/- - 3, delF508/- -2 and W1282X/- -1 case) were found in 73 men examined. Two infertile men were homozygous for the IVS8 5T variant and eight were heterozygous. In one case we identiﬁed a complete AZFc deletion and heterozygous IVS8 5T variant 
co-existing.
P0921. Simultaneous detection of the factor V Leiden, the 
prothrombin G20210A, the MTHFR C677T and the factor XIII 
Val34Leu variants by real-time PCR
P. Ernault1, M. Olivi1, T. Gaillon1, K. Arar2, J. M. Costa1;  
1American Hospital of Paris, Neuilly, France, 2Proligo, Paris, France.
Real-time PCR melting curve-based genotype determination has 
become available for the determination of single nucleotide alterations. However, the growing variety of genetic alterations requires multiplexing 
of genotyping assays.Here we report the simultaneous detection of the factor V Leiden, the prothrombin G20210A, the MTHFR C677T and the factor XIII Val34Leu variants by real-time PCR using a single tube four-color 
detection system.One hundred and twenty six samples (including 24 quality controls) were blind-tested with this new assay and the results were compared to those obtained with a multiplex allele-speciﬁc PCR procedure usually performed in our laboratory.Genomic DNA was extracted from 200µl EDTA-blood using an automatic procedure (MagNA Pure Compact) and eluted with 50μl of elution buffer of which 5µl were used per PCR reaction. Multiplex PCR reactions were set up in a ﬁnal volume of 20 µl containing the four primers and hybridization probe sets. Simultaneous mutation detection was achieved by analysis of the melting curves measured for each of the four sensor probes labeled with the LCRed 610, LCRed 640, LCRed 670 and LCRed705 ﬂuorophores, speciﬁc for the MTHFR C677T, the factor V Leiden, the prothrombin G20210A and the factor XIII Val34Leu variants respectively.The results were in perfect concordance with those previously obtained thus demonstrating the efﬁciency of the method for the simultaneous detection of single nucleotide polymorphisms. Combined with automatic DNA extraction, it provides a rapid and convenient method to detect 
known mutations, dramatically reducing the total hands-on time.
P0922. Geno- and phenotype studies of myotonic dystrophy 
(DM1) in Hungarian patients
H. Pikó1, H. Merkli2, R. Horváth3, Á. Herczegfalvi4, A. Tóth5, V. Karcagi1;  
1Fodor József National Center of Public Health, Budapest, Hungary , 2Medi -
cal Uni. of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 3Jahn Ferenc Hospital, Budapest, Hungary, 
4Bethesda Childrens Hospital, Budapest, Hungary, 5Natl. Center of Medical 
Care, Inst. of Obstr. and Gynecology, Budapest, Hungary.
Dystrophia myotonica type 1 (DM1 is a diffuse systemic disorder in which the most prominent features, i. e. myotonia and muscular atrophy may be accompanied by cataracta, gonadal atrophy, endocrine abnormalities, heart conduction defects and mental deﬁcit. It is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with a variable penetrance. An unstable expansion of (CTG)
n repeats in the 3’ untranslated region 
encoding a member of the protein kinase family in 19q13.3 is the causative mutation for myotonic dystrophy. Healthy individuals harbour 5-37 CTG repeats, whereas in affected individuals repeat expansion varies between 37 and 4000. To examine the correlation between clinical expression and CTG trinucleotide repeat length, radioactive PCR as well as Southern blot analyses using probe p5B1.4 were carried out in families clinically diagnosed with myotonic dystrophy. So far, 28 patients from 14 families were analysed and in 11 cases the mutation in DMPK gene was conﬁrmed. The expanded CTG repeats were transmitted maternally as well as paternally. In the maternally transmitted cases the expanded fragment lengths were always larger than in the paternally transmitted ones. Moreover, a clear correlation was established between phenotype severity and the length of the CTG expansion. Longer expansions resulted in earlier onset of the symptoms. Phenotypes varied between congenital onset, classical forms and mild symptoms even within the same family corresponding 
to the size of the expansion.
P0923. The X chromosome critical region for premature 
ovarian failure: alteration of chromatin organization around the 
translocations breakpoints.
F. Rizzolio1, S. Alboresi1, S. Gilli1, C. Sala1, S. Bione2, T. Pramparo3, M. Goegan1, 
O. Zuffardi3, D. Toniolo1;  
1DIBIT-HSR, Milano, Italy, 2IGM-CNR, Pavia, Italy, 3University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
Monosomies and rearrangements of the X chromosome are often associated to premature ovarian failure (POF) and several independent studies have mapped a “critical region” for POF between Xq21 and Xq26. We have analyzed 25 X;autosome balanced translocations in Xq: 23 in patients and two in normal women. Considering all the breakpoints studied by us and by others we can exclude an effect of the chromosomal rearrangements per se and we tentatively exclude haploinsufﬁciency for Xq genes. The analysis suggested a position effect of the breakpoint on gene(s), X linked or autosomal, in the vicinity of the breakpoints. To investigate the hypothesis we have studied a region of 3 Mb in Xq21, where 8 breakpoints in patients and one in a normal woman were clustered and we we mapped the X chromosome and two of the autosomal breakpoints. We studied the pattern of expression and the organization of the chromatin at the promoters and in ﬂanking regions of the genes around the breakpoints. The chromatin organization appeared altered in breakpoint regions associated with a POF phenotype while it was unchanged in the normal woman. In situ hybridization analysis of the genes around the breakpoints in adult mouse showed that 5 genes in two autosomal breakpoints were speciﬁcally expressed at high levels in granulosa cells and/or oocytes. Alteration of the expression of these genes may be responsible of the 
POF phenotype in the patients.
P0924. Hereditary spastic paraplegia type 4 in Russian families
G. Rudenskaya1, I. Sermyagina1, S. Illarioshkin2, I. Ivanova-Smolenskaya2, A. 
Polyakov1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Re-
search Institute of Neurology, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) type 4, or SPG4, caused by various mutations of spastin gene (locus 2p22) is the most common form in a heterogeneous group of autosomal dominant HSP's. In a recently begun molecular genetic study of HSP's in Russia, we have Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics281
so far detected three SPG4 families. Spastin mutation was found in 
one family with 4 patients in two generations. This frame-shift mutation 839-840delAG in exon 5 was previously described in a German family [Sauter et al., 2002]. Two unrelated families, one with 10 patients in ﬁve generations and another with 12 patients in four generations, showed linkage to SPG 4 locus, lod scores 1.66 and 1.51 correspondingly with recombination fraction equal to zero. Search of spastin mutation in these two and in a set of other HSP families is currently underway. As to clinical characteristics of the disease in three families, all patients (apart from one severe case presenting a mixture of HSP and hemolytic disease of the newborn) fall into relatively late-onset and slowly progressing "uncomplicated" HSP which is typical for SPG4; several 
persons, even elderly ones, have only subclinical signs of the disease.
This work was support in part by President's RF grant MD-
2456.2004.4
P0925. CFTR-opathies
P. F. Pignatti ;  
Biology and Genetics, Mother Child Biology Genetics, University of V erona, 
Verona, Italy.
In the workshop "Lessons from CF", the importance of CFTR-opathies will be remembered. This importance has led to the latest international classiﬁcation of CF together with its related diseases, when at least one CFTR gene mutation has been identiﬁed: CAVD,chronic pancreatitis, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, disseminated bronchiectasis, disseminated panbronchiolitis, sclerosing cholangitis, and neonatal hypertripsinemia. Still other diseases have been reported to have an increased frequency of CFTR gene mutations. In the case two mutations have been identiﬁed in an individual, generally at most one may be deemed causative of CF, while the other produces only a mild functional impairment and is nor deemed to be causing CF disease. CFTR gene expression, including haplotypes and quantitative approaches to transcript analysis in different tissues, and modiﬁer genes and environmental factors, modulate phenotypic expression in different CFTR-opathies. CFTR-related diseases may be thought of as extreme phenotypes of CF involving only one organ, or the result of modulation of gene expression in different tissues which may involve several organs even if in a minor degree. CFTR mutation screening is generally suggested for CBAVD and infertile couples before in vitro fertilization, while it is considered only in special cases (e.g.familiarity) 
for CFTR-related pulmonary or pancreatic diseases.
P0926. Model systems to study methylmalonic acidemia (MMA).
R. J. Chandler, C. Venditti;  
National Institute of Health, National Human Genome Research Institute, 
Bethesda, MD, United States.
The hereditary of methymalonic acidemias are a devastating group of autosomal recessive metabolic disorders caused by defective isomerization of L-methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA. In an attempt to develop tractable experimental systems to study this group of conditions, we have developed and characterized nematode and murine models. Genomic and biochemical characterization of the propionate to succinate conversion pathway in C elegans was undertaken. Homologues of PCCA, PCCB, MMAA, MMAB, MMCM, and MMCR were identiﬁed in C. elegans and cloned for functional studies. Tracer experiments using C14-propionic acid and H3-phenylalanine revealed incorporation ratios similar to that seen in mammalian cells. The pathway could be stimulated by glucose and OH-cobalamin. Loading of C. elegans with propionic acid caused the animals to produce methylmalonic acid and accrete propionylcanitine. A variable biochemical response to RNAi was seen. We also have created two new null alleles at the murine methylmalonyl-CoA mutase locus; one has exon 3 deleted and the 5’ coding exon ﬂanked by loxP sites, the other has a single loxP site in place of the 5’ coding exon and both exons deleted. Both alleles should be useful for genomic manipulations such as Cre-mediated cassette exchange and Cre-mediated insertion. The mice display many features seen in the human condition, including massive elevation of MMA in body ﬂuids, and perish shortly after birth. These diverse model organism systems will allow the human condition to be studied using modern genomic and genetic methods, and should facilitate the development and testing of 
new therapies for MMA.P0927. Evaluation of a multiplex assay for cystic ﬁbrosis using 
the Luminex platform
T. Yeomans, T. McDevitt , C. King, B. O'hIci, D. E. Barton;  
National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland.
Plans for newborn screening for cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) and issues of sensitivity and efﬁciency with our current “home-brew” CF assay led us to look for a multiplexed CF assay which could be adapted to the mutation spectrum of the Irish population. We have an excellent knowledge of the Irish mutation spectrum, as all patients with mutations not detected by our ARMS assay are screened by DHPLC of the entire CFTR gene at the laboratory of Professor Claude Ferec in Brest, France. We evaluated the CF Multicode Plx(TM) assay from EraGen Biosciences. MultiCode uses an additional base pair constructed from the synthetic complementary bases isoguanosine (
isoG) and 5’-Me-
isocytosine ( isoC). Base pairing of isoG to isoC is highly speciﬁc. These 
additional bases are used in each step of the MultiCode process: PCR, extension labelling, and liquid decoding on a Luminex instrument. All steps are carried out in the same micro plate well without transfers or 
washings.We have taken the assay designed by EraGen and designed target-speciﬁc extension primers for 10 additional mutations which occur at a frequency of 0.15% or greater in the Irish population. We have evaluated the core 29-target assay and the extended assay on a large cohort of samples of known genotype, to examine their sensitivity and speciﬁcity. We are also evaluating a second Luminex-based assay, Signature CF(TM) from Ambion. Results of these studies, as well as an analysis of cost and efﬁciency, will be presented.
P0928. Characterization of Caenorhabditis elegans mutant strain 
RB839
E. Zouharova , M. Kostrouchova, J. Krijt, V. Kozich;  
Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Prague, Czech Republic.
C. elegans is a widely used model organism. The aim of our ongoing 
study is to examine whether the genetically modifed C. elegans  
strains may be suitable models for studying disorders of homocysteine metabolism. As deﬁciency of cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS) is the main cause of homocystinuria in humans, we ﬁrst started to 
characterize C. elegans  strain RB839, in which a part of the F54A3.4 
gene- an ortholog of human CBS- has been deleted.Sequencing of genomic DNA obtained from RB839 revealed deletion between nucleotides 857 and 1548, which predicts an in-frame deletion of 231 amino acids in the putative active core of the enzyme. Subsequently we characterized the phenotype of RB839 nematodes. The body morfology, behaviour, lifespan and egg-laying of RB839 hermaphrodites did not differ from the wild-type N2 nematodes. We also determined the CBS activity in RB839 strain, which did not signiﬁcantly differ from the control strain N2, suggesting that F54A3.4 gene does not serve as cystathionine beta-synthase in 
C.elegans. 
This notion is also supported by the lack of difference in concentration of homocysteine and other aminothiols in crude extracts of RB839 and 
wild type N2 strains.These preliminary data show that the strain RB839 with deleted part of F54A3.4 gene- an ortholog of human CBS- may not be a proper model for studying human CBS deﬁciency. However, our study suggests that the F54A3.4 gene may confer other functions in nematode sulphur 
metabolism.This study was supported by The Wellcome Trust Senior Fellowship to V. K..
P0929. Two novel heterozygous TGFBR2 mutations in Marfan 
syndrome
E. Disabella, M. Grasso, S. Ansaldi, A. Pisani, S. Mauro, C. Lucchelli, E. Por -
cu, A. Pilotto, C. Malattia, M. Diegoli, N. Marziliano, L. Tavazzi, E. Arbustini;  
IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
Marfan syndrome (MFS, MIM 154700) is an autosomal dominant disorder of connective tissue with cardiovascular, skeletal and ocular abnormalities, due to mutations in the FBN1 gene (15q21.1). A second type of the MFS (MIM 154705) is associated with a second locus, MFS2, at 3p25-p24.2. Identiﬁcation of a 3p24.1 chromosomal breakpoint disrupting the TGFBR2 gene in a Japanese individual with MFS led to consider TGFBR2 as a gene underlying association with MFS at the MFS2 locus. Overall, four mutations of the TGFR2 gene Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics282
have been identiﬁed to date in MFS with prominent cardiovascular 
phenotype (Mizuguchi T, et al, 2004).The TGFBR2 encodes the human transforming growth factor beta type II receptor (70/80 kDa). It belongs to the serine-threonine kinase family of cell surface receptors, which regulate many cellular processes including proliferation, cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, differentiation and 
formation of extracellular matrix.We identiﬁed two novel heterozygous mutations (M425V, P525R) in two unrelated patients with MFS, who were proven not to be carriers 
of FBN1 gene mutations.The M425V mutation was identiﬁed in a 27-year-old male patient whose father died suddenly at the age of 40 of an unknown cardiovascular cause. He had major cardiovascular (aortic dilatation) and skeletal signs plus a minor cardiac and ocular signs. The P525R was identiﬁed in 17-year-old girl. Her phenotype was characterised by aortic dilatation (she recently underwent preventive cardiac surgery), major skeletal 
signs, retinal degeneration.Both mutations were absent in 50 healthy controls.We conﬁrm TGFBR2 
gene as associated with MFS with major cardiovascular involvement
P0930. Mucopolysaccharidosis type I: Molecular studies of IDUA 
gene in Czech and Slovak populations
L. Dvorakova, A. Vazna, L. Berna, L. Stolnaja, M. Bouckova, J. Zeman, H. 
Poupetova, M. Hrebicek;  
Inst.Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine and General Fac -
ulty Hospital, Praha 2, Czech Republic.
During the last 25 years the diagnosis of mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) was proved enzymatically in 89 patients from Czech and Slovak populations (15 mil.), including 18 mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I) patients. Fourteen of the patients had the severe form of the disease (Hurler syndrome), two had the mild form (Scheie syndrome) and two 
had intermediate Hurler/Scheie phenotype.All forms of MPS I are caused by the deﬁciency of a lysosomal hydrolase, alpha-L-iduronidase (IDUA, EC 3.2.1.76). The disease is inherited in autosomal recessive manner. We have analyzed the entire 
IDUA gene coding region sequence, exon-intron boundaries and a part of 5’ and 3‘ UTR in 15 Czech and Slovak MPS I patients. Up to now we identiﬁed 19 mutated alleles: W402X (9/19), Q70X (7/19), c.1614delG (1/19), R628X (1/19) and c.1917-1926del (1/19). Two patients with severe phenotype were homozygous for the prevalent mutations, W402X and Q70X, respectively. Two patients with Scheie syndrome were compound heterozygotes for one of the prevalent mutations combined with a mutation in exon 14 (W402X/c.1917-1926del and 
Q70X/R628X).We observed six known polymorphisms (A8, A20, Q33H, L118, A314, A361T). The Q33H, A8 and L118 were polymorphic in approximately 1/3 of the patient as well as control alleles. Preliminary results of haplotype analysis based on polymorphisms A8, A20 and Q33H showed that the alleles containing the mutation Q70X shared the same haplotype, suggesting a founder effect and a common ancestral origin.This work was supported by grants GA UK 154/2004/C/PrF and 
partially by VZ MSM CR 0021620806 and IGA-MZ 1A/8239-3.
P0931. Deletion scanning of the CFTR gene using multiplex 
ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation
T. Dörk1, D. Gläser2, C. Aulehla-Scholz3, A. Nygren4, J. Schouten4;  
1Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Gregor Mendel Laboratories, Neu-Ulm, 
Germany, 3Institute for Clinical Genetics, Stuttgart, Germany, 4MRC Holland, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Large genomic deletions in the CFTR gene (also called ABCC7) may 
account for several unidentiﬁed mutant alleles in cystic ﬁbrosis and other CFTR-related disorders. We have employed multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampliﬁcation (MLPA) to screen for the presence of genomic CFTR deletions in 24 patients who had cystic ﬁbrosis or obstructive azoospermia with only one mutation identiﬁed after sequencing of the whole coding region. In control samples, four out of ﬁve known genomic deletions were readily detected by MLPA. The mutation 134del120ins300 (also called CFTRdele1) was missed by this method because the probe is located upstream of the deleted exon. Our subsequent MLPA screening uncovered a new deletion, CFTRdele17(2.5kb), that had previously escaped detection by routine sequencing. Examination of the breakpoints showed that a highly polymorphic dinucleotide repeat at the IVS17b(TA)n locus is implicated in the generation of this deletion, which leads to the loss of the exons 17a and 17b in two unrelated German cystic ﬁbrosis patients in the heterozygous state. We conclude that MLPA is a sensitive and robust method for the rapid deletion scanning of the CFTR gene in cystic ﬁbrosis samples with hitherto incomplete mutation detection.
P0932. Mutations in the DYSF gene: the importance of analysing 
DNA and RNA
A. Freixas1, E. Gallardo1, C. Márquez2, L. Alías1, N. de Luna1, E. del Río1, M. 
Calaf1, I. Illa1, M. Baiget1, P. Gallano1;  
1Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Valme, Sevilla, Spain.
Mutations in the dysferlin gene ( DYSF) cause different muscular 
dystrophy phenotypes including Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy 2B, Miyoshi Myopathy and Distal Anterior Compartment Myopathy. These disorders are characterized by autosomal recessive inheritance, adult onset and elevated levels of serum CK. The 
DYSF gene maps to 
chromosome 2p13, has 55 exons and encodes a protein of about 237 
kDa that is located in the sarcolemma.We have studied 32 patients from 20 families clinically diagnosed as MM, LGMD2B and DAT through: 1) analysis of dysferlin expression by immunohistochemistry in muscle biopsies and by Western blotting in 
CD14+ peripheral blood monocytes and, 2) screening for mutations in 
the DYSF gene by sequencing cDNA from monocytes, amplifying 14 
fragments that cover the 55 exons. Finally, genomic DNA was studied 
to check mutations found in monocyte RNA.Seventeen different mutations were identiﬁed: 7 missense, 6 frameshift and 4 nonsense. One of the mutations consist in a G>A transition at position 1924 of the genomic DNA, causing a G519R change in the polypeptide chain. RNA analysis revealed that this apparent missense mutation causes a deletion of 34 nucleotides in exon 18 causing a frameshift that produces a stop codon in exon 19. The deletion was 
probably induced by the activation of a cryptic splice site.We consider that when considering a new mutation it is necessary to perform the analysis of both genomic DNA and RNA, including the 
analysis of normal controls to prove the pathogenicity of the mutation.
P0933. The use of real time PCR for detection of proteolipid 
protein-1 gene (PLP1) copy number in Palizaeus-Merzbacher 
patients.
E. Mikesova, I. Sakmaryova, L. Barankova, P. Seeman;  
Charles University, 2nd School of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is an X-linked recessive disorder of CNS myelination. More frequent classic form presents shortly after birth by nystagmus, psychomotor delay and hypotonia and later by spasticity and cerebellar ataxia. Rarer connatal type of PMD shows rapid progression and is fatal in infancy.PMD is caused most frequently by duplication of the PLP1 gene located on Xq22, less frequently by PLP1 point mutations and very rarely by 
PLP1 deletion. Carrier women show usually no clinical signs.Our aim was to distinguish samples with 1, 2 and 3 PLP1 copies using real time PCR and to deﬁne non-overlapping diagnostic ranges of ΔΔCt values for these groups. We tested 40 gDNA samples which were previously analyzed by microsatellite markers analysis: healthy men (n=10) (1 PLP1 copy), PMD patients (n=9) (2 PLP1 copies), control group of healthy women (n=7) (2 PLP1 copies), carrier women (n=14) (3 PLP1 copies). Samples were run on ABI 7900 in multiplex reaction using primers and TaqMan probes for exon 3 of PLP1 and exon 12 of albumin gene, which was used as endogenous control. Results were processed using the relative quantitative comparative threshold cycle 
method (ΔΔCt).The ranges of ΔΔCt values are: < 1,3 for healthy men, 1,7 - 2,3 for 
PMD patients and healthy women, > 2,5 for carrier women.Non overlapping ranges of ΔΔCt values were detected for selected 
groups. Real time PCR can be employed in PMD testing.Supported by the Grant Agency of Charles University (GAUK).Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics283
P0934. A novel mutation in the SCO2  gene in a patient with 
cytochrome c oxidase deﬁciency and a Werdnig-Hoffmann 
disease phenotype
K. Vesela1, H. Hansikova1, M. Elleder1, P. Martasek1, J. C. Salerno2, J. Zeman1;  
1Center of Integrated Genomic, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Rensselaer Poly -
technic Institute, Troy, NY, United States.
Disturbances of respiratory chain complexes, especially cytochrome 
c oxidase (COX) deﬁciency, represent a group of inherited disorders with clinical, biochemical and molecular heterogenity, which usually manifest in early childhood and affects tissues with high energetic demand (brain, muscle, heart). Targeted treatment is not available and the prognosis for patients is unfavourable. For genetic counseling it is crucial to ﬁnd the molecular background of the disease. In a group of 69 children with COX deﬁciency, mutations in 
SCO2 were found in 
8 children. We present a 3-months old girl with a Werdnig-Hoffman phenotype but negative on mutation screening of the 
SMN gene. A 
mitochondrial etiology of the disease was suspected after detection of hypertrophy of the interventricular septum. Biochemical analysis revealed increased levels of lactate in blood and CSF and analysis of respiratory chain complexes in isolated muscle mitochondria showed markedly decreased activity of COX. Mutation analysis of mtDNA was negative but sequencing of 
SCO2 revealed heterozygosity 
for the common mutation 1541G>A and a novel deletion 1518delA, which results in a frameshift and production of a truncated protein. To illustrate the possible effect of 1541G>A on the Sco2 protein, we 
present here a computer model of Sco2.
Conclusion: SCO2 mutations should be considered in patients with 
the phenotype of Werdnig-Hoffmann disease. Clariﬁcation of the molecular background of mitochondrial diseases may help in genetic counseling in affected families and it also enables prenatal diagnosis 
in families at risk with nuclear encoded defects.Supported by: GAUK 18/2004/C, GACR 303/03/D132 and GACR 
303/03/H065.
P0935. Respiratory and bioaminergic alterations in Mecp2-
deﬁcient mice, an experimental model for Rett syndrome
L. Villard1, J. Viemari2, J. Roux1, A. K. Tryba2, V. Saywell1, H. Burnet3, F. Pena4, 
S. Zanella3, M. Bévengut3, M. Barthélémy-Requin3, L. B. Herzing5, A. Moncla1, 
J. Mancini6, J. Ramirez2, G. Hilaire3;  
1INSERM U491, Marseille, France, 2Department of Organismal Biology and 
Anatomy - University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 3CNRS FRE2722 
- GERM - 280 boulevard de Sainte-Marguerite, Marseille, France, 4Departa -
mento de Farmacobiología - IPN, Mexico, Mexico, 5Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of Medicine - CMIER, Chicago, IL, United States, 6Dpt of Pedi -
atric Neurology - Timone Children's Hospital, Marseille, France.
Rett syndrome is a severe X-linked neurological disorder, in which 
most patients carry a mutation in the gene encoding methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MECP2). The clinical course of the disease consists of normal in utero and neonatal development followed by a period of regression showing signs of neurodevelopmental defects (arrest of brain development, loss of acquisitions such as speech and walk, 
apparition of behavioural troubles).Twenty six percent of deaths in Rett girls occur with sudden respiratory arrhythmia. Yet, the breathing irregularity has puzzled clinicians because of its state-dependency. Breathing is regular during sleep and can switch from highly irregular to regular even during wakefulness. Because breathing can be regular many clinicians believe that breathing problems are a consequence of disturbed neocortical rather 
than brainstem mechanisms.To date, little is known when it comes to cellular explanations for any symptom of Rett Syndrome. We performed experiments on wild-type and Mecp2-deﬁcient mice to understand the role of the Mecp2 gene in respiration and bioaminergic systems. We show that adult mice deﬁcient for the Mecp2 gene have erratic breathing with highly variable respiratory rhythm and frequent apneas, reduced norepinephrine content and a drastic reduction of tyrosine-hydroxylase expressing neurons in the medulla. Severe respiratory disturbances are also evident in the isolated medullary respiratory rhythm generating network of Mecp2-/y deﬁcient mice. We propose that breathing irregularities in Rett patients are due to a disturbed aminergic control of the medullary 
respiratory network.P0936. Presence of cell free fetal DNA in peripherial blood of 
patients with ectopic pregnancy
L. Lazar, B. Nagy, Z. Ban, G. R. Nagy, E. Toth-Pal, C. Papp, Z. Papp;  
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
Presence of cell free fetal DNA in peripherial blood of pregnant womans is a well known phenomenon. The quantity of DNA is changing during the pregnancy, and seems to be different in normal and pathological pregnancies. The possible applications by detection, quantiﬁcation and analysis of cell free fetal DNA in non-invasive prenatal diagnosis is the focus of the research. The aim of our study was to detect and to measure the quantity of fetal origin DNA in the peripherial blood of patients with ectopic pregnancy, and to compare with blood samples of women with normal pregnancies. Blood samples of the patients were collected before operative laparoscopy from ten patients with suspect ultrasound ﬁnding, positive pregnancy test and elevated serum hCG level. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis of the SRY region of Y chromosome was performed in order to detect and to measure the quantity of cell free fetal DNA. The diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy was veriﬁed by hystological examination. SRY region was detected in eight hystologicaly prooven ectopic pregnancy cases. The mean gestational age was 9 weeks. Relative quantity of cell free fetal DNA was between 1.067E-04 and 3.986E-02. The results of our study suggest that cell free fetal DNA in the maternal circulation is detectable in cases of ectopic pregnancies. Comparison of the relative quantity of cell free fetal DNA, gestational week and hCG levels between ectopic and normal pregnancies might have importance in early diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy.
P0937. Mutational screening of the RPGR gene in Spanish XLRP 
families
M. Garcia-Hoyos, D. Cantalapiedra, R. Riveiro-Alvarez, E. Vallespin, M. Tru -
jillo, I. Lorda-Sanchez, C. Ramos, C. Ayuso;  
Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain.
Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a degenerative disease of the retina, characterized by night blindness and visual ﬁeld constriction. X- linked form of RP (XLRP; MIM # 268000) is the most severe type of RP because of its early onset and the rapid progression. Five XLRP loci have been mapped: RP2, RP3, RP6, RP23 and RP24. The RP3 locus on Xp21.1 accounts for 60-90% of XLRP.We have analyzed the RPGR gene (RP3 locus) in 34 unrelated Spanish XLRP families. We have performed haplotype analyses to assign the locus responsible of the pathology in each family, in order to determine if the disease is linked to RP3 region. In those families in which the disease segregates with the RP3 locus we have carried out mutational screening of the RPGR gene. We have analyzed the ﬁrst 15 exons of RPGR at mRNA level and the ORF 14 and ORF 15 exons at DNA level by SSCP-PCR and automatic sequence.After haplotype analysis, we were able to rule out the RP3 locus in 5 XLRP families (14,7%). In the rest, we have identiﬁed 15/29 RPGR mutated families, 8 of them were novel and affected individual families. The 2 previously described mutations g.ORF15 481-482 Del AG and g.ORF15 652-653 Del AG have been identiﬁed in 4 and 3 families respectively. We conﬁrmed that exon ORF 15 is a mutational hot spot because 86,7% of the mutations found in our XLRP families were 
located in that region.
P0938. Evidence from autoimmune thyroiditis of skewed 
X-chromosome inactivation in female predisposition to 
autoimmunity
S. Bagislar1, A. Gursoy2, S. Gullu2, E. Uz1, C. Mustafa1, T. Özçelik1;  
1Bilkent University, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology and 
Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ankara University Medical School, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Ankara, Turkey.
The etiologic factors in the development of autoimmune thyroiditis is not fully understood. The disease is approximately ﬁfty times more frequent in women than in men. The role of X-chromosome inactivation has been questioned
 in female predisposition to autoimmunity. Until now 
this has not been illustrated experimentally. We tested the hypothesis that disturbances in X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) mosaicism may be involved in the pathogenesis of autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITDs) Hashimoto thyroiditis and Graves disease. One hundred and nine female autoimmune thyroiditis patients and 160 female controls Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics284
were analyzed for the androgen receptor locus by the HpaII/polymerase 
chain reaction assay to assess XCI patterns in DNA extracted from 
peripheral-blood cells. Furthermore, thyroid biopsy samples were obtained from ﬁve patients whose blood revealed an extremely skewed pattern of XCI, and the analysis repeated. Skewed XCI was observed in DNA from peripheral-blood cells in 27 of 82 informative patients (33 percent) as compared with 10 of 124 informative controls (8 percent, P<0.0001). Extreme skewing was present in 21 patients (26 percent), and only in three controls (2.4 percent, P<0.0001). However, XCI was random in all thyroid biopsy samples. Skewed XCI mosaicism may play a signiﬁcant role in the pathogenesis of autoimmune thyroid diseases.Supported by grants from the Scientiﬁc and Technical Research Council of Turkey - TUBITAK-SBAG 2513, and International Center for 
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology - ICGEB-CRP/TUR04-01.
P0939. Allelic series of arrhythmic disorders caused by different 
mutations in SCN5A  gene.
E. Zaklyazminskaya1, I. Pronicheva2, A. Revishvili2, S. Chuprova3, M. Shkol -
nikova3, A. Chapurnykh4, M. Kharlap5, A. Pevzner5, S. Golitsyn5, A. Polyakov1;  
1Russian Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federa -
tion, 2Bakoulev Scientiﬁc Center for Cardiovascular Surgery, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 3Federal Center of Children's Arrhythmias, Moscow, Russian Fed -
eration, 4Kirov State Medical Academy, Kirov, Russian Federation, 5Cardiology 
Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Molecular medicine seeks to explain why a particular mutation causes a particular clinical phenotype. The 
SCN5A gene has been implicated 
in a wide spectrum of inherited arrhythmic disorders. To date, at least six human diseases have been linked to mutations in the 
SCN5A  
gene: long QT syndrome type3 (LQT3), Brugada syndrome (BS), sick sinus syndrome (SSS), cardiac conduction defect (CCD), sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), and idiopathic ventricular ﬁbrillation (IVF). Here we present the results of genetic screening of the 
SCN5A  
gene. We screened 22 unrelated families with ventricular arrhythmias: 14 probands had LQTS, 6 had BS and 2 had IVF. All patients and their relatives had a detailed clinical checkup. Genomic DNA was isolated from EDTA venous blood by standard methods. For mutation screening, original intronic primers were developed that encompassed the complete coding sequence, the splice sites, and the adjacent areas. We found ﬁve 
SCN5A mutations in six probands: A572D and 
Q1033R in LQTS patients, 848delI and IVS17DS-5A/G in a BS patient, P2005A in an IVF patient, compound mutations A572D and S1431R in 
a patient with a mixed phenotype (BS + SSS).Different 
SCN5A mutations can produce different clinical phenotypes 
due to speciﬁc alterations of the inward INa current. Interestingly, the 
mutation A572D caused different clinical phenotypes in two unrelated patients: LQTS and BS. We suggest that this is due to the inﬂuence of other modiﬁers in 
SCN5A or other relevant genes (for example, these 
patients has differences in the SNPs distribution in SCN5A ).
P0940. Extremely skewed X-chromosome inactivation is 
increased in preeclampsia
E. Uz1, I. Dölen2, S. Bagislar1, A. R. Al2, T. Özçelik1;  
1Bilkent University, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology and 
Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ministry of Health, Etlik Maternity and Women’s 
Health Teaching Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
Preeclampsia is a disorder that affects about 5% of the pregnancies in Europe and US. Major diagnostic criteria include gestational blood pressure increase without a history of hypertension before pregnancy and proteinuria. We tested the hypothesis that skewed X chromosome inactivation (XCI) could be involved in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. Peripheral blood DNA was obtained from 55 preeclampsia patients and 131 age matched control women. Age, pregnancy history, blood pressure, and disease information were collected for clinical characterization of the patients. The androgen receptor locus was analyzed by the 
HpaII/polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) assay to asses XCI patterns in the DNA samples. Male DNA with cytogenetically veriﬁed 46, XY karyotype was used as control for complete digestion. PCR products were run on 10%PAGE and stained with ethidium bromide. XCI patterns were also quantitated by use of radioactive (α-[
33P] - dCTP (NEN) PCR. Densitometric analysis of the 
alleles was performed using the Multi-Analyst software version 1.1 (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Skewed XCI was observed in 13 of 38 informative patients (34.2 percent), and in 10 of 124 informative controls (8 percent, p<0.0001; χ
2 test). Extremeley skewed XCI, deﬁned as >90% 
inactivation of one allele was observed in eight (21 percent) patients and three controls (2.4 percent, p<0.0001). These results raise the possibility that extremely skewed X-inactivation may have a role in the 
pathogenesis of preeclampsia.Supported by grants from the Scientiﬁc and Technical Research Council of Turkey - TUBITAK-SBAG 2513, and International Center for 
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology - ICGEB-CRP/TUR04-01.
P0941. Molecular characterization of hemophilia A in the 
Republic of Macedonia
E. Sukarova Stefanovska1, O. Muratovska2, S. Kostova3, G. D. Efremov1;  
1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Center for Genetic En -
gineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Mace -
donia, 2Pediartic Clinic, Medical Faculty, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic 
of Macedonia, 3Institute of Transfusiology, Medical Faculty, Skopje, The former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
Hemophilia A is a common X-linked bleeding disorder affecting 1 in 5,000 males worldwide. The most common molecular defect is intron 22 inversion, which participates with 45% of all mutations in the factor VIII gene. The rest of the mutations are caused by single nucleotide substitutions in different parts of the gene. The knowledge of the causative gene defect has become an important instrument in hemophilia care with respect to prediction of the patients' clinical course and safe genetic counseling of relatives. The aim of this study was to determine the molecular defects underlying hemophilia A patients from the Republic of Macedonia. The molecular characterization of fVIII gene was performed in 50 unrelated hemophilia A patients. Southern blot analysis was used for detection of inversions in intron 22, while PCR followed by SSCP or DGGE were performed for mutation screening. The molecular defect was found in 34, or 68%, of analyzed patients. The most frequent molecular defect was inversion in intron 22, found in 38% of all studied patients, or in 67.7% severely affected patients. Nucleotide substitutions were found in 15 (30%) patients. With the exception of C->T change in codon 2159 found in 4 (8%) of unrelated patients, the other nucleotide substitutions were private. Two of the mutations were nonsense (Cd272G→T, and Cd1696C→T) while eight were missense of which four were found for the ﬁrst time (Cd-19Met→Arg; Cd78Ala→Pro; Cd2174Cys→Gly; Cd2256Tyr→Asp). Six prenatal diagnosis were successfully performed during this study.
P0942. Analysis of mutations in the ABCB4 (MDR3) gene in 
Czech patients with cholestatic liver disease
M. Hrebicek1, M. Bouckova1, L. Dvorakova1, J. Horák2, J. Sperl3, M. Jirsa3;  
1Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Praha 2, Czech Republic, 21st 
Department of Internal Medicine, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University , 
Praha, Czech Republic, 3Institute for Clinical AND Experimental Medicine 
(IKEM), Praha, Czech Republic.
The ABCB4 (MDR3) is a phospholipid export pump located predominantly at the biliary pole of the hepatocyte. Mutations in the 
ABCB4 gene were found in homozygosisty or heterozygosity in patients with progressive familial intrahepatic cholestatis (PFIC), cholesterol 
gallstones and intrahepatic cholestatis of pregnancy (ICP).
The ABCB4 gene is located at chromosome 7q21.11 and spans more 
than 75 kb.We have analysed 27 protein-encoding exons of ABCB4 gene in 6 Czech families with cholestatic disease, familiar occurence of cholesterol gallstones and recurrent contraceptive pill-induced cholestasis. In three of the families the probands carried on one of the alleles a mutation - c.3608C>G (S1203X), c.1501G>T (E501X), and c.1954A>G (R652G), respectively, and wild type sequence on the other. The fourth proband carried mutations c.523A>G (T175A) a 
c.1371del G (G457X).In two of the families no apparently pathogenic mutations were found. The family 5 proband was heterozygous for 3 synonymous mutations (c.175C>T, L59L; c.504T>C, N168N;c.711A>T, I237I) and the sixth proband carried on one of the alleles the IVS28-16C>T, that is likely 
not pathogenic.Our ﬁndings conﬁrm that mutation analysis of 
ABCB4 should be 
considered in the broadening spectrum of liver diseases including contraceptive pill-induced cholestasis and early onset familial Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics285
gallstones.
Supported by grant IGA MZ CR NM/7510-3.
P0943. Heterozygosity of eight STR markers studied by QF-PCR 
in spanish population
A. Bustamante Aragones , M. Lazaro, M. Garcia-Hoyos, D. Diego-Alvarez, R. 
Cardero, M. Trujillo, C. Ayuso, C. Ramos;  
Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain.
QF-PCR is a recent method for rapid detection of chromosome dosage based on the analysis of highly polymorphic STR markers. These markers must have a large number of alleles with a low frequency to 
give enough information to discriminate the presence of aneuploidies.The application of this technique in the prenatal diagnosis ﬁeld had permitted the diagnosis of the most common aneuploidies in less than 24 hours, reducing parental anxiety. However it is important to asses 
the heterozygosity of these markers for a reliable diagnosis.In this study we have used eight markers for chromosomes 13, 18, 21 X and Y that have been previously described as highly polymorphic (see Table).We have analysed a total of 172 samples. PIC (Polymorphism Information Content) has been calculated to ascertain if the markers were as informative in our population as previously described for other 
populations.The results obtained show that these markers are very polymorphic (PIC > 0,7) although we found slight differences in the heterozygosity 
values previously described.CONCLUSION: The markers previously described are polymorphic enough in our population, so they can be used for the study of the 
most common aneuploidies.
 
Marker 
Chromosome 
location 
Number of 
Homozygotes 
Allele 
Range 
Number 
of 
Alleles 
PIC
 
D13S63113q32.2 33/150188-
2127 0.76
 
D13S63413q14.13 30/114462-
4969 0.8
 
D18S53518q12.3 42/172127-
1517 0.76
 
D18S38618q22.1-22.2 9/111318-
40221 0.91
 
D21S141421q21.1 38/156326-
36611 0.82
 
D21S141121q22.3 25/150267-
31513 0.88
 
X22Xq28/Yqter 17/131196-
24412 0.82
 
XHPRTXq26.1 18/154273-
2977 0.72
P0944. Activated exonic splicing enhancer as a cause of 
homocystinuria
K. Betincova, P. Zavadakova, V. Kozich;  
Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Prague, Czech Republic.
Exonic splicing enhancers (ESE) are elements that interact with SR 
proteins and promote utilization of splice sites. Alteration of their motifs by mutations results in aberrant splicing. The aberrant splicing is also one of the causes of homocystinuria due to the methionine synthase reductase (MTRR) deﬁciency. In this case an intronic substitution T>C (IVS6+469T>C) of the 
MTRR gene putatively leads to activation of 
ESE and induces an insertion of 140 bp pseudoexon between exon 6 and 7. The aim of our study was to test the pathogenicity of this 
mutation.
The in silico  analysis of the pseudoexon strongly suggests the 
proposal mechanism of action of the intronic mutation. The T>C substitution forms a new ESE motif for binding of the SR protein SF2/ASF. This ESE may provide recognition of the cryptic sites delimiting 
the pseudoexon.Aberrant splicing was functionally studied in vivo using exon trapping 
technique. COS-7 cells were transfected with pSPL3 constructs carrying either the wild type or mutant pseudoexon. Splicing products were analysed by RT-PCR with vector speciﬁc primers. The results clearly showed that the pseudoexon is recognized and inserted into mRNA only in the presence of the intronic mutation.In conclusion, the in silico  and functional analyses conﬁrmed that 
the mutation in intron 6 causes aberrant splicing of 
MTRR transcript. 
Our study demonstrates that knowledge of general mechanisms of ESE action may contribute to the understanding of human genetic 
diseases.This study was supported by grant No. 30/2004 from the Grant Agency of Charles University, Czech Republic.
P0945. Novel germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis 
coli gene in Polish FAP patients
A. Plawski , D. Lipinski, R. Slomski;  
Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland.
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant 
predisposition to initiate numerous polyps in the colon and rectum which develop to the carcinoma if left untreated. FAP is caused by inherited or germ line mutations in the 
APC gene. Early recognition 
of the mutation carriers is very important for the medical treatment of persons from the high-risk group. It is estimated that few hundreds of Polish FAP families will be subjected to genetic testing. The DNA bank for Polish FAP patients at the Institute of Human Genetics at Poznan was established in 1997. FAP diagnoses were established in the cooperating health centers. 554 DNA samples from persons belonging to 220 FAP families were collected. 248 patients were diagnosed with FAP, 16 with attenuated FAP and 10 with the Gardner syndrome. 215 persons belong to risk group and 67 persons do not belong to risk group. The entire 
APC gene coding sequence was 
screened for mutations in 195 families. Forty-ﬁve types of mutations were identiﬁed in 74 Polish FAP families. Twenty-nine of them have not been described before. Seven mutations types recurred two ore more times. The recurrent mutations were detected in 52% of diagnosed families. From diagnostic point of view it was possible to diagnose almost all FAP cases on molecular level.
P0946. Identiﬁcation of a deletion in chromosome 1, including 
the ABCA4 gene region, resulting in a Stargardt disease 
phenotype.
R. Riveiro-Alvarez1, D. Valverde2, I. Lorda1, D. Cantalapiedra1, M. Garcia-
Hoyos1, A. Queipo1, M. Rodriguez de Alba1, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1, C. Ramos1, 
C. Ayuso1;  
1FUNDACION JIMENEZ DIAZ, Madrid, Spain, 2Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, 
Spain.
INTRODUCTION: Stargardt disease (STGD) is the most common 
juvenile macular dystrophy, characterised by central visual impairment. All recessively inherited cases are thought to be due to mutations in the ABCA4 gene, mapped to 1p21-p13.PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 85 STGD families were studied. DNA from the patient and relatives was analysed for variants in all 50 exons of the ABCA4 gene by screening on the ABCR400 microarray; the results were conﬁrmed by direct sequencing. Haplotype analyses 
and a HR karyotype were also performed.RESULTS: In one family segregating STGD, we found a patient with hemizygosity for a paternal missense mutation. By haplotype analyses, a maternal non-contribution with apparent segregation of a null allele was identiﬁed. Microsatellite markers spanning over 12 Mb could identify a microdeletion, of at least 7.5 Mb, involving the ABCA4 gene region. The cytogenetic study using high resolution techniques 
(800-900 bands) did not reveal this rearrangement.CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that genomic alterations contribute to only a small fraction of disease-associated alleles of ABCA4. For those cases where a homozygous mutation is found, is recommendable to perform haplotype analyses in order to discard a 
possible situation of hemizygosity due to deletions.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics286
P0947. Familial juvenile hyperuricemic nephropathy (FJHN), 
molecular analysis of 23 families, identiﬁcation and functional 
consequences of 6 uromodulin mutations
M. Kublová1, P. Vyleťal1, K. Hodaňová1, M. Kalbáčová1, J. Sikora1, H. Hůlková1, 
J. Živný2, J. Majewski3, A. Marinaki4, A. Simmonds4, J. Fryns5, G. Venkat-Ra -
man6, S. Kmoch1;  
1Center for Applied Genomics, Praha, Czech Republic, 2Department of Patho -
physiology, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Praha, Czech Repub -
lic, 3Laboratory of Statistical Genetics, Rockefeller Univerzity, New York, NY, 
United States, 4Purine Research Unit, GKT, Guy´s Hospital, London, United 
Kingdom, 5Center for Human genetics, Univerzity of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 
6Renal Unit, Saint Marry´s Hospital, Portsmouth, United Kingdom.
FJHN is an autosomal dominant renal disease characterized by 
juvenile onset of hyperuricemia, gouty arthritis, and progressive renal failure at an early age. In our study of 23 families we found linkage of FJHN to chromosome 16 (CH16) in 8 families. Mutations in the uromodulin (UMOD) gene (16p11.2) were recently proved to be a cause of FJHN. Analyzing UMOD coding sequence including exon/intron boundaries in all families, we found FJHN causing mutations (Cys32Tyr, Cys126Arg, Met229Arg, Pro236Leu, Val 273Phe and Cys317Tyr) only in 6 families.To characterize pathogenic effect, we cloned identiﬁed mutations into eucaryotic expression vector and expressed them in AtT20 cells (not expressing UMOD). We investigated UMOD localisation (immunocytochemistry), post-translational modiﬁcation (Western blot) and dynamics of plasma membrane exposition (ﬂow cytometry).Colocalization immunocytochemical studies proved storage of mutant proteins in endoplasmic reticulum. Western blot analyses revealed that mutant proteins varied in the extent of glycosylation and also in the relative distribution of the glycoforms. Flow cytometry showed lower level of exposed UMOD on plasma membrane in mutant proteins then 
in the wild type.The results suggest two different mechanisms of uromodulin dynamics impairment in FJHN - retention in ER and impairment of protein 
exposition on plasma membrane.
P0948. Experience of molecular diagnostics for genetic 
disorders in Latvia
N. Pronina , R. Lugovska, Z. Muceniece, O. Olhovaya, Z. Krumina, B. Lace, I. 
Balode;  
Latvian State Medical Genetics centre; State Children`s Hospital "Gailezers", 
Riga, Latvia.
The clinical application of genetic investigation started in Latvia in the Riga Medicine Institute, Mother and Children Protection Scientiﬁc Research Department in 1972. The Latvian State Medical Genetics Centre was organized as the only state medical genetics service in the 
Latvia in 1986.DNA diagnostics started in 1997 with the most common autosomal 
recessive metabolic disorder as phenylketonuria.Today DNA testing is available for 9 different genetic disorders: phenylketonuria, spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), X-linked Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deﬁciency, long chain hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deﬁciency, nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT), Fragile X, and Y chromosome AZF deletions.The following methods are used for DNA testing: PCR, multiplex PCR, restriction enzyme digestion, denaturing gel gradient electrophoresis, ﬂuorescent PCR and PCR fragment analysis on ABI Prism 310, direct DNA sequencing.Characterization of the molecular basis of PKU in Latvia has been accomplished through the analysis of 110 unrelated chromosomes from 56 Latvian PKU patients. The most frequent mutation, R408W, accounts for 78 % of Latvian PKU alleles, and six mutations (R408W, E280K, R158Q, A104D, R261Q and P281L) represent about 93 % of 
PKU chromosomes.Fifty patients suspected of having spinal muscular atrophy were analysed. Fourteen patients (28%) are homozygous for the 
SMN1  
deletion. Three patients have a conﬁrmed diagnosis of DMD. Eight patients from 13 referred for molecular diagnostic have a conﬁrmed diagnosis of CMT.This year we are going to start DNA testing for Huntington disease and 
BCR-ABL  gene transcript detection.P0949. Use of multiplex SNaPshot reaction for the detection 
of ﬁve prevalent mutations in GJB2 gene in Czech prelingual 
deafness patients.
I. Sakmaryova , P. Seeman;  
Charles University, 2nd School of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.
Summary: Bialellic pathogenic mutations in GJB2 gene are detectable 
in 39,2% Czech patients with prelingual deafness. The 3 most common mutations (35delG, W24X, 313del14) represent 96,2% of all pathogenic mutations detected in the coding region of GJB2. Testing for mutation in intron1 of GJB2 rises the detection rate of GJB2 mutations. So far GJB2 mutations are tested by direct sequencing of the entire coding region at the exon2 and noncoding exon1. In 51,9% patients no mutation is found by sequencing. We evaluated a new method for simultaneous detection of the 5 most common GJB2 mutations (35delG, W24X, 313del14, delE120, IVS 1+1 G in A), which could make the DNA testing of GJB2 in hearing impairment patients faster and more simple. SnaPshot reaction represents a single-base extension reaction using only dye-terminator nucleotides. Products are analyzed on capillary electrophoresis analyzer ABI310.Method: We tested 50 DNA samples from Czech patients with prelingual deafness which were previously tested by direct sequencing. 2 PCR fragments including both the coding exon2 and the noncoding exon1 of the GJB2 gene were tested in 2 SNaPshot reactions. The products of both reactions were analyzed simultaneously.Results: Genotypes of all patients tested with SNaPshot were in 
correlation with the results of previous direct sequencing analysis.Conclusion: Correct genotype of the GJB2 gene was detected in all 50 cases by multiplex SnaPshot. This method is suitable for further 
diagnostic procedure.Supported by Czech ministry of health grant No: IGA NM 7417-3.
P0950. Clinical Performance Validation Of A Diagnostic Kit For 
Common European Cystic Fibrosis Mutations
E. Schreiber1, S. Koepf1, R. Rico1, L. Christenson1, M. Jama2, E. Lyon2, L. W. 
Thompson3, K. Friedman3, A. Stafford4, A. Kellogg4;  
1Celera Diagnostics, Alameda, CA, United States, 2ARUP Institute for Clinical 
and Experimental Research, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 3Labcorp, Re -
search Triangle Park, NC, United States, 4Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
MD, United States.
Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is caused by mutations in the cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. We have recently launched a new diagnostic device (kit) for genotyping mutations in the CF gene that meets the CE mark requirements of the European In Vitro Diagnostics Directive (IVDD). The kit is based on multiplex PCR ampliﬁcation and subsequent probing of the various alleles by the oligonucleotide ligation assay (OLA). The assay detects the mutant and normal alleles for 33 common multi-ethnic mutations in a core panel. In addition, reﬂex reagents are provided for the genotyping of polymorphisms 5T, 7T, and 9T in intron 8 as well as for I506V, I507V and F508C in exon 10. Samples are automatically electrophoresed on the Applied Biosystems ABI PRISM® 3100 Genetic Analyzer. The resulting data are analyzed in an automated fashion using Applied Biosystems GeneMapper™ software and a template that has been conﬁgured for the CF assay. We demonstrated the clinical performance of the kit reagents and the CF-speciﬁc analysis system in a formal clinical trial using 3 external test sites and one internal site. Three lots of reagents were tested with a double-blinded panel of samples that contained all mutations to be detected by the assay. All samples were genotyped correctly by all four test sites demonstrating 100 % speciﬁcity and 100 % sensitivity.
P0951. Prenatal diagnosis in a spanish family affected with 
CMT1-A disease
M. Trujillo-Tiebas, J. Gallego-Merlo, A. Giménez-Pardo, D. Cantalapiedra, M. 
Rodriguez de Alba, I. Lorda, C. Ramos, C. Ayuso;  
Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain.
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is the most frequent inherited peripheral 
neuropathy. A microduplication of 1.5 Mb containing the gene for peripheral myelin protein 22 (PMP22) on chromosome 17p11.2 is responsible for the 75% of cases of demyelinating form (CMT1A). Diagnosis in our laboratory is performed with STR markers located inside the microduplication, according to the European Guidelines of Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics287
EMQN. The results are compatible with the diagnosis of CMT type 1 
disease if we detect three alleles or if we detect dosage effect in at 
least two markers.Prenatal diagnosis requires some special considerations: The mutation of the affected parent should be known, and it is also recommended to know the phase of the markers for both parents to facilitate the 
analysis.We present the ﬁrst prenatal diagnosis of CMT1A disease performed in our laboratory.Two sets of PCRs with 8 STR markers were performed to construct the haplotypes of a family with an affected pregnant patient, her affected 
sister and her husband.Four markers were informative (D17S839; D17S955; D17S1357; D17S921). We predicted the four possible embryonic haplotypes (two affected and two healthy). Peak patterns of the STR markers and the dosage effect was also estimated previous to the prenatal analysis, which ultimately showed that the fetus inherited the haplotype with the 
associated microduplication. 
Conclusions:
1st The prenatal diagnosis of this pathology requires a molecular study 
of the couple previous to the prenatal study.
2nd Experience in STR genotyping methods for the detection of dosage 
effect is highly recommended.
P0952. Detection of two independent deletions of the SMN1 gene 
in the same SMA family branch: a word of caution for carrier 
diagnosis.
E. F. Tizzano , M. Barcelo, L. Caselles, M. Cornet, M. Baena, M. Baiget;  
Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common autosomal recessive 
disorder caused by mutations in the SMN1 gene. Relatives of affected patients usually request genetic counselling resulting in a high demand for carrier testing. A number of reliable quantitative methods for carrier detection have been implemented with a risk of approximately 5% for false negative results owing to the presence of two copies of SMN1 in the same chromosome. DNA markers linked to the SMN locus can be used to exclude carrier status and to complement the quantitative 
results.We present a family with a SMA patient with homozygous deletion in the SMN1 gene in which 33 members of the paternal branch were analysed. Following Real-Time quantitative analysis, several ﬁrst and second degree branch relatives showed one copy of the SMN1 gene and were diagnosed as carriers. Marker analysis in some members with one copy demonstrated discordance, being carriers of a deletion on a different chromosomal background. We concluded that two deletions of different origins exist in this branch of the family. Marker analysis allowed us also to identify carriers with two SMN1 copies in the same 
chromosome and one of the deletions in the remaining chromosome.In the light of the ﬁnding of two independent deletions in the same branch of the family carrier testing in SMA should be performed employing both, quantitative and marker analysis in order to avoid pitfalls in carrier identiﬁcation and to allow a more accurate genetic 
counselling.
Supported by FIS 02-1275 and Red Inergen C03/05.
P0953. Tess (Telencephalic Embryonic Subtractive 
Sequences): a sub-collection of genes potentially involved with 
Holoprosencephaly
P. Carotenuto1, A. Bulfone2, A. Veruska1, A. Bello1, L. Garzia1, A. Faedo2, N. 
Marino1, C. Roma1, V. Mafﬁa1, J. Rubenstein3, A. Iolascon1, E. Roessler4, M. 
Muenke4, M. Zollo1;  
1CEINGE, Naples, Italy, 2SCRI - HSR, Istituto Scientiﬁco San Raffaele, Milan, 
Italy, 3Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, University of 
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 4Medical Genet -
ics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, United 
States.
One of the neurodevelopmental defects for which several genes are still unknown is Holoprosencephaly (HPE), a birth defect involving the failure of the prosencephalon to cleave into the cerebral and lateral hemispheres. The aim of this project is the functional characterization of new genes involved in the developing mouse telencephalon as being potentially involved in human neurodevelopmental disorders and correlated to HPE.We used a bioinformatic analysis and annotation, a high-resolution expression analyses by mRNA in situ hybridization, together with a gene array expression experiments in both Neural Stem Cells and Neuro2A cells, to identify several "unknown function" genes expressed during the neural differentiation processes. Of the cDNA collection we studied 832 cDNA, of which 323 (39%) correspond to novel rare transcripts, and includes 48 (14%) new putative MicroRNAs. Because this selected enriched cDNA source contains genes expressed in telencephalon (between E.7.5 to E.14.5), we think this source is enriched for genes involved in telencephalon development, which may be responsible for HPE in humans. On the basis of their homology and map positions near human holoprosencephaly candidate regions, twenty-three human TESS homologues (two hypothetical pre-miRNA and twenty-one novel transcripts) were selected for further characterization. We will present results on their expression at early stages of mouse development (E. 7.5) by Real Time PCR. Then we will attempt to select the best candidates for mutational analyses in the DNA of patients affected with HPE. Additionally, two pre-miRNAs will be presented to identify and validate their targets as potentially 
involved in HPE.
P0954. Nine novel mutations in EYA1  and one novel mutation in 
SIX1  in a BOR patient cohort
A. F. Baas1, K. van der Donk1, J. Schoots1, C. W. Cremers2, N. V. Knoers1, H. 
Scheffer1, L. H. Hoefsloot1;  
1Dept Human Genetics, St Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands, 2Dept Otorhinolaryngology, St Radboud University Medical Cen -
tre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Branchio-oto-renal (BOR) syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder, affecting both the internal and external ears, the branchial structures and the kidneys. It is estimated that in 50% of BOR patients, the genetic defect lies within the 
Eya1 gene. Recently, Six1 mutations 
were shown to account for a subset of Eya1 positive BOR patients. 
Eya1 and Six1 physically interact and form an active transcritional 
complex witin the Eya-Six-Pax-Dachshund  genetic network.
Over the last 5 years, we collected 55 BOR patients. In those patients, we identiﬁed three described and nine novel 
Eya1 mutations. Ten 
mutations were identiﬁed in patients with a positiveFamily history, 2 additional mutations in sporadic cases. In addition, we tested six clearly diagnosed BOR patients for 
Six1 mutations, and 
identiﬁed one novel missense mutation within the Six-domain.In a substantial part of our BOR patient cohort, no causative mutation was found. Completion of 
Six1 analysis may lead to the identiﬁcation 
of additional causative alterations. Furthermore, gross deletions of the Eya1 and Six1 genes may be present in patients with no reported mutation. Another possibility is that several of our patients were misdiagnosed. However, it appears equally likely that mutations in 
novel BOR genes are responsible for the onset of disease.
P0955. Suspected triallelism in Leber Congenital Amaurosis 
detected using a genotyping microarray
E. Vallespin, D. Cantalapiedra, C. Villaverde, M. Garcia-Hoyos, R. Riveiro-Al -
varez, M. Trujillo-Tiebas, C. Ramos, C. Ayuso;  
Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain.
Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) is the earliest and most severe form of all genetic retinal dystrophy causing blindness. Non syndromic LCA has been associated with mutations in eight genes: AIPL1, CRB1, CRX, GUCY2D, MERTK, LRAT, RPE65 and RPGRIP1. These genes are involved in different physiologic pathways of the retina.We report a mutational analysis of all eight genes in 111 unrelated families. Mutational analysis was performed in 24 families diagnosed with LCA, 53 with early onset Retinitis Pigmentosa and 34 not-early-onset Retinitis Pigmentosa. Samples were studied with a microarray (Asperbio) followed by a family study and direct sequencing in the laboratory.The respective frequencies of mutant alleles are: 23% (11/48) for LCA with 7 mutated families (one carried an homozygous mutation, two are compound heterozygotes, three are single heterozygotes, and one is digenic, possible triallelism), 15% (16/106) for early-onset ARRP with 13 mutated families (one carried an homozygous mutation, ten are single heterozygotes and two are digenic, possible triallelism) and 6% Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics288
(4/68) with 4 mutated families with ARRP not-early-onset (all four are 
single heterozygotes). CRB1 is the most mutated gene in Spanish affected families.The combination of microarray and laboratory analysis is an optimal option for ﬁnding new disease alleles and it allows detecting cases of 
possible triallelism.There is a gradient in mutation frequencies with respect to onset and severity of retinal disease, so correct classiﬁcation of families is 
fundamental.The relative percentage of mutations found with the microarray 
suggests that more LCA-associated genes remain to be discovered.
P0956. Rapid identiﬁcation of female haemophilia A carriers with 
deletions in the F8 gene by quantitative Real-Time PCR analysis.
M. J. Barcelo, E. F. Tizzano, M. Baena, M. Cornet, A. Vencesla, J. Mateo, J. 
Fontcuberta, M. Baiget;  
Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
Patients with haemophilia A have a bleeding disorder caused by a 
deﬁcient function of the coagulation factor VIII. The identiﬁcation of carriers of the disease is an essential part of genetic counselling and prenatal diagnosis. The present approach to carrier diagnosis of HA depends on the type of mutation involved in the family. Large deletions of the F8 gene account for approximately 5% of severe HA patients. Although deletions are readily detectable in males, the identiﬁcation of heterozygosity in possible carriers of these families still constitutes a challenge. In order to identify a deleted allele over the background of the normal allele in these carriers, we developed a rapid real-time quantitative PCR approach by means of LightCycler technology and SYBR green I for monitoring product formation. The method was applied to families with independent deletions (one in exon 14 and the other in exons 23-24) of the F8 gene, thereby allowing a reliable determination of carrier or non-carrier status. The method is extremely versatile and can be adapted to other deletions within the F8 gene as well as to other diseases whose molecular pathology consists of 
deletions or duplications.Supported by Fundació Catalana d´Hemoﬁlia and Red Inergen 
C03/05.
P0957. Alpha-Thalassemia molecular determinants
A. Moradmand, M. Karimipour, M. T. Akbari ;  
Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The a-thalassemias are probably the commonest monogenic condition worldwide. However, because of the restricted distribution of their more severe forms, they pose a less serious global health problems than the β-thalassemias. Nevertheless, the milder alleles which reach extremely high frequencies in some populations are cause for concern. Because many of them result in varying degrees of hypochromic anemia they are frequently mistaken for iron deﬁciency. Furthermore, they may have quite profound effect on the phenotypes of different varieties of β-thalassemia. Most of the deletional types (-a or -- genes) could be determined by GAP-PCR in a mutiplex format. The point mutation alleles are analyzed by ARMS-PCR. In this manuscript we describe the result of molecular screening for a-thalassemia mutations in 350 suspected carrier individuals. Most of those individuals are from south of Iran. The mutation for one third of the cases could not be characterized by the routine PCR appraoach. Amongst those diagnosed, the most frequent allele was the mild -a
3.7 in both heterozygous and homozygous forms 
with 65% and 17.5% respectively. This allele is also common in other populations in the region. The other common mild allele, i.e. the -a
4.2, 
had a much less frequency of around 2%. The point mutation allele 
a5NT del allele was observed at 7% frequency. From the severe alleles of 
-a20.5 and -MED, each were observed at 4% frequency. Further work is 
underway to fully characterize the complete spectrum of a-thalassemia 
mutations.
P0958. The S allele of alpha-1-antitrypsin associates milder lung 
disease in cystic ﬁbrosis patients under 15 years old
J. J. Telleria1, I. Fernandez1, M. J. Alonso1, C. Vazquez2, F. Baranda3, I. Diez3, 
E. Arranz1, J. A. Garrote4, A. Blanco1;  
1Universidad - IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital Cruces, Bilbao, Spain, 3IBGM, 
Valladolid, Spain, 4Hospital-Universidad, Valladolid, Spain.
The severity of the pulmonary disease in cystic ﬁbrosis patients cannot be predicted in patients with severe CFTR mutations partially due to 
the inﬂuence of genetic modiﬁers.The aim of this study was to investigate whether deﬁcient alleles of A1AT modulates the respiratory disease in cystic ﬁbrosis patients.Sixty one cystic ﬁbrosis patients were initially included in the study. CFTR mutations and the S and Z alleles of the A1AT gene were genotyped. In order to minimise the role of the CFTR genotype, patients with mild mutations were excluded of the study. Data corresponding to the basal forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1), Crispin-Norman score and forced vital capacity (FVC) under 15 years of life were 
retrospectively recordedTwenty patients carried at least one copy of the deﬁcient variant type S. No patients bearing the Z allele were found.. FEV1 values were higher in patients bearing the S allele. FVC values and Crispin-Norman 
scoring showed a trend to better results within this group.S allele is associated with better pulmonary function in cystic ﬁbrosis patients with pancreatic insufﬁciency under 15y of age and FEV1 is the functional indicator showing the best correlation with the presence 
of the S allele.
P0959. Rapid screening of Beta-thalassaemia mutations by 
heteroduplex analysis with capillary array electrophoresis (HA-
CAE) in the population of Castilla-Leon region (Spain)
M. J. Alonso Ramos1,2, E. Pestaña1, M. Duran3, E. Esteban3, M. Infante3, E. 
Velasco3, I. Fernandez1, B. Lopez1, j. telleria1, A. Blanco1;  
1Dept.Pediatria(IBGM), Valladolid, Spain, 2IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 3(IBGM), 
Valladolid, Spain.
We present a new method to detect mutations in the Beta-globin gene 
based in heteroduplex analysis by capillary array electrophoresis.In the last years more than 150 molecular defects in the human b-globin gene have been characterized. The gene maps to human chromosome 11 and consists of three exons separated by two introns. Mutations in the b-globin gene sequence can reduce the b-globin protein synthesis 
(β+thalassaemia) or even to abolish it completely (β0 thalassaemia). 
These alterations in the β-globin chains synthesis are an important 
health problem, specially among the Mediterranean population.We have analysed 47 DNA samples of patients with thalassemic trait (heterozigotes) : microcitosis and anomalous HbA
2 , and we have 
characterized 34 mutations (72,34%) analyzing only two exons of the B-globin gene, showing that the most frequent mutation in this population is CD 39 C-T substitution. These results are in agreement with those obtained by the DGGE method (Denaturant Gradient Gel Electrophoresis), but the mutation detection rate of this last method was only of the 70%. Furthermore, the posibility of use a multiplex PCR for the two exons and the reproducibility of electropherograms for each mutation pattern is an advantage for the mutation screening in 
the beta -globin gene in our population.
P0960. Analysis of HFE1  gene mutations in a group of steel 
makers and in a cohort of CF patients from Ukraine
L. A. Livshits, V. Pampuha, M. Nechyporenko;  
Institute of Molecular Biology & Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine.
Hereditary haemohromatosis is the prototype disorder of iron overload due to misregulated iron homeostasis in humans. That may result in severe systemic disease, such as cirrhosis, liver disease, pancreatic insufﬁciency, cardiomyopathy, diabetes mellitus, etc.In our study we compared the prevalence of the genotype C282Y/+ in a group of 49 patients with pancreatic insufﬁciency and diabetes mellitus and a control group (n=97). The prevalence in the patients (30.9%) was signiﬁcantly increased (p=0.032). Interestingly, all the patients worked 
in conditions of exogenous iron overload (steel makers, welders).In order to investigate the possible role of HFE1 gene mutations in modulation of the severity of gastrointestinal insufﬁciency in patients with cystic ﬁbrosis the C282Y and H63D mutations were analyzed in a cohort of 35 CF patients with severe gastrointestinal insufﬁciency and/or liver disease. The frequency of the C282Y mutation was the same in the control and CF groups. The frequency of H63D in the control and CF groups was 17% and 30% respectively. This difference is statistically signiﬁcant (p=0.01), and the prevalence of the genotype H63D/H63D was signiﬁcantly elevated in the CF group (p=0.05). Our data may show evidence of a possible role of 
HFE1 gene mutations in 
the pathogenesis of CF.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics289
P0961. Epigenetic regulations of the FMR1 gene: the role of the 
histone code.
R. Pietrobono1, E. Tabolacci1, F. Zalfa2,3, I. Zito1, A. Terracciano1, U. Moscato4, 
C. Bagni2,3, B. A. Oostra5, P. Chiurazzi1, G. Neri1;  
1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del S. Cuore, Roma, Italy , 2Di-
partimento di Biologia, Università di Roma ‘Tor Vergata’, Roma, Italy, 3Istituto di 
Farmacologia, Fondazione Santa Lucia IRCCS, Roma, Italy, 4Istituto di Igiene, 
Università Cattolica del S. Cuore, Roma, Italy, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, 
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
The fragile X syndrome is caused by a >200 CGG repeat expansion 
within the FMR1 gene promoter, with consequent DNA hypermethylation and inactivation of its expression. To clarify the mechanisms that suppress the activity of the mutant gene, we investigated the acetylation and methylation status of histones in three regions of the FMR1 gene (promoter, exon 1 and exon 16) in fragile X cell lines, using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) coupled with real-time PCR. Basal levels of histone acetylation and H3-K4 methylation were much higher in transcriptionally active controls than in fragile X cells. Treatment of fragile X cells with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine induced a decrease of H3-K9 methylation, an increase of H3 and H4 acetylation and an increase of H3-K4 methylation. On the other hand, treatment with acetyl-L-carnitine, which does not reactivate the FMR1 gene, resulted in increased histone acetylation, in spite of persisting DNA methylation and low H3-K4 methylation. Finally, the analysis of a cell line (5106), derived from a rare individual of normal intelligence with an unmethylated full mutation, revealed that this cell line expresses normal mRNA levels and reduced levels of FMRP protein (-30%). The epigenotype of line 5106 is surprising, with H3-K4 methylation comparable to controls, but deacetylated histones and methylated H3-K9, like fragile X cells, in both the promoter and exon 1. Our experiments indicate that H3-K4 methylation and DNA demethylation are the main epigenetic switches activating the expression of the FMR1 gene, with histone acetylation 
and H3-K9 methylation playing an ancillary role.
P0962. Molecular and methylation analysis of the FMR1 gene 
promotor and repeat region in twelve fragile X Spanish families
B. López , I. Fernández, M. J. Alonso, E. Velasco, J. Tellería, A. Blanco;  
Universidad de Valladolid-IBGM, Valladolid, Spain.
Fragile X syndrome (FRAXA) is the most common cause known of inherited mental retardation. Although no treatment is yet available the diagnosis of this syndrome in a child is essential in order to provide the family with genetic counselling. Because of this, molecular screening programs in mentally retarded individuals have been performed in several regions of Spain. Its variable phenotypic expression makes the clinical suspicion and genetic diagnostics difﬁcult, especially for premutation and intermediate alleles. New techniques in DNA analysis like methylation-sensitive PCR (MSP), novel approaches in DNA and bisulphite sequencing allow both affected individuals and carriers to be tested in a more precise way from a simple blood sample, and assist esearch about the molecular mechanisms involved. We have recently applied these techniques in 12 families with fragile X syndrome in order to improved fragile X diagnostics and do a retrospective study of the transmission of intermediate, premutation and full mutation alelles, to reach a better understanding of trinucleotide CGG repeat expansion. By means of repeat region sequencing we haved analyzed the absence of intervening AGG interruptions associated with instability of intermediate and premutation alleles. Methylation-sensitive PCR and bisulphite sequencing allow us to study the methylation status of the 
FMR1 gene promotor and CpG island repeat in these patients 
to attempt to understand the epigenetic mechanisms implicated in 
FMR1 gene regulation in order to acquire a better understanding of 
the molecular basis of FRAXA.
P0963. Hereditary hemochromatosis mutation S65C prevalence 
in general population of Latvia and patients with iron overload
I. Micule1, J. Keish1, V. Sondore2, N. Pronina1, B. Rozentale2, A. Krumina1;  
1Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 2Infectology center of Latvia, Riga, Lat -
via.
Background. The hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is an inborn disorder characterized by iron overload of parenchymal organs. The disease is caused by mutations of gene HFE. The mutation S65C is found on 7.8% of patients' chromosomes that lack the two most common mutations C282Y and H63D, and is associated with a milder form of the disease. The population frequency of the mutation S65C varies between populations. The frequency of HH mutations C282Y and H63D in healthy Latvian population has been reported earlier and is 3.5% and 12.1% respectively. 
Objectives. To establish the 
mutation S65C frequency in population of Latvia, and to analyze DNA of patients with iron overload for mutations C282Y, H63D and 
S65C. Materials and methods. The DNA analysis was performed in 
a group of 155 healthy residents of Latvia and in 48 patients with iron overload. The DNA was extracted from whole blood, PCR, restriction enzyme digestion and polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was used for mutation analysis. 
Results. Of 310 chromosomes of general 
population examined, 3 carried the mutation S65C. The resulting mutation frequency is 0.0097, with a heterozygous carrier frequency of 1.9% or ≈ 1:50. Of 48 patients with iron overload, 5 were conﬁrmed to have hereditary hemochromatosis, the detected genotypes were: C282Y/C282Y - 2 patients, C282Y/H63D - 2 patients, H63D/S65C - 1 patient. 2 of the rest were heterozygous for mutation C282Y, 11 - for mutation H63D, and 1 - for mutation S65C. The resulting frequency of 
mutation S65C among patients with iron overload is 0.021.
P0964. Expression studies of Sall4  and its interaction with Sall1
L. Malinouskaya1, J. Kohlhase2, A. U. Mannan1, W. Engel1;  
1Institute for Human Genetics, Goettingen, Germany, 2Institute for Human Ge -
netics and Anthropology, Freiburg, Germany.
Sall4  belongs to the spalt  (sal) family of proteins, which are 
characterized by their unique multiple double zinc ﬁngers motifs. Sall proteins act as transcriptional repressor factors and have been implicated in development and disease. Four members of 
Sall family 
have been identiﬁed in mouse and human. Mutations in SALL4 are 
associated with Okihiro syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder characterised by forelimb defects and Duane anomaly. 
SALL1 
mutations cause Townes-Brocks syndrome which has an overlapping phenotype with Okihiro syndrome. Our investigation is focused on the characterization of 
Sall4  expression in mouse and its interaction with 
Sall1 . In the previous studies strong expression of Sall4 was found in 
the developing neural tube and limbs. In present study we report new alternative splicing variants of 
Sall4 , transcripts which we named Sall4  
major and Sall4  minor. Sall4  minor variant contains a unique exon 
instead of exon 1 of Sall4  major, which we named exon 1a. Exon 1a 
encodes for a translation initiation site which differ from Sall4  major 
only in amino acids (1-40). Expression during embryonic development for both transcripts was detectable as early as E7.5 and gradually decreases until E17.5. Real-time RT-PCR analysis revealed lower expression level of 
Sall4  minor variant in compare with Sall4  major. To 
study the interaction of Sall4 with Sall1  we use biochemical approach. 
Epitope tagged Sall4 , Sall1  and truncated Sall1 (dominant negative 
fragment) were transfected into NIH 3T3 cells and interaction were studied by co-immunoprecipitation and co-localization experiments. The results will be presented in the poster.
P0965. Molecular analysis of Czech and Slovak patients with 
Methylmalonic aciduria
L. Mrazova , E. Pospisilova, O. Martincova, J. Zeman;  
Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, General Faculty Hospital and 1st Fac -
ulty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
Methylmalonic aciduria (MMA) is an autosomal recesive disorder caused by a functional defect in the nuclear encoded mitochondrial enzyme methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MCM, EC 5.4.99.2, gene 
MUT ) 
which catalyzes the isomeration of L-methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA. MMA can also result from the defects in the synthesis of MCM cofactor adenosylcobalamin: cblA is caused by the defect in the mitochondrial Cbl transport (gene 
MMAA) and cblB is caused by the 
defect in the cob(I)alamin adenosyltransferase (EC 2.5.1.17, gene 
MMAB ).
We have examined eight patients with MMA. Enzyme assay revealed ﬁve patients with mut MMA and three with defect of cblA/B. Subsequently we detected 16 mutated alleles. On the basis of molecular studies we were able to distinguish between the cblA (one patient) and cblB (two 
patients).Four novel mutations were found in the 
MUT gene - two novel missense 
mutations (c.1881T>A and c.1105C>T), one nonsense (c.2179C>T) Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics290
and one splicing mutation. The splicing mutation is caused by unknown 
intronic mutation. It leads to two mRNAs of different length caused by deletion of exon 4 in the ﬁrst transcript and deletion of exon 4 and part of the exon 3 in the second transcript. One novel indel mutation (c.558_559delGGinsC) was found in the 
MMAB gene and one novel 
insertion (c.551insG) was found in the MMAA  gene.
The results of molecular analyses have been already used in the prenatal diagnoses in two affected families.This study is supported by IGA MZ CR 7617-3 and partially by VZ 
MSM CR 0021620806.
P0966. Molecular diagnostics of pathogenic fungi in patients 
treated with hormonal replacement therapy.
S. A. Wisniewski , M. Koralewska-Kordel, K. Jurzyk, Z. Przybylski;  
University of Medical Sciences, Department of Forensic Medicine, Poznan, 
Poland.
Fungal infections of oral cavity are very common in general population 
(30-40% occurrence) especially in patients with dental wears. Medical treatment, especially immunosuppression, could be additional risk factor of fungal infection. Hormonal replacement therapy could result in nonspeciﬁc immunomodulation probably caused by leukocyte activation dependent on estrogen receptor polymorphism. Molecular methods of identiﬁcation of pathogenic fungi are universally applicable in contrast to limitations of morphological characteristics. Our aim of study was recognition of pathogenic fungi by molecular analyses and correlation between the presence of fungi and estrogen receptor polymorphism known as a PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms in control group and group of patients treated with hormonal replacement therapy. DNA was isolated from vaginal and oral swabs. A panel of 100 DNA derived from normal individuals was used to establish allele frequencies for control population. Universal primes, targeting the conserved regions of ITS1 and ITS2 respectively, were used for ampliﬁcation. DNA pattern from known fungal strains was established for comparison with clinical samples. PCR products were analyzed with real-time PCR using Lightcycler System. Results show the presence 
of Candida albicans  with or without Candida Glabrata in almost all 
clinical samples. In several cases analyses revealed infection with more than two fungal species. The allele frequencies for the PvuII and XbaI RFLPs in our control population were found as follows: P allele 0.48; p allele 0.52; X allele 0.37; x allele 0.63. In group of patients frequencies were similar, but frequency of infection with more than one fungal species was higher.
P0967. Analysis of gene expression in Pax3  null mouse embryos 
using Affymetrix microarrays
K. R. Prescott1, D. Henderson2, M. Hubank1, P. Scambler1;  
1Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Human Genet -
ics, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
Pax3 is a paired box containing transcription factor expressed in the region of the dorsal neural tube that gives rise to migrating neural crest populations. Mutations in 
Pax3 result in neural crest defects in 
mouse and man. Heterozygous mutations in human PAX3 give rise to 
Waardenburg syndrome which comprises of deafness and pigmentary defects of the hair, skin and iris. 
Pax3 null mouse embryos exhibit 
conotruncal heart defects and abnormalities of the thymus, thyroid and parathyroids. They also suffer from defects of neural tube closure such as spina biﬁda and exencephaly and have abnormal development of their dorsal root ganglia, sympathetic ganglia and somitic tissues. To understand the genetic aetiology of the defects seen in the 
Pax3  
null mouse, RNA was extracted from the branchial arch region of 3 e10.5 embryos and hybridised to Affymetrix microarray chips (wild type n=3, 
Pax3 null n=3). The expression proﬁles of the chips were 
analysed statistically to arrive at a list of signiﬁcantly changed genes. Several genes involved in outﬂow tract formation, neural tube closure, neurogenesis and somite development were found to be signiﬁcantly up or downregulated in 
Pax3 null mouse embryos. Some of these 
genes changes were veriﬁed by RTQPCR. This study contributes to the understanding of defects in mammalian neural crest migration and 
provides candidate genes for potential Pax3  targets.P0968. A new splicing isoform of LOX-1 is protective against 
acute myocardial infarction
R. Mango1, F. Clementi2, F. Del Vecchio1, F. Amati1, S. Grelli3, A. Filareto1, P. 
Spitalieri1, I. Filesi4, C. Favalli3, S. Biocca4, F. Sangiuolo1, J. L. Mehta5, F. Ro -
meo2,5, G. Novelli1,5;  
1Dept of Biopathology Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2Dept of Internal 
Medicine Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 3Dept of Microbiology Tor Vergata 
University, Rome, Italy, 4Dept of Neuroscience Tor Vergata University, Rome, 
Italy, 5University for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States.
Lectin like oxidized LDL receptor-1 (LOX-1) is a scavenger receptor formerly identiﬁed as a membrane receptor for oxidized LDL (OxLDL). LOX-1 activation is associated with endothelial and monocyte/macrophage apoptosis and adhesion of monocytes to activated endothelial cells. Independent association genetic studies have demonstrated the implication of LOX-1 gene variants in myocardial infarction susceptibility (MI). Since single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) linked to MI are located in intronic sequences of the gene, it remains unclear as to how they determine their biological effects. We show that intronic SNPs associated with MI regulate the expression of a new functional splicing isoform of the LOX-1 gene (LOXIN) lacking exon5. Using quantitative Real-Time PCR and minigene approach, we demonstrate that subjects, carrying the disease susceptible haplotype at LOX-1 gene, show a decreased expression of LOXIN mRNA and an increase in the expression of LOX-1. The hypothesized protective effect of LOXIN was investigated by analysis of the macrophage apoptosis induced by OxLDL. Flow cytometric analysis showed a 24% reduction in apoptotic cells number in subjects carrying the “no risk haplotype”. These data conﬁrm that the increase of LOXIN mRNA protects cells from apoptosis supporting the protective role of LOXIN overexpression against MI. To investigate the cellular localization of LOX-1 and LOXIN, we tagged both cDNA sequence with that of the green ﬂuorescent protein (GFP) showing an impaired intracellular trafﬁc to the plasma membrane of the LOXIN-GFP fusion protein. Our ﬁndings provide evidence for a direct link between the LOX-1 
expression and the pathogenesis of MI.
P0969. 10 years of DNA diagnostic services in Estonia
E. Raukas1,2, T. Kahre1,3, K. Õunap4,5, A. Metspalu1,6;  
1Molecular Diagnostic Center, Tartu University Clinics United Laboratory, Tartu, 
Estonia, 2Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 3Children's Clinic and Women's 
Clinic, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 4Molecular Diagnostic Center and 
Medical Genetic Center, Tartu University Clinics United Laboratory, Tartu, Esto -
nia, 5Children's Clinic, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 6Estonian Biocen -
tre and Department of Biotechnology, Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia.
Molecular Diagnostic Center was established in 1996 for DNA testing and newborn screening for phenylketonuria and hypothyroidism for whole Estonia. Since 2001 it belongs to the United Laboratories of Tartu University Clinics. Introducing the DNA diagnostics was started from cystic ﬁbrosis. Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy and Fragile X syndrome were next obvious choices. By 2005, the number of tested disorders has increased to 28 (www.dnatest.med.ee). The most recent DNA tests are Stargardt disease, Usher syndrome, retinitis pigmentosa, CF, deafness, Leber congenital amaurosis where several hundred mutations are analysed using APEX (arrayed primer extension) microarrays (collaboration with Asper Biotech).The Estonian population is 1,35 million with 14 053 newborn in 2004. More than 3000 patients have been tested up to now. The most frequent test is one for cystic ﬁbrosis and/or CBAVD. Two most common mutations in CF gene are F508del and 394delTT accounting for 54% and 14 % of all CF chromosomes. Another big group of patients are tested for Fragile X syndrome. Altogether 13 patients were found. Interestingly, from four spinocerebellar ataxias 11 patients were diagnosed as SCA2, and only one as SCA1. The largest number of tests performed last year was factor V Leiden and prothrombin gene G20210A mutations as risk factors for thrombophilia, both introduced in 2004. 22 patients out of 95 were factor V Leiden heterozygous, 6 out of 75 were prothrombin G20210A heterozygous. We will give comprehensive data about the DNA testing in Estonia for all tests and 
their dynamics over the 10 years.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics291
P0970. Altered patterns of Edar  and Xedar  expression in Mus 
musculus and Rattus norvegicus
A. Kujawa1, S. A. Wisniewski2, W. H. Trzeciak1;  
1University of Medical Sciences, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, Poznan, Poland, 2University of Medical Sciences, Department of Fo -
rensic Medicine, Poznan, Poland.
Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia results from a defect in the 
differentiation of skin appendages during embryonic development. Affected individuals may exhibit symptoms of anodontia or oligodontia, hyperthermia and hypotrichosis (sparse hair). Several animal models have been described that exhibit symptoms similar to those seen in affected patients. Results support the hypothesis that the 
Edar and 
Xedar genes encode proteins involved in pathways transducing signals from ectoderm to mesenchyme, which initiate formation of skin appendages. Recently we have developed comparative analysis of mouse and rat models of 
Edar and Xedar gene expression during 
embryonic development. Formalin-ﬁxed, parafﬁn-embedded specimens of Mus musculus (8-16 day embryos) and Rattus norvegicus (10-18 day embryos) were obtained
 from Novagen. The tissues were chosen 
to show different development of hairs or scales in the same parts of the body like the tail. Total RNA was isolated from epidermal cells microdissected from embryonic tails according to standard laboratory procedures. RNA was used as a template for real-time RT-PCR with a Lightcycler System. Results after normalization with β-actin expression (detected in all samples) were placed in an Excel spreadsheet. Analysis revealed almost the same expression proﬁle of 
Edar in both mouse 
and rat epidermis. Proﬁles of Xedar gene expression were different: in 
the mouse epidermis the level of expression is almost constant during all analyzed days of embryogenesis, in the rat the level of expression increases signiﬁcantly during embryogenesis. Our results suggest strong correlations between timing of expression and development of 
skin appendages.
P0971. Mosaic dup(17)p11.2 CMT1A: not as rare as previously 
thought?
C. Hinard1, I. Bouchardy1, M. Chofﬂon2, M. Estade3, P. Burkhard2, S. Fokstuen1, 
D. Genoud4, I. Moix1, M. Sinnreich2, M. A. Morris1;  
1Service of Medical Genetics, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Neurology Department, 
Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Neurology Practice, Ge -
neva, Switzerland, 4Neurology Practice, Martigny, Switzerland.
CMT1 is a genetically heterogeneous peripheral neuropathy, characterized by muscle weakness and atrophy and sensory loss. CMT1A represents about 70% of cases and is commonly caused by a duplication of a 1.5 Mb region including PMP22, generated by unequal crossing-over. Cases of mosaic duplications have been very rarely described and it is suggested but currently unproven that they may 
arise as mitotic reversion events (Liehr et al. 1996).We have selected interphase FISH of cultured lymphocytes followed by analysis of >100 nuclei as the diagnostic method of choice, to allow detection of such mosaics. The duplication was identiﬁed in 9/51 individuals (18%), 4 of whom exhibited somatic mosaicism. The patients were aged 72, 51, 22 and 19 years of age, with 47%, 52%, 33% (two independent samples) and 81% of duplicated nuclei respectively. Patient 1 was mildly affected and had a more severely affected son whose test revealed no mosaicism (100% duplicated). Patient 2 had a mother with “polyneuritis” who could not be tested. Patient 3 has a mother with a clinical diagnosis of CMT but who has not been genetically tested. Patient 4 has a negative family history .
Such a high incidence of mosaicism is surprising. It may be due to chance, to a selection bias (testing of less-affected patients), or to our analytical approach. Liehr et al. found that rapidly-dividing cells had a lower frequency of duplications; our use of cell culture and analysis of a large number of nuclei may reveal mosaicism that would otherwise 
be missed.P0972. Molecular analysis of CX26, D(GJB6-D13S1830) and 
A1555G mitochondrial point mutation in Italian deaf population 
and occasional ﬁndings of CX26 mutations in partners of deaf or 
carrier subjects.
P. Primignani1, P. Castorina1, F. Sironi1, U. Ambrosetti2, L. Garavelli3, D. Cuda3, 
F. Lalatta1, M. Travi1, D. A. Coviello1;  
1Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy, 2IRCSS Ospedale Policlinico di 
Milano, Milan, Italy, 3Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
More than 100 different mutations of Connexin 26 are described in non-
syndromic recessive deafness but one is particularly common in our population, the 35delG that accounts for up to 60% of mutated GJB2 alleles. We analysed 448 NSRD patients and identiﬁed mutations in 288/896 chromosomes; 32,1% (191/896) showed 35delG, while the remainder showed many different mutations: -3170GÆA, 31del14, G12V, 35insG, W24X, M34T, V37I, A40G, E47X, W77R, V84M, L90P, V95M, H100L, 167delT, 290insA, 310del14, delE120, W133X, E147K, C174R, D179N, R184P and R184W. 35delG was present in about 66% (191/288) of all Cx26 mutations identiﬁed. We investigated also the del(GJB6-D13S1830), a 342 kb deletion in 13q12, including exon 1 of GJB6 coding Connexin 30. We have found two compound heterozygotes both carrying del(GJB6-D13S1830) in association with the 35delG and the 167delT GJB2 mutations, respectively. Our results show that GJB2 mutations account for less than 50% of recessive non syndromic hearing loss cases and conﬁrm that the 35delG mutation is the most frequent one, but many other mutations are also present such as M34T, E47X, L90P and delE120. Moreover 12 affected subjects were compound heterozygous for recessive GJB2 allele not including 35delG and 4 were carrying the D179N dominant mutation, indicating that the complete sequence of the gene is needed for an appropriate molecular diagnosis. We found 3 affected subjects carrying the A1555G and the subsequently family analysis performed in each case has led to the pre-symptomatic identiﬁcation of this mutation in 5 relatives.
P0973. Mutation analysis of LEMD3 in osteopoikilosis, Buschke-
Ollendorff syndrome and melorheostosis patients
J. Hellemans1, P. Debeer2, P. Verdonk3, W. Van Hul4, M. Wright5, A. De Paepe1, 
P. Coucke1, G. R. Mortier1;  
1Dept Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Center for 
Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Dept of Orthopedic 
Surgery, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 4Dept Medical Genetics, 
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 5Institute of Human Genetics, New -
castle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom.
Osteopoikilosis is an autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasia characterized by multiple hyperostotic areas in different parts of the skeleton. Osteopoikilosis can occur either as an isolated anomaly or in association with other abnormalities of skin and bone. Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome (BOS) refers to the association of osteopoikilosis with connective tissue nevi. Osteopoikilosis can also be associated with melorheostosis. The latter disorder is characterized by a “ﬂowing” hyperostosis of the cortex of tubular bones. After a genome wide linkage analysis in three families, we were able to identify 
LEMD3 as 
the causal gene for this group of disorders. In each family, affected individuals had osteopoikilosis with or without manifestations of melorheostosis or BOS. 
LEMD3 codes for an integral protein of the 
inner nuclear membrane. We showed that LEMD3 has the capability of antagonizing both BMP and TGFβ signaling in human ﬁbroblasts.We present the results of mutation analysis of the LEMD3 gene in a series of 13 patients. In 9 patients manifestations of BOS were present, 3 patients had melorheostosis and 1 patient had both signs of osteopoikilosis and melorheostosis. In 11 patients, a 
LEMD3 mutation 
was identiﬁed. All mutations were predicted to result in haploinsufﬁciency of the protein. In 3 patients (2 patients with melorheostosis and 1 patient with BOS) no mutation was found in the coding sequence of 
LEMD3 . 
We are currently sequencing in these patients the non-coding parts of the LEMD3 gene. We are also investigating the possibility of a somatic 
LEMD3  mutation in osteoblasts from one patient with melorheostosis.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics292
P0974. Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Expression Studies of 
MCPH1
I. Gavvovidis1, M. Trimborn2, D. Schindler1, H. Neitzel2;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Biozentrum, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerz -
burg, Germany, 2Department of Human Genetics; Charité, Humboldt University, 
Berlin, Germany.
Primary microcephaly can be due to gene defects at any one 
of six recently reported microcephalin loci, MCPH1 to MCPH6.. Corresponding patients show reduction of their cerebral cortex volume and mental retardation. In addition, defects of the MCPH1 gene, located on chromosome 8p22, result in premature chromosome condensation in the G2 phase (PCC syndrome). The MCPH1 gene encodes a polypeptide encompassing 835 aa. The MCPH1 protein contains one N-terminal und two C-terminal BRCT domains linking its function to DNA checkpoint control and/or DNA repair. We cloned two ORFs of MCPH1 cDNA, 1-2508 and 286-2508, into the bacterial vector, pIVEX1.3, for prokaryotic protein expression in the cell-free E.coli lysate system. Expression of the large ORF gave rise to two translation products of 93 and 80.5 kDa. The latter variant corresponded to the translation product of the shorter MCPH1 ORF. This ﬁnding suggests that the internal ATG at 286 may be used as a translation initiation site, although the shorter product was present when the large MCPH1 ORF was cloned into the pIVEX vectors for cell-free eukaryotic expression in wheat germ extract and rabbit reticulocyte lysate. We also cloned the large and small variants of MCPH1 as bi-cistronic constructs with the neomycin resistance gene into a retroviral vector. Studies are underway to show if one or both species are able to complement MCPH1 -/- human cell lines. With tools for expression at hand interactions and cell cycle effects, may be studied in MCPH1 proﬁcient vs. deﬁcient states 
of the same cell line.
P0975. Molecular and demographic analysis of the cystic 
ﬁbrosis population in Estonia.
T. Kahre1,2, M. Vasar3, M. Panov3, M. Pärlist4, A. Metspalu1,5;  
1Molecular Diagnostics Center, United Laboratories,Tartu University Clinics, 
Tartu, Estonia, 2Women´s Clinic, Children´s Clinic, Tartu University Clinics, 
Tartu, Estonia, 3Children´s Clinic,Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 4Tallinn 
Children´s Clinic, Tallinn, Estonia, 5Dept. of Biotechnology, Estonian Biocentre, 
Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia.
Our aim was to analyze the molecular and demographic data of the 
CF population in Estonia in terms of age, gender, age at diagnosis, ethnicity, survival and mortality rates during last decades and to investigate the clinical manifestation of CF patients in relation to their genotype. We aimed to include all CF patients (n=80) in Estonia born between 1974-2004, but clinical and molecular data was available for 
45 patients from 40 families.The incidence of CF in Estonia by archival data is 1:7750 and according to the Hardy-Weinberg calculations 1:7450 live-births. Several common CFTR mutations were detected: F508del (54% of all chromosomes), 394delTT (14%), 3659delC (2%), 1716G>A (2%). Additionally, 14 mutations were found only in one allele. Altogether, 87,5% of all mutated CF chromosomes were identiﬁed. New methods like arrayed primer extension (APEX) allowing parallel detection of numerous mutations should be introduced to reach mutation detection 
rate close to 100%.In 2003 the mean age of the living patients known by us was 12 years 3 months (95% CI 113-182 months) and 29% of our patients were over 18 years old. The mean age of establishing CF diagnosis was 2 years 3 months (95% CI 18.0-36.1 months). The mortality rate of CF patients in Estonia is decreasing, being 12.2%during the period 1983-1987 and dropping to 0.7% in the period 1997-2002. Although, there is a tendency of ageing of our CF population, more effort should be made to diagnose CF in earlier age and to give better treatment in 
specialized centrums.
P0976. Functional identiﬁcation of a classical nuclear export 
signal in spastin ( SPG4 ) and generation of constructs targeting 
over-expressed protein to the nucleus
C. Beetz, J. Schickel, T. Deufel;  
Institut für Klinische Chemie und Laboratoriumsdiagnostik, FSU Jena, Jena, 
Germany.
Mutations in SPG4, the gene encoding spastin, are responsible for the majority of cases of hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP). Native 
spastin is detected mainly in the nucleus, and two basic amino acid stretches from within the protein have recently been shown by us to act as nuclear localisation signals (NLSs); over-expressed spastin, however, is restricted to the cytoplasm. Actual protein function in either compartment as well as the mechanism(s) underlying pathogenicity of mutations remain to be elucidated. To investigate the role of nuclear spastin, we set out to direct over-expressed protein to the nucleus by adding yet another strong NLS; we observed that full length constructs still fail to localise to the nucleus. We identiﬁed an N-terminal region conferring this effect and subsequently showed that it contains a functional, exportin 1-dependent nuclear export signal (NES). Based on these ﬁndings, we applied site-directed mutagenesis of a single critical leucine residue from within the NES to generate constructs ﬁnally directing over-expressed protein to the nucleus. Our study adds to understanding the intra-cellular distribution of spastin and prepares the ground for further studies into its physiological role. It may therefore help to, eventually, fully link 
SPG4 mutations to HSP pathology.
P0977. Point mutation in the STS gene in a severe affected 
patient with X-linked ichthyosis
L. M. Gonzalez , O. M. Messina, J. Toral, R. M. Rivera, S. H. Kofman, S. A. 
Cuevas;  
Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D,.F., Mexico.
X-linked ichthyosis (XLI), an inherited disorder characterized by scaly skin, is due to steroid sulfatase (STS; EC3.1.6.2) deﬁciency and occurs 1 in 2000 or 6000 males. Onset is at birth or during the ﬁrst months of life with the presence of dark, regular, adherent scales of skin. XLI diagnosis can be established through the STS assay. STS gene is located on Xp22.3. Most XLI patients harbor complete deletion of the entire STS locus and ﬂanking markers. In some cases, abnormal paring of the low-copy-number repeats G1.3 and CRI-S232, on either side of the STS gene, seems to be responsible of these interstitial deletions. Only a few patients have been reported with partial deletions or point mutations in the STS gene. In the present study we analyzed a severe affected XLI patient with a missense mutation in exon 8 that seems to be a critical region in the presence of point mutations in XLI.
P0978. MDR3 gene analysis in children with Progressive Familial 
Intrahepatic Cholestasis type 3 (PFIC3) phenotype
D. Degiorgio1, C. Colombo2, M. Seia1, L. Porcaro1, M. Marchi1, M. Travi1, V. 
Bennato2, G. Maggiore3, G. Torre4, D. A. Coviello1;  
1Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy, 2Clinica Pediatrica, Università di 
Milano, Milan, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Medicina della Procreazione e della Età 
Evolutiva, Università di Pisa, Pisa, Italy, 4Ospedali Riuniti di Bergamo, UO di 
Pediatria, Bergamo, Italy.
Human MDR3 gene encodes the class III multidrug resistance P-glycoprotein that mediates the translocation of phospholipids across the canalicular membrane of the hepatocyte, a process that is of crucial importance in protecting cholangiocyte membranes from high concentrations of detergent bile acids. MDR3 mutations are cause of Progressive Familial Intrahepatic Cholestasis type 3 (PFIC3), characterized by early onset of cholestasis that progresses to cirrhosis and liver failure before adulthood, with high serum gamma-glutamyltransferase (gGT) activity; the liver histology shows ductular proliferation and inﬁammatory inﬁltrate in the early stage despite 
patency of intra and extrahepatic bile ducts.We analysed 33 children with a PFIC3 phenotype by sequencing the entire coding sequence of MDR3 gene and we identify 10 pathogenetic alleles and twelve mutations in six children. Eleven are single different mutation and all are unpublished. In particular, in two patients only one mutation was identiﬁed, and in other two children we identify three 
mutations, two of which on the same allele.Four mutations imply the synthesis of a truncated protein. In particular we identify 9 missense mutations (Arg159X, Ala250Pro, Glu558Lys, Met 630Val, Leu701Pro, Thr715Ile, Gly723Glu, Glu888X e Ala1186Thr) and 2 insertions (1167insAA and 2200insG). Exon 17 could be identiﬁed as a hot-spot since it holds four of the eleven mutation identiﬁed (36.4%).None of the eleven mutation is present in 100 alleles of the control population. The low detection rate of MDR3 mutation in our patients (about 18%) could be due both to genetic and clinical heterogeneity .Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics293
P0979. Molecular and biochemical basis of alcohol-induced 
oxidative stress in rat’s lungs
K. Kordel1, A. P. Jurczyk2, S. A. Wisniewski1, M. Barzdo2, B. Jankowska2, E. 
Meissner2, A. Prośniak2, S. Szram2;  
1University of Medical Sciences, Department of Forensic Medicine, Poznan, 
Poland, 2University of Medical Sciences, Department of Forensic Medicine, 
Lodz, Poland.
In forensic practice intoxications with alcohols are very common. 
Recently authors evaluated rat model of intoxication to establish biochemical basis of alcohol poisoning. Our aim was investigation of the inﬂuence of methanol, ethanol, and ethylene glycol on oxidative stress in rat’s lungs and evaluation of the tissue expression of catalase and superoxide dismutase. Male Lewis rats had been administered 1M methyl alcohol or 1M ethyl alcohol or 0,25M ethylene glycol for 4, 8 and 12 weeks. In rat’s lungs we measured the concentrations of hydrogen peroxide, lipid peroxidation products (TBAR) and antioxidant system components (SH-groups). Results are represented in count per milligram of protein (Lowry’s method). Isolation of RNA from rat’s lungs has been made according to the laboratory procedures. RNA was used as template for real-time RT-PCR. Results after normalization with β-actin expression have been analyzed with Excel spreadsheet. Our results suggest that ethanol, methanol and ethylene glycol generate oxidative stress in rat organs and may inﬂuence on antioxidative enzyme activity causing lipid peroxidation and protein damage, and increase hydrogen peroxide production. These parameters were changing especially in erythrocytes, liver, kidney, brain, lung. The alcohol generating the oxidative stress in all examined organs most signiﬁcantly, was ethylene glycol. Examination of catalase and superoxide dismutase expression proﬁles revealed signiﬁcant differences in analyzed groups of rats due to intoxication with different alcohols.
Results
Methanol Ethyl alcohol Ethylene glycol
4 weeks 8 weeks 12 weeks 4 weeks 8 weeks 12 weeks 4 weeks 8 weeks 12 weeks
SH 89,41663 57,00633 51,31375 167,4597 48,36255 50,31624 44,91551 20,68021 32,74381
statistic p<0,001 ns ns p<0,01 ns ns ns p<0,01 ns
TBAR 4,654119 3,507508 2,529495 4,006854 3,796295 2,551526 4,611628 9,269838 7,61818
statistic p<0,001 p<0,001 p<0,001 p<0,001 p<0,001 p<0,001 p<0,001 p<0,001 p<0,001
Hydrogen 
peroxide88,83909 142,9098 129,3559 145,955 127,3569 75,21629 60,97764 86,50598 761,8356
statistic ns ns p<0,05 p<0,05 p<0,05 ns ns ns p<0,01
P0980. ABCA1 gene polymorphism and lipid proﬁle in a Scottish 
population
A. Pasdar, A. Cumming, D. St. Clair, M. J. MacLeod;  
University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, United Kingdom.
The ATP Binding Cassette Transporter (ABCA1) is a protein involved in lipid metabolism. Common polymorphisms in this gene could affect High Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol (HDL-C), triglyceride and Apolipoprotein A1 (apoA1) levels and thus the risk of atherosclerotic diseases. The purpose of this study was to assess the effects of different 
ABCA1 genotypes on lipid proﬁle. A cohort of 181 healthy 
Scottish individuals with complete lipid proﬁle data (adjusted for age, sex, BMI and smoking, drinking habits) was recruited. We studied four common polymorphisms in ABCA1 gene at different positions, G158A (Leu/Leu), G219A (Arg/Lys), G316A (Gly/Gly) and A1587G (Lys/Arg).Genotyping assays were based on Dynamic Allele Speciﬁc 
Hybridisation (DASH).
Results:No differences were found in VLDL/TG, VLDL/Cholesterol, LDL, HDL2 and HDL3 concentrations in females or males between different genotypes. However, in females with different A1587G genotypes IDL was higher in “AA” genotype (table1). It was also higher in females with G219A “GG” genotype (table2). Males with G316A “GA” genotype also had a higher level of HDL (Mean HDL: “GG”, 53.27; “GA”, 63: p=0.032). In conclusion, only A1587G “AA” and G219A “GG” genotypes may inﬂuence IDL in females. G219A “GG” genotype might have an effect on total HDL in males only.Table-1: IDL in different A1587G genotypes (females); P=0.016
Genotype Number IDL(mg/dL) Log ( ± SD)Mean
11 (GG) 43 12.60 1.10 ( ± 0.22)
12 (GA) 36 14.81 1.18 ( ± 0.18)
22 (AA) 3 23.33 1.44 ( ± 0.31)
Table-2: IDL in different G219A genotypes (females); P=0.013
Genotype Number HDL2(mg/dL) Log ( ± SD)Mean
11 (GG) 27 17.70 1.27 ( ± 0.16)
12 (GA) 21 12.05 1.07 ( ± 0.23)
22 (AA) 4 13.25 1.11 ( ± 0.23)
P0981. CRYGD gene mutation in a new family with congenital 
hereditary aculeiform cataract
J. Zenteno1, M. Morales1, V. Moran-Barroso2, A. Sanchez-Navarro3;  
1Institute of Ophthalmology "Conde de Valenciana", Mexico City, Mexico, 2Pedi-
atric Hospital "Federico Gomez", Mexico City, Mexico, 3Institute of Ophthalmol -
ogy, Mexico City, Mexico.
Autosomal dominant congenital acueliform cataract is one of the rarest types of inherited cataract and is characterized by ﬁberglass-like or needle-like crystals projecting in different directions, through or close to the axial region of the lens. Previously, crystallin Gamma D gene (CRYGD) mutations were demonstrated in 3 families (two from Switzerland and the other one from Macedonia) with aculeiform cataract; interestingly, the same Arg-58 to Hys mutation was identiﬁed in these three unrelated pedigrees. Here, we report the results of CRYGD
 
molecular analyses in a large Mexican family with aculeiform cataract.
The propositus is a female aged 23 years who asked for medical advice because of “low visual acuity” from childhood; familial history disclosed that several relatives were previously diagnosed as having congenital cataracts; on eye biomicroscopy, a white central opacity resembling glass, originating from the fetal nucleus and radially projecting needle-like crystals, was observed in both lenses. Fourteen relatives were clinically examined and 7 of them were identiﬁed as suffering from the 
same type of bilateral cataract.Molecular analyses on genomic DNA from the propositus and from 5 affected relatives demonstrated a G to A heterozygous missense mutation in position 411 in exon 2 of CRYGD, which originates a Arg-
58 to Hys substitution in the protein. The Arg-58 to Hys substitution identiﬁed in this family is identical to that previously demonstrated in three unrelated familes with aculeiform cataract. These data suggests that there is a strict genotype-phenotype correlation in this type of 
congenital hereditary cataract.
P0982. Evidence for a New Locus for Bardet Biedl Syndrome
N. Smaoui1,2, M. Chaabouni1, H. Kallel3, F. Maazoul1, R. M'rad1, H. Chaabouni1, 
J. F. Hejtmancik4;  
1hopital Charles Nicolle, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Func -
tion Branch- National Eye Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, 3Service de 
pédiatrie hopital, Ras Jbel, Tunisia, 4National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
United States.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by obesity, retinopathy, polydactyly, renal and cardiac malformations, learning disabilities, and hypogenitalism. Eight BBS loci have been mapped, and eight genes have been identiﬁed. We investigate linkage and haplotype analysis in two consanguineous Tunisian families.METHODS. Haplotype and linkage analysis of two consanguineous families diagnosed BBS was scored with more than 24 polymorphic markers neighboring and surrounding the eight known BBS genes. Two-point lod scores were calculated. DNA from affected individuals from both families was ampliﬁed with primers speciﬁc for BBS1, BBS2, BBS4, BBS6, BBS7 and BBS8 genes and then sequenced by direct automated sequencing.RESULTS. The combined haplotype analysis and linkage analysis in two Tunisian consanguineous families with BBS have excluded any linkage to any of the eight known BBS loci. Sequence analysis of BBS1, BBS2, BBS4, BBS6, BBS7 and BBS8 genes revealed no sequence alterations in their coding sequence.CONCLUSIONS. These results describe evidence for at least one new locus for BBS conﬁrming the extreme genetic heterogeneity for this disease. The absence of alterations in six of the eight known BBS genes demonstrates that a new BBS locus is not 
involved in triallelic inheritance with these known genes.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics294
P0983. Technical and ethical considerations in the use of MLPA 
technology.
P. J. Bridge , C. Clark, S. Bleoo, L. M. Graham, D. Fletcher, L. M. Yunker, A. 
Innes, R. Lowry, J. S. Parboosingh, INHERIT BRCAs;  
Alberta Children's Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada.
MLPA technology is a very valuable addition for molecular diagnostics 
however we have encountered several interesting problems.
Single exon deletions. We found an apparent deletion of one copy of exon 25 of the BRCA1 gene, but sequence analysis demonstrated that this patient was heterozygous for a mutation (R3128X) in that exon. The nonsense mutation is present in one of the MLPA primer binding sites and caused a false-positive result on MLPA. Any similar base-pair substitution in a binding site could cause an apparent false-positive result so apparent single-exon deletions should be veriﬁed by 
an alternate method.Incidental ﬁndings. MLPA kits also contain control fragments or exons from other genes. We screened a patient with the MLPA kit for Rett syndrome and found a 50% reduction of a control peak. This control amplicon is from the proteolipid protein (PLP) gene that is normally involved in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease and spastic paraplegia 2. Although this has been useful, we note that there might have been an issue surrounding lack of informed consent. We have already encountered two similar instances: a deletion of the Fanconi D control probe in a patient with a VHL deletion indicating that the deletion was fairly large and involved a second gene that might have signiﬁcance in tumour formation and a deletion of the CHL1 control probe but not any VHL exon in a patient with a cytogenetically-detected 3p deletion.Remembering these, or similar, difﬁculties will allow us to make better 
use of this excellent technique.
P0984. Familial hypercholesterolemia in St.-Petersburg: the 
known and novel mutations found in the low density lipoprotein 
receptor gene in Russia
F. M. Zakharova1, D. Damgaard2, M. Y. Mandelshtam1, V. I. Golubkov1, P. H. 
Nissen2, V. B. Vasilyev1, O. Faergeman2;  
1Institute of Experimental Medicine, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Aar-
hus Sygehus, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is one of the most common monogenic human diseases. FH is inherited as an autosomal-dominant trait with the prevalence of the heterozygous form in most populations 1:500. The main purpose of current research is to create the mutation map of the LDL receptor gene in St.-Petersburg FH patients. As a result, 32 sequence variants besides common polymorphisms were identiﬁed. Among 32 mutations, 17 were new and 27 were disease-causing mutations. All these mutations alter the reading frame of the receptor mRNA, affect splicing of mRNA or lead to changes in the amino acid sequence of the mature receptor. Rapid test methods were developed for most of the mutations. We analyzed the inheritance of the mutations in probands’ families by rapid test methods. Totalizing our data, only 27 out of 66 relatives of probands were found to carry the mutations. Our results allowed to conclude that predominating mutations are absent in FH patients in St.-Petersburg. In the current study only ﬁve mutations (C139G, c.313+1G>A, c.651-653del3, c.652-654 delGGT è C308Y) were found to be recurrent, i.e. were found in two unrelated families each. Other 22 mutations were found in unique family each. Many of mutations found in St.-Petersburg were previously identiﬁed in other ethnic groups, for example in Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden. Most probably these mutations share the common ancestor in all Baltic countries. Current research was supported by Russian Fund for Basic Research (05-04-48235), Program “Leading Russian Scientiﬁc Schools” and by the President of 
Russian Federation (MK-899.2003.04).
P0985. Maternal MTHFR genotype and incidence of Neural Tube 
Defects (NTD) and Down syndrome
S. Andonova1, V. Dimitrova2, R. Vazharova3, R. Tincheva4, I. Kremensky1;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Department of Fetal Medi -
cine, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 3De-
partment of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 4Section of 
Clinical genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Medical University, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Down syndrome (DS) and Neural tube defects (NTD) are common malformations among newborns. The C677T polymorphism in the MTHFR gene combined with reduced dietary intake of folates has been associated with increased risk of having a pregnancy affected by NTD. Other studies suggested that abnormal folate metabolism and the C677T mutation may be maternal risk factors for DS. However, it was reported that the frequency of this polymorphism differs between different ethnic populations. In our study the frequency of C677T substitution was evaluated in DNA samples from 38 women with NTD affected pregnancy, 26 women with DS affected pregnancy and control group of 96 Bulgarian women without NTD or DS pregnancy. Differences in allele and genotype frequencies among investigated groups of NTD mothers and controls were found. The CC genotype was observed in 40% of NTD mothers, 42% of DS mothers and in 37% of control women; C/T genotype - in 50%, 42% and 45% respectively; and T/T genotype - in 10%, 16% and 18%, respectively. We suggest that NTD incidence is affected by a multifunctional interaction, including maternal folate metabolism, MTHFR genotype, and other loci. A study of the frequency of a second MTHFR polymorphism - A1298C is now 
in progress.Bulgarian Ministry of Science and Education supported this study - 
Grant No. MUL-1201.
P0986. Contribution of GJB6 (connexin 30) mutations to 
nonsyndromic deafness in the Portuguese population
H. Teixeira1, O. Dias2, M. Andrea2, C. Correia1, G. Fialho1, H. Caria1,3;  
1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University of 
Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Center of ORL, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lis -
bon, Lisbon, Portugal, 3College of Health Care, Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal, 
Setúbal, Portugal.
Mutations at the GJB2 gene, encoding connexin 26, account for up to 50% of the nonsyndromic recessive deafness cases. Nevertheless, many heterozygotes for recessive mutations are deaf, which may suggest the implication of another connexin gene eventually related to 
the formation of heteromeric connexons.The GJB6 gene, encoding connexin 30 protein, is located in the same gene cluster as GJB2. Moreover, connexins 26 and 30 exhibit 77% identity and are expressed in the mouse cochlea. As such, GJB6 arouse as a candidate for the mutations which would cause deafness in individuals with a single GJB2 mutation. However, some previous screening studies suggest that GJB6 point mutations are rare, especially when comparing with the high frequency of GJB2 mutations worldwide. Screening for GJB6 mutations in other populations should 
help to elucidate this puzzling situation.In this study, we sought the contribution of the GJB6 gene for the aetiology of familial or sporadic deafness in the Portuguese population. The GJB6 gene was thus screened in hearing impaired individuals 
presenting monoallelic mutations or no mutations in GJB2
P0987. V84M variant in GJB2 gene associated with 
nonsyndromic autosomal dominant deafness
T. Matos1, H. Caria1,2, A. O'Neil3, C. Correia1, G. Fialho1;  
1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University 
of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 2College of Health Care, Polytechnic Institute of 
Setúbal, Setúbal, Portugal, 3ORL Service, Hospital Egas Moniz, Lisbon, Portu -
gal.
Most pathogenic mutations in GJB2, which encodes the gap junction protein connexin 26, are recessive alleles associated with nonsyndromic prelingual hearing loss. Yet, a few alleles are described in the literature 
as being implicated in dominant forms of nonsyndromic deafness.The present report describes a novel GJB2 variant, V84M, acting as a putative dominant allele. This variant was detected in two deaf patients, mother and daughter, both heterozygous for V84M. Identiﬁcation was performed by SSCP followed by bidirectional sequencing and 
enzymatic restriction.Variant V84M substitutes a valine for a methionine in the second transmembrane domain of the protein. The four transmembrane domains of connexins are highly conserved. Moreover, the valine at position 84 of connexin 26 is invariant across the connexins, thus enabling us to admit that its substitution probably leads to loss of function. So, V84M variant acting in a dominant negative manner might be the cause of deafness in this family. Another evidence that accounts for V84M being a putative dominant variant is the fact that the two carriers present a different degree of deafness, which is common in Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics295
cases of dominant deafness.
These data thus suggest that V84M might be a novel GJB2 mutation 
implicated in nonsyndromic autosomal dominant deafness.
P0988. Genetic testing in Czech patients with idiopathic and 
hereditary chronic pancreatitis.
M. Koudova1, J. Spicak2, R. Keil3, J. Nevoral4, E. Michkova4, I. Anguelova1, M. 
Kouda5, M. Macek Sr.1, V. Vavrova4, M. Macek Jr.1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University Prague, Czech 
Republic, 2Clinic of Hepatogastroenterology, IKEM Prague, Czech Republic, 
3Clinic of Internal Medicine, Charles University Prague, Czech Republic, 4Pe-
diatric Clinic, Charles University Prague, Czech Republic, 5Clinic of Surgery, 
Charles University Prague, Czech Republic.
We have analyzed the entire CFTR gene coding region and screened 
for common PRSS 1 (R122H, N29I), SPINK 1 (N34S) mutations in a 
representative cohort of 65 Czech chronic pancreatitis (CP) patients comprising: idiopathic CP-iCP cases (inclusion criteria: N Engl J Med
 
1998, 339: 653) - 22 children / 32 adults and hereditary CP- hCP (EUROPAC inclusaion criteria: Med Clin North Am 2000, 84: 575) - 7 
children / 4 adults. Hundred random controls (50F, 50M; age range 18-45 years) were analyzed in parallel. In iCP the frequency of 
CFTR 
mutations F508del, R117H, L997F was increased only in adults (p=0.01) and was associated with an increase of the IVS8-9T /10 TG haplotype (p=0.001) and of the 125G/C variant (p=0.01), compared to controls. The frequency of R122H and N29I PRSS 1 mutations
 was 
signiﬁcantly increased in both children/adults (3/22) with hCP (p < 0.01), but not in iCP cases (2/108) compared to controls. However, the SPINK 1 N34S mutation was found at a considerable frequency also 
in controls (4/200 chromosomes). Our data indicate that mutations 
in CFTR, PRSS 1 genes are associated with iCP / hCP, with PRSS 
1 alleles being more often common in “early onset” CP. SPINK1 mutations may have a modiﬁer role in the development of CP. In positive cases genetic counseling and long-term monitoring of eventual development of other cystic ﬁbrosis-related symptoms (in iCP) and the adenocarcinoma of pancreas (in hCP) should be provided. 
Supported 
by MZCR: 000000064203.
P0989. Eight new mutations of the KIAA1985 gene associated 
with severe form of demyelinating autosomal recessive Charcot-
Marie-Tooth disease (CMT4C) in 11 families and founder effects in families North African and European origin
H. Azzedine1, N. Ravisé1, M. Tazir2, A. Gabreels-Festens3, M. Lammens4, O. 
Dubourg1, J. Senderek5, C. Verny1, A. Brice1, D. Grid6, N. Birouk7, E. Le guern1;  
1INSERM U 679 (ex U289), Paris, France, 2Hôpital Mustapha Bacha Depart -
ment of Neurology, Algiers, Algeria, 3University Medical Center Nijmegen De -
partments of Pathology and Neurology, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4University 
Medical Center Nijmegen Departments of Pathology and Neurology, Nijme -
gen, The Netherlands, 5Institut f. Humangenetik Klinikum d. RWTH Aachen, 
Aachen, Germany, 6Généthon-BTR, Paris-Evry, France, 7Hôpital des spécialités 
Département de Neuro-physiologie, Rabat, Morocco.
CMT is a pathologically and genetically heterogeneous group of 
hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies characterized by slowly progressive weakness and atrophy, primarily in peroneal and distal leg muscles. Two major types have been distinguished on anatomopathological and electrophysiological grounds: demyelinating and axonal CMT. Up to now, 8 different loci have been reported and 7 genes have been identiﬁed in demyelinating autosomal recessive forms of the disease. Recently, the KIAA1985 gene has been implicated in a severe demyelinating form of CMT associated with kyphoscoliosis.We selected 38 consanguineous families with demyelinating ARCMT in whom 72 subjects were affected in a total of 178 individuals. These families were screened for 8 microsatellite markers covering the 
CMT4C locus. Assignment of the families to CMT4C was established by homozygosity mapping and conﬁrmed by linkage analysis. The KIAA1985 gene was sequenced in all families with putative linkage 
to CMT4C .
We identiﬁed 11 families with linkage to the 5q32 locus. In 10 of them, eight new different mutations were identiﬁed. We also identiﬁed 2 mutations previously reported (Senderek et al., 2004), one of which was found in 5 of our 10 families. Together, both studies strongly suggest a common ancestor of these families. Indeed, this mutation was found in families originating from the Netherlands, Germany, Bosnia, North Africa, Greece and Turkey. In agreement with this hypothesis, common haplotypes with ﬂanking markers segregated in these families.The genetic subtypes of AR-CMT linked to 5q32 locus account for 43% 
of our series.
P0990. Hereditary thrombophilia risk factors are not signiﬁcantly 
associated with an increased risk of stillbirth in Czech patients
E. Rausova1, I. Hadacova2, I. Spalova3, M. Macek Jr.1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University and UH Motol, 
Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Clinical Hematology and Blood Bank, 
UH Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Clinic of Gynecology and Obstetrics, 
Charles University and UH Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
The aim of this study was to asses the inﬂuence of inherited thrombophilia risk factors FV-Leiden (FV-L), FII 20210G->A (FII), MTHFR 677C->T (MTHFR) and PAI-1 4G/5G on the risk of stillbirth in the Czech population. In total, 52 cases with stillbirth (deﬁned as a baby born with no signs of life after 24 weeks of gestation) and 102 healthy controls were genotyped. Only in FV-L there was a trend towards an increased risk of stillbirth in studied patients (p=0.08; odds ratio, 2.3). One of the patients was homozygous for FV-L (ns, odds ratio, 3.96). The frequencies of prothrombin FII and MTHFR mutations, including the PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphism were similar in patients versus controls (FII /2% vs. 2%/, for MTHFR /37% vs. 38%/ and PAI-1 4G/5G /56% vs. 58%/). Moreover, frequencies of combined genotypes of heterozygous FV-L mutation together with PAI-1 4G/4G hypoﬁbrinolytic genotype in the same patient and heterozygous FII mutation with PAI-1 4G/4G allele were not statistically different from controls. We conclude that hereditary thrombophilia does not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the risk of stillbirth, even in combination of studied factors. Interestingly, despite pathogenetic heterogeneity of the sample under investigation FV-L was associated with a positive trend. Pregnant women could thus beneﬁt from FV-L mutation screening and patients from anticoagulant therapy in subsequent pregnancies. Nevertheless, further larger scale studies are necessary. Supported by VZFNM 00000064203.
P0991. Identiﬁcation of a novel splice variant produced by the 
Hermansky Pudlak Syndrome Type 1 Gene (HPS1)
C. Carmona-Rivera , I. Rivera-Lugo, C. L. Cadilla;  
University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences, San Juan, PR, United States.
Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS)[MIM#203300] is a rare, autosomal 
recessive disorder characterized by a triad of clinical features such as, oculocutaneous albinism, bleeding tendency caused by storage pool deﬁciency platelets, and a ceroid-like storage disorder. HPS exhibits locus heterogeneity, seven HPS-causing genes have been identiﬁed in humans. Patients with HPS type 1 are frequently found in the Northwest region of the island of Puerto Rico. Two major HPS1 mRNA variants result from alternative splicing of exon 9, encoding the major and minor protein isoforms of 79.3 and 75.9kDa, respectively. To date, four different splice HPS1 gene variants have been reported in GenBank. These splice variants were found to be expressed in human lymphoblasts by RT-PCR. The four mRNAHPS1 were detected in cells derived from a patient with HPS-1 and other tissues. Sequencing analysis of PCR ampliﬁcation of the normal coding sequence (CDS) of the HPS1 mRNA showed an unexpected splice variant lacking exon 5. These studies show that the HPS1 gene expresses more than one transcript variant in human lymphoblasts. Further studies of these variants are necessary to better understand the role of each transcript in the pathways affected in HPS. Grants from NIGMS S06GM08224 and R25GM61838 and NCRRG12RR03051 supported this study.
P0992. Common Mutations In The Alpha-1-Antitrypsin Gene 
Are Not Frequently Found In Patients With Hermansky Pudlak Syndrome Complicated With Pulmonary Fibrosis
L. E. Riviera, P. J. Santiago Borrero, C. L. Cadilla;  
University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine, Departments of Pediatrics, He -
matology and Oncology Section, Biochemistry, San Juan, PR, United States.
The Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS) [MIM #203300] is an 
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by oculocutaneous albinism, a bleeding tendency, and a ceroid-lipofuscin-like lysosomal storage disease (Witkop et al. 1990). Frequent medical problems seen in HPS patients include prolonged bleeding, granulomatous colitis and progressive pulmonary ﬁbrosis (PF). PF has been associated in 30-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics296
40% of HPS cases. Deﬁciencies in Alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT) produce 
a degenerative pulmonary disorder by a mutation in the gene of proteinase inhibitor 1 (PI). The S and Z alleles are the most common in persons manifesting AAT, while the M allele is the most common one in normal persons. The Z allele consists of a G->A in exon 5 (Lys 342->Glu), whereas the S allele is an A->T change in exon 3 of the AAT gene (Val 284->Glu). We utilized PCR combined with restriction digestion with TAQ a1 enzyme and DNA sequencing to screen for these AAT gene variants in PR HPS patients. Eighteen samples of HPS-1 and HPS-3 patients were examined for the exon 3 and exon 5 alleles of the AAT gene, All the patients examined for the exon 5 mutations had the normal M variant. Only two patients examined for exon 3 mutations had the mutation found in the S variant. One of the three patients with pulmonary ﬁbrosis turned out to be heterozygous for the mutation of the S variant. The other heterozygote patient for this mutation has yet to show pulmonary problems. Grants from NIGMS S06GM08224 and R25GM61838 and NCRRG12RR03051 supported this study.
P0993. Sense and antisense Foxl2 transcripts in mouse
J. Cocquet, M. Fellous, R. A. Veitia;  
INSERM E0021 and U361, Hôpital Cochin, Pavillon Baudelocque, Paris, 
France.
FOXL2 is a forkhead transcription factor involved in the eyelid development and in the development and adult function of the ovary, in mammals. Its mutations in man are responsible for a rare genetic disease characterized by eyelid malformation, associated or not with premature ovarian failure (Blepharophimosis syndrome of type I and II, respectively. OMIM 110100). In mouse, we have identiﬁed 2 mRNA isoforms of Foxl2 that result from an alternative polyadenylation. Here, we characterize in depth the structure and expression of these 2 variants. We also describe an antisense transcript that overlaps the whole Foxl2 transcription unit. This antisense transcript, called Foxl2OS (for opposite strand), yields several isoforms resulting from alternative splicing. No signiﬁcant coding region was found in the Foxl2OS sequence. Foxl2OS displays a pattern of expression very similar to that of Foxl2 in the gonads during development and at the adult age. RNA-FISH experiments show that both transcripts are expressed in the same cells at the same time. We suggest that Foxl2OS is a non-coding antisense RNA that may be involved in the regulation of Foxl2. All in all our results provide new insights about the organization of the murine Foxl2 locus. This might help understand its 
regulation and function.
P0994. Automated genomic DNA extraction: performance 
evaluations of the Abbott m1000TM system for multiple clinical 
diagnostic applications
J. E. Norton1, R. Mareco2, D. Ligeiro2, G. Michel1;  
1Abbott GmbH & Co.KG, Molecular Diagnostics, Wiesbaden-Delkenheim, 
Germany, 2Centro de Histocompatibilidade do Sul – Lusotransplante, Lisbon, 
Portugal.
The m1000 instrument is a fully automated DNA extraction system 
based on chaotropic lysis of whole blood followed by capture and 
washing of DNA on magnetic particles and ﬁnally elution of DNA. Yield and purity are suitable for a wide range of molecular diagnostic applications. The system, developed for medium to high throughput workload, allows several different user-designed protocol options 
depending on the laboratory yield and concentration requirements.Here, data are presented showing suitability of the genomic DNA system as exempliﬁed for two widely used clinical applications: Cystic Fibrosis (CF) testing and HLA typing.For CF testing 81 frozen blood samples were extracted and subsequent CF genotyping with a PCR/OLA assay revealed the expected normal/
mutant types.For HLA typing, where laboratories typically require good quality DNA in sufﬁcient quantity for normal SSP, SSOP and/or SBT testing and also archiving, a large number of fresh and frozen blood samples (>8000) was extracted with successful HLA typing using this technique.
The m1000 was shown to meet requirements for rapid extraction 
of high quality DNA suited for genomic analysis. No sample cross-contamination was detected and the puriﬁed DNA was free of inhibitors. These data demonstrate the potential of the system to reliably provide suitable DNA in the molecular diagnostic setting generally.P0995. Vitamin D Receptor Gene Polymorphisms in Turkish 
Psoriasis Patients
I. Acikbas1, B. S. Erdogan2, S. Ergin2, S. Aktan3, E. Tepeli1, H. Bagci1;  
1Pamukkale University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology, Denizli, 
Turkey, 2Pamukkale University, Medical Faculty, Department of Dermatology, 
Denizli, Turkey, 3Dokuz Eylül University, Medical Faculty, Department of Derma -
tology, Izmir, Turkey.
Psoriasis is an inﬂamatory disease characterized with increased squamous cell proliferation and impaired differentiation. Altough, vitamin D, Calcitriol, and it’s analogues are successfully used for psoriasis therapy, some psoriasis patients are resistant to Vitamin D therapy. Vitamin D mediate it’s activity by intracellular receptor. It’s suggested that polymorphisms in VDR gene may explain the differences in response to vitamin D therapy.In this study, 102 psoriasis patients and 102 healthy controls were studied for VDR gene polymorphisms. The 
Fok I, Bsm I and Apa I 
polymorphisms were examined by PCR-RFLP and 50 subjects received vitamin D therapy to evaluate the association between VDR gene polymorphisms and response to vitamin D therapy.There was no signiﬁcant difference between demograﬁc data and clinical parameters of the patients and vitamin D therapy and VDR polimorphisms. However, Aa and bb genotypes were signiﬁcantly higher in early onset than late onset psoriasis. The haplotype “FfBbAa” was signiﬁcantly higher in patients than controls.In conclusion, our results indicate that VDR gene polymorphisms does not affect the response to vitamin D therapy in psoriasis. However, “FfBbAa” haplotype and Apa I,
 Bsm I polymorphisms are associated 
with psoriasis and early onset of the disease, respectively.
P0996. Plasmid proﬁles of multidrug resistant uropathogentic 
Escherichia coli, Klebsiella spp., Proteus spp. and 
Pseudomonas spp. isolates from Nigeria
B. A. Adeniyi, C. C. Amajoyi, S. I. Smith;  
Department of Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria.
Fifty-two multidrug resistant local uropathogenic Escherichia coli, 
Klebsiella spp.,  Proteus spp., and Pseudomonas spp. isolates were 
tested for susceptibility to 10 antimicrobial agents. Tetracycline (100.0%) and ampicillin (94.2%) showed the highest rates of resistance, and ciproﬂoxacin (50.0%) demonstrated the lowest. The majority of MDR isolates showing concurrent resistance to all 10 agents (n=17) was a component of 32.7%. A total of 23 antimicrobial resistance patterns was observed. The predominant phenotype (32.7%) amongst the isolates included resistance to ciproﬂoxacin, cefuroxime, ceftriaxone, ampicillin, gentamicin, nalidixic acid, nitrofurantoin, co-trimoxazole, streptomycin, and tetracycline. A 38.5% (n=10) of the isolates were carrying plasmids of sizes estimated above 2.1kb. After curing, most of the mutant strains lost their plasmids as was corroborated by their improved susceptibilities. Given that uropathogens are demonstrating increasing antimicrobial resistance, epidemiological investigation using the molecular characterization tools is highly necessary.
P0997. Performance of a DHPLC based platform for 
comprehensive mutation detection in a clinical molecular 
diagnostic setting
B. L. Wu1,2, J. Zhu3, D. Bennett1, G. Wu3, K. Tomaszewicz1, V. Lip1, T. Xu1, H. 
Fang1, H. Shao1, O. Platt1,2;  
1Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 2Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, United States, 3Transgenomic, Omaha, NE, United States.
OBJECT: Denaturing High Performance Liquid Chromatography (DHPLC) is a sensitive, high throughput technique widely used in research to identify hundreds of mutations. We evaluated the effectiveness of DHPLC in a clinical molecular diagnostic setting. 
METHOD: We designed 3 denaturing strategies to detect the common types of clinically important mutations: 1) using partial denaturing to form heteroduplex for rapid screening of base-pair deletions, insertions, and substitutions; 2) using complete denaturing to couple with primer extension to identify multiple target mutations simultaneously; and 3) using non-denaturing for straightforward quantitative detection of genomic deletions and duplications. We studied 518 previously tested clinical samples with documented abnormalities in the following genes: Dystrophin; SLC26A4; Factor V; Prothrombin; MTHFR; HFE; Molecular and biochemical basis of disease, and molecular diagnostics297
and Mitochondrial genome. RESULTS: We correctly identiﬁed all of 
the genetic abnormalities including 37 exon/s deletions, duplications 
and 53 point mutations in Dystrophin gene; 16 SLC26A4 mutations; 29 homozygote, 35 double heterozygote, and 9 triple heterozygote in simultaneous detection of 3 targeted mutations associated with hypercoagulation (Factor V, Prothrombin, MTHFR) and 2 targeted polymorphisms related to hemochromatosis, respectively; and 62 mitochondrial mutations/polymorphisms. In addition, we found 12 new pathogenic mutations in these genes including point mutations, genomic deletions and duplications. These approaches, either single or combination, have signiﬁcantly saved the time and cost of genetic tests. 
CONCLUSION: DHPLC offers a unique combination of 
sensitivity, accuracy, speed and cost-effectiveness in the detection of a variety of mutations. It is a platform that is highly suited to the clinical and regulatory environment of a diagnostic laboratory.
P0998. Four new mutations in the PINK1 gene in early onset 
autosomal recessive parkinsonism
P. Ibanez , S. Lesage, E. Lohmann, L. Haﬁd, M. Borg, D. Grid, M. Haguenau, V. 
Meiniger, Y. Agid, A. Dürr, A. Brice, and the French Parkinson’s Disease Genet -
ics StudyGroup;  
INSERM U289, Neurologie et Thérapeutique Expérimentale, Hôpital de la Pitié-
Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France.
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a frequent disorder. A growing number of 
responsible loci/genes have been identiﬁed in familial forms. Mutations in the PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) gene located within the PARK6 locus on chromosome 1p35-p36 have recently been identiﬁed in autosomal recessive forms of PD. In this study we screened a large series of 145 families, of diverse geographic origins, with autosomal recessive parkinsonism and age at onset before 60 years, for PINK1 
mutations.After excluding 50 families with mutations in the parkin gene, 3 newly developed microsatellites markers ﬂanking the PINK1 gene were analysed in the remaining 95. Sixteen familial cases presenting haploidentity and 5 cases with consanguinity presenting homozygosity at these markers were sequenced. Five new mutations were identiﬁed in the PINK1 gene in four families. Two homozygous substitutions in exon 6, G386A and G409V, and an homozygous deletion in exon 8, 
L519 fs>522X, were identiﬁed in isolated patients with consanguinity. 
We also identiﬁed a compound heterozygous mutation (K24 fs>54X 
and C549 fs>553X) in the fourth family. The mutation in exon 1 is the 
ﬁrst found in the 34-amino acid mitochondrial targeting motif. Patients had a phenotype of typical PD with early onset (range 22 to 52 years) 
with additional signs in those carrying the homozygous mutations.In conclusion, autosomal recessive mutations in PINK1 are a rare cause (2.8%) of young-onset Parkinson disease but might give new 
insight in the understanding of the disease.
P0999. Polymorphisms at the ligand- binding sites of the vitamin 
D receptor gene and osteomalacia
D. Gezen Ak1, H. Kahraman2, E. Dursun1, B. Süsleyici Duman3, N. Erensoy4, F. 
Alagöl5, S. Yilmazer1;  
1Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 
Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medi -
cine, University of 19 Mayis, Samsun, Turkey, 3Department of Medical Biology, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Kadir Has, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Institute for 
Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Department of 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University , Istan -
bul, Turkey.
Vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene polymorphisms have been suggested as possible determinants of bone mineral density (BMD) and calcium metabolism. In this study, our aim was to determine if there is an association between VDR gene polymorphism and osteomalacia. We determined ApaI and TaqI polymorphisms in the vitamin D receptor gene in 24 patients with osteomalacia and 25 age-matched healthy controls. Serum calcium, phosphorus, ALP, PTH, 25OHD levels were also examined. We used PCR and RFLP methods to test for an association between osteomalacia and polymorphisms within intron 8 and exon 9 of the VDR gene. After genetic analysis of the VDR gene, allelic variations were: AA, 50%; Aa, 45.8%; aa, 4.2% and TT, 33.3%; Tt, 62.5%; tt, 4.2% FF in patients and AA, 28 %; Aa, 56%; aa, 16% and TT, 36%; Tt, 52%; tt, 12% in the healthy controls. When the control and patients were compared for their ApaI and TaqI genotypes there was no relationship between VDR gene allelic polymorphisms and osteomalacia. Also no association between biochemical datas and VDR gene polymorphisms was observed. Thus, we were unable to ﬁnd an association between the VDR gene polymorphisms and 
osteomalacia.
P1000. The role of of folates and/or cobalamine in occurrence 
and pathogenesis of trisomy 21
N. Emery-Fillon1, A. Chango2, R. Rivet1, C. Mircher3, B. Herbeth4, H. Bléhaut3, 
D. Lambert5, M. O. Réthoré3, J. P. Nicolas1;  
1Faculty of Medicine, Laboratory of Medical and Pediatric Biochemistry , Van -
doeuvre-les-Nancy, France, 2ISAB, Laboratory of genomic nutritional, Beauvais, 
France, 3Institut Medical Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France, 4INSERM U525, 
Nancy, France, 5INSERM U52, Nancy, France.
Trisomy 21, the most frequent cause of mental retardation of genetic origin, is the most common of the chromosomal aberrations. It causes a characteristic syndrome of mental deﬁciency, malformations and neurological signs characteristic of Alzheimer disease. However these disorders are also observed in the event of deﬁciency in folates and cobalamines. These two vitamins play a capital part in the processes of methylation, the synthesis of DNA and the development of the foetus. Moreover, two genes of folate metabolism are localised on chromosome 21: CBS and RFC. Our hypothesis is that DS could be due to hypomethylation caused by a deﬁcit of the enzymes implied in one carbon metabolism (MTHFR, MTR, MTRR, CBS and RFC). Moreover, hypomethylation leads to nondisjunction of the chromosomes during meiosis thereby playing a role in the occurrence of trisomy 21. We have studied the impact of these 2 vitamins in the occurrence of Trisomy 21 by examining various polymorphisms of genes involved in one carbon metabolism and by measuring biochemical factors (Homocysteine, B9, B12). Moreover, we studied, in vitro, on trisomic ﬁbroblasts of patients 
in culture, the state of methylation according to the senescence and quantiﬁed the form of the folate carriers (RFC and FR).
P1001. Islet amyloid polypeptide (amylin) haplotypes and 
bone mineral density in young and elderly women in Southern 
Sweden
S. Gebre-Medhin1, P. Gerdhem2, M. Callreus2, K. Åkesson2, H. Luthman3;  
1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 2Dept of 
Orthopedics, Malmö University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden, 3Dept of Endocrinol -
ogy, Malmö University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
BACKGROUND AND AIM: Islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP or amylin) is a putative hormone which is secreted together with insulin by the pancreatic beta-cells. Several studies have implied a role for IAPP in bone remodelling. For example, adult mice heterozygote or homozygote for a null mutation in the IAPP gene have increased numbers of osteoclasts and develop an osteporosis-like phenotype in adulthood. We have investigated whether different IAPP haplotypes are associated with bone mineral density (BMD) in young women at peak bone mass and elderly women at high risk of fracture. MATERIALS AND METHODS: 1005 young women from the Malmö Peak-study (age 25±0.1 yrs, BMI 23.0±3.7 kg/cm2) and 1044 elderly women (Malmö OPRA-study; age 75±0.1 yrs, BMI 26.2±4.2 kg/cm2) were recruited. The primary phenotype was BMD assessed by DXA. Body composition data, calcaneus ultrasound estimates and fracture data (OPRA-study) were also available. Short nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the vicinity of the IAPP gene were retrieved from the International HapMap Genotype Database and genotyped by PCR using the ABI SNP genotyping assay. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Obtained data are 
currently being processed and will be presented in further detail.
P1002. Associations and gene-environment interactions between 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in IL4 (c-589t) and IL4 
receptor (I50V and Q576R) and total speciﬁc IgG to diphtheria 
and tetanus toxoids in children at risk of atopy
G. S. Baynam1, S. Khoo1, P. D. Sly1, P. G. Holt1, J. Goldblatt2, P. N. Le Souef2;  
1Telethon Institute for Child Health Research, Perth, Australia, 2School of Paedi -
atrics and Child Health, University of Western Australia, Australia.
Rationale:  There is evidence for (1) high heritability for antibody, and Genetic analysis, linkage, and association298
a Th2 cytokine (IL-13) responses to vaccines (2) atopy inﬂuencing 
immune system development, including delay in maturation from Th2 to Th1 bias and (3) an association between smoking and impaired vaccine response. To assess the role of these multi-factorial inﬂuences this study investigated the effects of: SNPs in the Th2 cytokine IL-4 and IL4 receptor; and parental smoking, on diphtheria and tetanus vaccine response in a cohort enriched for atopy. 
Method:  
The cohort was recruited at birth on the basis of a family history of atopy. Total speciﬁc IgG to diphtheria and tetanus toxoids at 2 years were measured by ELISA. Genotyping was performed by PCR and restriction digestion. 
Results:  For the three SNPs studied (IL4 c-589t, 
IL4R I50V and IL4R Q576R) the allele previously associated with atopy was associated with increased antibody levels to diphtheria (
p= 
0.029, n=197  n=; p=0.062, n=191 and p=0.267, n=183, respectively), 
and tetanus (p=0.685 n=196, p=0.022, n=193 and p=0.055, n=185, 
respectively) toxoids. Furthermore, for these genotypes interactions with smoking were found with diphtheria (
p=0.032, p=0.062and 
p=0.079, respectively) and tetanus ( p=0.001 , p=0.022, p=0.067, 
respectively) toxoid antibodies. Amongst those exposed to parental smoking “atopic alleles” were associated with increased vaccine responses, the converse being found amongst those without exposure to parental smoking. 
Conclusion:  “Atopic alleles”  of SNPs in IL-4 and 
IL-4 R are associated with increased antibody responses to diphtheria and tetanus toxoids, which is modiﬁed by parental smoking.
P1003. Novel autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness 
locus maps on chromosome 6p21.2-22.3 in a large Tunisian  
consanguineous family
A. Tlili1, I. Charfedine2, M. Männikko3, I. Lahmar4, Z. Benzina5, M. Ben Amor2, 
N. Driss4, L. Ala-Kokko3, M. Drira2, S. Masmoudi1, H. Ayadi1;  
1Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire Humaine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service d'O.
R.L., C.H.U. H. Bourguiba de Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Collagen Research Unit, 
Biocenter and Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology , 
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 4Service d'O.R.L., C.H.U. de Mahdia, Mahdia, 
Tunisia, 5Service d’Ophtalmologie, C.H.U. H. Bourguiba de Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia.
Autosomal recessive nonsyndromic sensorineural deafness 
segregating in a large consanguineous Tunisian family was mapped to chromosome 6p21.2-22.3 deﬁning a new locus. A maximum lod score of 5.36 at θ=0 was obtained for the polymorphic microsatellite marker IR2/IR4. Haplotype analysis deﬁned a 14.5 cM critical region between D6S1602 (50.75 cM) and D6S1665 (36.4 cM). This interval overlap with DFNA13, DFNA21 and DFNA31 loci. The entire coding region 
of COL11A2, responsible of the DFNA13 deafness, was analysed by 
conformation sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE) and sequencing analysis. No mutation was observed. The genes corresponding to the ESTs mapped to chromosome 6p21.2-22.3 are being screened for 
deafness-causing mutations.
P1004. Results of a genetic scan of the X-chromosome and 
implications for the genetics of synaesthesia
J. E. Asher1,2, J. A. Lamb1, E. Maestrini3, S. Rahman4, H. Waine5, S. Baron-Co -
hen2,5, A. P. Monaco1;  
1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2De-
partment of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 
3Universita di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Northwick Park Hospital, London, United 
Kingdom, 5Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Synaesthesia, a neurological condition affecting approximately 0.05% of the population, is characterised by anomalous sensory perception: a stimulus in one sensory modality triggers an automatic, instantaneous, consistent response in another modality (e.g. sound evokes colour) or in a different aspect of the same modality (e.g. black text evokes colour). Growing evidence links synaesthesia to cognitive dysfunction; dyslexia, dyscalculia
 and cognitive interference from synaesthetic 
experiences have been reported. Conversely, anecdotal and experimental evidence has linked synaesthesia to enhanced recall 
and absolute musical pitch.Family studies have shown evidence of a strong underlying genetic predisposition with 48% prevalence among ﬁrst-degree relatives of synaesthetes and greater risk to female than to male relatives. Pedigree analysis and evidence from previous studies suggests an X-linked dominant mode of inheritance. The results of a genetic linkage scan of the X-chromosome using 20 microsatellite markers (average 
inter-marker spacing 10cM) in 27 multiplex families will be reported.Additionally, following an investigation of two cases of male-to-male transmission of synaesthesia raising the possibility of oligogenic inheritance, a whole genome screen using 400 microsatellite markers 
was commenced. Progress to date will be reported.
P1005. Haplotype analysis of the serotonin transporter gene in 
Russian suicide attempters
D. Gaysina1, A. Zaynullina1, E. Jurjev1, R. Ghabdulhakov2, E. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir 
State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Genetically-mediated alterations in serotonergic transmission have been implicated in suicidal behavior. Resent studies showed that sex differences exist in the contribution of genetic factors to suicidal behaviour. The aim of this study was to estimate the contribution of the serotonin transporter gene (
SLC6A4 ) in suicidal behaviour for 
males and females of Russian origin. A total of 100 suicide attempters (66 females and 34 males) were included in this study. The control group included 167 individuals (58 females and 109 males) without a personal/family history of any psychiatric disorders. Two polymorphisms in the 
SLC6A4 gene - 5-HTTLPR (in the promoter region) and 
VNTR (in the second intron) were analyzed using PCR technique. Maximum likelihood analysis of haplotype distribution demonstrated the presence of linkage disequilibrium between the two polymorphic in control subjects (females χ
2= 32.25, p < .00001; males χ2 = 32.93, p < 
.00001), in suicide attempters (females χ2 = 15.42, p = .0004; males 
χ2 = 15.42, p = .078), in the overall samples (females χ2 = 39.24, p 
< .00001; males χ2 = 26.33, p < .00001). Analysis of distribution of 
the estimated haplotype frequencies revealed a signiﬁcant difference between suicide attempters and control subjects in females only (χ
2 
= 15.52, df = 5, p = .002). The haplotype S12 had lower frequency in female suicide group (χ
2 = 6.11, df = 2, p = .014, OR = 0.49, 95%CI = 
0.28-0.87). Our ﬁndings indicate the contribution of the SLC6A4 gene 
to susceptibility for suicidal behaviour in females only.
P1006. Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) gene polymorphism as 
an ischaemic stroke risk factor in Moscow population
T. V. Tupitsina1, I. M. Shetova2, P. A. Slominsky1, V. I. Skvortsova1, S. A. Lim -
borska1;  
1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian State 
Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) belong to the basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS protein superfamily. HIF-1 is a heterodimeric transcription factor consisting of HIF-1α and HIF-1β subunits. The expression and the level of the HIF-1α is regulated by protein stabilization under hypoxic and protein degradation under normoxic conditions. HIF-1α protein levels increase in cells to hypoxia. Under low O
2 tensions, HIF-
1α enhance the expression of genes encoding erythropoietin (EPO), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and some other. Thus, the aim of our investigation was to study the connection between IVS9-675C>A polymorphism in gene HIF-1 and atherothrombotic ischaemic stroke. We enrolled 60 patients with atherothrombotic ischaemic stroke from Moscow and controls group consisting of 104 healthy persons. Polymorphism of HIF-1 gene was studied by PCR and restriction SmiM1. The A allele frequency was higher in controls group (88,46%) than in patients group (80,83%) and the frequency of C allele was higher in patients group by 7,63%. C/C genotype wasn’t found in patients group although its frequency was 3,85% in controls. This differences was statistically signiﬁcant (p = 0.0016 for genotype frequency, 0.043 for allele frequency). Thus, the patients with C/C and C/A genotypes have higher rate of development of stroke than ones with A/A genotype (OR = 1,99; CI [1.92; 2.03]). Also we analyzed a possible association between HIF-1α gene polymorphism and stroke severity. But it was not found signiﬁcant correlations between IVS9-675C>A polymorphism of gene HIF-1 and brain infarction volume on 1, 3, 7, 21 days after stroke and stroke severity according to Orgogozo 
scale.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association299
P1007. Genetic polymorphisms in the CYP1A1, CYP2E1, EPHX1, 
GSTM1, GSTT1 and GSTP1 genes and their relationship to 
chronic bronchitis and relapsing pneumonia in children.
G. Korytina1, D. Yanbaeva2, T. Victorova1;  
11Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientiﬁc Center, Ufa, Russian 
Federation, 2Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientiﬁc Center, Ufa, 
Russian Federation.
Aim of this study was to investigate the possible roles of the genes 
functioning in xenobiotic metabolism and antioxidant pathways in the 
development of severe chronic lung disease in children.Polymorphisms in the genes encoding CYP1A1, CYP2E1, EPHX1, GSTM1, GSTT1 and GSTP1 were investigated in Tatar children with chronic lung disease (CLD): chronic bronchitis (N=129) and relapsing pneumonia (N=50) and in ethnically matched healthy individuals (N=227) living in Ufa, Bashkortostan by PCR-RLFP method.The frequencies of *2C allele of CYP1A1 gene were signiﬁcantly higher in CLD patients than in the healthy control group (χ2=15.02, 
P=0.0007).This allele were associated with higher risk of chronic bronchitis in children (OR=4.14 CI 95% 1.83-9.53). Similar results were obtained in the relapsing pneumonia patients (OR =3.86 CI 95% 1.34-10.95 for*2C allele). The patients with CLD showed signiﬁcantly elevated frequencies of the GSTT1 gene deletion (χ2=10.72 P =0.0019). The increase of the GSTT1 gene deletion was signiﬁcant only in the case 
of chronic bronchitis (OR=2.44 95% CI 1.48-4.04).The distribution of the EPHX1, CYP2E1, GSTM1 and GSTP1 gene genotypes did not signiﬁcantly differ between CLD patients and healthy 
subjects.Our ﬁndings support that the polymorphisms of the CYP1A1 and GSTT1 genes, which code for enzymes with dramatically altered activities, probably play a substantial part in susceptibility to severe pulmonary inﬂammation in children with CLD.
P1008. Genetic Heterogeneity of PKD1  & PKD2  Genes In Iran 
And Determining The Genotype/Phenotype Correlations In 
Several Families With Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney 
Disease
R. Radpour1,2, M. M. Haghighi1, M. Ohadi1, A. Hajibeigi1, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetic Research Center of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences Uni -
versity, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Genetics and PGD, 
Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center of Royan Institute, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most 
common genetic nephropathy. So far, three genetic loci have been identiﬁed to be responsible for ADPKD. Little information is available concerning the pattern of linkage in Iranian population. In the present study the linkage analysis was performed using three pairs of polymorphic microsatellite markers including 16AC2.5-CA (D16S291), SM7-CA (D16S283) and KG8-CA (intragenic marker at the 3' end of the gene), that were closely linked to the ADPKD1 locus and three pairs of selected polymorphic microsatellite markers including YUNCA9 (D4S231), AFM155xe11 (D4S1534) and AFM224x6 (D4S423) which were closely linked to the ADPKD2 locus. In parallel, the genomic DNA of 150 unrelated healthy individuals were used to determine frequency, heterozygosity rate and PIC for each marker. Assignment of the disease gene loci was performed following phasing and haplotype construction, genotype/phenotype correlations were deduced from the constructed haplotypes. Our results showed relatively high heterozygosity rates and PIC values for some markers, while the most informative markers were KG8 and 16AC2.5 for 
PKD1 gene and AFM224x6 for PKD2  
gene. We report here the ﬁrst molecular genetic study of ADPKD and the existence of locus heterogeneity for ADPKD in Iranian population by performing linkage analysis on 15 affected families. Eleven families showed linkage to 
PKD1 and two families linked to PKD2 gene. In 
2 families, PKD1 markers were common in all affected members but 
PKD2 markers were not informative. In our study, a gene frequency of 
0.001 was assumed for PKD1  and 0.0001 for PKD2 .P1009. Association of the MCP-1 promoter polymorphism with 
tuberculosis in the Hong Kong Chinese population
S. F. Chu1, M. W. Ng1, C. M. Tam2, K. M. Kam3, Y. Q. Song4, Y. L. Lau1, A. K. S. 
Chiang1;  
1Department of Paediatrics & Adolenscent Medicine, Faculty of Medicine Build -
ing, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region 
of China, 2Tuberculosis and Chest Service, Department of Health, Hong Kong 
Special Administrative Region of China, 3Public Health Laboratory Services 
Branch, Centre for Health Protection, Department of Health, Hong Kong Spe -
cial Administrative Region of China, 4Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of 
Medicine Building, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Adminis -
trative Region of China.
Hong Kong is a place of intermediate burden of tuberculosis (TB). The TB notiﬁcation rate in Hong Kong was 108 per 100,000 persons in 2001. MCP-1 is a chemokines recruiting activated T cells to form granuloma in mouse M. tuberculosis (MTB) infection, suggesting 
MCP-1 involved in the immunopathogensis of TB. A functional polymorphism (A-2518G) in the promoter region of MCP-1 was shown to inﬂuence the transcriptional level of the gene. We hypothesize that MCP-1 polymorphisms may contribute to human susceptibility to TB. Genomic DNA was extracted from frozen EDTA-treated whole blood samples of TB patients and blood donors. A 930 base pair segment of the MCP-1 were ampliﬁed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and the genomic variants were detected by restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) using restriction enzyme, PvuII. We performed a population case-control study to test if the -2518 A/G polymorphism of the MCP-1 gene contributes to the susceptibility to tuberculosis. A total of 941 individuals, including 447 controls and 494 TB patients, was genotyped. The GG genotype and the G allele of the MCP-1 gene polymorphism were signiﬁcantly more common in the TB patients than in the controls (P = 0.01). This ﬁnding indicates that the -2518 A/G polymorphism of the MCP-1 gene is associated with TB in Hong Kong 
Chinese population.
P1010. Variability in apo(a) gene control regions and correlation 
to lp(a) plasma levels
K. Zídková1,2, V. Kebrdlová2, L. Zlatohlávek1, R. Češka1;  
13rd Medical Department, the First Faculty of Medicine and General T eaching 
Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and 
Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching Hospi -
tal, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
High lipoprotein(a)[Lp(a)] level is an independent risk factor for development of premature atherosclerosis. Apolipoprotein(a)[apo(a)] is the main determinant of Lp(a) plasma concentration. The aim of our study was to assign if particular variants of apo(a) gene control regions (promoter, DHII, DHIII enhancers) or their combinations are correlated to speciﬁc Lp(a) levels.Randomly chosen individuals were sorted out into several groups according to Lp(a) level. The relevant control regions were scanned for polymorphism occurrence using the DGGE method, fragmentation analyses and sequencing. Population frequencies of polymorphic variants were obtained from a sample of 263 individuals by means of the RFLP assay and the PCR ampliﬁcation of speciﬁc alleles method. The linkage disequilibrium was measured by RelD and Δ statistic.The DHII enhancer is fully conserved. As we expected, the promoter site revealed only a restricted variability. The most polymorphic region was shown to be the DHIII enhancer, which discloses several polymorphisms as well as relatively high frequency of mutations. We detected strong linkage disequilibrium among proximal and distal promoter regions and DHIII enhancer sites. Finally, some polymorphic variants have distinct frequencies among groups with a different range 
of Lp(a) level.We conclude from our study that variability in apo(a) gene control regions assemble complex haplotypes which could be connected with speciﬁc range of Lp(a) levels.This study was supported by grant IGAMZCR NB-7392-3 and by 
MSM0021620807.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association300
P1011. Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD): Identiﬁcation of a 
novel locus in the Arabic population with atypical central pair 
transposition defect
R. Chodhari1, W. Stannard2, C. O. Callaghan2, C. Wallis3, R. Gardiner1, E. M. 
K. Chung1, H. Mitchison1;  
1University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Lung Health, 
Leicester, United Kingdom, 3Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, Lon -
don, United Kingdom.
PCD is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterised by 
respiratory tract infections and subfertility. The clinical phenotype results from dysmotility of the cilia, which is associated with a variety of structural abnormalities. The core or axoneme of cilia comprises a bundle of microtubules and associated proteins including dyneins, nexin links and radial spokes. About 50% of patients exhibit laterality defects, commonly situs inversus , association known as Kartagener 
syndrome. We have studied large consanguineous family from UAE. Parents are ﬁrst cousins with three affected children (None of whom have situs inversus ) and eight unaffected individuals. They 
have circular ciliary beat pattern which is consistent with atypical ciliary transposition defect. A genomewide scan identiﬁed a region consistent with linkage on 6p21.2. Using GENEHUNTER, a maximum multipoint LOD score of 2.9 was obtained between novel microsatellite 
C6orf197-CA  and D6S282 . This critical region spans approximately 6 
megabases of genomic DNA. Work is in progress to using comparative genomics approach to identify potential candidate genes. There are 40 known genes in this region of which two have been identiﬁed as potential candidates. 
DNAH8 , axonemal heavy dynein8, is an integral 
component of cilium. DNAH5  (protein from same gene family) knock 
out mice exhibit phenotype similar to that of human PCD. Another 
candidate KNSL8, kinesin light chain8, is essential for intraﬂegellar 
transport of ciliary components. Both genes are expressed in the lungs and testes. 
DNAH8  and KNSL8, therefore represents an excellent 
candidate gene for PCD. There genomic characterisation will be 
undertaken before performing mutational analysis in patients.
P1012. Association of B lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS) 
polymorphisms with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
M. W. Ng, C. S. Lau, T. M. Chan, H. S. WONG, Y. L. Lau;  
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region of China.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease characterized by dysregulation of T and B lymphocytes, leading to production of autoantibodies and immune complexes (ICs). Recently, a promoter polymorphism of B Lymphocyte stimulator (BLys, also known as BAFF, TALL-1, zTNF4, TNFSF13B) was found to be associated with higher anti-Sm antibody level in Japanese. BLys promotes B cell differentiation, proliferation and survival. It is located in chromosome region 13q32, which is a susceptibility locus of SLE. In BLys-/- mice, number of B cells, serum IgG and IgM levels were decreased and B cell development was blocked at transitional T1 stage. Higher BLys level was found in SLE patients. Therefore, we hypothesized polymorphisms of BLys may affect the susceptibility and 
development of clinical features of SLE in our population.Association of 4 promoter single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (-1283G/A, -871C/T, -514T/C, -353G/C) and 1 intronic SNP (IVS1-45C/G) of BLys were analyzed in 456 SLE patients and 760 healthy controls, using high-throughput Sequenom Assay.No signiﬁcant association was found in the promoter SNPs with disease susceptibility. However, frequency of G-carrier of the intronic SNP IVS1-45C/G was found to be higher in the controls (
P = 0.03). In 
addition, -871CC was over-represented in patients with Anti-nRNP ( P 
= 0.0046; OR 2.38; 95% CI 1.33-4.23).This suggests that the allele G of the intronic SNP IVS1-45C/G of BLys may increase the risk for developing SLE, while -871CC is associated with the development of Anti-nRNP in SLE patients.P1013. SPG7 in 139 patients with Hereditary Spastic Paraparesis
N. Elleuch1, C. Depienne1, A. Benomar2, G. Besson3, X. Ferrer4, F. Santorelli5, 
G. Stevanin1, A. Durr1, A. Brice1;  
1INSERM U679 and Département de Génétique, Cytogénétique et Embryolo -
gie, Paris, France, 2Laboratoire de Neurogénétique, Service de Neurologie, 
Hôpital des spécialités, Rabat, Morocco, 3Service de Neurologie. Centre Hos -
pitalo-Universitaire, Grenoble, France, 4Service de Neurologie. Centre Hospi -
talo-Universitaire, Bordeaux, France, 5Division of Molecular Medicine, Bambino 
Gesù Hospital, Rome, Italy.
Mutations in the SPG7 gene, which encodes paraplegin, are responsible for an autosomal recessive form of pure or complicated hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP). All 17 exons of SPG7 were analyzed using DHPLC and/or direct sequencing in 139 probands with pure or complicated HSP and autosomal recessive inheritance, 41 with consanguinity.We found 50 different heterozygous sequence changes, 40 of which were not previously reported. Twenty-six of these variants were found in 22 families and were absent in controls, 18 of them in coding regions. No homozygous mutations were identiﬁed, even in the 7 consanguineous families, but 5 out of 22 families had 2 heterozygous 
changes.Two families with complicated HSP with cerebellar signs and onset at age 27 and 28, had mutations affecting the protein sequence: 850-851 delTTinsC and V581del in a Moroccan family and R294H and N730D in a Mauritanian family.Two other families had the same association of a missense mutation (A2T) and a synonymous mutation (L67L) located in cis. One
 family 
associated 2 intronic variations and one synonymous mutation of unknown effect. We also identiﬁed 17 families with only one heterozygous mutation, including 4 with highly probable pathogenic mutations (M1L, IVS11-1-1457 del9, Q507X, Q82del).In conclusion, mutations in the paraplegin gene are rare and represent < 2% (2/139) of the families studied. The frequency of rare nucleotidic variants was high, however, complicating routine diagnosis. 
P1014. Association of CTLA-4 Gene Polymorphisms with Coeliac 
Disease in the Maltese Population
J. Borg1, C. A. Scerri1, C. Vidal2, A. E. Felice3, A. Xuereb Anastasi1,2;  
1Institute of Health Care, University of Malta, Guardamangia, Malta, 2Depart -
ment of Pathology, University of Malta Medical School, Guardamangia, Malta, 
3Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Physiology and Biochemistry , 
University of Malta, Msida, Malta.
Coeliac disease (CD) has an autoimmune component in genetically predisposed individuals triggered by environmental factor (gluten). The disease manifests in partial or total villous destruction of the small intestine with malabsorption and malnutrition. The main environmental triggering factor is a transglutaminated peptide within the gliadin component of gluten, found in wheat. CD has an established HLA component responsible to 35% of the genetic predisposition, rest being in the non-HLA region.100 coeliac patients were recruited, having predominance of females over male coeliac patients (3:1, χ
2 = 25, p <0.001). The mean age at 
diagnosis for the whole group was 34 years (males 32 years, females 34 years, t = -0.65, N.S.). The predominant presenting symptoms were gastrointestinal related. A higher proportion of males reported a 
positive family history as compared to females (χ2 = 5.44, p = <0.02).
Two polymorphisms found within the CTLA 4 gene were studied amongst 
a sample of coeliac patients and cord blood DNA samples (n = 187) that acted as the control group. Polymorphisms within the CTLA
4 gene 
have been associated with other autoimmune conditions and the gene plays a very important role in immunoregulatory function. The coeliac individuals and cord blood samples were genotyped for the -318 C/T and +49 A/G SNPs. No association of the single polymorphisms or the combined haplotypes with the coeliac condition was apparent amongst the coeliac patients under study. The -318 C allele and the +49 A allele 
were in linkage disequilibrium amongst the cord blood samples.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association301
P1015. Molecular-genetics analyses of hepatolenticular 
degeneration in Republic of Moldova.
V. C. Sacara ;  
National Centre of reproductive health and medical genetics, Chisinau, Repub -
lic of Moldova.
Hepatolenticular degeneration also known as Wilson Disease (WD) 
is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder of copper metabolism, characterized by excessive accumulation of copper in the liver, central nervous system, kidneys, eyes and other organs, in individuals ranging 
in age from 4 to over 50 years.Our 28 patients had presented with predominantly hepatic, neurological or psychiatric manifestations. 15 of them were children who have one of liver diseases that clinically manifests at the age of 4-8 years. Neurological and psychiatric ﬁndings manifest in 48 % of the patients. These patients are characterized by combination of tremor, dystonia, dysarthria, dysphagia, chorea, drooling, open-mouthedness, parkinsonian symptoms - rigidity and bradykinesia and incoordonation. Inappropriate behavior sudden changes, difﬁculty concentrating, deterioration of schoolwork, emotional lability was noted in about 30 % of the patients. The molecular genetic analysis of the linkage loci D13S118 and D13S228 of the ATP7B gene responsible for WD among the 41 and 20 patients respectively, allowed to observe a heterozygosity of 0,59 (for D13S118) and of 0,80 (for D13S228). Comparing our results with the frequencies from the GDB we established that in our population the 189 bp., 193 bp. allele are more frequent and 195 bp is less frequent then in the European population for D13S118 loci.The complex clinical neurological and molecular genetic methods applied in our study for WD turned out to be very efﬁcient in establishing a correct diagnosis and prescribe a correct treatment, if necessary .
P1016. Xenobiotics-metabolizing enzymes genes and cancer: a 
link between polymorphisms and environment
M. Freidin1,2, I. Goncharova1,2, E. Slonimskaya3, S. Kolomiets4, A. Karpov2, R. 
Takhauov2, V. Puzyrev1;  
1Medical Genetics Research Institute, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Seversk 
Biophisical Research Center, Seversk, Russian Federation, 3Cancer Research 
Institute, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 4Tomsk Regional Cancer Dispensary, 
Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Polymorphisms of CYP2E1 , CYP2C19 , GSTT1 , GSTM1 , GSTP1 
genes were studied in 287 breast cancer (BC), 102 lung cancer (LC), 72 head and neck cancers patients from Tomsk and in 96 workers of the largest Russian nuclear energy combine - Siberian Group of Chemical Enterprises (SGCE) with different cancer types. For control, 221 healthy people from Tomsk and 102 SGCE workers were used.We found, that “slow” 
CYP2C19 *2 allele was a risk factor for LC and BC 
in Tomsk: its frequency in patients was twofold higher than in controls (37.3%, 32.9% and 17.0%, respectively, in LC, BC, and controls; p<0.001). Also, 
GSTT1 “null”-allele homozygozity was associated with 
LC (40.5 % and 23.1 % in LC and controls, respectively; p=0.005).In SGCE cancer cases there was an excess of the “fast” 
CYP2C19 *1 
allele in comparison with controls (84.9% and 65.1%, respectively; p=3.6E-4) and an excess of 
GSTM1 “null”-allele homozygotes (63.7% 
and 39.5%, respectively; p=9.7E-3). Such genetic features should, in theory, correspond to relatively fast accumulation and slow degradation of potential carcinogens. At that, there were no differences between frequencies of these alleles and genotypes in SGCE cancer cases and healthy people from Tomsk, suggesting that not yet identiﬁed carcinogen is present at SGCE and it has more signiﬁcant etiological potential in carriers of adverse
 combination of CYP2C19  and GSTM1  
alleles.Thus, the common polymorphism of 
CYP2C19 , GSTT1, and GSTM1  
genes is the risk factor for different cancer types, but its negative phenotypical effects signiﬁcantly depend on the environment (carcinogens and modiﬁers presence).
P1017. Mutational analysis of genes BBS1 and BBS6 involved in 
Bardet-Biedl syndrome in spanish patients
I. Pereiro1, C. Ayuso2, M. Baiget3, D. Valverde1;  
1Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 
3Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS, MIM209900) is a clinical and genetically heterogeneous disorder. BBS patients manifest a complex and variable phenotype that includes as cardinal charactheristics: retinal dystrophy, polydactily, mental delay, obesity and hipogonadism; other characteristics are renal dysplasia, dental malformations and a speciﬁc facies with wide forehead, hypoplasia malar, depressed eyes, large nose, ﬁne uplip, everted down-lip, and retrognatia in lateral vision; additional features such asthma, situs inversus and diabetes mellitus may also be present. Although BBS is rare in the general population there is a considerable interest in identifying the genes causing BBS because components of the phenotype, such as obesity and diabetes, are very common. The prevalence varies from 1/13.500 among Bedouin population to 1/160.000 in Western Europe. Until now eight BBS loci have been described: BBS1 on 11q13, BBS2 on 16q21, BBS3 on 3p11, BBS4 on 15q22.2-q23, BBS5 on 2q31, and BBS6 on 20p12, BBS7 on 4q27 and BBS8 on 14q32, with evidence for at least one more locus. Recently the theory of the segregation of this disease in an autosomal recessive manner was eclipsed by a new one that presents this segregation as a triallelic inheritance. This suggests that multiple alleles may act in concert to cause pathogenesis. We analyzed by PCR-SSCP the involvement of mutation in genes BBS1 and BBS6 in 43patients. Several changes have been observed in both genes. Our results indicated that mutation M390R in BBS1 is the most frequent 
mutation founded appearing in 12% of the disease alleles.
P1018. Exclusion of GDAP1 and MTMR2 genes responsible 
for CMT4A and CMT4B1 phenotypes in autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease (AR-CMT).
D. Aktas1, B. Akın2, E. Utine1, M. Alikasifoglu1, N. Akarsu2, H. Topaloglu3, E. 
Tuncbilek1;  
1Department of Genetics, Hacettepe University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey, 
2Department of Hematology, Hacettepe University Medical School, Ankara, 
Turkey, 3Department of Child Neurology, Hacettepe University Medical School, 
Ankara, Turkey.
Charcot-Marie-Tooth diseases are a genetically heterogenous group 
of disorders with autosomal dominant (AD), X-linked recessive and autosomal recessive (AR) inheritance. AD form is the most common one. There is progressive muscular weakness and atrophy affecting the distal extremities in all types. AR-CMT is less common and clinical manifestations are usually similar to AD-CMT; however, generally more severe and has an earlier age of onset. Electrophysiological classiﬁcation as demyelinating or axonal is generally valid. AR-CMT’s, are also genetically heterogeneous. More than 11 chromosomal loci have been assigned so far. We hereby report two large Turkish families originating from the same village in central Anatolia with CMT. Entire pedigrees structures of the ﬁrst and second families consisted of a total of 46 and 18 individuals (7 and 4 affected members) respectively. More than one affected members in the same generation and highly inbred nature of the pedigrees suggested an autosomal recessive inheritance potentially originating from a common ancestor, Electrophysiological data of the two affected individuals conﬁrmed demyelinating CMT. Genetic linkage analysis of all reported loci has been initiated and the candidate regions on 8q13 (GDAP1) and 11q22 (MTMR2) have now been deﬁned. The respective order of the DNA markers and candidate genes are: D8S279-(1.26Mb)-D8S2324-(1.01Mb)-GDAP1-(0.4Mb)-D8S548-(1.9Mb)-D8S541 and D11S4176-(1.49Mb)-D11S1757-(0.87Mb)-MTMR2-(2.25MB)-D11S1390. We used an initial screening panel containing a total of 12 informative offspring (7 affected) from both families. Neither a common haplotype segregating in autosomal recessive fashion nor a signiﬁcant lod scores was observed in both regions. Linkage analysis of the remaining loci are currently underway.
P1019. Spectrum of germ-line MLH1  and MSH2  mutations in 
Austrian Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer patients.
B. Wolf1, S. Henglmueller1, E. Janschek1, D. Ilencikova1, C. Ludwig-Papst1, M. 
Bergmann2, C. Mannhalter3, F. Wrba4, J. Karner-Hanusch2;  
1Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Research Laboratories, 
Vienna, Austria, 2Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Vienna, 
Austria, 3Medical University of Vienna, Clinical Institute of Medical and Chemi -
cal Laboratory Diagnostics, Vienna, Austria, 4Medical University of Vienna, 
Department of Clinical Pathology, Vienna, Austria.
Background: Germ-line mutations in mismatch repair genes are associated with the hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer Genetic analysis, linkage, and association302
syndrome. The latter is characterized by a susceptibility to cancer of 
the colon, endometrium, small bowel or urothelium at an unusually 
young age and with a high degree of penetration in all generations.Material and Methods: We analyzed 109 individuals from 46 Austrian families, who fulﬁlled the Amsterdam criteria (n=29) or at least one of the Bethesda guidelines (n=17), for mutations in 
MLH1 and MSH2 . 
Microsatellite instability was determined in the tumors of the index persons and affected relatives.Results and Conclusion: High-grade instability was present in 60.6% of the tumor samples from index patients. Twenty-three germ-line DNA sequence variants in 24/46 families and 4 somatic mutations in 3 tumors were detected in 
MLH1 and MSH2. Fifteen mutations are 
novel. None of the newly identiﬁed germ-line variants were found in 100 alleles of healthy control individuals. We were able to characterize two intronic variants (
MLH1 c.589-10T>A; MSH2 c.367-1G>A) with 
regard to their effect on mRNA. Both created new splice sites that replaced the regular ones. Germ-line mutations occurred in 44.8% of the families fulﬁlling the Amsterdam criteria and in 35.3% of the Bethesda patients. The detection of a pathogenic mutation was highly signiﬁcantly correlated with microsatellite instability in the tumor DNA (p=0.007). This study is the ﬁrst comprehensive report of mismatch repair gene mutations in Austrian HNPCC patients.
P1020. Polymorphism of SLAM gene in RA in French population
G. Chabchoub1, E. Petit2, A. Maalej1, C. Pierlot2, F. Cornelis2, H. Ayadi1;  
1Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire Humaine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Genhotel 
Laboratoire de Recherche Européen pour la Polyarthrite Rhumatoïde, Evry , 
France.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a complex genetic disease where numerous genetic factors contribute to susceptibility. CD150 signaling lymphocytic activation molecule (SLAM) is a cell surface glycoprotein found on activated B cells, T cells and dendritic cells.In order to investigate the role of SLAM gene in the susceptibility to RA, we have analysed three SNPs (rs 2295612
, rs 1809963  and rs 
3796504 ) localised in exon 1, in intron 4 and in exon 7 respectively, 
using PCR-RFLP technique. Statistical analysis was performed by Transmission Disequilibrium Test (TDT).One hundred French caucasian trio families composed of one affected subject and the two parents were investigated. The mean age at 
disease onset was 39.6 years.Our analysis showed no signiﬁcant association with RA susceptibility 
(p=0.3079 for rs 2295612 ; p=0.314 for rs 1809963  and p=0.744 for rs 
3796504 ).
The lack of association of SLAM gene polymorphism in our study suggests that the SLAM gene is not a candidate gene for RA 
predisposition.
P1021. Association of VDR gene with thyroid autoimmune 
diseases in Tunisian population
A. Maalej1, G. Chabchoub1, M. Mnif2, A. Rebai1, H. Ayadi1;  
1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service 
d'Endocrinologie, CHU Hédi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia.
Autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITDs) including Graves’ disease (GD) 
and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (HT) are inherited as complex traits. In order to detect the susceptibility genes involved in the pathogenesis of these diseases, we analysed the role of vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene polymorphisms (
FokI, BsmI and TaqI) localised in exon 2, intron 
8 and exon 9.Our study concerned one hundred Tunisian patients affected with AITDs subdivided into 55 patients affected with GD and 45 affected with HT and one hundred unrelated healthy subjects. Molecular genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP technique and statistical analysis was 
performed using Chi 2X2  test.
Our results showed signiﬁcant association of BsmI ‘b’ allele and ‘bb’ 
genotype with autoimmune thyroid diseases ( p=2 10-4 and p=7.8 10-
6) respectively. However, no signiﬁcant association of FokI and TaqI  
polymophisms was found between patients and controls ( p=0.328 and 
p=0.13) respectively.These results suggest that VDR ‘b’ allele and ‘bb’ genotype have a potential effect in AITDs.P1022. Autozygosity mapping reveals deletion of MCPH1 
gene as cause of autosomal recessive mental retardation in 
consanguineous Iranian family
M. Garshasbi1, M. M. Motazacker1, S. S. Abedini2, S. Esmaeeli Nieh2, S. Ghas -
semi Firouzabadi2, F. Behjati2, K. Kahrizi2, C. Becker3,4, F. Rueschendorf3, P. 
Nuernberg3,4, S. Lenzner1, H. H. Ropers1, H. Najmabadi2;  
1Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Genetics Re -
search Center, USWR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Gene Mapping Cen -
ter, Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 4Cologne 
Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
Autozygosity mapping in 6 affected individuals (4 boys and 2 girls) and their healthy parents of a large Iranian family with severe mental retardation (MR) and microcephaly has enabled us to map the underlying gene defect to the short arm of chromosome 8. Linkage analyses yielded a single peak at 8p22-p23.2, with LOD scores of 25 and 4.2, respectively, upon non- parametric and parametric multipoint linkage analysis using Merlin and GeneHunter. Thorough examination of the linkage data and haplotypes revealed an abnormal pattern of inheritance for several markers in the middle of this peak, and analysis of the raw genotyping data identiﬁed a 50-480 kb deletion encompassing three SNP markers as well as part or all of the MCPH1 
gene.MCPH1 is one out of only three genes for autosomal recessive MR that have been identiﬁed to date, and it has been shown to play a role in chromosome condensation. So far, only two point mutations in this gene have been described, and thus, the deletion mutant found in the Iranian family is the ﬁrst of its kind. Cytogenetic analysis of these patients showed high number (10%-15%) of prophase-like cells in routine preparations and poor-quality metaphase G-banding, and clinically, the patients in this family are also indistinguishable from previously reported patients. Thus, our ﬁndings demonstrate that contrary to earlier speculations, MCPH1 null mutations are not lethal. High-resolution array CGH experiments are in progress to precisely deﬁne the borders of this deletion.
P1023. Two large French families with late-onset focal dystonia 
not linked to the three known loci DYT6, DYT7 and DYT13
M. Y. Frederic1, C. Dhaenens2, C. M. Monino1, S. Schraen2, M. Claustres1, S. 
Tuffery-Giraud1, B. Sablonnière2, G. Collod-Beroud1;  
1Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire, Montpellier, France, 2Laboratoire de 
Biochimie et de Biologie Moleculaire, CHU de Lille, Lille, France.
Focal Idiopatic Torsion Dystonia (FITD) is a group of movement disorders which is usually autosomal dominant with reduced penetrance. Commonly described forms of FITD include cervical dystonia (spasmodic torticollis), blepharospasm, oromandibular dystonia, laryngeal dystonia (spasmodic dysphonia), and limb dystonia (among which task-speciﬁc dystonias as writer’s cramp). We studied two large French families presenting with varied symptoms of adult-onset FITD: spasmodic torticollis, postural tremor, blepharospasm, ”task-speciﬁc” cramp and dysphonia. The ﬁrst family, DYST143, is composed of 26 subjects (ﬁve deﬁnitely affected, two with unclear status). The average of onset is 43 ± 20 years. The second family, DYST154, included 21 subjects (three deﬁnitely affected, two with unclear status). The average of onset is 32 ± 16 years. DYST 143 and DYST154 were studied for the three loci known to be implicated in FITD, DYT6, DYT7 and DYT13, by genotyping all individuals with markers spanning these regions: 
DYT6(Tel-D8S1791-D8S532-D8S587-
D8S507-D8S1178-D8S1797-D8S1775-D8S279-D8S1475-Cen), 
DYT7 (Tel-D18S59-D18S481-D18S54-D18S1154-D18S63-D18S452-D18S1163-D18S464-D18S53-Cen), 
DYT13 (Tel-D1S2663-D1S450-
D1S2667-D1S228-D1S507-D1S2697-Cen). Haplotype construction showed no common haplotype shared among all deﬁnitely affected family members within the 3 regions. These results were conﬁrmed by Lod scores < -2 for DYST 143. For DYST154, non informative Lod scores for DYT 7 were obtained, but the implication of this locus would lead to a change of status for three subjects currently aged of more than 32 years old and scored as unaffected. 
Conclusion : These 
results illustrate the great genetic heterogeneity of FITD and indicate the existence of one or more unassigned genes for this pathology in 
the French population.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association303
P1024. The contributuion of OCTN1/2 variants within the IBD5 
locus to disease susceptibility and severity in Crohn's disease
E. R. Nimmo, C. L. Noble, H. Drummond, N. Anderson, I. D. R. Arnott, J. Sat -
sangi;  
Gastrointestinal Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Recent data suggest that variants of the organic cation transport 
genes OCTN1 (a missense substitution in exon 9) and OCTN2 (a G-C transversion in the promoter) may represent disease causing mutations which account for the genetic contribution of the IBD5 locus, on chromosome 5q31, to the development of Crohn’s disease (CD) 
(Peltekova et al(2004) Nature Genetics 36;471-475).
We have genotyped 374 CD, 305 ulcerative colitis (UC) and 294 healthy controls (HC) for ﬁve SNPs in the IBD5 region, including the published OCTN1 and OCTN2 variants. Association with disease susceptibility and phenotype was determined in CD and UC patients. We have conﬁrmed the ﬁndings of Peltekova et al, that the variants 
of OCTN1 and OCTN2 are associated with CD but not with UC, and that the TC haplotype of OCTN1/OCT2 is associated with CD (25.3% v 16%, P=0.0035) when compared to HC. We have also shown that this haplotype is associated with disease progression (P=0.049) and disease severity, as measured by the need for surgery in CD patients (P=0.004). All ﬁve SNPs were in strong linkage disequilibrium: in the absence of the IBD5 risk haplotype we do not see an association of 
OCTN1/OCTN2 variants with CD.Analysis was also performed to look for epistatic interactions between the IBD5 SNPs and Nod2 variants but no evidence of interactions were 
found.
P1025. Molecular characterization of nonsyndromic 
craniosynostosis
S. A. Boyadjiev1, G. X. Zhang1, R. G. Ingersoll1, D. J. Hur1, C. A. Vander Kolk2, 
B. S. Carson3, J. L. Marsh4, J. Panchal5, D. Cutler1, A. F. Scott1;  
1McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 2Department of Surgery, 
Division of Plastic Surgery, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, United States, 3Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins 
Hospita, Baltimore, MD, United States, 4St Louis Children’s Hospital, Section of 
Pediatric Plastic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, United States, 5Section of Plastic Surgery, University of Oklahoma Health 
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, United States.
Nonsyndromic craniosynostosis (NSC) is a heterogeneous condition of multifactorial etiology with evidence of genetic factors that are yet to be identiﬁed. Hot-spot mutation analysis for FGFR1 exon IIIa, FGFR2 exons IIIa and IIIc, FGFR3 exon IIIa, and TWIST1 was performed on 147 patients with presumed NSC. Two TWIST1 and two FGFR3 P250R mutations were identiﬁed among 21 patients with coronal synostosis. Another FGFR3 P250R mutation was identiﬁed in a patient with cloverleaf skull, indicating the extreme variability of Muenke syndrome. Twenty patients with isolated sagittal NSC were analyzed for mutations in the entire coding sequence of FGFR1, 2, and 3, FGFRL1, SNAIL, SLUG, TWIST1 and 2, MSX2, RUNX2, and NELL1. These genes were selected on the basis of their biologic function and/or involvement in similar phenotypes. No obvious disease causing mutations have been identiﬁed so far. Familial nonsynonymous SNPs were identiﬁed in RUNX2, NELL1, and TWIST1 in several NSC families and are being evaluated as disease predisposing variants. The entire TWIST2 gene was sequenced for 19 patients with coronal NSC, 17 patients with metopic NSC, and 9 patients with lambdoid NSC, but no mutations were found. The negative results of the sequencing analysis of these candidate genes demonstrate that more efﬁcient strategies, such as association analysis, are needed for the identiﬁcation of genes contributing to NSC. In a study of 34 trios with sagittal NSC using 1048 SNPs in 82 craniofacial genes we established an association to chromosome 3q12, which is currently being validated with additional 
families.P1026. Association of polymorphic variants of human NRAMP1, 
VDR, IL12B, IL1B and IL1RN genes with tuberculosis and clinical 
traits of the disease
A. Rudko1, M. Freidin1, V. Puzyrev1, E. Ondar2;  
1Medical Genetics Research Institute, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Multiple-
discipline Scientiﬁc Laboratory for Medical and Biological Problems, Kizil, Rus -
sian Federation.
To analyze associations between genetic markers and tuberculosis (TB) and its clinical traits in ethnically homogenous population, common polymorphisms of ﬁve TB candidate genes were studied: 
NRAMP1 (469+14G/C, D543N, 1465-85G/A, 274C/T), VDR (F/f, B/b) , 
IL12B (1188A/C), IL1B (+3953A1/A2) and IL1RN (VNTR in second 
intron) in 240 TB patients and 263 controls from Tuva RepublicOnly 1465-85G/A polymorphism of 
NRAMP1 gene was associated with 
TB itself and with inﬁltrative form of the disease (p<0.05), suggesting just a little impact of the investigated polymorphisms upon the TB development. At the same time, several alleles of 
NRAMP1 were 
associated with severity of the disease, higher percent of segmental leukocytes and lower percent of monocytes (543N), higher percent of eosinophils (469+14C), lower level of hemoglobin and an increase of leukocytes (274T). Polymorphisms of 
VDR gene were associated 
mainly with rontgenological sings: both b and f alleles were associated 
with small size of cavities, whereas f alone was associated with small 
sizes of inﬁltrations, and b alone was associated with lung tissue 
destruction and decrease of stab leukocytes. A2+ allele of IL1RN gene 
was associated with lung tissue destruction and higher erythrocyte 
sedimentation rates, decrease of lymphocytes and thymol tests.Thus, the studied genes NRAMP1, VDR, IL12B, IL1B 
and IL1RN in 
Tuvinians more likely inﬂuence the TB endophenotypes (acute phase reactions, size and degree of lung tissue destruction), but not the 
disease itself.
P1027. Distribution of cystic ﬁbrosis mutations and the three 
microsatelite loci in Croatian population
J. Knezevic1, G. Tanackovic1, I. Barisic2, J. Pavelic1;  
1Division of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 
2Children's Hospital zagreb, University of Zagreb, Medical School, Zagreb, 
Croatia.
Cystic ﬁbrosis is one of the most common recessive disorders in Caucasian affecting approximately 1 in 3 000 individuals. More than 1000 mutations have been identiﬁed in cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene (
CFTR). The most frequent mutation, 
accounted for about 67% CF chromosomes, is ΔF508. Only four others (G542X, N1303K, G551D and W1282X) have frequencies higher than 1%; most other are rare and speciﬁc for some population subgroups. The southern-east region of Europe is highly heterogenic and CF mutation analysis can be facilitated by association studies between 
intragenic polymorphic haplotypes.The aim of this study was to reveal the frequency of 29 CF mutations along with the distribution of three polymorphic loci (IVS 1 CA, IVS 8 CA and IVS 17b CA) and associated haplotypes in diseased population. A total of 41 unrelated CF patients from Croatia were included in this study which revealed 6 different mutations accounted for 68,29% diseased alleles. The most frequent mutation was ΔF508 (58,74%), followed by G542X (3,66%) and N1303K (2,44%). Polymorphic loci analysis revealed high level of heterogeneity, 15 different haplotypes were found. The most frequent associated with CF was 21-23-13 (23,2%), followed by 21-17-13 (14,6%). ΔF508 mutation was associated with 5 different haplotypes, 21-23-13 being the most frequent one (31,3%).According to our results it can be concluded that genetic background of cystic ﬁbrosis in Croatian population is more complex than it was expected. Much more work is needed to get inside the exact population 
screening with available kits and association studies.
P1028. Complex diseases: spurious evidence for a second gene 
when the effect of the ﬁrst one is incorrectly speciﬁed
M. Bourgey, F. Clerget-Darpoux;  
INSERM U 535, Villejuif, France.
Cordell and Clayton (Am J Hum Genet, 2002 ) proposed to use a 
stepwise logistic-regression procedure to evidence the effect of several 
variants in disease susceptibility. They applied this approach to test whether several genes of HLA are involved in the susceptibility to type Genetic analysis, linkage, and association304
I diabetes. They concluded that DOB has an additional effect to the 
one of DRB1 in the disease susceptibility. In the above study, the DRB1 gene was considered as a biallelic susceptibility factor. However, such a model was strongly rejected by Clerget-Darpoux and Babron (
Genet 
Epidemiol,1989 ) who showed that at least a tri-allelic or more likely 
a complementation model could explain the HLA DRB1 observations in type I diabetes families. Consequently, we study the robustness of the stepwise logistic-regression in concluding to a second locus effect when the effect of the ﬁrst one is incorrectly speciﬁed.We simulate, in trio families (one patient and his two parents), a tri-allelic disease gene and another gene not involved in the disease but with linkage disequilibrium between alleles of the two genes. We apply the stepwise logistic-regression to these simulated data coding the 
disease gene either as tri-allelic or as bi-allelic.When the disease gene is correctly coded as tri-allelic, we do not conclude to an additional effect of the other gene. In contrast, coding the disease gene as bi-allelic leads to falsely conclude to the involvement of the second gene. This emphasizes the importance of a correct modelling in the interpretation of a logistic regression analysis.
P1029. R121W polymorphism of PAX4 gene and risk of type I 
and type II diabetes in Russian North -West population.
O. S. Romashkina1, M. A. Bogdanova1, M. U. Pavlov2, L. V. Tirtova1, V. I. Lari -
onova1;  
1St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Fed -
eration, 2St. Petersburg Pavlov State Medical University, St.Petersburg, Rus -
sian Federation.
PAX4 gene plays a crucial role in the differentiation of insulin-
producing β-cells in the pancreatic islets of Langerhans. The R121W mutation in the exon 3 of PAX4 has been reported to be a possible susceptibility polymorphism to the Type II diabetes in Japanese, while the investigation of this and other polymorphisms has shown no evidence of linkage with onset of Type II Diabetes in French population and in Ashkenazi Jews.In this study we examined the association of R121W mutation with Type I and Type II Diabetes in Russian North-West population.We investigated 121 children (62 girls, 59 boys) aged 3 to 17 with Type I Diabetes and 36 grown-ups (17 women, 19 men) aged 46 to 95 with Type II Diabetes, complicated with the neuropathy of the lower limbs. The control group included 142 healthy children. Identiﬁcation of R121W PAX4 gene polymorphism was carried out by means of polymerase chain reaction followed by restriction.(Shimajiri et. 
al.,2001)  
We didn’t ﬁnd mutant alleles in Type I and Type II Diabetes no in 
control group.Thereby, the explored population seems to be homogeneous on R121W polymorphism and this mutation has no evidence of linkage with either Type I or Type II Diabetes in the Russian North-West population.
P1030. Interim CARD15  genotype results from a population-
based study of Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease
R. L. Roberts1, R. B. Gearry1, M. L. Barclay2, M. A. Kennedy1;  
1Christchurch School of Medicine & Health Sciences, Christchurch, New Zea -
land, 2Christchurch Hospital, Christchurch, New Zealand.
Three single nucleotide mutations (R702W, G908R & 1007fs) within 
the CARD15  gene are well recognized risk factors for the development 
of Crohn’s disease (CD) in Caucasians. However, what has not been clearly established is whether these mutations can also be used to predict clinical parameters of CD. To date, almost all studies examining possible links between 
CARD15  genotype and clinical course of CD 
have used referral-based patient samples. These studies inherently suffer selection bias as only extreme cases of CD are included. We sought to clarify the potential predictive value of 
CARD15  genotype 
by examining all cases of inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD) within a geographically deﬁned region of New Zealand. It is hoped that this population-based approach will eliminate the selection bias seen in many previous studies. Since recruitment was initiated in 2003, DNA samples, epidemiological data and clinical history have been collected from 965 IBD patients (out of a total predicted population of 1400). 
CARD15  genotype has been established for 922 of these IBD patients 
and 200 controls. Interim analysis of CARD15  genotype data has 
found a signiﬁcant increase in the frequency of individuals with two CARD15  mutations in the IBD population compared to controls. Unlike 
previous studies, the elevated frequency of CARD15  mutations was not 
restricted to CD patients but also observed in patients with ulcerative colitis. Once recruitment and genotyping is complete it is anticipated that this population-based study will provide valuable insights into the 
role CARD15  mutations play in the development and progression of 
IBD.
P1031. Novel variants located within the intron 1 and the 
promoter region of the RET proto-oncogene are associated to 
the sporadic forms of Hirschsprung disease
S. Borrego1, R. M. Fernández1, G. Boru2, A. Peciña1, K. Jones2, M. López-
Alonso3, C. Eng2,4, G. Antiñolo1;  
1Unidad Clínica de Genética y Reproducción, Hospitales Universitarios V irgen 
del Rocío, Seville, Spain, 2Human Cancer Genetics Program, Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States, 
3Servicio de Cirugía Infantil, Hospitales Universitarios Virgen del Rocío, Seville, 
Spain, 4Division of Human Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH, United States.
Several studies have demonstrated the existence of speciﬁc haplotypes of the 
RET proto-oncogene associated with the sporadic forms of 
Hirschsprung disease (HSCR). Based on such studies, Linkage Disequilibrium (LD) mapping estimates predicted the presence of a HSCR locus located at 22-50 kb upstream of codon 45 (exon 2) of 
RET.
Our aim was the identiﬁcation of such a founding locus responsible for 
the majority of the HSCR cases of our series.After a systematic mutational screening upstream of exon 2 of 
RET, we 
found a wide spectrum of new polymorphisms, all of them presenting with a distribution signiﬁcantly different among cases and controls (p<0.00002). We identiﬁed a speciﬁc haplotype clearly linked to HSCR. Such LD was maintained along the whole region studied until position -1249. We noted that the ancestral haplotype associated with HSCR was characterised by the presence of speciﬁc SNP’s (at -200 and -196) in proximity to the transcriptional start site. Functional modelling using luciferase expression assays revealed a signiﬁcantly depressed activity for the HSCR-linked haplotype at -200/-196 in comparison with 
other combinations associated with controls.Our results seem to discard the existence of an HSCR-causing mutation as it is conceived in the traditional sense, but strengthen the concept of a speciﬁc combination of markers conferring susceptibility to the disease in a low penetrance fashion. It would be conceivable that such HSCR-haplotype together with other events occurring in other genes, might give raise to the disease, which would be concordant with a 
polygenic model for the disease.
P1032. Statistical power of the HapMap study design
C. Zapata1, S. Rodríguez2, L. Rodríguez1, J. Hermida1, E. Sande1;  
1Universidad de Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2University of 
Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.
The International Haplotype Map (‘HapMap’) Project aims to characterize genome-wide SNP-based gametic disequilibrium (GD) patterns to facilitate the discovery of genes that inﬂuence complex human diseases. Here we undertook an evaluation of the statistical power of the study design currently being used by The International HapMap Consortium for detecting different levels of GD between pairs of SNPs. The initial phase of HapMap is scheduled to genotype 270 individual samples from four widely distributed geographic regions for about 600,000 SNPs spaced at approximately 5-kilobase intervals and each with major allele frequency (MAF) < 0.95. Sample sizes across populations are 45 and 90 individuals. Our observations show that the power of this study design is highly heterogeneous, and often fairly low under a variety of pairwise GD scenarios. Lack of power can lead to erroneous estimates of the size and number of blocks, as well as of the total number of haplotype-tagging SNPs (htSNPs) associated with block partitioning. In addition, heterogeneity of power can be a very relevant factor hindering comparisons of block structure both across genomic regions and among samples of varying sizes. Our analyses suggest that about 50- to 100-fold larger sample sizes that those currently used are required to effectively map genome-wide patterns 
of GD with estimation procedures used in HapMap.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association305
P1033. Frequency of Interleukin-2 gene promoter polymorphism 
at position -330 among Iranian patients with chronic hepatitis B 
infection in Iran
L. Najaﬁ1, Z. Hajebrahimi1,2, M. Somi1, M. Agah1,3, M. Zafarghandi1, M. Zali1;  
1Research Center for Gastroentrology and Liver Disease, Tehran, Islamic Re -
public of Iran, 2Tarbiat Modarres University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
3Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
Background: The clinical course of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection 
varies from spontaneous recovery to chronic persistent infection depending on viral and host factors. Cytokines play an important role in the defense against viral infection, both indirectly, through determination of the predominant pattern of the host response, and directly, through inhibition of viral replication. Several pro-inﬂammatory cytokines such as interleukin-2 (IL-2) and interferon-gamma (IFN-g) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a) have been identiﬁed as participating in the viral clearance and the host immune response to HBV. In this study we have evaluated IL-2 polymorphism in patient with 
chronic HBV infection.Material and Method: We investigated -330 IL-2 polymorphism in 96 patients with chronic HBV infection, 96 subjects spontaneously recovered from acute HBV infection, and 95 healthy controls. After receiving an informed consent, genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes by salting-out method. The -330 T/G polymorphism in the promoter region of IL-2 gene was detected by PCR-RFLP.
Results: The prevalence of -330 IL-2 polymorphism is shown in the table below, obtained by Chi-Square test in SPSS 11.5 software . The -330 G promoter allele frequency was 49.4%, 47.3%, and 47.8% in chronic, spontaneous recovered patients and controls, respectively. 
Conclusion : These ﬁndings suggest no association between the IL-2 
promoter polymorphism at position -330T/G and the development of 
chronic HBV infection (p=0.83).
The frequency of IL-2 (-330 T/G) polymorphism in studied groups
T/G or G/G T/T Total
Chronic73 
76%23 
24%96 
100%
Spontaneus  
Recovered70 
72.9%26 
27.1%96 
100%
Control69 
72.6%26 
27.4%95 
100%
Total212 
73.9%75 
26.1%287 
100%
P1034. Reﬁned mapping of the autosomal recessive non-
syndromic deafness locus DFNB13 using eight novel 
microsatellites markers
I. Benrebah1, S. Masmoudi1, A. Rebai2, H. Ayadi3;  
1laboratoire de genetique humaine faculté de medecine Sfax, Sfax, T unisia, 
2Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, 3laboratoire de genetique 
humaine faculté de medecine Sfax,Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, Sfax, 
Tunisia.
The locus for a type of an autosomal recessive non-syndromic 
deafness (ARNSD), DFNB13,was previously mapped to 17-CM interval of chromosome 7q34-36.In order to reﬁne this interval, we identiﬁed nine dinucleotide repeats in the 7q34 region. To investigate the polymorphism of these repeats, a population study of 74 unrelated individuals from different regions of Tunisia was carried out. Our results demonstrated that eight of the nine repeats are polymorphic. The average number of alleles at these informative loci was 9.12 with a polymorphism information content of 0.71. Little evidence for linkage disequilibrium between some markers pairs was found. Haplotype analysis using these markers reﬁned the DFNB13 interval to an area of 2.2 Mb between the D7S5377 and D7S2473.In order to identify the DFNB13 gene, we sequenced and eliminated three candidate genes. Other known and predicted genes are being screened for deafness-
causing mutations.P1035. Short tandem repeats haplotyping of the HLA region in 
preimplatation HLA matching
F. Francesco1, S. Kahraman2, A. Biricik1, H. Karadayi2, Y. Saglam2, A. Nuc -
citelli1, M. Baldi1;  
1"GENOMA" Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Rome, Italy, 2ART and Reproduc -
tive Genetics Unit, Istanbul Memorial Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
Recently, Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) has been 
considered for several indications beyond its original purpose, not only to test embryos for a genetic disease, but also to select embryos for a non-disease trait, such as speciﬁc Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) haplotypes, related to immune compatibility with an existing affected 
child in need of an hematopoetic stem cell transplant.We have optimized an indirect single-cell HLA typing protocol based on a multiplex ﬂuorescent polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of short tandem repeat (STR) markers scattered throughout the HLA complex. The assay was clinically applied in 60 cycles (54 for β-thalassemia, 1 for Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome, 2 for Diamond-Blackfan anemia and 3 for Acute Lymphoid Leukaemia) from 45 couples overall, involving the testing of 486 embryos in combination with a genetic disease and 44 embryos for HLA matching only. In 848/922 (92.0%) of blastomeres a successful ampliﬁcation was achieved, obtaining a conclusive HLA matching diagnosis in 483/530 (91.1%) of the embryos tested. In total, 74 (15.3%) embryos revealed an HLA match with the affected siblings, 55 (11.4%) of which resulted unaffected and 46 (9.5%) have been transferred back to patients in 30 clinical cycles. Nine pregnancies were achieved, 5 healthy HLA matched children have been already delivered and cord blood stem cells were transplanted to 3 affected 
siblings, resulting in a successful hematopoietic reconstruction.Multiplex PCR of STR markers located in the HLA region has revealed a reliable diagnostic tool for indirect HLA matching evaluation in single 
cells.
P1036. Growth hormone (GH) receptor codon 437* T allele is 
related with GH therapeutic efﬁcacy
F. Tsai1, C. Tsai2;  
1China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan Republic of China, 2Tai-
chung Healthcare and Management University, Taichung, Taiwan Republic of 
China.
Objective: Growth hormone (GH) replacement is an effective therapy 
for the GH deﬁcient (GHD) children. However, the height gain post GH replacement therapy varied differently between individuals. In this study, we aimed to investigate the correlations of the different gene polymorphisms and the GH efﬁcacy.Patients and methods: A total of 100 GHD children (73 male, 27 
female) who accepted one-year GH treatment were included. All individuals were divided into three groups: (1) GHD; (2) 126 children with familial short stature (FSS, n=126) (3) normal controls (n=100). Gene polymorphisms for GH receptor (codon 437, 488, 492, 540), Janus kinase codon 1305, signal transducers and transactivators of transcription -5a codon 812, insulin-like growth factor I codon 230, IGF binding protein-3 codon 2605, and acid-labile subunit codon 1285 were detected by the PCR-RFLP (restriction fragment length polymorphism). The correlations of these gene polymorphisms and other parameters (sex, age, bone age, parents’ heights, serum GH concentration, pituitary size, and birth weight) upon ﬁrst year growth 
velocity were evaluated.
Results: The G homozygote, G/T heterozygote and T homozygote 
for GHR codon 437 appeared the lower, moderate, and height growth velocity. Other gene polymorphisms and parameters were non-correlated with the GH-therapy efﬁcancy. The G-related genotype and 
allele were also related with higher susceptibility of FSS.
Conclusions: GHR codon 437* T allele is associated with therapeutic 
efﬁcacy of GH replacement and lower susceptibility of FSS. GHR codon 437 gene polymorphism might become a useful marker for the 
pre-treatment evaluation of GHD children.
P1037. Screening for DFNB1, DFNB2, DFNB3, DFNB4, DFNB9 
and DFNB21 loci in the Iranian patients with autosomal 
recessive non-syndromic hearing loss
Y. Riazalhosseini1,2, A. Daneshi3, P. Imanirad1,2, M. Mohseni1, N. Bazazzade -
gan1, E. Taherzadeh1, K. Kahrizi1, M. Farhadi3, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Genetic analysis, linkage, and association306
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular-Cellular Biology Depart -
ment, Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of 
Otolaryngology, Rasoul Akram Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) is the 
most common form of severe inherited hearing impairment. To date, at least 43 loci for ARNSHL have been identiﬁed, indicating it as an extremely heterogeneous disorder. These loci are referred to as DFNB loci. Although, mutations at the DFNB1 locus (including GJB2 and GJB6 genes) are the most common cause of ARNSHL in populations originating from Northern Europe, we have shown that mutations in GJB2 and the Δ (GJB6-D13S1830) do not play a signiﬁcant role in the etiology of deafness in Iran. In this study, we assess the contributions made by other loci to the ARNSHL genetic load in Iran. We have selected 50 consanguineous families with normal GJB2
 and GJB6 
alleles to be screened for linkage to the DFNB2, DFNB3, DFNB4, DFNB9 and DFNB21 loci. Linkage analysis is applied using, in average, 3 short tandem repeat (STR) markers for each locus. These loci have been excluded in 11 families but two families; each has been localized to DFNB4 and DFNB21. We are screening these families for mutations in SLC26A4
 and TECTA, respectively. Our results suggest 
that other loci may have the major causative roles in ARNSHL in Iran. This hypothesis will be conﬁrmed by including more families and 
screening additional loci.
P1038. Colobomatous macrophthalmia with microcornea 
syndrome maps to 2p23-p16 region containing CYP1B1, SOS1 
and SIX2 and 3 genes
N. A. Akarsu1, N. H. Elcioglu2, B. Akın1, E. Toker3, M. Elcioglu4, A. Kaya5, T. 
Tuncali5;  
1Gene Mapping Laboratory, Pediatric Hematology, Hacettepe University, An -
kara, Turkey, 2Pediatric Genetics, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Oph-
thalmology, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Ophthalmology, Izzet Baysal 
University, Bolu, Turkey, 5Medical Genetics, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey.
Colobomatous macrophthalmia, microcornea syndrome (MIM 602499) is a rare eye malformation manifesting iris coloboma, microcornea associated with macrophthalmia and high myopia. The mode of inheritance is autosomal dominant with full penetrance and variable expressivity. We recently reported a third family with bilateral involvement of the iris coloboma, microcornea, macrophthalmia and myopia. Additional iridocorneal angle abnormalities causing glaucoma were present in three of the affected members (AJMG 2003: 121, 25-30). Neither a locus nor a gene responsible for this phenotype were identiﬁed as yet. For mapping purpose, we used 13 informative meioses (7 phase known) from this kindred. A total of 28 DNA markers selected from chromosomes 2q35, 10q24, 11 and 14 were genotyped before signiﬁcant lod scores were obtained. In this screen, PAX (2, 3, 6, 9), CHX10, SIX1 and SIX4 were clearly excluded. A maximum two point lod score of 3.61 at 0 cM was obtained with the DNA marker D2S1788. Further saturation and haplotype analysis using 22 DNA markers from 2p23 region positioned the disease gene between tel-D2S2263 and D2S1352-cent within a 22 Mb physical interval. This region contains a number of candidate genes involving morphogenesis and eye development. DNA sequencing analysis of CYP1B1 coding region (exons 2 and 3) revealed no causative mutation except two reported SNP changes (R48G and V432L). These results indicated that this eye malformation, COMM (
COlobomatous Macrophthalmia, Microcornea), 
maps to 2p23-p16 region. The major cause of congenital glaucoma, 
CYP1B1, is less likely to be responsible for this phenotype
P1039. Genetic Heterogeneity of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease: 
Exclusion of Linkage to the Proteolipid Protein 1 Locus in Three 
Affected Families
B. Bilir1, Z. Yapici2, C. Yalcinkaya2, E. Battaloglu1;  
1Bogazici University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, 
Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Neurology, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is a rare X-linked recessive hypomyelinating disorder of the central nervous system (CNS). The clinical severity in PMD varies, but the common characteristics include nystagmus, psychomotor retardation, spasticity and ataxia. PMD is primarily caused by mutations in the proteolipid protein 1 (
PLP1) gene on chromosome Xq22. About 20% of PMD cases have been shown to carry no mutation in the 
PLP1 gene suggesting involvement of other 
loci or mutations in noncoding regions of the PLP1  gene.
In the present study, we tested the genetic homogeneity of PMD by performing linkage analyses in three PMD families. A common haplotype was found in all affected individuals, their asymptomatic mothers, and in two other asymptomatic females in the ﬁrst family. X chromosome inactivation (XCI) analysis revealed presence of the same active chromosome in both affected and unaffected individuals ruling out the 
PLP1 region as the causative locus in this family. The two 
affected brothers in the second family and the two affected sisters in the third family, both born to unaffected parents, were found to inherit different maternal haplotypes for the 
PLP1 locus. The lod score value 
was less than zero at θ = 0.00 conﬁrming the results of haplotype 
analysis.The exclusion of linkage to the 
PLP1 locus in these families suggests 
existence of at least one other locus and presence of genetic 
heterogeneity in PMD.
P1040. Genotype distribution and allele frequencies of the 
endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene polymorphism (G894T, 4a4b, T-786C) in women with coronary heart disease (CAD) in St. 
Petersburg, Russia.
M. A. Bogdanova1, A. N. Voitovich1, M. Y. Pavlov2, A. Y. Anisencova1, Y. R. 
Kovalev1, V. I. Larionova1;  
1St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Fed -
eration, 2St. Petersburg Pavlov State Medical University, St.Petersburg, Rus -
sian Federation.
Endothelial dysfunction is a key step in both initiation and progression 
of atherogenesis. Nitric oxide is synthesized from L-arginine by endothelial nitric oxide synthase encoded by eNOS gene. Mutations affecting the eNOS gene, and consequently impairing NO availability, 
might contribute to increased predisposition to CAD.We designed this study to investigate the role of these 3 types of polymorphisms in the eNOS gene as predisposing factors to CAD in 
women.In 79 angiographicaly diagnosed CAD women and in 145 unrelated controls genotypes of eNOS G894T and T-786C polymorphism were determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis and the repeat polymorphism 4a4b was analyzed by polymerase chain reaction. The genotype distribution was in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for all variants. Statistical signiﬁcance of differences between groups was assessed with χ
2 tests.
Genotype distribution and allele frequencies in the controls and the 
group of patients (p<0.05).We found no signiﬁcant differences in genotypes and alleles frequency distribution between patients and population control. Our ﬁndings neither support nor exclude possible associations between genetic variations in the eNOS gene and the presence of vascular disease 
states.
Genotype Allele Controls n (%) Patients n (%)P-
value
4b4b  
4a4b  
4a4a90 (62.9)  
45 (31.5)8 (5.6)56 (70.9)  
20 (25.3)3 (3.8)0.232
4a 61 (21.3) 26 (16.5) 0.216
894GG  
G894T  
894TT77 (52.4)  
58 (39.5)  
12 (8.1)37 (49.3)  
29 (38.7)9 
(12.0)0.783
894TT 82 (27.9) 47 (31.3) 0.548
-786 TT  
-786 C-786 
CC56 (38.4)  
70 (47.9)20 
(13.7)32 (40.5)  
39 (49.4)8 
(10.1)0.647
-786 
CC110 (37.7) 55 (34.8) 0.450
P1041. Classiﬁcation of haplotypes based on evolutionary 
relationships
A. Saito, T. Shintani, K. Seto, M. Fujio, S. Mitsuyama, Y. Bito;  
Central Research Laboratory, Hitachi Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.
Increasing numbers of marker loci make the number of different haplotypes too large, which reduces statistical power to an insufﬁcient Genetic analysis, linkage, and association307
level to detect an association between single haplotype and disease. 
To obtain the sufﬁcient statistical power, classiﬁcation of haplotypes is often carried out. Many of the methods of the classiﬁcation, including hierarchical classiﬁcation and partitions, require measures of similarity. Appropriate choice of the measure is a key factor to obtain good classiﬁcation. However, the usual measures using the numbers of different variant sites do not always reﬂect the relationships of haplotypes. In the present study, we have deﬁned a new measure based on evolutionary relationships between two haplotypes, and applied the measure to the classiﬁcation of haplotypes.The presented approach is performed as follows. We ﬁrst build the maximum likelihood evolutionary tree from observed haplotypes, by assuming that each edge represents a single evolutionary change (i.e. single mutation or recombination). To satisfy this assumption, some unobserved haplotypes are incorporated as nodes to complete the tree if required. Once the tree is built, the maximum likelihood path between two haplotypes is computed from probabilities of mutation and recombination. We deﬁne the likelihood as the measure of similarity. We then carry out the haplotype classiﬁcation, by both common hierarchical classiﬁcation and partitions, using the deﬁned measure.We have validated our approach using synthetically created datasets. The datasets are created by mixing haplotypes derived from different ancestors. The resultant classiﬁcation shows good agreement with the 
given ancestors.
P1042. Association of genetic polymorphisms in the ACE, BCHE 
and APOE genes with Late-Onset Alzheimer Disease in the 
Korean population
E. Shin1, S. Choi2, Y. Cho1;  
1Hanyang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 2University of Southern Califor -
nia, CA, CA, United States.
Apolipoprotein E(APOE) ε4 allele and Angiotensin Converting Enzyme 
deletion(ACE-D) have been reported to have an association with Late-Onset Alzheimer Disease(LOAD). Butylcholinesterase(BCHE) is also known to be up-regulated in the Alzheimer Disease(AD) brain, and the increased odds of carrying the K variant of BCHE(BCHE-K) was indicated among AD cases as compared with controls. The objective was to determine if these DNA polymorphisms at the ACE, BCHE and APOE genes that have been linked with different levels of enzyme expression, have some effect on the risk of developing LOAD. In order to verify the association of ACE and BCHE genes with AD, as well as its association with APO-E genotype, ACE and BCHE genotyping were performed in subjects with 62 LOAD cases and 190 healthy controls including 68 healthy age-matched controls, who were previously characterized for APOE gene. After component analyses, ACE-D, BCHE- K and APOE ε4 alleles disclosed the highest prevalence in the AD group (P<0.05). A comparison between the AD and the healthy individuals, both with the APOE ε4 allele, indicated an interaction between the BCHE-K and the APOE ε4 allele(p<0.05). The association of the BCHE-K with AD was limited to carriers of the APOE ε4 allele, among whom the presence of the BCHE-K gave an odds ratio of AD 3.48 (95% C.I. 1.3-9.2). Therefore, ACE D allele seems to be a susceptibility factors for the AD with the APOE ε4 allele, and the BCHE-K variant acts in synergy with the APOE ε4 allele as a susceptibility genes for AD.
P1043. Genetic association of vitamin D receptor polymorphisms 
wth autoimmune hepatitis in iranian patients
Z. Motahari1, M. Zafarghandi1, F. Esteghamat1, M. Agah1,2, M. Zali1;  
1Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is an immune mediated disorder of the 
liver with unknownetiology.1, 25 dihydroxyvitaminD3 has immunomodulatory capabilities which extents its biological effects through the vitamin D receptor (VDR).The aim of this study was to investigate the association of VDR polymorphisms in Iranian patients with AIH . METHODS: In this study we investigated the frequency of the VDR polymorphisms in a case-control study between 71 patients with AIH (53 female, 18 male), referred to Taleghani hospital (Iran), and 109 healthy blood donors (73 female, 36 male) matched by sex and age after obtaining the informed consent. The mean age for cases and controls were 36.6 ± 13.5 and 35.0 ± 12, respectively. After DNA extraction by salting out method, polymorphisms of FokI, BsmI, ApaI and TaqI were detected by PCR RFLP method. RESULTS: The VDR genotype distribution in patients and controls are shown in Table 1. The frequency of A, B, F, and T alleles are 60.5% vs. 58.7%, 47.1% vs. 38.9%, 74.6% vs.75.2%, 63.3% vs. 71.1% in cases and controls, respectively. Analysis of allelic frequencies revealed no signiﬁcant difference between AIH patients and controls for either of the polymorphisms (P>0.05). CONCLUSION: Our results do not conﬁrm the association between VDR polymorphisms and AIH. As a consequence, these polymorphisms cannot possibly be considered as 
biomarkers, at least, in Iranian patients with autoimmune hepatitis.
Case Control
Female (%) Male (%) Female (%) Male (%)
AA 
Aa 
aa16 (30)  
31 (58)  
6 (11)7 (39)  
9 (50)  
2 (11)25 (34)  
38 (52)  
10 (14)11 (31)  
18 (50)  
7 (19)
BB 
Bb 
bb9 (17)  
29 (55)  
15 (28)5 (28)  
10 (55)  
3 (17)14 (19)  
31 (42)  
28 (38)3 (8) 
20 (55)  
13 (36)
FF 
Ff 
ff34 (64)  
16 (30)  
3 (6)6 (33)  
10 (56)  
2 (11)39 (54)  
27 (36)  
7 (9)23 (64)  
13 36)  
0 (0)
TT 
Tt 
tt23 (43)  
22 (42)  
8 (15)5 (28)  
12 (67)  
1 (5)35 (48)  
34 (47)  
4 (5)16 (44)  
19 (53)  
1 (3)
P1044. DNA typing in Tatar patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus
D. S. Avzaletdinova1, O. E. Mustaﬁna1, T. V. Morugova2;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Research Center, Russian Acad -
emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, 
Ufa, Russian Federation.
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) is caused by interplay of genetic and environmental factors. Human leukocyte antigen system (HLA) has been demonstrated to contribute to T1DM genetic susceptibility. Tumor necrosis factor α and interleukin 1β activate inducible NO-synthase in β-cells causing their destruction. So, the genes, encoding these cytokines, can be supposed as candidate genes for T1DM. We aimed to analyze the relationship between HLA class II 
DRB1 and 
DQB1 genes, G-308A polymorphism of tumor necrosis factor α gene 
(TNFA) and T-511C polymorphism of interleukin 1β gene ( IL1B) and 
susceptibility to T1DM in Tatars of Bashkortostan. We PRC-analyzed DNA of 111 T1DM Tatar patients and 232 Tatar controls. The 
HLA-
DRB1 (investigated in 87 T1DM patients and 97 controls) and HLA-
DQB1 (analyzed in 46 T1DM patients and 22 controls) genomic 
typing revealed increased frequencies of DRB1*04 (27.6% vs. 9.3%, 
P<0.001), DRB1*08 (8.6% vs. 1.0%, P<0.001), DQB1*02 (33.7% vs. 
15.9%, P=0.041), DQB1*0302/08 (26.1% vs. 6.8%, P<0.01) in T1DM 
patients compared to controls. The frequencies of genotype AG 
(32.4% vs. 19.4%, P<0.01) and allele A (19.8% vs. 10.6%, P=0.001) 
of the TNFA G-308A polymorphism were higher in T1DM patients 
(n=111) than in controls (n=232). Concerning T-511C polymorphism 
of IL1B gene, we couldn’t ﬁnd differences of the genotype and allele 
frequencies between T1DM patients (n=60) and controls (n=166). Thus, the genetic markers of T1DM in Tatars from Bashkortostan are 
DRB1*04 , DRB1*08 , DQB1*02 , DQB1*0302/08 of HLA class II DRB1 
and DQB1 genes, genotype AG and allele A of G-308A polymorphism 
of TNFA gene.
P1045. No association of the polymorphisms (TTTTA)n in the 
CYP11A gene and VNTR in the INS gene with polycystic ovary 
syndrome
P. Ferk, K. Gersak, N. Teran;  
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Division of Medical Genetics, Uni -
versity Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Hyperandrogenism and insulin resistance are cardinal features of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Among several PCOS candidate genes, the gene encoding P450scc (CYP11A gene) and the insulin 
(INS) gene have been proposed.
The aim of the study was to  investigate an association of the (TTTTA)n 
microsatellite polymorphism in the CYP11A gene and the minisatellite 
polymorphism (VNTR) in the  INS gene with PCOS.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association308
Forty-six PCOS women and 110 control patients were genotyped for 
the genetic polymorphisms in the CYP11A  and INS gene.
The CYP11A allele frequencies  were 0.56, 0.27, 0.09, 0.09 in the study 
and 0.55, 0.28, 0.09, 0.09 in the control group, for alleles with four, 
six, eight and nine TTTTA repeats, respectively. Eighty-ﬁve percent of PCOS patients vs. 80.9 % controls had 4+ genotype (with at least one copy of the four-repeat-unit allele), and 15.0 % patients vs. 19.1% 
controls had 4- genotype (without the four-repeat-unit allele).In the 
INS gene, allele frequencies for class I and class III alleles were 
0.25 and 0.75 in the study vs. 0.30 and 0.70 in the control group. The genotype frequencies were 0.54, 0.41 and 0.05 in the study vs. 0.49, 0.42 and 0.09 in the control group, for genotypes III/III, I/III and I/I, respectively.None of the alleles or genotypes in the two genes was statistically differently distributed between the study and the control group of 
patients.Our results suggest that the CYP11A (TTTTA)
n and the INS VNTR 
allelic variants are not likely to be associated with PCOS in Slovene 
patients.
P1046. Is p.S1235R a cystic ﬁbrosis causing mutation? Results 
from a French molecular collaborative study
C. Guittar1, E. Girodon2, F. Chevalier-Porst3, C. Dorche3, T. Bienvenu4, V. 
Dumur5, M. Blayau6, A. Iron7, H. Mittre8, D. Feldmann9, M. Claustres1, M. Des 
Georges1;  
1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire et Chromosomique, Montpellier , France, 
2Laboratoire de Biochimie, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 3Laboratoire 
de Biochimie Pédiatrique, Lyon, France, 4Laboratoire de Biochimie et Géné -
tique Moléculaire, Cochin, Paris, France, 5Laboratoire de Biochimie et de Biolo -
gie Moléculaire, Lille, France, 6Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Rennes, 
France, 7Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Bordeaux, France, 8Laboratoire de 
Biochimie B, Caen, France, 9Laboratoire de Biochimie et de Biologie Molécu -
laire, Trousseau, Paris, France.
More than 1300 different mutations in the CFTR gene, causing or non-causing disease, have been reported to the CF Consortium. p.S1235R, initially reported in a CF patient with a second mutation on the same allele, has been found at a frequency higher than that of many other mutations and its clinical signiﬁcance is not clear.The aim of this study is to compare the phenotypes of 57 subjects with p.S1235R in order to classify this sequence anomaly. They were referred for diagnosis of classical CF, non-classic or atypical phenotypes or carrier screening. The entire coding and ﬂanking regions and six microsatellite markers were analyzed. 8 patients (3 CF, 4 CBAVD, 1 ICP) and 2 normal individuals were compound heterozygotes for a severe CFTR mutation. p.S1235R was found to be associated on the same allele with a stop mutation (p.R785X) in 2 CF patients with a severe disease and TG13-T5 in the 4 CBAVD patients. The CF patient with a mild phenotype, the ICP patient and the normal subjects did not 
carry a complex allele.Our data suggest that another CFTR mutation may inﬂuence the pathogenic effect of p.S1235R in severe classical CF or in patients with CFTR-opathies. However, p.S1235R alone, when combined in trans with a second CF mutation, may be associated with a mild 
phenotype or with absence of clinical manifestations.
P1047. Association analysis of neurotransmitter systems of 
brain genes with paranoid schizophrenia in different ethnic 
origin groups from Russia
A. G. Zainullina , G. V. Sharaphutdinova, D. A. Gaysina, E. B. Jurjev, E. K. 
Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of Biochemistry & Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Schizophrenia is a chronic debilitating psychotic mental disorder that affects about 1 percent of people.The aim of our study was to test a contribution of 9 polymorphisms of some candidate genes in paranoid schizophrenia, namely -
5-
HTTLPR and VNTR in the serotonin transporter ( SLC6A4 ), MspI in 
the serotonin 2A receptor ( HTR2A ), VNTR in the dopamine transporter 
(SLC6A3 ), TaqIA and NcoI in the dopamine D2 receptor ( DRD2 ), A/
G polymorphism  in intron 13 in the monoamine oxidase A (MAO A ), 
Hsp92II in the catechol- O-methyltransferase ( COMT) and NlaIV in the 
brain - expressed protein ( G72) genes.
351 patients (131 Russians, 112 Tatars and 108 Bashkirs) with paranoid schizophrenia (diagnosed as having ICD-10) at the age of 15 - 74 and 423 control subjects (115 Russians, 168 Tatars and 140 Bashkirs) were genotyped using PCR- technique and subsequent 
enzyme digestion.We found a signiﬁcant association of the 
COMT*H/*H genotype with 
schizophrenia in different ethnic origins groups (Tatars: OR=2.38, 95%CI=1.19-5.64; Russians: OR=2.83, 95%CI=0.89-4.86; Bashkirs: OR=2.11, 95%CI=1.22-6.23).It was shown associations with schizophrenia of the SLC6A4 *S/*S 
genotype (OR=2.04, 95%CI=0.98-4.27), of the HTR2A *A/*A genotype (OR=2.21, 95%CI=0.97-5.04) and of the DRD2 *N1/*N1  genotype (OR 
= 2.8, 95% CI=1.33-5.92) in Tatars; of the DRD2 *A1/*A2 
genotype 
(OR=2.13, CI=1.02-4.47) in Bashkirs; of the SLC6A3  *9/*9 genotype 
(OR=17.28, 95%CI=2.09-3.99) in Russians.The obtained results are interesting for greater understanding of 
molecular-genetic mechanisms of predisposition to schizophrenia.
P1048. The role of GSTM1, CYP1A1, CYP2D6, APOE gene 
polymorphisms in sporadic Parkinson's disease development
I. R. Gilyazova , I. Khidiyatova, V. Akhmetova, A. Baitimerov, R. Magzhanov, E. 
Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a complex disorder with multiple genetic and environmental factors. The majority of PD cases (80-90%) are sporadic. Several causal genes for familial PD have been identiﬁed, but genetic factors associated with sporadic PD haven’t been ascertained. Genes involved in the process of xenobiotic detoxication can play a 
causal role in PD development.We’ve performed analysis of some gene mutations and polymorphisms in 200 sporadic PD patients and 210 controls to investigate their role 
in disease development.Analysis of GSTM1 gene revealed higher frequency of GSTM1-deﬁcient genotype in PD patients in comparison with controls that determines low level of enzyme activities in patients. Differences were signiﬁcant (χ
2 = 8,21,P=0,005, OR=1,45, CI=1,20-2,83). These 
data conﬁrm the hypothesis that GSTM1 gene, coding antioxidative enzyme and playing a major role in toxins elimination, may be involved in PD pathogenesis. CYP1A1 and CYP2D6 polymorphisms didn’t show signiﬁcant differences between patients and controls.One of genetic neurodegeneration markers is APOE gene polymorphism. It is considered that *E4 allele plays a modifying role in some neurodegenerative diseases, but its role in PD development remains contradictory. We found signiﬁcant differences in allele and genotype distribution between patients and controls (χ
2=10,43; 
P=0,005). Analysis of *E4 allele distribution showed signiﬁcant differences between PD patients of Tatar origin and control group of Tatars (χ
2=7,45, P=0,007, OR=4,12), PD patients of Russian origin 
and control group of Russians (χ2=5,60, P=0,01, OR=4,82). So, allele 
*E4 is a risk factor of PD development in Tatars and Russians in the Volga-Ural region.
P1049. Association of VDR Bsm I Polymorphism with Prostate 
Cancer in Turkish Population
M. H. Müslümanoğlu1, O. Çilingir1, S. DEMİR1, M. Turgut2;  
1Osmangazi University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genetics, Es -
kisehir, Turkey, 2Osmangazi University Medical Faculty Department of Urology, 
Eskisehir, Turkey.
OBJECTIVE : To investigate the association between VDR gene Bsm I 
polymorphism and prostate cancer in Turkish population.
METHOD : DNA was extracted from whole blood of 39 prostate 
cancer cases and 52 controls by Qiagen DNA extraction kit.The area 
of which Bsm I polymorphism located in 8th intron of VDR gene was ampliﬁed by PCR.Subsequently, PCR products have been digested by Bsm I restriction enzyme and results were analysed by agarose gel 
electrophoresis.RESULTS
:Bsm I BB, Bb and bb genotype frequencies are not 
signiﬁciantly different between cases and controls(P>0,05). Bsm I Bb genotype frequencies were 56.4 % and 57.6% , BB genotype frequencies were 20.5 % and 26.9%, bb genotype frequencies were 23% and 15.3 % in cases and controls respectively.
CONCLUSION : Our ﬁndings did not conﬁrm an association between 
VDR gene Bsm I polymorphism and prostate cancer in Turkish 
population.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association309
P1050. Association of VDR Gene Apa I Polymorphism with Bone 
Mineral Density in Obese Postmenopausal Women
O. Çilingir , M. Özdemir, T. Basmacı;  
Osmangazi University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genetics, Es -
kisehir, Turkey.
To investigate the incidence of Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism 
and look for the association between VDR gene polymorphism Apa I genotypes and BMD of obese postmenauposal women in Turkish population. Genomic DNA of 87 nonosteoporotic and 72 osteoporotic subjects was extracted from whole blood. In order to detect the Apa I polymorphism in the 8th intron, genomic DNA was ampliﬁed by PCR and PCR products were further digested by Apa I restriction enzyme. The fragments were detected by agarose gel electrophoresis. Comparison of genotype frequencies of osteoporotic and nonosteoporotic obese postmenopausal women was done by using Chi square method. Differencies in bone density at different skeletal sites (BMD1=Lumbar Spine) and (BMD2= Femoral Neck) between the osteoporotic and nonosteoporotic obese postmenopausal women deﬁned by VDR genotypes were determined by using variance analysis and BMD values of subjects with different genotypes were compared by t-test. It was observed that the frequency of aa genotype in osteoporotic obese postmenopausal women were increased compared to nonosteoporotic subjects. When we compared BMD-VDR gene polymorphism genotype relationship within the group, nonosteoporotic obese Aa postmenopausal women had 0.98 ±
 0.094g/cm2 lumbar spine BMD 
and it was higher compared to AA subjects who had 0.92 ± 0.060 g/
cm2.No signiﬁcant differences were detected between the geneotypes 
and lumbar spine BMD in the osteoporotic obese group. However aa 
subjects had the lowest femoral neck (0.67 ± 0.082 g/cm2).
P1051. Evaluation of RET variants and haplotypes as 
susceptibility factors for sporadic medullary thyroid cancer
R. M. Fernandez1, A. Peciña1, G. Antiñolo1, E. Navarro2, S. Borrego1;  
1Unidad Clinica de Genetica y Reproduccion, HHUU Virgen del Rocio, Seville, 
Spain, 2Servicio de Endocrinología, HHUU Virgen del Rocio, Seville, Spain.
Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is a neoplasm of the C cells of the thyroid comprising about 5-10% of all thyroid malignancies. About 25% of all MTCs are believed to be inherited and grouped in a cancer syndrome known as Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2), while the remaining 75% of all MTCs are sporadic (sMTC). While germline gain-of-function mutations in the 
RET proto-oncogene cause 
hereditary MTC, the molecular mechanisms leading to the sporadic 
forms remain obscure.Our group had evidence about the existence of a low-penetrance susceptibility locus for sMTC in linkage disequilibrium with 
RET 
variants S836S and IVS1-126G>T, and probably in 5´ with respect both variants. To identify such locus, we performed a case-control study analysing a wide spectrum of 
RET variants in the 5´ region of 
the gene. On the other hand, since an over-representation of G691S/S904S variants in sMTC patients had been previously reported by other groups, we sought to determine if such association was also 
present in our series.No differences were obtained among cases and controls in the distribution of all the variants tested. The whole ﬁndings would suggest that the major genetic events contributing to the appearance of sMTC may reside in several different 
RET loci. In this way, we 
could hypothesise about the existence of at least two sMTC loci, linked to S836S-IVS1-126G>T, or to G691S-S904S respectively. The characterization of those loci is a challenge, and would have important 
repercussions in the management of medullary thyroid carcinoma.
P1052. Association of VDR Gene Taq I Polymorphism with Bone 
Mineral Density in Obese Postmenopausal Women
M. Özdemir, M. H. Müslümanoğlu, O. Çilingir, A. Uludağ;  
Osmangazi University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genetics, Es -
kisehir, Turkey.
The relationship between VDR gene Taq I genotypes and BMD 
of obese postmenopausal women in a Turkish population was addressed in this study.Following the extraction of genomic DNA of 87 nonosteoporotic and 72 osteoporotic subjects, Taq I polymorphism was analysed in the 9th exon of the gene. The genotypes and their relations with the clinical features [bone density at different skeletal sites (BMD1=Lumbar Spine) and (BMD2=Femoral Neck)] of the cases were compared. Tt heterozygote subjects had the highest lumbar spine BMD ( 098 ± 0.099 g/cm
2) compared to TT and tt subjects, whereas no 
signiﬁcant differences were seen between the genotypes and lumbar spine BMD. However, tt subjects had the highest femoral neck BMD 
(0.81 ± 0.05 g/cm2)
P1053. Association of genetic polymorphisms in ERa , ERβ and 
AR genes with osteoarthritis
A. Tsezou, P. Fytili, T. Karahalios, K. Malizos;  
University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece.
To elucidate the possible role of genetic variation in the estrogen receptor α (ΕR-α), β (ΕR-β) and androgen receptor (AR) genes with osteoarthritis of the knee, the (TA)n , (CA)n and (CAG)n repeat polymorphisms of ER-α , ER-β and AR genes were studied.A case-control cohort of 94 patients with idiopathic knee osteoarthritis who had undergone total knee replacement (TKR) and 123 unaffected controls were used. The (TA)n, (CA)n and (CAG)n repeat polymorphisms of the human ER-α, ER-β and AR genes were analyzed using an automated DNA analysis method.An association was observed between (CA)n and (CAG)n repeat polymorphisms in ER-β and AR genes and knee OA(p=0.000) and p=0.007), while no association was found between (TA)n repeat polymorphism in the ER-α gene and knee osteoarthritis (p=0.3). The mean number of (CA)n repeats was higher in OA individuals than controls, while the mean number of (CAG)n repeats was lower in men with OA compared to controls. This was reﬂected in a signiﬁcantly increased odds ratio (3.5 and 3.6 respectively) of knee OA in individuals possessing alleles with more than 21 CA repeats, and having LL or SL genotypes, (95% CI 1.7-7.5, p=0.001) compared to individuals with the SS genotype, while men having the L genotype of CAG repeats (OR=0.3) had decreased odds ratio for knee OA compared to those 
with S genotype (95% CI 0.9-16, p=0.063).An association between (CA)n and (CAG)n repeat polymorphisms in the ER- β and AR genes and knee osteoarthritis was found in 
individuals of Greek descent.
P1054. Prevalence of pathogenic mutations in an Italian clinical 
series of patients with familial dementia
L. Benussi1, R. Ghidoni1, L. Barbiero1, S. Signorini1, L. Gigola1, F. Nicosia1, A. 
Villa1, A. Paterlini1, R. Rossi1, E. Sina1, P. M. Rossini2, G. Binetti1;  
1NeuroBioGen Lab Memory Clinic IRCCS CENTRO SAN GIOVANNI DI DIO, 
Brescia, Italy, 2Neuroscience Department AFaR Fatebenefratelli Hospital, 
Roma, Italy.
Mutations in the genes encoding for presenilin 1 and 2 (PSEN1, PSEN2), amyloid precursor protein (APP), and tau (MAPT) are associated with familial forms of dementia. Mutations in PSEN1 account for more than 50% of Alzheimer Disease cases with positive family history (FAD), while mutations in PSEN2 are more rare. Familial cases with an autosomal dominant inheritance have been estimated to have a frequency of APP mutations around 10-15%. Thirty to 50% of Familial Frontotemporal dementia (FFTD) cases are explained by MAPT mutations.Our aim was to investigate the prevalence of pathogenic mutations in an Italian clinical series of patients with a positive family history for dementia: we analyzed 13 patients with FAD and 40 patients with FFTD. In the FAD group, we found two novel presenilin 2 mutations (M239I, T122R) and one previously reported mutation in presenilin 1 (P117L). No mutations were detected in APP gene. In the FFTD patients group that we analyzed, we found just a patient bearing any mutation in the MAPT gene (tau-P301L).The communication of the 
presence of mutations occured during genetic counselling sessions.The frequencies of mutations in PSEN1, PSEN2 and APP genes were 7.14%, 14.28% and 0% and, restricting the analysis to early onset FAD cases, the frequencies were 14.28%, 28.57% and 0%, respectively.Our data suggest that other gene mutations or additional genetic factors might be responsible for disease onset in most cases of dementia with a positive family history. The non-homogeneous distribution of 
pathogenic mutations might depend on a genetic drift.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association310
P1055. Mutation in Lysosomal Acid Phosphatase (Acp2) causes 
cerebellum malformation by disrupting the synaptic transport
A. U. Mannan1, J. Landgrebe2, W. Engel1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Göttingen, Germany, 2Institute of Biochemistry II, 
Göttingen, Germany.
Lysosomal acid phosphatase (Acp2) is a phosphoesterase of the 
endosomal-lysosomal compartment. Its expression in brain is considerably higher as compared to basal level ubiquitous expression. We have identiﬁed and characterized a mouse mutant named nax, which exhibit complete impairment of the cerebellar cytoarchitecture. In nax cerebellum the precursor external granule cells fails to migrate to form inner granular layer, Purkinje cell layer is disorganized, and Bergmann ﬁbre structure is disrupted. Ultrastructural analysis of nax cerebellum showed lysosomal storage bodies in cerebellar cells. By linkage analysis and positional cloning, we identiﬁed a missense mutation (G244E) in Acp2 gene in nax mice DNA. Identiﬁcation of Acp2 as the gene mutated in nax mice provides a valuable model system to study the role of Acp2 in cerebellum homeostasis and lysosomal storage disorder.To decipher the underlying mechanism leading to cerebellum malformation currently our studies are focused on differential gene regulation in P5 stage nax cerebellum through microarray and real time RT-PCR analysis. We have identiﬁed 79 genes, which are either up-regulated or down-regulated in P5 stage of nax cerebellum as compared to normal wild-type siblings. Our initial analysis suggests that genes involved in synaptic vesicles and its transport are affected in nax mice cerebellum. Further analysis on this differentially regulated 
gene is in progress.
P1056. Polymorphism of the ACE (I/D), AGT  (T174M), NOS1  (C/T) 
and NOS3 (VNTR, C691T, C774T, G894T) genes in patients with 
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
T. Kosyankova1, N. Tarasenko2, E. Kondratieva2, V. Puzyrev1;  
1Medical Genetics Research Institute, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian 
Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Polymorphisms of NO-synthases and renin-angiotensin-aldosteron system genes could be one of the earliest marker of vascular damages in diabetes, when exacerbated hormonal and metabolic changes accompanying with activation of oxidative processes and infringement 
of the nitric oxide cycle exist.An analysis of I/D polymorphism in the 
ACE gene and AGT (T174M), 
NOS1 (C/T) and NOS3 (VNTR, C691T, C774T, G894T) genes  in 
patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM, n=113, 170 families) was carried out. 122 men without clinical symptoms of 
cardiovascular diseases and diabetes were studied as control.There was an excess of the allele B of 
NOS3 gene (VNTR polymorphism) 
patients with diabetic nephropathies (χ2=4.189, p=0.041) and excess 
of the allele A in patients with ketoacidic conditions (χ2=5.304, 
p=0.021). An association between the polymorphism and IDDM was revealed: relative risk (RR) for 
NOS1 locus was 1.600 (p=0.007);  RR 
for NOS3 C691T was 1.990 (p=0.010); RR for NOS3 C774T was 2.230 
(p=0.007). Also, signiﬁcant contribution of I/D polymorphism of ACE 
gene in a variability of some parameters of lipids metabolism, body mass index and insulin doze was found out. Using Transmission/Disequilibrium Test (TDT), we found an association between the 
NOS3 774C allele and IDDM (TDT=4.2, p=0.016). Finally, the 174T allele of 
AGT gene and the D allele of ACE gene were associated with 
diabetic retinopathies (TDT=3.765, p=0.048; TDT=8.522, p= 0.004, 
respectively).
Thus, NOS-genes and renin-angiotensin-aldosteron system genes are 
the risk factors for IDDM and the disease-associated traits.
P1057. Identifying candidate Hirschsprung disease associated 
RET variants.
G. M. Burzynski1, I. M. Nolte2, A. Bronda1, K. K. Bos1, J. Osinga1, I. Plaza 
Menacho1, B. Twigt1, S. Maas3, A. S. Brooks4, J. B. G. M. Verheij1, C. H. C. M. 
Buys1, R. M. W. Hofstra1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Groningen, The Netherlands, 
Groningen, The Netherlands, 2Department of Medical Biology, University of 
Groningen, The Netherlands, Groningen, The Netherlands, 3Department of 
Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Med -
ical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Abstract Patients with sporadic Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) show an increased allele sharing at markers in the 5' region of the 
RET locus, 
indicating the presence of a common ancestral RET mutation. In a 
previous study, we found a haplotype of six SNPs that was transmitted to 55.6% of our patients, whereas it was present in only 16.2% of the controls we used. Among the patients with that haplotype, 90.8% had it on both chromosomes, which gave a much higher increased risk of developing HSCR than when the haplotype occurred heterozygously. In order to more precisely deﬁne the HSCR-associated region and to identify candidate disease-associated variant(s), we sequenced the shared common haplotype region from 10 kb upstream the 
RET 
gene through intron 1 (in total 33 kb) in a patient homozygous for the common risk haplotype and in a control individual homozygous for the most common non-risk haplotype. A comparison of these sequences revealed eighty-four sequence differences. Eight of these eighty-four variations proved to be in regions highly conserved among different vertebrates and within putative transcription factor binding sites. We therefore, considered these as candidate disease-associated variants. Subsequent genotyping of these eight variants revealed a strong disease association for six of the eight markers. These six markers also showed the largest distortions in allele transmission. Interspecies comparison showed that only one of the six variations was located in a region also conserved in a non-mammalian species, making it the 
most likely candidate HSCR associated variation.
P1058. Association analysis of serotonin transporter promotor 
region polymorphism 5-HTTLPR with personality risk factors 
associated with pathological gambling in Han Chinese 
population
W. Y. Chau1, R. Y. L. Chen1, P. Sham2;  
1Department of Psychiatry, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special 
Administrative Region of China, 2Institute of Psychiatry, King's College, United 
Kingdom.
Family and twin studies have demonstrated evidence for genetic inﬂuence in the etiology of pathological gambling (PG). Recent molecular genetic studies suggest possible association of serotonin transporter gene (5-HTTLPR) with PG. At the same time, researchers have attempted to identify core personality trait of PGs. It is believed that people having certain personality traits maybe more vulnerable to the development of PG and the strongest evidence exists for impulsivity. However, the manifestation of PG should not be simply induced by either genetic or personality risk factors, but more likely the interplay between the two. This association study aims to examine the interrelationship between PG related personality risk factors and 
5-HTTLPR in Han Chinese male.134 PGs and 104 normal controls with mean age 41.84 and 40.80 years (p=0.324) were genotyped for 5-HTTLPR. Personality risk factors were identiﬁed through Zuckerman’s Sensation Seeking Scale, Barratt’s Impulsivity Scale and Chinese Personality Assessment Inventory. PGs as compared to controls have signiﬁcantly higher sensation seeking, impulsivity, emotionality, external locus of control, pathological dependence and antisocial scores. No signiﬁcant differences were observed in genotype (p=0.963) and allele frequency (p=0.794) of 5-HTTLPR between the two groups. Also, no association was found between 5-HTTLPR genotype and any of the personality risk factors identiﬁed. Since majority of gambling studies were based on Western samples, this negative ﬁnding for 5-HTTLPR as risk factor for PG may be attributed to ethnic difference or our modest sample size. However, the core personality traits identiﬁed can be good endophenotypes for 
further genetic studies.
P1059. Frequencies of HFE mutations in Russia
A. V. Lavrov, A. A. Baev, I. K. Surkova;  
Research Center for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is autosomal-recessive iron overload characterized by high polymorphism which embarrasses diagnostics. Estimation of the 
HFE main mutations’ (C282Y and H63D) 
frequencies among HH and non-HH patients is necessary to determine role of the mutations and possibility to use them for diagnostics. We selected 54 patients matching clinical and laboratory criteria of HH. Genetic analysis, linkage, and association311
Average age was 44,3 years (SD=13,3). Male/female ration was 3,5:1. 
The second group (n=567) was formed from patients of the following departments: gastroenterology, hepathology, cardiology, endocrinology (diabetes). Average age was 50,1 years (SD=26,8). Male/female ration was 1:1,2. Only 39 blood samples from 54 HH patients were available for genotyping: CC - 87,2%; CY - 7,7%; YY - 5,1%; HH - 51,3%; HD - 46,1%; DD - 2,6%. The second group was genotyped: CC - 94,5%; CY - 5,1%; YY - 0,4%; HH -70,9%; HD - 26,6%; DD - 2,5%. C282Y frequency is surprisingly low among HH patients compared to European data. Controversy H63D is relatively frequent among HH patients. Allele frequencies in the second group does not differ from most population data in Russia and in Europe as well. However, H63D frequency is slightly higher in Russians. Though pathogenic genotypes (YY, DD, CY/HD) are quite frequent, clinically overt HH is very rare. Our data supports low penetrance of C282Y mutation and demonstrates also that it is necessary to search for new loci responsible for HH in Russia. Population screening of HH is not reasonable and use of 
HFE-
genotyping should be restricted to very rare cases.
P1060. Association analysis of the candidate genes RELN, 
LAMB1, CUTL1 and NRCAM for autism on chromosome 7q
N. H. Sykes1, J. A. Lamb1, G. Barnby1, E. Bonora2, A. J. Bailey3, A. P. Monaco1, 
Int. Molecular Genetic Study of Autism Consortium(IMGSAC), www.well.ox.ac.
uk/~maestrin/iat.html;  
1The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 
2Unit di Genetica Medica, Bologna, Italy, 3Section of Child and Adolescent Psy -
chiatry, University Department of Psychiatry, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Autism is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder that usually occurs due to a complex genetic predisposition. It is characterized by impairments in reciprocal social interaction and communication, and restricted and stereotyped patterns of interests and activities. Previously linkage for autism has been found to chromosome 7q, which has been replicated by many groups. Four candidate genes present in chr7q22-31 have been screened for mutations and association with autism in the IMGSAC sample; RELN, LAMB1, CUTL1 
and NRCAM. Several 
missense mutations were found in RELN and new coding variants in 
CUTL1 and LAMB1. Evidence for association was found with LAMB1  
and NRCAM .
To further analyse these genes an additional 31 SNPs were genotyped in 239 Affected Sibling Pairs from the IMGSAC sample. Association analysis was carried out using the Transmission Disequilibrium Test (TDT) and some evidence for association was found with 
LAMB1 
(p<0.05). TRANSMIT was also run to test for haplotype transmission but no signiﬁcant results were obtained. 192 controls were genotyped and their allele frequencies compared with unrelated affected individuals in a case-control analysis, which was carried out using Fishers exact test. A signiﬁcant result was found for a SNP in 
CUTL1 (p<0.001).
Although a denser marker map was used in this study to cover the candidate genes in question it was not exhaustive. To deﬁnitively exclude these genes further genotyping of an even greater number of 
markers would be required.
P1061. The inﬂuence of endothelin gene polymorphisms on the 
progression of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease 
(adpkd)
J. Reiterova1, J. Štekrova2, M. Merta1, D. Kmentová1, V. Tesař1;  
1Nephrology Dept of General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 
2Dept of Biology and Genetics of General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
A signiﬁcant phenotypical variability is observed in ADPKD. Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is a promoting factor in renal diseases. We examined the inﬂuence of single-nucleotide polymorphisms of EDN1 - K198N, 3A/4A and T-1370G - on the progression of ADPKD.205 ADPKD patients (pts) were analyzed. Pts were divided in three groups: 1. 48 pts with ESRF later than in 63 years (slow progressors), 2. 83 pts with ESRD between 45-63 years and 3. 74 pts with ESRF before 45 years (rapid progressors). DNA samples were genotyped for three single-nucleotide polymorphisms of EDN1. The EDN1 genotype distribution showed no differences between slow progressors and rapid progressors. We did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant differences in the ages of end stage renal disease (ESRD):1.K198N - KK (51.9±8.8 years), KN (50.4±8.6 years), NN (51.8±7 years), 2. 3A/4A - 3A/3A (51.7±8 years), 3A/4A (50.9±8 years), 4A/4A (52.5±7 years), 3.T-1370G - TT (51±8 years), TG (50.8±8.6 years), GG (50±4.5 years). Comparing the ages of ESRD in patients with different 3A/4A and K198N haplotypes we found signiﬁcantly lower age of ESRD (47.1 ±5.9 years) in the carriers of 4A allele in combination with 198N allele than in the carriers of 4A allele homozygous for K198 allele (52.9±9.4 years) (t-test, p< 0.01) and in the carriers of 198N allele homozygous for 3A allele (53±9.8 
years) (t-test, p< 0.05).We found deleterious effect of the combination of 4A allele and 198N allele of EDN1 gene was observed in APKDK individuals.Supported by grants IGA MZ CR 7733, 7633 and ZZ MSMT 
0021620806
P1062. Decreased frequency of the TNF2 allele of TNF-α -308 
promoter polymorphism is associated with lacunar infarction
B. Blaskó1, P. Harcos2, J. Laki1, Z. Széplaki3, Z. Szolnoki4, M. Kovács1, B. Me -
legh5, G. Széplaki1, G. Füst1;  
1Semmelweis University, 3rd Department of Medicine Research Lab, Budapest, 
Hungary, 2St. Imre Hospital, Department of Neurology, Budapest, Hungary, 
3Semmelweis University, Neurological Clinical Group, Budapest, Hungary, 
4Pándy Kálmán County Hospital, Department of Neurology and Neurophysiol -
ogy, Gyula, Budapest, Hungary, 5University of Pécs, Department of Medical 
Genetics and Child Development, Pécs, Budapest, Hungary.
Background and Purpose-  Enhanced release of proinﬂammatory 
cytokines may contribute to the pathogenesis of stroke. We examined whether G to A promoter polymorphism in the tumor necrosis factor-α gene at position -308 affects the stroke risk.
Methods-  We genotyped 336 patients with ischemic stroke and 273 
healthy controls for this polymorphism. We divided patients into different groups by both modiﬁed TOAST and Oxfordshire Community Stroke Project (OCSP) classiﬁcation and determined the allele frequency in 
every group.
Results- Patients with ischemic stroke had a signiﬁcantly (p<0.001) decreased (0.115) frequency of the -308 A (TNF2) allele compared to the healthy controls (0.196). When patients were classiﬁed according to a modiﬁed TOAST classiﬁcation, reduction of the TNF2 allele was found to be restricted to the small vessel pathology, lacunar infarction group (allele frequency: 0.068, p=0.003 compared to the healthy controls). The result was conﬁrmed by OCSP classiﬁcation, where the TNF2 frequency in lacunar infarct (LACI) patients (0.065) was signiﬁcantly (p=0.002) decreased.
Conclusions-  Our results  suggest TNF2 allele have a protective effect 
against the development of lacunar subtype of ischemic stroke.
P1063. No evidence of association of CXCL2 haplotypes with the 
development of sepsis
N. Maca-Meyer1, C. Flores1, L. Pérez-Méndez2, R. Sangüesa3, E. Espinosa3, 
J. Villar1;  
1Research Institute, Hospital Universitario N. S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de 
Tenerife, Spain, 2Primary Health Care, Hospital Universitario N. S. de Cande -
laria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 3Department of Anesthesiology, Hospital 
Universitario N. S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain.
Sepsis is the most common cause of acute lung injury (ALI). It has been shown that inﬂammatory and immune responses, cell proliferation, chemotaxis and blood coagulation are the ﬁve key biological processes involved in the development of sepsis and its complications. 
CXCL2  (MIP-2  alpha ) has been recently catalogued as a candidate 
gene for ALI based on gene expression proﬁles derived from multiple animal models of lung stress. The encoded protein acts as a potent chemoattractant, and the abolishment of its effects leads to lung injury. In this study we have analysed the ~2.1 kb sequence of the 
CXCL2 
gene in 66 septic patients and 364 unrelated population-based controls from the Canaries (Spain). We ﬁrst measured linkage disequilibrium in 86 chromosomes using two previously described SNPs (rs3806792 and rs9131) and a insertion/deletion of [ATTT] motif (rs5859414), and found no evidence of historical recombination in the region. We then used one of these SNPs (rs3806792) along with a newly described polymorphic short tandem repeat (D4S3454) to obtain known phased haplotypes and analysed their association with the disease. We tested the overall haplotype frequency distribution between cases and controls and found no statistically signiﬁcant differences. These preliminary results suggest that 
CXCL2  genetic variants may not Genetic analysis, linkage, and association312
contribute substantially to the development of sepsis.
Supported by grants 37/02 and 44/02 from FUNCIS, 99/0361 and 02/1158 from FIS, and 209/03 from DGUI.
P1064. LBP genetic variants and susceptibility to sepsis
C. Flores1, N. Maca-Meyer1, L. Pérez-Méndez2, R. Sangüesa3, E. Espinosa3, 
J. Villar1;  
1Research Institute, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de 
Tenerife, Spain, 2Primary Health Care, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Cande -
laria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 3Department of Anesthesiology, Hospital 
Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain.
Sepsis is the most common cause of acute lung injury, organ dysfunction and death in critically ill patients. Previous association analyses using candidate genes support that variants in the genes involved in inﬂammation play an important role in the development of sepsis. Prior studies used 
LBP (the protein recognises Gram-negative 
bacteria endotoxin) as a candidate gene. However, the positive results found for a variant in the earliest study have not been replicated. Our aim in this work is to study the association of 
LBP gene with sepsis 
using a “haplotype tagging” approach. On the basis of their gene distribution and frequency, 11 SNPs were selected and assembled into two SNaPshot multiplex reactions for the analysis. Four of them were tagging identifying more than 90% of European haplotypes. After haplotype reconstruction with PHASE 2.1 program, we assessed whether differences between cases and unrelated population-based controls from the Canaries (Spain) exist through an omnibus likelihood ratio test statistic for the overall haplotype frequency proﬁle, with signiﬁcance empirically determined via randomisation tests. Our results are suggestive of the existence of sepsis susceptibility alleles on one or some sets of chromosomes exhibiting the allelic patterns of 
haplotypes studied.Supported by grants 37/02 and 44/02 from FUNCIS, 99/0361 and 02/1158 from FIS, and 209/03 from DGUI.
P1065. Vitamin D receptor allele combinations and FokI 
polymorphism inﬂuence genetic susceptibility to type 1 diabetes 
in Dalmatian population
V. Boraska1, T. Zemunik1, V. Skrabic2, I. Marinovic Terzic1, M. Peruzovic1, J. 
Terzic1;  
1School of Medicine, Split, Croatia, 2Clinical Hospital Split, Split, Croatia.
INTRODUCTION: Vitamin D and it's receptor gene (VDR) have immunomodulatory properties and inﬂuence insulin secretion. Recent data indicate VDR polymorphisms to be associated with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) and therefore we studied 
FokI polymorphism 
in exon 2.MATERIALS AND METHODS: 134 individuals with T1DM and 232 control subjects from the Dalmatian population of South Croatia were 
examined. FokI genotyping was performed by PCR ampliﬁcation 
followed by FokI endonuclease restriction. Data were analysed 
using the chi-square test. On the basis of our previous research, haplotype analysis of VDR polymorphisms 
BsmI , ApaI and TaqI and 
their association with susceptibility to T1DM have been investigated. Estimates of haplotypes were made using the statistical program 
EH+.RESULTS: 
FokI polymorphism showed unequal distribution 
(p=0.0049) between T1DM cases and controls indicating ff genotype to be associated with development of T1DM and Ff genotype to be a protective one. 
BsmI , ApaI and TaqI polymorphisms were found to 
be in strong linkage disequilibrium (LD) (p<0.0001). Bat haplotype was observed 11 times in controls and not once in T1DM individuals (p=0.0007) and therefore revealed it's possible protective role. No signiﬁcant LD between 
FokI and any other polymorphism was 
detectable but, nevertheless, bf haplotype was signiﬁcantly more frequent in T1DM patients (p=0.0168) while the aF haplotype was 
observed more times in controls (p=0.0413).CONCLUSIONS: Our ﬁndings indicate that VDR 
FokI polymorphism 
and several VDR allele variants are associated with susceptibility to 
T1DM in the Dalmatian population.P1066. Genetic variants in both cysteinyl leukotriene 1 and 2 
receptors are independently associated with atopy and asthma 
in a Tristan da Cunha isolate.
M. D. Thompson1,2, N. Zamel1,3, A. S. Slutsky1,4, C. M. Lilly1,5, M. Burnham1,6, K. 
A. Siminovitch1,7, D. E. C. Cole1,8;  
1University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Dept. of Laboratory Medicine and 
Pathobiology, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Cana -
da, 4St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 5Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Division, Bringham & Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 6Dept. of 
Pharmacology, Toronto, ON, Canada, 7Depts. of Medicine, Immunology and 
Medical Genetics and Microbiology, University of Toronto, Samuel Lunenfeld 
and Toronto General Hospital Research Institutes, Toronto, ON, Canada, 8Dept. 
of Clinical Pathology, Sunnybrook & Women's College Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Asthma is a complex disorder with heterogeneous etiology, while atopy 
is a well-deﬁned phenotype of immune hyperactivity that often underlies asthma. The genes encoding the cysteinyl leukotriene 1 (CysLT
1 at 
Xq13.2) and 2 (CysLT2 at 13q14) receptors have been implicated in 
atopy, in part because they bind the cysteinyl leukotriene ligands that mediate atopic asthma, and they are targets for anti-leukotrienes used to treat asthma. We analyzed the association of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of CysLT
1 (p.G300S) and CysLT2 (p.M201V) 
with either asthma or atopy phenotype. We genotyped the Tristan da Cunha isolate with an excess prevalence of atopy (47% of 112 subjects), and smaller cohorts of asthmatics (n=25) and non-asthmatics (n=25) from the Boston area. The frequencies of the 300S and 201V variants were 15% (25/167 X chromosomes) and 13% (30/224 alleles) in the Tristan da Cunha sample, and 4% (3/70 X chromosomes) and 0% in the Boston sample, respectively. While the trend in the Boston sample did not reach signiﬁcance, both CysLT
1 and CysLT2 SNPs were highly 
correlated with atopy in the Tristan da Cunha sample (r=.35, p<.001 & r=.33, p<0.001, respectively). However, only the CysLT
2 variant 
was predictive of asthma (r=.21; p=0.045). All double heterozygotes were atopic, and further analysis of joint genotype is consistent with an additive model (r=.45; p<.001), whether corrected for age, gender and smoking, or not. This is the ﬁrst description of association between CysLT
1/2 genotypes and atopy/asthma phenotypes. Further testing in 
larger panmictic populations is warranted.
P1067. Association of CARD15 gene variants with pediatric 
inﬂammatory bowel diseases
A. Ferraris1,2, B. Torres1,2, D. Knafelz3, B. Papadatou3, A. Barabino4, P. Lionetti5, 
G. L. de' Angelis6, G. Iacono7, G. D'Amato1,2, P. Fortina8, M. Castro3, B. Dal -
lapiccola1,2;  
1CSS Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel Institute, 
Rome, Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University 
La Sapienza, Rome, Italy, 3Gastroenteroly Unit, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Hospi -
tal, Rome, Italy, 4Pediatric Gastroenterology, G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 
5Department of Pediatrics, University of Florence - Meyer Hospital, Florence, 
Italy, 6Department of Pediatrics, University of Parma, Parma, Italy, 7Pediatric 
Gastroenterology, Di Cristina Hospital, Palermo, Italy, 8Clinical Genomics Labo -
ratory, Center for Translational Medicine, Department of Medicine, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
Three major polymorphisms of CARD15 gene (R702W, G908R, 
L1007fsinsC) have been associated with Crohn’s disease (CD), but not with ulcerative colitis (UC), in different Caucasian adult populations. We analysed the three variants in 198 pediatric Italian patients affected by inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD), including 112 with CD and 86 with UC, with an onset at ≤ 18 years. As a control group, 115 unaffected individuals were analysed. Comparison of allele frequencies between patients and controls demonstrated an independent association for all three variants with CD, but not with UC. After combining the three polymorphisms, 39.3% of CD patients carried at least one CARD15 variant compared to 5.2% of controls (
P<10-9; OR=11.75; 
95% CI=4.75-29.06). Eleven CD children (10.1%), but only one UC and no control subjects carried two CARD15 variants (homozygotes or compound heterozygotes). The combined frequency of CARD15 variants was higher also in UC children compared to controls (14% 
vs 5.2%; P=0.029; OR=2.95, 95% CI=1.06-8.2). Analysis of genotype-
phenotype correlation did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant clinical difference between CARD15 positive and negative patients in both CD and UC groups. The present study shows that the major CARD15 variants are Genetic analysis, linkage, and association313
strongly associated with pediatric onset CD in Italy. A possible role for 
these polymorphisms in pediatric UC is also supported; however, this association needs to be conﬁrmed in larger cohorts. Present results do not predict a role for CARD15 genotypes in the clinical presentation of 
pediatric IBD patients.
P1068. The detection of genotyping errors and pseudo-SNPs via 
deviations from Hardy Weinberg equilibrium
S. M. Leal ;  
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States.
Genotype error can greatly reduce the power of a genetic study. For 
family data, genotype error can be assessed by examining marker data for non-Mendelian inconsistencies, closely linked markers for double recombination events and consistency of duplicate genotypes. For case-control data, duplicate samples are genotyped, and controls are tested for deviations from Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE). Although genotyping errors can cause deviations from HWE, these deviations are usually small, and the power to detect them is low except for high rates of genotyping error and/or large sample sizes. An additional problem is that even when deviations from HWE are detected for marker loci, without additional experimentation it is not possible to unequivocally implicate genotyping error as the cause. The power and sample sizes necessary to detect deviations from HWE for SNP data was examined for a variety genotyping error and pseudo-SNP models. For the majority of the genotyping models examined, the power is poor to detect deviations from HWE. For example, for 1,000 controls, if an allele with frequency of 0.1 fails to amplify for 28% of the heterogeneous genotypes producing a sample error rate of 0.05, the power is 0.51 to detect a deviation from HWE at an alpha level of 0.05. On the other hand, the detection of deviations from HWE for pseudo-SNPs (paralogous and ectopic sequence variants) for the majority of models examined produced a power of >0.8 for sample sizes as small 
as 50 individuals.
P1069. SimPed: A simulation program to generate haplotype and 
genotype data for pedigree structures
B. Müller-Myhsok1, K. Yan2, S. M. Leal2;  
1Max-Planck-Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany, 2Baylor College of Medi -
cine, Houston, TX, United States.
With the widespread availability of SNP genotype data, there is greater interest in analyzing pedigree haplotype data. For microsatellite markers due to their physical distance intermarker linkage disequilibrium is usually low; however, for dense maps of SNP markers, there can be strong linkage disequilibrium between marker loci. Linkage analysis (parametric and nonparametric) and family-based association studies are currently being carried out using dense maps of SNP marker loci. Monte Carlo methods are often used for both linkage and association studies; however, to date there are no programs available which generate haplotype and/or genotype data consisting of a large number of loci for pedigree structures. A program, SimPed has been developed to quickly generate haplotype and/or genotype data for pedigrees of virtually any size and complexity. Marker data either in linkage disequilibrium or equilibrium can be generated for > 10,000 diallelic or multiallelic marker loci. Haplotypes and/or genotypes are generated for pedigree structures using speciﬁed genetic map distances and haplotype and/or allele frequencies. The data generated by the SimPed program is useful for a variety of analysis purposes, including evaluating methods that estimate haplotype frequencies for pedigree data and estimating empirical p-values for linkage and family-based 
association studies.
P1070. The inﬂuence of interleukin-10 (IL-10) promoter 
polymorphism on the occurrence of non Hodgkin Lymphoma (NHL) in subjects infected with Hepatitis C Virus (HCV).
M. Capasso1, M. Persico2, E. Persico2, V. Aglio1, D. Spano1, C. Marzocchella2, 
A. De Renzo2, F. Cimmino1, A. Iolascon1;  
1Ceinge Advanced Biotecnology, Napoli, Italy, 2University Federico II, Napoli, 
Italy.
HCV along with chronic liver disease is also considered a causative 
agent of other clinical pathological conditions which testify the possible direct pathogenic role of the virus in several different cell types including hepatocytes and leukocytes. Prevalence of HCV is signiﬁcantly higher also in patients suffering with NHL and, all around the world, it was conﬁrmed except for patients studied in North Europe and some areas of North America. In Italy, different groups showed prevalence ranging from 15 to 30%. The goal of this paper is to establish if a polymorphic gene encoding for cytokine could be a predisposing factor for this condition. To do this, we analyzed the distribution of the polymorphism of IL-10 -1082 G/A in 63 patients, not infected with HCV, with NHL (NHL/HCV-) and in 50 patients, infected with HCV, with chronic active hepatitis, with NHL, (NHL/HCV+). In this study, for the ﬁrst time we show that irregardless of age, sex, virus genotype and/ or severity of chronic liver disease a signiﬁcant prevalence of IL-10
-1082 GG genotype 
seems to inﬂuence the occurrence of NHL in HCV infected patients. In fact the distribution of the IL-10
-1082 G/A polymorphism was different 
between NHL/HCV+ and NHL/HCV- patients (P=0.028). The frequency of the IL-10
-1082 G allele (P=0.019) and the frequency of the IL-10 -1082 GG 
genotype against overall genotypes (IL-10-1082 GA/AA) were signiﬁcantly 
higher in NHL/HCV+ patients as compared with NHL/HCV- patients 
(P=0.014).
P1071. N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor subunit NR1 gene (GRIN1) 
and temporal lobe epilepsy: no evidence of association analysis 
for genetic variant in promoter region of the gene
I. Manna1, A. Labate1,2, A. La Russa1, E. Le Piane3, F. Condino1, R. Cittadella1, 
U. Aguglia3, A. Quattrone1,2, A. Gambardella1,2;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences- CNR, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neu -
rology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, 3Regional Epilepsy Centre, 
Reggio Calabria, Italy.
Glutamate is the principal excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain. Excitatory amino acids are very important in the synaptic transmission of the brain, and for this reason does not surprise that such excitatory pathways is involved in the onset and propagation of epileptic seizures. Recently, in epileptic animal models has been shown that increased excitability might be due to an abnormal glutamatergic transmission involving altered properties of ionotropic N-methyl-D-aspartate 
(NMDA) receptors.Here, we aim to assess if the human non lesional temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) is associated to changes in the subunit NR1 of the GRIN1 receptor which is the common subunit of the NMDA receptor. We screened single nucleotide polymorphisms (G1001C) of the upstream region using a case-control study. The alleles distribution of the G1001C polymorphism were analyzed in 266 Italian patients with non-lesional TLE (146 women and 120 men; mean age
 47.3±17.8) 
and in 374 healthy controls (182 women and 192 men; mean age 49.2±21.9) matched for age, sex and ethnicity. The DNA study was performed using a PCR ampliﬁcation followed by digestion with a 
restriction endonuclease.No statistical signiﬁcant differences in the 1001G/C genotype and allele frequencies between patients with temporal lobe epilepsy and controls (p=0.053 and p=0.032, respectively) were found. Neither association was found in sex, age at onset and duration of disease after dichotomization of the data in terms of carrier or non-carrier for 
C allele.In conclusion, our results do not suggest any association between the GRIN1 polymorphism (G1001C) and non lesional temporal lobe epilepsy.
P1072. Association of paraoxonase 1 gene polymorphisms with 
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
M. Flekac , J. Skrha;  
3rd Department of Internal Medicine, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles Univer -
sity, Prague, Czech Republic.
Background:  Low antioxidant activity of paraoxonase (PON1) in patients 
with Type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM), where an increase in oxidative 
stress was detected, has been traced, in part, to polymorphisms within 
promoter and coding regions.
Aim: To investigate the association of the four single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) of PON1, Met-Leu 55 (M55L), Gln-Arg 192 (Q192R) in coding and in promotor region (-107C/T, -907G/C) with 
DM.Design and methods:
 Case-control association study. Distribution of 
the SNPs was determined by PCR-RFLP. The allele and genotype frequencies were calculated in DM (n=109) diagnosed by the WHO Genetic analysis, linkage, and association314
criteria and in healthy controls (n=70). There were no differences 
between these groups in gender and age distribution. Following biochemical parameters were measured. Fasting plasma glucose (FPG), concentration of triglycerids (TG), LDL - cholesterol (LDL-C), glycated hemoglobin (FPG 9,29±3,09 mmol/l, TG 1,91±0,32 mmol/l , LDL- C 3,22±0,78 mmol/l, glycated hemoglobin 6,65±1,76 in DM vs. FPG 4,95±0,49 mmol/l, TG 1,43±0,63 mmol/l, LDL-C 3,00±0,66 mmol/l in controls).Normal urinary excretion of albumin was found in 
all patients.Results: The allele frequencies of L55M were L= 0,583, M= 0,417 in DM vs. L= 0,850, M= 0,150 in controls, in Q192R were Q= 0,849, R= 0,151 in DM vs. Q= 0,543, R= 0,457 in controls. There were detected statistical signiﬁcant differences in allele and genotype frequencies between studied groups in L55M (P=0,01) and Q192R (P= 0,01), whereas polymorphisms in promotor region differed statistically nonsigniﬁcant.
Conclusion:  These data indicate that PON1 SNPs in coding area could 
be regarded as genetic factors associated with DM.
P1073. Performance evaluation of the SNPlex Genotyping 
System using population validated SNPs
M. H. Wenz, J. C. Briggs, Y. Wang, A. R. Tobler;  
Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States.
In addition to producing highly accurate and reliable data, a high-throughput SNP genotyping system must offer speed and ﬂexibility, paired with low cost. We have recently introduced the SNPlex™ Genotyping System that utilizes multiplexed OLA/PCR and capillary electrophoresis to genotype SNP information encoded in genomic DNA. In each multiplex reaction, up to 48 SNPs are interrogated in parallel, using a set of SNP-speciﬁc ligation probe pools. After puriﬁcation, all speciﬁc ligation products are ampliﬁed simultaneously with one pair of universal PCR primers. Biotinylated amplicons are captured in streptavidin coated microtiter plate wells. A set of universal ﬂuorescently labeled probes, called ZipChute™ reagent, is hybridized to single-stranded amplicons. After selective hybridization, the ZipChute probes are eluted for subsequent detection on Applied Biosystems 3730/xl and 3130xl Analyzers. The GeneMapper® Software determines the SNP genotypes, which are displayed in cluster plots with associated genotype data. We will present data generated by utilizing a simpliﬁed SNPlex System assay workﬂow that validate the SNPlex System for high throughput SNP genotyping. Accuracy and precision data generated by different sites, obtained both with 3730/xl and 3130xl Analyzer platforms, will be shown for a 48-plex SNP set, the SNPlex System Control Pool. This set consists of an optimized ligation probe set that addresses 48 population validated SNPs. This control pool together with a genomic DNA panel is designed for use in quality 
control, trouble shooting, and training purposes.
P1073. The role of vascular and hormonal gene variants in 
migraine susceptibility
L. R. Grifﬁths1, N. J. Colson1, R. A. Lea1, M. P. Johnson1, S. Quinlan1, J. Mac -
Millan2;  
1Genomics Research Centre, Gold Coast, Australia, 2Queensland Clinical Ge -
netics Service, RBH, Brisbane, Australia.
Migraine is a common and debilitating neurological disorder characterised by headpain, nausea, vomiting, photophobia and often severe, neurological disturbances. Although calcium channel and ATPase gene variants have been implicated in the rare familial hemiplegic migraine sub-type, the exact number and identity of genes involved in the more common types of migraine have yet to be deﬁned. Genetic linkage studies in our laboratory have so far revealed migraine susceptibility regions on chromosomes 19, X and 1, emphasising the heterogeneity of the disorder. In order to identify the molecular basis of migraine, neurotransmitter-related pathways have been the main focus of studies. However vascular and hormonal disturbances also occur in migraineurs, as highlighted by alterations in cerebral blood ﬂow and hormonal triggers of migraine. We have recently investigated a number of genetic factors involved in these functions. These studies have provided evidence implicating variants in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) and angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE) genes, as 
interacting  determinants of migraine, that 
increase total migraine risk by ~2-fold and migraine with aura risk by ~3 fold. We have also investigated a number of hormonal gene variants. These studies have implicated variants in both the estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor genes. Furthermore, interaction analysis revealed that individuals who carried at least one copy of both hormone receptor susceptibility genotypes were even more likely to suffer from migraine, indicating that these genes also appear to act synergistically. These overall results indicate that migraine is a complex polygenic disorder, involving multiple and possibly interacting 
gene components.
P1074. Hypertension with and without metabolic syndrome 
presents as distinct clinical and genetic entities in French-
Canadians
O. Seda1, E. Merlo2, J. Tremblay1, U. Broeckel3, M. Kaldunski3, D. Gaudet4, G. 
Bouchard5, F. Gagnon6, G. Antoniol7, P. Brunelle1, A. Gurau1, F. Gossard1, T. 
A. Kotchen3, Z. Pausova1, S. N. Orlov1, R. Wan1, M. Jomphe5, J. Pintos1, A. W. 
Cowley, Jr.3, P. Hamet1;  
1Research Centre CHUM, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 2École Polytechnique de 
Montréal, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 3Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
WI, United States, 4Complexe hospitalier de la Sagamie, Chicoutimi, PQ, Cana -
da, 5Université du Québec à Chicoutimi, Chicoutimi, PQ, Canada, 6University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 7University of Sannio, Benevento, Italy.
Hypertension is generally perceived as a constitutive attribute of the metabolic syndrome, though not a requisite one in either of the deﬁnitions by the World Health Organization or the National Cholesterol Education Program’s Adult Treatment Panel III. While hypertension without metabolic syndrome has received little attention recently, its genetic determinants and cardiovascular outcomes may be distinct 
from hypertension within the context of metabolic syndrome.In 120 hypertensive French-Canadian families from the Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean region of Quebec, we identiﬁed and compared those with a high density (>50%) of metabolic syndrome (HDMS, n=25) vs. families with no metabolic syndrome in propositus sibships (LDMS, n=23). Using a method of layered founders, we assessed the separability of hypertensive HDMS and LDMS families in terms of speciﬁc ancestry. We compared > 40 hemodynamic, metabolic and anthropometric traits and their heritability. The LDMS hypertensives showed distinct features in comparison to hypertensives in HDMS families, e.g. signiﬁcantly lower volume of extracellular water (19.0±0.5 vs. 16.2±0.5 L, p=0.0001) and higher Na+/K+ cotransport in erythrocytes. Heritability estimates suggested higher heritability of blood pressure, extracellular water and several metabolic traits in LDMS families. At the depth of 14 layers (generations), the ancestors of LDMS families showed a higher speciﬁcity of genetic contribution to the recent generation in contrast with HDMS families (75% vs. 55%). In summary, hypertension with and without features of metabolic syndrome constitutes distinct entities in terms of genetic and clinical characteristics, possibly with speciﬁc 
cardiovascular outcomes.Supported by: NIH SCOR, IHRT CardioGEn, CIHR MT-1183, TACTICS.
P1075. The effects of complex unaccounted pedigree structure 
on homozygosity mapping
Y. S. Aulchenko1,2, F. Liu1, S. Elefante1, C. M. van Duijn1;  
1Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Institute of Cytology & 
Genetics SD RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
Genetically isolated populations have proven to be a useful tool in mapping genes underlying complex human disease. One of the most powerful tools, which could be applied for gene identiﬁcation in such populations, is homozygosity mapping. When performing homozygosity mapping, one may typically account only for a few of the shortest loops, in part because more extended genealogic information may be missing, or due to computational complexities arising in analysis of larger pedigrees. Ignoring part of pedigree information might lead to false positive ﬁndings. We evaluated the effect of underestimation of the inbreeding on type I error of homozygosity mapping using heterogeneity LOD scores. In general, the inﬂation of type I errors is sensitive to the extent to which true inbreeding is underestimated and to marker allele frequencies. We investigate type I errors using simulated data and real data on Alzheimer disease patients identiﬁed in a recent genetically isolated population. Using this data, we show which scenario may lead to a real hazard in gene-identiﬁcation. We Genetic analysis, linkage, and association315
work out recommendation on how to avoid inﬂation of type I error and 
over-estimation of obtained LOD scores.
P1077. The E-selectin S128R polymorphism in patients with 
ankylosing spondylitis from Romanian population
O. Popa1, R. Sfrent-Cornateanu1, L. Popa2, M. Bojinca3, C. Bara1;  
1Department of Immunology and Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine, Univer -
sity "Carol Davila", Bucharest, Romania, 2"Grigore Antipa" National Museum of 
Natural History, Bucharest, Romania, 3"I.C. Cantacuzino" Hospital, Bucharest, 
Romania.
As an active participant in inﬂammatory processes, the vascular 
endothelium produces E-selectin in response to proinﬂammatory cytokines. The E-selectin gene S128R (serine to arginine) polymorphism has not been investigated yet in relation with ankylosing 
spondylitis (AS).We have tested a limited number of AS patients (N=35) and an ethnically matched control group (N=40) from Romanian population for S128R polymorphism in E-selectin gene. In the case group, 24 (68.6%) individuals exhibited wild type E-selectin 128S genotype, 7 (20%) were heterozygous S128R and 4 (11.2%) were homozygous for the 128R allele. In the control group, the distribution was 26 (65%) homozygous 128S, 13 (32.5%) heterozygous S128R and 1 (2.5%) 
homozygous 128R.The distribution of the E-selectin genotype in our control group showed Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, which veriﬁed that the control group was statistically appropriate, and that the genotyping protocol was error-
free.The genotype distribution in the AS group was statistically signiﬁcant different (χ
2=5.74) from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.
Disease association with S128R was assessed by single-locus and single-locus allele based χ
2 tests for a 3x2, respectively 2x2 contingency 
table, to compare each genotype/allele frequency in patients with AS versus control individuals. No signiﬁcant association was found in 
either situation.The Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium observed in AS group could be produced by random sampling errors due to small population size (estimated frequency of AS in general Caucasian population is 0.1-
0.2%).
P1078. Contribution of polymorphisms Ile50Val and A1188C in 
IL4RA  and IL12B genes into predisposition to hepatoﬁbrosis 
development in patients with viral hepatitis
I. A. Goncharova1, M. B. Freidin1, L. E. Dunaeva2, E. V. Beloborodova2, E. I. 
Beloborodova2, V. P. Puzyrev1;  
1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Sibirian medical 
state university, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
High prevalence of viral hepatitis and severe complications of the disease such as cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma, cause the interest to study genetic basis of susceptibility to viral hepatitis. Genetic status of the host organism is one of the main factors whish determine individual reaction to the viral infection and particularities of disease course. We studied the association of polymorphisms Ile50Val in 
IL4RA  
gene and A1188C in 3’-UTR region of IL12B gene with clinical features 
of chronic viral hepatitis and extent of hepatoﬁbrosis. The case group consisted of 61 patient with chronic hepatitis. A sample of Tomsk city inhabitants was used as a control group (N=128). The genotyping was done by PCR-restriction analysis. There were no signiﬁcant differences in genotypes and allele frequencies between cases and controls. Also, no association of A1188C polymorphism in 
IL12B with disease course 
was identiﬁed. However, there was difference in genotype distribution 
for IL4RA polymorphism in subgroups of patients divided by different 
extent of ﬁbrosis. From one side, there was increasing of the frequency of homozygotes Ile/Ile and Val/Val in the group without ﬁbrosis, and from other side, there was accumulation of Ile/Val heterozygotes along with ﬁbrosis progression, from 7.1% in the group without ﬁbrosis up to 47.6% in initial ﬁbrosis (p=0.035) and 57.7% in moderate and profound ﬁbrosis (p=0.004). This ﬁnding suggests that the carriers of Ile/Val genotype for IL4RA have increased risk for hepatoﬁbrosis 
development while being affected by viral hepatitis.P1079. PED 5 pedigree drawing software
H. Plendl , A. Caliebe, W. Grote;  
Institute of Human Genetics, UKS-H, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
PED is a fast interactive pedigree drawing software for Windows 98 (R) and above. PED was introduced at the ESHG Conference in 1997 and now has a continuously growing user community with researchers and clinicians in over 30 countries worldwide. PED complies with the "Recommendations for standardized human pedigree nomenclature" proposed by the PSTF (Bennet RL et al, Am J Hum Genet 56:745-752,1995). Apart from fully sizable printed output, pedigrees can be exported as Windows metaﬁles (WMF) to virtually any Windows Ofﬁce 
or drawing program.Among other enhancements, PED 5 now can fetch family information from a data ﬁle with LINKAGE or CSV (comma separated values) format, where each line describes an individual by the pedigree ID, the individual's ID, the IDs of his/her father and mother, the gender, the phenotype or affectation status, and any other data related to the individual (like haplotypes, or clinical characteristics). Imported pedigrees can virtually be of any size; also descendants with a second, third, or even tenth partner or any descendants of the probands' ancestors will be correctly displayed. Currently, marriage loops are not handled; they must be edited in the edit window. Pedigree charts can also be exported to these standard ﬁle formats. With each open/edit/save cycle, all IDs will be preserved. So pedigree data can easily be imported into a spreadsheet, a database, or further be used in linkage calculations or risk assessment. A demonstration program is available at www.medgen.de/ped.
P1080. The MTHFR  C677T variant is associated with an 
increased risk of migraine with aura in Canarian patients.
P. Tejera, N. Ruiz, S. Méndez, F. Montón;  
Unidad de Investigación, Hospital Universitario Nª Sª de La Candelaria, Santa 
Cruz de Tenerife, Spain.
Migraine is a complex neurovascular disorder that affects 
approximately 12% of the Caucasian population. Although the pathophysiological events that underline migraine are not fully understood, migraine neurobiology may be explained as the result of disturbances in neurological pathways and cerebral circulation. High serum homoscysteine levels have been shown to produce endothelial injury, altering the cerebrocirculatory system. The 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (
MTHFR) enzyme is involved in homocysteine 
metabolism. The MTHFR C677T genetic variant has been correlated 
with a reduced enzyme activity and hyperhomocisteinemia.In this study we determined the prevalence of the 
MTHFR C667T 
polymorphism in migraineurs and test its association with migraine susceptibility using an unrelated case-control design. Seventy four patients with migraine headache (50% with aura, MA, and 50% without aura, MOA) and 118 non-affected controls were recruited from the same geographical area (Canary Islands, Spain) and genotypes for 
the MTHFR C677T were determined by PCR-RFLP.
Our results show that the MTHFR 667T allele was over-represented in 
the migraine group compared to the control group, principally among the MA subtype (43.2% vs 29.7%) (χ
2 = 3.98, p=0.04). A comparison of 
the genotype distribution showed a higher incidence of the homozygous transition (T/T) in the migraine group and speciﬁcally in the MA group. The T/T genotype of the 
MTHFR gene in the Canarian patients studied 
was associated to and increase risk of suffering migraine (OR= 1.6 95% CI 1.05-2.49, p=0.02), particularly MA (OR= 1.8 95% CI 1.05-
3.09, p=0.03).
Funding Source: FUNCIS 39/02
P1081. Polymorphisms of mitochondrial nuclear-encoded 
complex II and Citrate Synthase genes in idiopathic male 
infertility
S. Bonache1, J. Sarquella2, J. Martinez1, J. Arrús2, L. Bassas2, S. Larriba1;  
1Medical and Molecular Genetics Center - IRO - IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de Llo -
bregat (Barcelona), Spain, 2Fundació Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain.
Previous studies have shown a correlation between sperm cell concentration in the ejaculate and nuclear-encoded [Succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) complex or complex II and citrate synthase (CS)] mitochondrial enzyme activities [Ruiz-Pesini et al., (2000) Clinica Chimica Acta 300, 97-105]. From these data, we postulate Genetic analysis, linkage, and association316
that enzymatic expression should be decreased in severe sperm 
impairment and investigate if this decrease could be a consequence of 
the presence of sequence variants on these genes.An exhaustive mutational study of the ﬁve genes was performed using the SSCP/HD technique followed by sequencing of abnormal migrating patterns in 44 infertile men with a phenotype of non-obstructive azoospermia or severe oligozoospermia (<5 million sperm per mL) and 46 fertile men as the control group. Several sequence variations in these genes were identiﬁed: 21 in SDHA (13 in coding regions), 4 in SDHB (two of them in exonic sequences), 4 in SDHC (one in a coding region), 5 in SDHD (three of them in coding regions), and 5 in CS (one in an exon). Five of these nucleotide changes produced amino acid substitutions. The frequency of nucleotide variations showed no statistically signiﬁcant differences between infertile and fertile groups.These preliminary results suggest that no particular allele or haplotype in these genes appears to be associated to male infertility and that the activity of mitochondrial enzymes may be transcriptionally and/or transductionally regulated. New SNPs identiﬁed should be useful in segregation and linkage disequilibrium analyses in families affected by other disorders caused by these nuclear encoded mitochondrial 
genes.
P1082. Homozygosity mapping of an Usher-like syndrome to 
chromosome 15q21.3-q23
E. Ostergaard1, T. Rosenberg2, K. Brondum-Nielsen1, L. B. Moller1;  
1John F. Kennedy Institute, Glostrup, Denmark, 2National Eye Clinic for the 
Visually Impaired, Hellerup, Denmark.
Mutations in 7 different genes have so far been identiﬁed in Usher syndrome and 4 loci have been mapped. Three clinical types are 
distinguished.In 1996, an autosomal recessive Usher-like syndrome was reported in two branches of a large, consanguineous family from Denmark. A common ancestor born in 1702 was identiﬁed.The syndrome is characterised by congenital cataract, which distinguishes it from other Usher types, severe and progressive hearing impairment with onset from 8 to 20 years, adult-onset retinitis pigmentosa and vestibular dysfunction. This is the only reported family 
with the syndrome.In order to try to identify the causative gene, we performed homozygosity mapping in ﬁve affected members of the family with 400 polymorphic microsatellite markers with an average spacing of 9.2 cM. The disease was mapped to an 11.8 Mb interval on chromsome 15q21.3-q23, between markers D15S648 and D15S1025. The region contains around 100 known genes. By cDNA sequencing, four candidate genes 
in the region were excluded as responsible for the disease.
P1083. Apolipoprotein AV gene SNP determination in patients 
with high triglyceride levels
A. Horinek1,2, M. Vrablik1,2, K. Zidkova1, R. Ceska1,2, J. A. Hubacek3;  
11st School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2General 
Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Centre for Experimental Medicine, 
Institute of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.
Objective: A new gene designated apolipoprotein A-V (APOAV) has been identiﬁed in the APOAI/APOCIII/APOAIV gene cluster. The aim of our study was to examine the SNPs frequencies in a group of patients with extreme triglyceride levels compared to controls with normal lipid ones. 
Methods: The patient group consisted of 132 
unrelated individuals, in the control group 59 people were screened. Five SNPs were tested (SNP3-rs662799, rs651821-Kozak, rs1729410, rs4938312, rs648450) and variabilty of the exon 1 and a putative TATA box together with the DR1 and IR8 elements in the promoter ApoAV region was screened. 
Results: The frequency of carriers of SNP3 
minor allele (7 homozygotes and 41 heterozygotes) were much higher in patients group compared to the population sample. On the other hand no homozygotes and 3 heterozygotes only were determined in the control group. The same allele distribution was observed for the SNP rs651821-Kozak. SNP rs1729410 did not show any conclusive linkage association evidence. We did not ﬁnd any polymorphism in the case of rs4938312 and rs648450. Neither mutation nor polymorphism were determined in the exon1 or the promoter region. 
Conclusions:  
Our study veriﬁed the association between the SNP3 and SNP-Kozak minor allele in the APOAV gene and extreme triglyceride levels. Presented results support the assumption, that ApoA5 belongs to the most important genetic determinants of plasma triglycerides detected so far.Supported by the grant of IGA of the Czech Ministry of Health NB 7392-3 and by the Research project MSM002162080 of the Czech 
Ministry of Education
P1084. The interaction between Metabolic Syndrome and PON1 
polymorphisms increases the risk of coronary artery disease
E. Trabetti1, U. Cavallari1, M. Biscuola1, N. Martinelli2, D. Girelli2, O. Olivieri2, S. 
Friso2, F. Pizzolo2, I. Tenuti2, C. Bozzini2, G. Villa2, B. Ceradini2, M. Sandri2, S. 
Cheng3, M. A. Grow3, R. Corrocher2, P. F. Pignatti1;  
1Dept Mother & Child/Biol & Genet, Section of Biology and Genetics, Univ V e-
rona, Verona, Italy, 2Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Univ 
Verona, Verona, Italy, 3Department of Human Genetics, Roche Molecular Sys -
tems, Inc., Alameda, CA, United States.
Background. Serum paroxonases play an important role in anti-oxidant defences and prevention of atherosclerosis. Metabolic syndrome is a clinical condition associated with increased oxidant stress and cardiovascular mortality. Two common polymorphisms of PON1, Leu55Met and Gln192Arg, have been suggested to modulate 
cardiovascular risk.Methods. 915 subjects were subjected to angiographic documentation of coronary artery vessels: 642 were classiﬁed as atherosclerotic (CAD) and 273 as non atherosclerotic (CAD-free). 224 subjects met the diagnostic criteria of metabolic syndrome. All subjects were 
genotyped for the two PON1 polymorphisms.Results. A signiﬁcant interaction between metabolic syndrome and both PON1 polymorphisms in determining CAD risk (p<0.05) was observed. The 55Leu and the 192Arg alleles, associated with reduced protection against lipid peroxidation, were associated with CAD only in the metabolic syndrome subgroup. Subject with metabolic syndrome and both 55Leu and 192Arg alleles had signiﬁcantly increased risk (OR 9.38, 95%CI 3.02-29.13 after adjustment by multiple logistic 
regression) relative to subjects with 55Met/Met-192Gln/Gln genotype.Conclusion. PON1 polymorphisms modulate coronary artery disease 
in metabolic syndrome patients.
P1085. Further evidence for a genetic heterogeneity of Mal de 
Meleda
C. Charfeddine1, M. Mokni2, C. Bouchlaka1, H. Zribi2, S. Kassar1, S. Boubaker1, 
A. Ben Osman2, K. Dellagi1, S. Abdelhak1;  
1Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Hopital La Rabta, Service de Derma -
tologie, Tunis, Tunisia.
Mal de Meleda (MDM) (MIM 248300) is a rare inherited skin disorder which belongs to a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of palmoplantar keratoderma (PPK). The disease has a world-wide distribution mainly in the Mediterranean population. Clinically, MDM is characterized by erythema and hyperkeratosis extend to the dorsal face of hands and feet. The gene responsible for MDM, 
ARS 
(component B )-81/s, has been mapped on chromosome 8qter using 
homozygosity mapping. The ARS gene encodes for the SLURP-1 
protein (Ly-6/uPAR related protein-1). Various mutations within the 
ARS gene have been identiﬁed to underline MDM disease in different populations. We have recently demonstrated that three different homozygous mutations (82delT, C77A, C99Y) are responsible for MDM disease in 17 patients belonging to 8 unrelated consanguineous families from Northern Tunisia. We report here, one Tunisian family with three siblings presenting with classical clinical features of MDM. No mutation was detected by direct sequencing of all three exons and ﬂanking intronic region of the 
ARS gene for the three patients. 
Furthermore, linkage analysis, by genotyping all family members, using microsatellite markers, excluded the 
ARS gene region. Genetic 
heterogeneity is a likely explanation for our ﬁndings, as this has been already hypothesized by other authors. A genome-wide search for the 
locus of the present phenotype is in progress.
P1086. Analysis of eNOS , ACE  and MTHFR  genes 
polymorphisms in placental insufﬁciency.
I. A. Zainullin1,2, V. A. Kulavsky2, A. G. Zainullina1, E. K. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry & Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State 
Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association317
Recently, signiﬁcant associations of endothelial nitric oxide synthase 
(eNOS), angiotensin converting enzyme ( ACE) and methylenetetrahy
drofolate reductase ( MTHFR) genes polymorphism with thrombophilia 
at pregnant, recurrent spontaneous miscarriages and preeclampsia in 
women of different populations were reported (Tempfer et al, 2001; Buchholz et al, 2003; Vefring et al, 2004; Lin et al, 2005). These loci are located on different chromosomes and encode products involved into various metabolic pathways leading to obstetrics pathology. Therefore, we studied the eNOS VNTR polymorphism in 4 introne, 
ACE I/D polymorphism and 
MTHFR  C677T polymorphism in women 
with to placental insufﬁciency (PI) from Bashkortostan (Russia). 78 women with PI induced gestational hypertension and 130 normotensive women with normal pregnancy were genotyped using PCR technique and subsequent enzyme digestion. We did not ﬁnd signiﬁcant association of the 
eNOS , ACE and MTHFR polymorphisms with PI, but 
there were differences in ACE genotype frequencies between women 
with gestational hypertension and normotensive women (χ2 = 3.80; p 
= 0.049).Further studies are needed to conﬁrm the 
eNOS , ACE and MTHFR  
polymorphisms with PI.
P1087. Association between GEFS+3 locus and GEFS+ 
syndrome in two affected Tunisian families
N. Fendri1,2, F. Kammoun2, A. Rebai3, C. Triki2, F. Fakhfakh1;  
1laboratoire de génétique moléculaire humaine, faculté de medecine Sfax, Sfax, 
Tunisia, 2Unité de Neuropédiatrie de SFAX, CHU Habib Bourghiba de SFAX, 
Sfax, Tunisia, 3Unité de Biostatistique, Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, Sfax, 
Tunisia.
Febrile seizure (FS) occur between 3 months and 6 years of age, and 
do not show evidence of deﬁned cause. In FS, only ﬁve loci have been reported but no responsible gene has been identiﬁed so far. FS and epilepsy have been recently described in a syndrome called generalized epilepsy with febrile seizure plus (GEFS+). GEFS+ syndrome is an heterogeneous autosomal dominant disorder characterized by FS which persist after 6 years of age and/or by afebrile seizures. Four responsible genes of GEFS+ have been identiﬁed: 
SCN1B , SCN1A , 
SCN2A and GABRG2 localized on chromosomes 19q13.1, 2q24 and 
5q31.1-q33.1 respectively.The aim of this report is to search for a linkage and/or association between the known FS and GEFS+ loci and GEFS+ syndrome in affected Tunisians families.A total of 14 patients with GEFS+ and 55 controls belonging to two Tunisian families affected with GEFS+ syndrome were studied. Genetic analysis of genomic DNA has been performed using microsatellite markers spanning the FS and GEFS+ loci. Statistical analysis has been realized by intrafamilial association test (FBAT) and by parametric linkage (LOD scores) and non-parametric linkage (NPL) tests. In addition, a transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) has been 
performed using the computer program GENHUNTER v 2.1.The result of FBAT test revealed an association between GEFS+3 locus and GEFS+ syndrome in these two Tunisian families with a very signiﬁcant 
P value. This association was also conﬁrmed by results of 
TDT test.
P1088. Clinical Report of a Belgian family with Adams-Oliver 
syndrome and molecular analysis of 5 candidate genes.
P. Verdyck1, B. Blaumeister1, M. Holder-Espinasse2, W. Van Hul1, W. Wuyts1;  
1University and University Hospital of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Institute of 
Child Health, London, United Kingdom.
Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is a rare congenital disorder deﬁned by the combined presence of both limb truncation and scalp defects, frequently associated with underlying defects in the parietal bones. We present a Belgian AOS family with several affected individuals over 4 generations. Clinical symptoms included large areas of alopecia on the vertex of the skull and serious limb reduction defects with large phenotypic variation between the affected family members.Although AOS is clearly genetic and mostly inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, no disease causing gene has been identiﬁed so far. We therefore selected a number of candidate genes for AOS based on the phenotype of knockout mice, and/ or clinical overlap with other human diseases. Using sequencing and linkage analysis in 10 AOS families, the 
MSX1 , CART1 , P63 ( P73L ), RUNX2  and HOXD13 genes were analyzed. We could not detect any disease causing mutations, but further investigation is ongoing to identify the genetic cause of AOS 
in these families.
P1089. A second locus for autosomal recessive nonsyndromic 
optic atrophy
J. Désir1, N. Van Regemorter1, M. Cordonnier2, J. Laes3, B. Pichon1, M. 
Abramowicz1;  
1Genetics Department, Hôpital Erasme-ULB, Free University of Brussels, 
Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Ophtalmology, Hôpital Erasme-ULB, Free 
University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium, 3Molecular Genetics Department, 
Biovallee laboratory, Gosselies, Belgium.
Nonsyndromic optic atrophy, when familial, is usually transmitted in an autosomal dominant pattern. Recessive optic atrophy is rare and is usually associated with multisystemic disease involving the central nervous system and other organs. Recently, a locus for isolated autosomal recessive optic atrophy (ROA1) has been mapped to chromosome 8q21-q22. We investigated a novel consanguineous family of Morroccan origin with nine children. Three of them were affected with isolated optic atrophy. They presented with moderate to severe loss of visual acuity, temporal optic disc pallor and color vision deﬁcits. Two sibs reported subnormal vision since infancy. The third was initially suspected of Leber optic atrophy because of a sudden loss of visual acuity at age 16 years. No mutation was detected in mitochondrial DNA. Interestingly he was treated for subacute axono-demyelinating polyneuropathy at age 33. We performed a genome-wide search for homozygosity in affected siblings using an 11K SNP microarray chip (Affymetrix). A 10 cM homozygous region was found on chromosome 11. Our data show genetic heterogeneity within autosomal recessive optic atrophies, and suggest a causal link with 
polyneuropathy in one of our patients.
P1090. Alcohol dehydrogenase genes and susceptibility to Fetal 
Alcohol Syndrome in South African Coloured populations
D. Naidoo , M. Ramsay;  
University of Witwatersrand and National Health Laboratory Service, Johan -
nesburg, South Africa.
Mental retardation is a prominent feature of fetal alcohol syndrome 
(FAS) and is attributable to the teratogenic effects of in utero alcohol 
exposure in individuals with susceptible genetic variants. Possible candidate genes involved with the aetiology of FAS include alcohol 
dehydrogenase (ADH) and aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH).A case-control genetic association study was done to examine the roles of ADH1B, ADH1C and ADH4 in two Coloured populations from the Northern and Western Cape with a high prevalence of FAS. Single nucleotide polymorphisms associated with the genes were typed using PCR-based methods in the FAS children and controls.Previous studies in the Western Cape suggested that the ADH1B*2 
alleleconfers protection against the development of FAS (p=0.0036), however this was not signiﬁcant in the Northern Cape (p= 0.088). Further preliminary studies on ADH1B, ADH1C and ADH4 have revealed signiﬁcant associations where each of the alleles mentioned below appears to decrease the risk of developing FAS. Allele ADH1B*3 is signiﬁcantly asociated in the Northern Cape only (p= 0.043); ADH1C*2 allele in both populations (p= 0.024); and the ‘T’ allele of the rs1126670 polymorphic locus in ADH4 in the Western Cape only (p = 0.008). These results show that the ADH genes do play a role in susceptibility to FAS in South African Coloured populations.
P1091. Homozygosity for a frequent and weakly penetrant 
predisposing allele at the RET locus in sporadic Hirschsprung 
disease
A. Pelet1, L. de Pontual1, M. Cément-Ziza1, R. Salomon1, C. Mugnier1, F. Mat -
suda2, M. Lathrop2, A. Munnich1, J. Feingold1, S. Lyonnet1, L. Abel3, J. Amiel1;  
1Unité de Recherches sur les Handicaps Génétiques de l'Enfant INSERM U-
393, Paris, France, 2Centre National de Génotypage, Evry, France, 3Laboratoire 
de Génétique Humaine des Maladies Infectieuses, INSERM U-550, Paris, 
France.
Hirschsprung disease (HSCR), the most common malformation of the hindgut (1/5,000 live birth), is a neural crest derived malformation Genetic analysis, linkage, and association318
characterised by the absence of enteric ganglia of variable length of the 
intestine. The genetics of HSCR is complex. Genetics and functional evidences support that the RET proto-oncogene is the major disease-causing locus. However, a mutation within the RET gene coding sequence could be detected in only 40% and 10-20 % of familial and sporadic cases respectively, despite families co-segregation with markers at the RET gene locus. These data suggesting a frequent hypomorphic allele(s) at the RET locus, led us and others to perform linkage disequilibrium mapping, using single nucleotide polymophisms (SNPs) scattered along the RET genomic domain. We identiﬁed a predisposing haplotype located in the 5' region of the RET gene. In order to reﬁne the mapping of predisposing allele(s) and to characterise its genetic behaviour, we used transmission disequilibrium test across the RET gene, in a series of HSCR cases divided according the presence/absence of a RET gene mutation, and the familiality (sporadic or multiplex). We observed highly signiﬁcant over-transmission of a predisposing SNPs haplotype extending over 23kb from the promoter region to exon 2. Over-transmission was not signiﬁcant when considering cases with RET gene mutation. Conversely, the majority of sporadic HSCR cases with no RET gene mutation showed homozygosity for the predisposing haplotype suggesting its major involvement and its dosage-sensitive effect on the RET signalling pathway in the commonest form of HSCR.
P1092. Linking TGFA  gene to Cleft Lip with or without Cleft 
Palate
A. Morkuniene1, A. Utkus1, D. Kasperaviciute1, L. Linkeviciene2, V. Kucinskas1;  
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithu -
ania, 2Istitute of Odontology, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
The transforming growth factor alpha gene (TGFA, 2p13) has emerged as a promising candidate gene for orofacial clefting based on data from expression and allelic association studies. Assessment of different TGFA gene markers in a number of separate studies has resulted in association with CL/P phenotype as well as in negative results. Thus the question of if and how allelic variants of TGFA gene (eg. TaqI
 
polymorphism) could contribute to the risk of clefting in children is still 
open.In the present study biallelic TaqI marker (A1 allele is reference and A2 
- variant, i.e. deletion of 4 bp in intron V) was analyzed in the sample of 51 unrelated case-parent triads, where the case was a child with an 
isolated non-syndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL/P).The inheritance of TaqI marker alleles of the TGFA locus was studied 
by using PCR genotyping of the triads. The standard transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT) as described by Spielman et al. (1993) was used for statistic analysis. The paternity was conﬁrmed in all families before TDT analysis.We found only 22 informative case-parent triads (i.e. heterozygous parent) out of 51 initially genotyped ones. We evaluated the presence of association between TaqI marker alleles 
in the TGFA gene and the risk of isolated CL/P. Our data provide no 
evidence of TGFA genotype in the TaqI site and susceptibility to cleft 
lip and/or palate within case-parent triads and there is no signiﬁcant linkage disequilibrium with the A2 allele in TaqI site and CL/P 
phenotype.
P1093. Polymorphism in the non-coding region of human 
Mitochondrial DNA in Iranian diabetes type II patients
G. Dorraj, V. Khalili, M. Houshmand;  
National Institute for Genetic engineering and Bio, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran.
The sequence in the ﬁrst hypervariable segment (HVS-I) of the control 
region has been used as a source of evolutionary information in most 
phylogenetic analyses of mtDNA. Population genetic inference would 
beneﬁt from a better understanding of the variation in the mtDNA coding 
region, but, thus far, complete mtDNA sequences have been rare. We 
determined the nucleotide sequence in the none- coding region of 
mtDNA from Iranian patients sequencing by direct sequencing of the 
D loop.
The D-loop region is a hot spot for mtDNA alterations and it contains two hypervariable regions (HVS-I and HVS-II). In order to identify polymorphic sites, and also to ﬁnd out any possible variations in D-loop of diabetes typeII patients, the complete non-coding region of mitochondrial DNA from 7 Azari type2 diabetic patients and 23 normal controls from the same origin were sequenced. Alignment was made with the Cambridge Reference Sequence (CRS) and any differences recorded as single base substitution (SBS) numerical changes in C-tract (PCT), insertions and deletions .PCT changes were present in 52% compared to 71% diabetes patients. We found that polymorphism C150T was exist in 42.8% diabetes patients compared to normal cases (28.6%). Also variation in T16189C was found in 14.2% diabetes patients compared to our normal related population (28.6%). mtDNA mutations within the D-loop control region
 are a frequent event in 
Diabetes typeII and may be an indicator of mtDNA instability. 
P1094. Mutation analysis in Duchenne/Becker muscular 
dystrophy patients: identiﬁcation of 11 novel mutations
F. Joncourt1, D. Bartholdi2, S. Fokstuen3, S. Gallati1;  
1Department of Pediatrics, University of Berne, Switzerland, 2Institute for Medi -
cal Genetics, Zürich, Switzerland, 3Division of Medical Genetics, University 
Hospital Geneva, Switzerland.
In approximately one third of Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy 
(DMD/BMD) patients the disease is caused by point mutations in the dystrophin gene on Xp21. Using SSCP-HD analysis followed by direct sequencing of the variants we have performed mutation analysis in a series of DMD/BMD patients after negative deletion screening. In addition to a series of known mutations, 11 novel mutations were identiﬁed: 3 nonsense mutations (Q393X, W1029X, W2479X), 1 missense mutation (S868G), 2 small deletions (4350delA, 5124_5127delGAAA), 1 duplication (5020_5021dupTT) as well as 4 splice-site mutations (357+1G>C, 1993-3C>G, 5922+5G>A, 7309+4G >A). In general nonsense mutations and other changes leading to a frameshift result in a truncated, non-functional dystrophin protein, causing the severe DMD form of the disease. Inframe and missense mutations, leaving the dystrophin partially functional, mostly lead to the milder BMD. The newly detected nonsense mutations as well as the deletions and the duplication conﬁrmed this observation, while the missense mutation S868G was associated with a DMD phenotype. Predicting the effect of splice-site mutations is more difﬁcult. The patients with 357+1G>C and 1993-3C>G suffered from DMD, while for those with 5922+5G>A and 7309+4 G>A the diagnosis was BMD. The mutations segregated with the disease and were not present in any unaffected male. Their pathogenic nature was inferred from these family data, as well as from the predictions by a splice-site ﬁnder. In order conﬁrm pathogenicity of these mutations, RNA analysis will be performed.
P1095. Campora: an isolated population database for the study 
of cardiovascular traits
M. Ciullo1, T. Nutile1, V. Colonna1, M. Astore1, A. Calabria1, O. Guardiola1, G. L. 
Iovino2, B. Trimarco2, G. Lembo3, M. G. Persico1;  
1Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A. Buzzati-Traverso - CNR, Naples, Italy, 
2Department of Internal Medicine, "Federico II" University of Naples, Naples, 
Italy, 3IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli (IS), Italy.
The population of the small village of Campora in the Cilento area of South Italy was chosen as model of isolated founder population for the identiﬁcation of allelic variants responsible of complex traits by means of genomic regions identical by descent (IBD) search. We have demonstrated that the population of this village derives from about ﬁfty founders that contributed to the repopulation of the village after the plague of the 17th century. We attempted the description of the phenotype of each individual in the population by instrumental measurements of several parameters with particular attention to the cardiovascular system. We have assembled a database containing a 10,737-individual pedigree, spanning over 17 generations, and connecting all the 1400 living Campora’s inhabitants with data derived from: the genome screening with a 1094- microsatellite map (average marker distance: 3.4 cM), blood tests, personal and familial past diseases, past and present drug therapies, diet, smoking habit and alcohol use, cardiovascular instrumental check up (Ultrasonography and ECG) to measure left ventricular interior dimension and mass, intima-media thickness of carotids, measurement of left ventricle 
volume changes, blood pressure and anthropological measurements.We will present our data on methodology of analysis and preliminary 
data of the search of loci responsible for cardiovascular diseaseGenetic analysis, linkage, and association319
P1096. MDR1  C3435T Polymorphism and susceptibility to 
inﬂammatory bowel disease: lack of association in an Italian 
population.
C. M. Caligara1, V. Bianchi1, S. Ardizzone2, G. Maconi2, E. Colombo2, G. Bian -
chi Porro2, M. L. Tenchini1;  
1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Science,University of Milan., 
Milan, Italy, 2Chair of Gastroenterology, L. Sacco University Hospital., Milan, 
Italy.
The C3435T multidrug resistance 1 ( MDR1) gene polymorphism 
and homozygous TT genotype has been recently found to be 
overrepresented in ulcerative colitis (UC). However, further studies reported no evidence of this association with UC or Crohn’s disease (CD). Aim of this study was to evaluate the frequency of C3435T 
MDR1 
polymorphism in UC and CD patients. 150 UC and 200 CD patients, and 300 healthy subjects were consecutively enrolled. All study participants were unrelated Caucasians of Italian origin. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood, genotyping was performed by PCR and 
Sau3AI restriction analysis. The results were conﬁrmed 
by sequencing a limited number of samples using an automated DNA sequencer. Differences between cases and controls were compared by using a 2x2 contingency and χ
2-test statistics. Odds ratios (OR) 
with 95% conﬁdence intervals (CI) were also calculated. Both allele frequencies and genotype distributions did not signiﬁcantly differ 
between UC, CD patients and the health control group.
Cases and 
ControlsT otal numbersAllele Genotype C vs T CC vs. TT
C T CC CT TTOR 
(95%CI) P value
>0.05OR 
(95%CI) P value
>0.05
CD 186 181 191 45 91 50 0.95 0.88
CU 8548.6% 51.4% 24.2% 48.9% 26.9% 0.72-1.27
>0.050.48-1.58
>0.05
76 94 14 48 23 1.12 1.30
Controls 19544.7% 55.3% 16.5% 56.5% 27.0%
0.78-1.60.59-2.41
185 205 81 82 32
47.4% 52.6% 41.5% 42% 16.5%
Conclusions.  These data enlarge the list of studies where no 
implication of C3435T MDR1 polymorphism in UC or CD was detectable. 
These different results may be attributed to ethnic diversities of the 
studied populations and suggest that C3435T might not be the only polymorphism in 
MDR1 gene implicated in the susceptibility to UC or 
CD.
P1097. GAS6  polymorphisms in patients with ischemic or 
hemorrhagic stroke
X. Muñoz1, V. Obach2, B. Hurtado1, M. Revilla2, A. Chamorro2, P. García de 
Frutos3, N. Sala1;  
1IDIBELL-Institut de Recerca Oncològica, Barcelona, Spain, 2Unitat d’ictus, 
Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 3IIBB-CSIC-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, 
Spain.
Growth arrest-speciﬁc 6 gene product ( GAS6) is a tyrosin kinase 
receptor ligand with anti-apoptotic and pro-thrombotic effects. In a previous study we identiﬁed different 
GAS6 SNPs and found an 
association between c.834+7G>A, in intron 8, and stroke. The purpose of the present study was to conﬁrm these results with the analysis of 8 
GAS6 SNPs in a larger population of 588 stroke patients (407 ischemic 
and 181 hemorrhagic) and in 127 healthy controls.The genotypes for the 8 
GAS6 polymorphisms were determined either 
by PCR and restriction analysis or by real time PCR and ﬂuorescent probe hybridisation in a LightCycler.
Results: The prevalence of the AA genotype of GAS6 c.834+7 G>A 
was 12.2%*, 10.4%* and 18.2%, respectively in patients with ischemic stroke, hemorrhagic stroke and in controls (*chi-square, p<0.05 of AA vs non-AA compared with controls). After adjustment for age, gender, current smoking, hypertension, diabetes and hypercholesterolemia, the AA genotype was not independently associated with stroke (OR 0.74, 95% CI 0.39-1.42). The genotype distribution of the other 7 
GAS6 polymorphisms (c.280+170C>G, c.712+26G>A, c.713-155T>C, c.1263G>C, c.1332C>T, c.1478-94C>G and c.1869T>C) did not differ 
between patients and controls.
Conclusions: The AA genotype of the GAS6 -c.834+7 G>A SNP- is 
less prevalent in patients with ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke than in healthy controls but this association is not independent from other vascular risk factors. The rest of 
GAS6 polymorphisms analysed are 
not associated with ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke.We thank ISCIII (01/1468 and C03/07) and MCYT (SAF 2001-1059-
C02) for grants.
P1098. Linkage to rheumatoid factor seropositive rheumatoid 
arthritis conﬁrms the involvement of the protein tyrosine 
phosphatase 22 gene
P. Dieudé1,2, S. Garnier1, L. Michou1, E. Petit-Teixeira1, E. Glikmans1, C. Pier -
lot1, S. Lasbleiz1, T. Bardin2, B. Prum1, F. Cornélis1,2;  
1Laboratoire de Recherche Européen pour la Polyarthrite Rhumatoïde - Gen -
Hotel - EA3886 Evry Genopole, Evry, France, 2Fédération de Rhumatologie 
-Centre Viggo Petersen - CHU Lariboisière -APHP, Paris, France.
Objective. The protein tyrosine phosphatase-22 ( PTPN22) gene 
encodes for the lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase (LYP), involved in the 
negative regulation of early T cell activation. Recently, an association has been reported between 
PTPN22-620W  functional allele and 
rheumatoid factor positive (RF+) rheumatoid arthritis (RA) as well as 
other autoimmune diseases. However, the linkage proof required to conﬁrm a new genetic factor could not be deﬁnitely produced by an affected sib-pair (ASP) analysis. Our aim was to test this allele for 
linkage to RF+ RA with the transmission disequilibrium test (TDT),.
Methods. DNA from the French Caucasian population was available for 2 sets of 100 families with one RA patient and both parents, and for 88 RA index cases from RA ASP families. Genotyping was done by PCR-RFLP. The analysis was performed using the TDT, the genotype relative risk (GRR) and a ASP-based tests.
Results. The TDT of the PTPN22 620W allele showed linkage and 
association for RF+ RA (61% transmission, P = 0.037). The GRR 
showed the risk allele in 34% of RF+ RA patients and in 24% of controls 
(P = 0.047, OR 1.69, 95%CI [1.03-2.78]). The ASP investigation 
showed no enriched risk allele in RA multiplex families, leading to a major lack of power of ASP analysis.
Conclusion.  This study is the ﬁrst to show clear linkage of PTPN22  
to RF+ RA, providing compelling evidence for PTPN22 as a new RA, 
gene.
P1099. Hormone receptor variants and premature ovarian failure
K. L. Bretherick1, M. R. Fluker2,3, W. P. Robinson1;  
1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2B.C. Children's and 
Women's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3Genesis Fertility Center, Vancou -
ver, BC, Canada.
Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is the occurrence of menopause before age 40, and affects approximately 1% of women. Variants in hormone receptor genes may affect hormone function and contribute to infertility and an earlier age at menopause. We therefore examined the presence of polymorphisms in hormone receptor genes including androgen receptor (
AR) and estrogen receptor α ( ERα) in POF patients 
and control women ascertained in Western Canada. The AR gene 
contains a translated, highly polymorphic CAG repeat that has been inversely correlated with receptor activity. Long 
AR repeats (≥24 CAG 
repeats) were found in 38 of 106 (36%) POF patient alleles and 162 of 588 (28%) control alleles (p=0.08). Since the 
AR gene is on the X 
chromosome, expression of alleles may be affected by X chromosome inactivation (XCI) skewing. We therefore assessed 
AR repeat size 
weighted by XCI ratio in a subset of patients and controls. XCI 
weighted AR repeat sizes ≥24 occurred in 15 of 53 (28%) POF patients 
and only 13 of 97 controls (13%) (p=0.03). A TA repeat in the ERα 
gene promoter was also examined and long repeats (≥18 TA repeats) were signiﬁcantly more common in the POF patient population than in controls (p=0.002) (60/104 (58%) POF alleles vs. 84/214 (39%) control alleles). Assessment of polymorphisms in the estrogen receptor β and the FSH receptor genes are currently underway.
 Although we cannot 
exclude a confounding effect of ethnicity, these results suggest a role 
for functional hormone receptor variants in POF pathogenesis.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association320
P1100. Molecular analysis of the Fragile X mental retardation 
syndrome in Volga-Ural region of Russia.
D. Islamgulov1,2, A. Karunas1, R. Valinurov2, E. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Republican 
psychiatric hospital, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Fragile X syndrome is most common inherited cause of mental 
retardation (MR). For the ﬁrst time we have realized a study using molecular screening to estimate the prevalence of fragile X syndrome among mentally retarded children of Bashkortostan. Molecular screening was carried out using methylation-sensitive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to detect CpG methylation. We used DNA samples from male patients at the age of 3 to 18 years with non-speciﬁc MR (n=214). We found that 4.2% (n=9) of mentally retarded male screened by DNA analysis had the fragile X full mutation. This result is very close to the prevalence of the fragile X syndrome in Caucasian MR population, where it accounts for 2.6 to 8.7% among 
moderate to severely retarded males.In order to investigate the origin of the fragile X mutation, we assessed the size of the microsatellite markers DXS998, DXS548 and FRAXAC1 in FRAXA patients and control groups. We found a different distribution of alleles between fragile X patients and controls for loci DXS998, FRAXAC1, but not detected apparent linkage disequilibrium for DXS548 locus. The frequencies of DXS998/FRAXAC1 haplotypes 117/152 bp (3-4) and 113/156 (1-2) were signiﬁcantly greater in affected 
males in comparison with healthy donors.The data of this study revealed signiﬁcant differences in the distribution of DXS998/FRAXAC1 haplotypes between fragile X patients and 
controls.
P1101. Selection of putative functional coding SNP for direct 
genetic association studies of complex traits
S. Guenther1, C. R. Scafe2, A. Kejariwal2, E. G. Spier2, P. D. Thomas2, D. A. 
Gilbert2, F. M. De La Vega2;  
1Applied Biosystems - Germany, Uberlingen, Germany, 2Applied Biosystems, 
Foster City, CA, United States.
Genetic association studies of complex disease can be: indirect, when surrogate markers in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with the disease allele are tested for trait association; or direct, in which a list of putatively functional SNPs, non-synonymous coding variants (nsSNPs), are tested for their disease relevance directly. An indirect genome scan would probably need from 120,000 to 1 million SNPs - an enormous genotyping cost and a problem of statistical inference. A direct genome scan may require typing only tens of thousands common nsSNPs. The feasibility of such studies requires that most of the common variants inﬂuencing the susceptibility to complex disease are available for genotyping. About 40,000 candidate nsSNPs are available on public databases and an additional 30,000 novel nsSNPs were discovered by resequencing the exons of 23,363 human genes. Combined, these datasets provide a comprehensive resource of nsSNPs making feasible the execution of candidate gene/region and whole genome direct association studies. We designed genotyping assays for these nsSNPs as TaqMan® SNP Genotyping Assays and for the 
SNPlexTM Genotyping System, a high throughput implementation of 
the oligonucleotide ligation assay. We prioritized a subset of 28,709 nsSNPs, including over 9,000 novel SNPs, based on their measured or expected heterozygosity in populations of European and African descent. This list represents the common nSNPs in the genome and an analysis of the gene classes overrepresented therein meets our expectations of genes that can tolerate slightly deleterious mutations. These assay resources are available to researchers through our 
SNPbrowserTM Software and our web site.
P1102. Association of ADH1B, ADH7, CYP2E1 gene 
polymorphism with alcohol dependence in Russian populations 
of Siberia
A. V. Marussin, V. A. Stepanov, M. G. Spiridonova, E. Y. Bragina, I. A. Gon -
charova;  
Research Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk Research Center, Siberian 
Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federa -
tion.
The allele and genotype distribution of two alcohol dehydrogenase 
genes ADH1B (exon 3 polymorphism A/G (47His) ), ADH7 (intron 5 polymorphism G/C) and cytohrome P450 2E1 gene ( CYP2E1; 5’-
ﬂanking region polymorphism G/C) were examined in two urban 
(Seversk, n=124 and Tomsk, n=112) and one rural (Kargala, n=96) 
Russian populations. No interpopulation or sex difference in allele frequencies was revealed. The genotype frequencies obeyed the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and the alleles were in linkage equilibrium or gametic equilibrium in the total sample. The frequencies of the derived alleles at ADH1B (*G (+Msl I) allele) and CYP2E1 (*C (+Pst I) allele) 
were low (5.87% and 2.56%, accordingly). 
ADH7 gene polymorphism 
show the high level of genetic variability; the frequency of the “mutant” ADH7*C (-Sty I) allele was 45.48%. Similar allele frequencies of these genes were revealed in most Caucasoid populations.The alcohol dehydrogenase gene polymorphisms were signiﬁcantly associated with an increased risk of comorbidity of alcoholism and tuberculosis (n=83) in Tomsk population. The frequencies of the derived 
ADH1B*G , 
ADH7*C and CYP2E1*C  allele were 1.81%, 54.82% and 1.81% in 
patients accordingly. In individuals with ADH1B*A  allele odds ratio 
for comorbidity of alcoholism and tuberculosis is 3.39 (95% CI 0.99 - 13.93; P=0.052) and in individuals with 
ADH7*G allele - 0.69 (95% CI 
0.48 - 0.98; P=0.031). The ADH1B*G (*47His)  allele encodes enzyme 
with higher activity, likely causing protection against alcoholism. Possibly the association with 
ADH7*G allele are explained by linkage 
disequilibrium with other functionally signiﬁcant loci or by stochastic 
reasons.
P1103. Mutation detection in a large cohort of patients with 
Common Variable Immunodeﬁciency using Multiplex Capillary Heteroduplex Analysis (MCHA)
C. Bacchelli1, S. Buckridge1, A. D. B. Webster2, U. Salzer3, C. Kinnon1, A. 
Thrasher1, H. B. Gaspar1;  
1Molecular Immunology Unit, Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 
2Department of Clinical Immunology, Royal Free Hospital School of Medicine, 
London, United Kingdom, 3Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, 
Department of Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany .
Common Variable Immunodeﬁciency (CVID), one of the most common 
primary immunodeﬁciency syndromes, is a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by hypogammaglobulinemia and speciﬁc antibody deﬁciency resulting in recurrent infective and inﬂammatory problems. Although most cases of CVID are sporadic, about 20-25% are familial, displaying autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive modes of inheritance. CVID patients have T cell defects as well as defects in terminal B cell differentiation. Although the genetic defect is unknown, a number of genes are now emerging which may be good candidates to screen to identify molecular defects in CVID. Detection of unknown mutations in a large number of genes and a large number of samples through DNA sequencing is an expensive and time-consuming process. In our cohort of CVID patients, we adopted Multiplex Capillary Heteroduplex Analysis (MCHA) as a method to rapidly identify DNA fragments containing mutations, the exact nature of which may subsequently be determined by DNA sequencing. MCHA is a simple and rapid assay performed on a 96-capillary sequencer, the MegaBACE 1000, and has the ability to detect point mutations with high sensitivity. High throughput is achieved by multiplexing compatible fragments in the same capillary and by analysing 96 samples in 40 minutes. The overall mutation detection rate is currently over 95%, conﬁrming the usefulness of this particular method for high throughput 
mutation detection.
P1104. DGGE analysis of several genes in patients with 
(idiopathic) Dilated Cardiomyopathy referred to the combined 
cardiogenetics clinic
Y. J. Vos, J. P. van Tintelen, M. Kraak, H. Katerberg, L. G. Boven, M. P. 
v.d.Berg, R. M. W. Hofstra;  
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a heart muscle disease characterised 
by left ventricular dilatation with impaired contraction of the left ventricle. Dilated cardiomyopathy is also associated with limb girdle muscular dystrophy 1B (LGMD1B) and Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD). Idiopathic DCM is familial in up to 30% of cases. Mutations in different genes have been identiﬁed as disease associated, among others in the gene encoding lamin A/C (
LMNA), delta-sarcoglycan 
(SGCD), troponin I ( TNNI3), beta-myosin heavy chain ( MYH7), desmin, Genetic analysis, linkage, and association321
cardiac actin, dystrophin and tafazzin. The most common mode of 
inheritance in families with DCM is autosomal dominant and the most commonly mutated gene so far is 
LMNA with a mutation frequency of 
5-10% of all DCM cases.In recent years we collected material from more than 100 patients referred to our combined cardiogenetics outpatients clinic. To identify the genes involved in (familial) DCM or DCM associated with muscular disease in our population we developed an efﬁcient screening method, based on denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) and sequence analysis, for the 
LMNA , SGCD , MYH7 and TTNI3 genes. 
Up to now eleven different mutations have been found in LMNA, two 
in TNNI3, and none in SGCD and MYH7, of which ﬁve had not been 
described before. The most remarkable ﬁnding was the identiﬁcation of an 
LMNA mutation in a family with pure cardiac conduction 
disease (CCD), A225X, thereby expanding the clinical spectrum of laminopathies, although CCD can precede ventricular dilatation up to 
20 years.
P1105. Familial steroid responsive nephrotic syndrome: search 
for a candidate gene
T. Oved1, D. Landau2, H. Shalev2, R. Parvari1;  
1Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2Soroka Medical Cen -
ter, Beer Sheva, Israel.
The etiology for Steroid-responsive idiopathic nephrotic syndrome (SSINS), the common form of childhood nephrosis is unknown. We identiﬁed an extended Bedouin family with a high rate of consanguinity, suitable for linkage analysis (LOD score of 3.5 for a model marker at 0cM distance for recessive inheritance). Its 10 affected individuals’ clinical presentation and steroid response are similar to the non-familial SSINS. Retrospective analysis of all children with INS treated by our institution in the past 15 years revealed another 5 non-related Bedouin families with 2-3 ﬁrst-degree cousins affected with SSINS in each. The overall familial SSINS rate among the Bedouin population (excluding 
the index family) is 26%, contrary to 4.7% among Jewish.DNA was extracted from 8 affected individuals in the index family and 16 of their non affected siblings and parents. Genome wide linkage analysis with a panel of 387 supplemented by 70 polymorphic markers, aimed to limit intervals to~10cM and verify markers showing allele homozigotization, failed to identify linkage based on autosomal recessive and X-linked recessive models of inheritance. In addition, linkage was excluded to 8 candidate genes associated with NS by the use of adjacent polymorphic markers. In summary: Although 
the Bedouin population presents an increased familial tendency for SSINS (milder diseases), this disease is probably not caused by the homozigotization of one major susceptibility gene since autosomal recessive and X-linked recessive inheritances were ruled out by genetic analysis of a statistically signiﬁcant family. Autosomal dominant (with partial penetrance) and multifactorial inheritances cannot still be 
ruled out
P1106. Association of the serotonin receptor 5HT2C with eating 
disorders and related psychopathological traits
M. Ribases1, J. M. Mercader1, M. Gratacos1, M. Morell1, A. Badia2, L. Jimenez2, 
R. Solano2, F. Fernandez-Aranda2, X. Estivill1;  
1Genes and Disease Program, Center of Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, 
Spain, 2Psychiatric Service, Ciutat Sanitaria Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain.
Several lines of investigation support a serotoninergic participation in eating behaviour and body weight regulation and suggest its involvement in the aetiology of eating disorders (ED) and some related psychopathological traits. To test this hypothesis we have analyzed the -995G>A, -759C>T, -697G>C and Cys23Ser SNPs within the serotonin receptor 5HT2C gene by a population-based association study in a total sample of 151 ED patients and 116 sex-matched unrelated controls. We also analyzed the potential involvement of the 5HT2C gene in different psychiatric symptoms measured by the Symptom Checklist 90-revised (SCL90-R) questionnaire. The case-control study showed that the -995G/-759C/-697C/Ser23 haplotype was associated to the purging ED categories of and binge-eating/purging anorexia and bulimia nervosa (P = 0.01). We also observed that bulimic patients carrying the -995A/-759T/-697C/Cys23 5HT2C haplotype showed increased symptomatology for seven of the nine subscales of the SCL90R questionnaire. These include somatization (p = 0.029), obsessive-compulsiveness (p = 0.021), depression (p = 0.032), anxiety (p = 0.004), hostility (p = 0.028), phobic anxiety (p = 0.029) and paranoid ideation (p = 0.008). The results presented here suggest that the 5HT2C gene may participate in the physiopathology of ED, not only through its direct effect on eating behaviour, but also on the anxiety and depressive traits associated to anorexia and bulimia 
nervosa.Supported by the “Fondo de Investigaciones Sanitarias” (PI040632 and Psychiatry Genetics network, G03/184), and the “Departament 
d’Universitats i Societat de la informació, Generalitat de Catalunya”.
P1107. Mutational analysis of the PROP1  gene in Polish patients 
with combined pituitary hormone deﬁciency (CPHD)
R. Kalak1, K. Ziemnicka2, K. Drobnik2, J. Zielaskowska1, J. Kosowicz2, M. Gryc -
zynska2, J. Sowinski2, R. Slomski1,3;  
1University of Agriculture, Poznan, Poland, 2University of Medical Sciences, 
Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland.
Genetically determined congenital form of the combined pituitary hormone deﬁciency (CPHD) occurs in about 10% of patients with impaired production and secretion of anterior pituitary hormones. 
PIT1 
(POU1F1), HESX1, PITX1, PITX2, LHX3, LHX4 and PROP1 genes  are 
involved in ontogenesis of anterior pituitary gland. The PROP1 gene, 
located on chromosome 5q35, consists of three exons and spans 4 kb. Gene product, a tissue speciﬁc paired-like homeodomain transcription factor consists of 226 amino acids. Mutations
 in PROP1 gene appear 
to be one of the most common causes of familial CPHD and may account for up to 50% of all cases. We analyzed 
PROP1 mutations 
in a group of 35 Polish patients from 32 families with CPHD and gene defects were found in ﬁfteen (42.9%) patients. Analysis revealed three different mutations: c.150delA, c.301_302delAG and novel transition c.334C>T causing p.Arg112X substitution. Six patients were found to be homozygous for c.150delA and eight such mutations were in compound heterozygosity with c.301_302delAG mutation (6 cases) or with substitution c.334C>T (two brothers). One patient was found to be heterozygous for mutation c.150delA but compound mutation at other allele was not found. The most frequent mutation - deletion c.150delA (72.4% of all found mutations) is rare in other populations. Genotyping of marker D5S408 linked to the 
PROP1 gene suggests that c.150delA 
in Polish patients is not a result of single common founder mutation.
P1108. Studies of chimerism in twins
K. Wielgus1, B. Siemieniako1, K. Kowalska2, M. Szalata1, J. Kempiak3, G. Bre -
borowicz3, R. Slomski2;  
1University of Agriculture, Poznan, Poland, 2Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, 
Poznan, Poland, 3University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
It is already known that in vitro fertilization is associated with an increase in embryo splitting and monozygotic twinning. It may be also associated with an increase risk of embryonic fusion before implantation. Zygosity studies on DNA extracted from peripheral blood of 87 twins conceived by in vitro fertilization, born in Clinics of University of Medical Sciences, were undertaken. Analysis of restriction fragments length polymorphism (RFLP) detected by hybridization with molecular probes and detection of polymorphic minisatellite and microsatellite DNA sequences (STR) by PCR was performed. Nine genetic markers D1S7, D1S80, TPOX, D7S21, TH01, D12S11, PLA2A1, VWA and CYAR04 were analyzed. Quantitative studies were performed using radioactivity scanning of RFLP blots hybridized with molecular probes. The results of analysis show that in four cases among 173 twins blood chimerism may be considered, which suggests that the inﬂuence of in vitro fertilization on 
early embryonic development requires further investigation.
P1109. Analysis of genetic variants of NOD2/CARD15  and DLG5  
gene in a Polish family with daughter suffering from Crohn`s 
disease
M. Kaczmarek1, A. Dobrowolska-Zachwieja2, J. Hoppe-Golebiewska1,3, R. Ka -
lak4, R. Slomski1,4;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2University of Medical Sciences, 
Poznan, Poland, 3Delta Pharma BV, Hengelo, The Netherlands, 4University of 
Agriculture, Poznan, Poland.
Crohn’s disease (CD) belongs to inﬂammatory bowel diseases (IBD) with growing frequency, especially a form involving the colon. Molecular background is still unknown, although recent data suggest that Genetic analysis, linkage, and association322
mutations in NOD2/CARD15  gene and genetic variants in DLG5 gene 
are associated with the disease. In studied case the female patient’s 
development was normal until the age of 19 years when symptoms of CD appeared. Main complains were: diarrhea without the presence of RBC in bowel movements, cramp abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, lost of weight. On examination the painful tumor in abdominal right lower quadrant was still palpable. The abnormalities in laboratory tests and other parameters were detected. Ultrasound examination showed thickened wall of distal part of ileum and colonoscopy showed
 
narrowed lumen in ascending colon with the presence of ulcerations and pseudo polyps. CD was conﬁrmed histopathologicaly.Molecular analysis of 
NOD2/CARD15 and DLG5 gene was performed 
on patient’s DNA and family members without any symptoms of disease, using screening methods and DNA sequencing. Analysis of patient showed homozygous presence of two frequent sequence variants: 802C>T (Pro268Ser) and 3020insC (1007fs). Variant 802C>T in both alleles appeared in brother and father of affected girl as well, whereas mother was heterozygous. The 3020insC was homozygous in patient sample only, whereas the other family members were heterozygous. The ﬁrst conclusion is that complete disruption of NOD2-signaling pathway may be crucial in development of the disease, but the other factors, such as the others susceptibility genes as 
DLG5 or co-existing 
infection could also play important role.
P1110. Glucokinase mutations and low triglycerides
T. H. Lindner1,2, M. Berger2, D. Mönks2, H. Schmidt2, V. Krane2, C. Wanner2, U. 
Walter1;  
1Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry, Medical University 
Clinic Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 2Division of Nephrology, Department 
of Medicine, Medical University Clinic Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany .
Mutations in the glucokinase gene (GCK) lead to an impaired sensing of blood glucose by the pancreatic β-cell causing an autosomal dominant form of type 2 diabetes, Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young type 2 (MODY2). Usually, MODY2 patients present increased fasting blood glucose levels (6-12 mM) from an early age on which should signiﬁcantly increase their risk for diabetic complications. Whereas other forms of diabetes lead to macrovascular complications, MODY2 
patients rarely develop those problems.In a family with autosomal dominant diabetes we identiﬁed a novel C to A substitution (A232D) in the GCK gene in all affected individuals. Mutations around codon 232 cause a very low glucokinase activity and suggest a similar effect of A232D.Elevated HbA
1c levels should correspond with elevated triglycerides 
since they indicate a disturbed metabolic control. However, despite off an elevated HbA
1c affected subjects showed even lower fasting 
triglycerides than the unaffected persons (affected/unaffected (n=7/13): Triglycerides 0.65/1.56±0.31/0.82 mM (P=0.025), HbA
1c 
6.63/5.40±0.26/0.28% (P=0.0000028)). We made the same observation in another MODY2 family.GCK mutations should lead to lower triglycerides, even within the normal range (0.35-2.30 mM), since they impair glycolysis which is responsible for delivering glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate as the later glycerol backbone of triglycerides. Transgenic mice overexpressing GCK develop hypertriglyceridemia, therefore indicating a link between 
glucokinase activity and triglyceride regulation.In conclusion, an impaired GCK activity could cause particularly low triglycerides. The contribution of low triglyceride levels to lesser macrovascular complications in MODY2 patients remains a matter of 
future investigation.
P1111. easyLINKAGE Plus - Automated single-/multipoint linkage 
analysis for microsatellites and large scale SNP data in an user-friendly Windows environment
K. Hoffmann1, T. H. Lindner2,3;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Charité - Campus Virchow Klinikum, Humboldt 
University Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Department of Clinical Biochemistry and 
Pathobiochemistry, Medical University Clinic Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 
3Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Medical University Clinic 
Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
Most of linkage analysis software was traditionally developed for UNIX 
environments restricting calculations to experienced users. Input ﬁles had to be generated in a time-consuming process and graphical output capabilities were limited.We have generated the program easyLINKAGE that combines automated setup and performance of linkage analyses and simulation under an easy to handle graphical user interface for Microsoft Windows 2000/XP. The program can analyze microsatellite as well as SNP data (Affymetrix 10k chip). easyLINKAGE supports single- point linkage analyses (FastLink, SuperLink, SPLink), multi-point linkage analyses (GeneHunter/-Plus, Allegro), and single-point simulation studies (SLink). In particular, Allegro can now be used for SNP chip data because it is not limited by marker numbers. easyLINKAGE Plus tests for Mendelian errors prior subsequent linkage analyses based on PedCheck. The program uses predeﬁned marker databases (Marshﬁeld, decode, LDB, SLM1). The user can choose between ﬁve different allele frequency algorithms plus additional allele frequency reference values for Asian, Caucasian, African-American populations for SNP chip projects (data kindly provided by Affymetrix Inc.).easyLINKAGE provides genome-wide as well as chromosomal graphical plots of LOD scores, NPL scores, P values, and many other parameters. The program generates input ﬁles for pedigree/haplotype drawing software such as HaploPainter.There is currently no other program available that offers the comfort and versatility of easyLINKAGE at a comparable level. The design 
enables the use of the program for a wide audience.
P1112. Attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
association with the DAT1 core promoter -67 T-allele
A. Irani Shemirani1, M. R. Keikhaee1, E. Shirazi2, M. Tehranidoost3, M. 
Ehssani1, N. Moghimi1, H. Najmabadi1, M. Ohadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci -
ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Psychiatry, Rozbeh Hospital, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Association between attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
and the 10-repeat allele of a polymorphism (a 40 bp variable number of tandem repeats) in the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) has been widely documented. In this study, we examined whether either allele of the DAT1
 core promoter -67 polymorphism is associated with ADHD 
in a case/control study. The allele and genotype frequencies of the polymorphism were studied in 100 patients and 163 controls, which were matched on the basis of sex, age and ethnicity. The genotype frequencies in the patients group were as follows: AA 15.5%; AT 71.8%; TT 12.6% vs. the genotype frequencies in the control group: AA 49%; AT 41.8%; TT 9.2% [χ
2=31.11, df = 2, OR = 2.15 (95% CI 
1.34-3.47, p ≤ 0.0001]. The T-allele of the -67A/T polymorphism 
revealed a ~1.6-fold excess in the patients group comparing with the controls (χ
2=18.45, df = 1, p ≤ 0.001). For the ﬁrst time, these ﬁndings 
provide tentative evidence of the contribution of the DAT1 gene core promoter polymorphism to the etiopathophysiology of ADHD at least in the Iranian population that we have studied. Replication studies of independent samples and family-based association studies are necessary to further evaluate the signiﬁcance of our ﬁndings.
P1113. Genetic predisposition for cardiac hypertrophy of 
different origin
O. A. Makeeva1, K. V. Puzyrev2, M. V. Golubenko1, E. N. Pavlukova2, V. P. 
Puzyrev1;  
1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Re-
search Institute of Cardiology, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Cardiac hypertrophy (CH) is a leading predictor of heart failure, 
it considered being adaptive response to a variety of stimulus (excessive hemodynamic burden, endocrine abnormalities, mutations in sarcomeric protein genes etc.). Nevertheless, common genetic mechanisms and common genes may exist for etiologically distinct CH 
forms.We studied three groups of patients with diverse initial events for CH: 136 - with essential hypertension (64% had left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH)), 95 - with arterial hypertension, combined with diabetes mellitus type 2 (53% with LVH) and 32 - with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Analysis of 15 polymorphisms in 9 candidate genes (ACE, AGTR1, GNB3, NOS3, TNF, PPP3CA, GATA4, MYH7
, MYBPC3) revealed that 
the majority of genes (5 of 8) where associations with echocardiographic parameters were detected are common for two or three CH forms, Genetic analysis, linkage, and association323
although individual effects varied considerably. Some distinctions 
in genetic basis of different CH forms were found: while in essential 
hypertension ACE (A-240T and A2350G) and AGTR1 (A1166C) 
genotypes accounted for 6,0-9,0% of variability of left ventricular mass index (LVMI), no substantial effect of renin-angiotensin system genes was found in hypertensive patients with DM2. On the contrary, polymorphisms of 
NOS3 (C774T and G894T) accounted for 7,0-8,0% 
of LVMI variability in DM2 group, while for essential hypertension were no associations with LVMI. In hypertrophic cardiomyopathy expression of LVH depended on contractile protein gene polymorphisms (T15753C 
of MYH7 accounted for 14% of variance). The comprehensive approach 
to CH genetic analysis has revealed features, which can remain hidden 
when single forms of CH are studied.
P1114. Molecular genetic study for the prenatal diagnosis of 
hemophilia B by linkage analysis
E. Shin , J. Kyhm, C. Lee, Y. Cho;  
Hanyang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Linkage analysis is a very useful method for prenatal diagnosis or carrier status evaluation of Hemophilia B, especially when a mutation was not identiﬁed in a family. Eleven polymorphic markers were evaluated in Korean populations. We analyzed nine intragenic markers within the factor IX gene and two extragenic microsatellite markers in 100 healthy Korean women (200 X-chromosomes). 
SalI, MseI, NruI, DdeI, XmnI, 
TaqI, Mnl I and HhaI polymorphisms were detected by polymerase 
chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method, DXS 102 and DXS 1232 microsatellite markers by DNA fragment analyses with GeneticAnalyzer, and T/C nucleotide variation at nucleotide 32770 in the poly-A region by ﬂurescence melting curve analysis with real-time PCR machine. There was no polymorphism of 
DdeI, XmnI and TaqI markers in Korean population. There was complete 
linkage disequilibrium between SalI(+) allele and Mse(-) allele, and 
vice versa. The expected heterozygosity of SalI, Nru I, Mnl I, Hha I were 
estimated to be 45.8%, 24.8%, 8.3%, 32%, respectively. The repeated number of (AC)
n dinucleotide in DXS 102 and DXS 1232 ranged 13-
20 and 21-30 repeats, respectively, and expected heterozygosities were 36.8% and 74.8% respectively. T/C Polymorphism at the poly-A region (nt32770) showed expected heterozygosity of 15%. With the 7 informative polymorphisms together, the expected heterozygosity rate was improved to 95.86%. Therefore the prenatal diagnosis and carrier detection in hemophilia B families can be achieved effectively 
and rapidly in Korean with these polymorphisms.
P1115. A gene causing cataract and hypogonadism maps to the 
long arm of chromosome 2
E. Pras1, H. Resnik-Wolf1, M. Mendelblat1, M. Frydman1, Y. Zlotogora2, S. Alon-
Shalev3;  
1Danek Gartner Institute of Human Genetics, Tel Hashomer, Israel, 2Depart -
ment of Community Genetics, Health Ministry, Tel Hashomer, Israel, 3Depart -
ment of Human Genetics, Haemek Medical Center, Afula, Israel.
We have encountered an extended inbred Arab Muslem family in which four members suffer from congenital cataract, developmental delay and hypogonadism. Laboratory tests indicated high levels of FSH and LH and low levels of testosterone, ﬁndings indicative of primary hypogonadism. The disease segregates in an autosomal recessive mode and is consistent with previous descriptions of Martsolf's syndrome. A genome wide search performed on DNA samples from 15 family members, revealed initial linkage to chromosome 2q. A maximal lod score of 3.51 was obtained with the marker D2S1334 at θ=0.00. Fine mapping with self constructed polymorphic CA repeats conﬁned the disease to 1 Mb interval betweens the genomic clones AC012450 and AC112255. Sequencing of seven candidate genes from the interval, expressed in the eye, brain and gonads failed to disclose disease-associated mutations. Additional genes are currently 
being sequenced.
P1116. Use of the NanoChip platform for genotyping TNFa gene 
SNPs likely to be involved in the pathogenesis of COPD.
A. Papatheodorou1, M. Tzetis1, P. Latsi2, C. Vrettou1, A. Dimakou2, D. Orphani -
dou2, E. Kanavakis1;  
1Athens University, Athens, Greece, 2Sotiria Chest Disease Hospital, Athens, 
Greece.Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is associated with abnormal inﬂammatory response of the lungs to noxious particles or gases. Tumor Necrosis Factor -α (TNF-α) gene polymorphisms are suspected to play an important role in disease susceptibility.
 TNF-α 
gene SNPs:-1031T>C, -863C>A, -857C>T, -308G>A, and -238G>A, were examined in 95 Greek COPD patients diagnosed according to GOLD guidelines (FEV1/FVC < 70% and FEV1<80% of predicted values) and compared to 96 Greek control subjects without evidence of COPD or other lung disease. Biotinylated primers speciﬁc for the promoter sequence of the TNF-α gene were used for PCR. SNPs were genotyped using the NanoChip™ Molecular Biology Workstation (Nanogen www.nanogen.com) using the amplicon down format. To reduce the cost of the assay we developed a universal reporting system 3’ labeled with ﬂuorescent dyes Alexa555 (wild-type) and Alexa647 (mutant). The target sequences on the 100 electronically addressable sites were hybridized to speciﬁc oligonucleotide reporters in conditions that allow discrimination between mutant, heterozygous and wild-type samples. For the 5 SNPs studied no statistical signiﬁcant difference 
was found between COPD patients and controls.
SNP posi -
tiongenotypeCOPD  
Genotype fre -
quenciesCONTROLS  
Genotype fre -
quenciesStatistical 
analysis
-1031  
T/CTT 
TC 
CC0.6667 0.6042
P=0.2 0.3333 0.3646
- 0.0312
-863 
C/ACC 
CA 
AA0.7143 0.625
P=0.14 0.2857 0.3438
- 0.0312
-857 
C/TCC 
CT 
TT0.5555 0.5053
P=0.75 0.3889 0.4210
0.0556 0.0737
-308 
G/AGG 
GA 
AA0.8737 0.8260
P=0.33 0.1158 0.1740
0.0105 -
-238 
G/AGG 
GA 
AA0.9551 0.9674
P=0.66 0.0449 0.0326
- -
P1117. Conﬁrmation of psoriasis susceptibility genes on 
chromosomes 6p21 and 20p12 by linkage and family-based 
association study in French families
F. Lesueur1, T. Oudot1, C. Lefevre1, F. Jobard1, S. Heath1, M. Lathrop1, J. 
Prud'homme2, J. Fischer1;  
1Centre National de Genotypage, Evry, France, 2Genethon, Evry, France.
Psoriasis is a common skin disorder affecting 1 to 4 % of the population worldwide. The trait is widely regarded to be multifactorial in origin including gene-gene and gene-environnement interactions. Genetic and allelic heterogeneity, complex inheritance, and low penetrance of susceptibility alleles substantially complicate both study design and interpretation of results. Genome-wide scans for disease susceptibility have repeatedly demonstrated the existence of a major locus, PSORS1, which encompasses 3 genes (HLA-C, HCR and CDSN) carrying psoriasis-associated SNPs. Subsequently, 20 additional loci have been suggested in the literature. With the aim of elucidating the genetics of psoriasis, a study was initiated at Généthon in 1996, which led to the identiﬁcation of 3800 families through a national media campaign. From this collection, 46 large families with over 8 affected individuals and apparently autosomal dominant inheritance were pre-selected to carry out a genome-wide search. Our results conﬁrm previous ﬁndings of linkage to PSORS1 and support the presence of a susceptibility locus on proximal chromosome 20p. Genotyping for HLA-C alleles and SNPs within genes HCR and CDSN demonstrates association with PSORS1 alleles HLA-Cw6, CDSN 971T (p=0.0001), HCR 325T (p= 0.0003), HCR 1723T (p=0.0001) and HCR 2327G (p=0.0003). Using a dense SNP map to narrow the area of linkage on chromosome 20p, we also identiﬁed a risk allele for the disease in a new candidate gene. Further studies are needed to evaluate the proportion of families linked to 6p21 and to 20p12, and to determine 
whether the 2 loci interact.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association324
P1118. A new player in the ﬁeld of celiac disease? Results from 
ﬁne-mapping the CELIAC4 region
A. J. Monsuur , I. Lavrijsen, A. Zhernakova, L. Franke, C. Wijmenga;  
Complex Genetics Section, DBG-Department of Medical Genetics, UMC Utre -
cht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Celiac disease (CD) is a complex genetic disorder. Besides the 
environmental factor gluten and the HLA-DQ2 and 8 proteins, other unknown genetic factors are involved. Several genome-wide screens have been performed to locate the regions with genes involved in CD. In the Dutch population this has led to the discovery of two susceptibility regions, 6q21-22 and 19p13 (CELIAC4). The region on 19p13 is only limited to 3.5 Mb, but due to its high density of genes, it still contains 92 candidate genes. We set out to ﬁne-map this region with microsatellite markers and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to search for association between genes and CD. We started with a cohort of 216 cases and 216 controls and expanded this to 311 cases and 540 controls. Association testing using microsatellite markers has revealed a small region of interest of around 450 kb. Further ﬁne-mapping with SNP shows association in a 150 kb region, encompassing a limited number of genes. Adding more SNPs led to the discovery of MYO9B as the gene on 19p13 most strongly associated to CD. This gene, which is a single-headed motor myosin, shows association in its 3’ part. This part of the gene contains the most interesting domains, differentiating the role of this myosin from the other family members. The Rho-Gap and Dag-Pe domains indicate that this gene is involved in signal transduction. We are now elucidating the speciﬁc role of this gene in 
signal transduction and trying to incorporate it in our models for CD.
P1119. ABCA1 gene R1587K polymorphism and coronary artery 
disease in CAD probands and sibs from Russia
P. A. Slominsky1, T. V. Tupitcyna1, Y. A. Yuefereva2, S. A. Limborska1;  
1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian State 
Center for Preventive Medicine, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Coronary artery disease (CAD) is multifactorial disease, and its progression is known to be inﬂuenced by different risk factors. Plasma lipoprotein disturbances are among the most common biochemical abnormalities observed in patients with CAD. Among the lipoproteins, HDL-C level are strongly inversely correlated with CAD . Recently, the ABCA1 protein was identiﬁed as an mediator of cholesterol efﬂux. A number of common polymorphisms have been reported in the coding and promoter regions of ABCA1 gene. We have analyzed single-nucleotide polymorphism R1587K in a group of patients with angiography proven coronary artery disease and their sibs from Russian population. To assess the inﬂuence of R1587K polymorphism on the clinical and biochemical characteristics in proband and sibs groups non parametric gamma correlation analysis was performed. For probands with CAD the R1587K polymorphism does not inﬂuence the main CAD clinical and degree of an coronary arteries atherosclerotic lesion. It is not revealed also effects of this polymorphism on a plasma lipid spectrum. At the same time for CAD patient sibs the strong and very signiﬁcant correlation between a R1587K CAD, myocardial infarction and angina is found. Thus the increased risk of CAD and its main manifestations is associated with R1587 allele - relative risk of CAD development for genotypes RR and RK carriers is 4,88 (95 % CI 4,14-7,62). This association of a R1587K polymorphism with risk of CAD development in sibs group is not linked with its effect on a plasma 
lipid levels.
P1120. Two p53 polymorphisms modify cancer risk in BRCA2 
mutation carriers
A. Osorio1, M. Pollán2, M. Cuadros1, C. Torrenteras1, R. Rodríguez-López1, L. 
Melchor1, G. Ribas1, R. Salazar3, E. Velasco4, M. de la Hoya5, O. Díez6, B. Mar -
tínez-Delgado1, J. Benítez1;  
1Spanish National Cancer Centre, Madrid, Spain, 2Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 
Madrid, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain, 4Uni-
versidad de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain, 5Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, 
Spain, 6Sant Pau Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.
Germ-line mutations in the BRCA genes confer a high life-time risk to develop breast and other cancers. Although these mutations are considered as highly penetrant, estimates of risks actually may vary from 36% to 70% to develop breast cancer at age 70, depending on the family ascertainment and the population studied. Other genetic and/or environmental factors, called “modiﬁers” are supposed to be the cause of these differences not only in the risk to develop breast 
cancer but also in the appearance of other associated tumours.The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of the two p53 polymorphisms, 16bp insertion and Arg72Pro, as BRCA1/2 modiﬁers. For this purpose we investigated the possible association between the two polymorphisms and disease status in 424 BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation carriers belonging to 170 breast and/or ovarian cancer Spanish families. Genotype and haplotype analysis revealed that the presence of a speciﬁc haplotype carrying the wild-type allele for the 16bpins and the variant allele for the Arg72Pro (WT-72Pro haplotype) was associated with an earlier age of onset in BRCA2 mutation carriers. We found almost a three-fold increase risk to develop the ﬁrst primary tumour (breast or ovarian) before 35 years of age considering all the carrier women OR: 2.77 (95%CI: 1.05-7.31 p=0.039). Considering index cases only, results were even more signiﬁcant given that younger 
cases were over-represented (OR:5.29 CI95% 1.48-18.8 p=0.001).The ﬁnding of concordant and statistically signiﬁcant results in both analysis allow us to conclude that these polymorphisms in p53 modify 
BRCA2 penetrance.
P1121. DIAPH2 is a susceptibility gene for Premature Ovarian 
Failure (POF
S. Bione1, C. Sala2, F. Rizzolio2, M. Goegan2, A. Marozzi3, W. Vegetti3, R. 
Nappi4, D. Toniolo5;  
1IGM-CNR, Pavia, Italy, 2DIBIT.HSR, Milano, Italy, 3University of Milano, Milano, 
Italy, 4University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 5DIBIT-HSR, Milano, Italy.
Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is an heterogeneous genetic disorder characterized by lack of ovulation and elevated gonadotropin level before 40 years of age. POF has a frequency of about 1% and with the increase of women reproductive age it has become a relevant cause of infertility. The DIAPH2 gene in Xq22 is one of the two human homologues of the Drosophila dia gene, whose mutated alleles affect fruit ﬂy fertility. DIAPH2 was interrupted by a balanced X/autosome translocation in a familial case of POF. We performed a case-control study on a panel of 255 Italian patients and 404 matched controls to identify allelic variants in DIAPH2 associated with the disorder. The haplotypic structure of the gene was constructed using a pair-wise maximun likelihood estimation method. Inside LD block 1, one SNP (L2) showed a signiﬁcant excess of heterozygotes (X-square test, 1df, p=0,002) among patients, resulting in the deﬁnition of a risk-genotype (O.R.=1,67; 95%CI: 1,2-2,3). The excess of heterozygotes at the L2 locus may be the result of different genetic mechanisms. One possible explanation is that the risk-haplotype would be lethal in male embryos: accordingly, the number of females and males in the offspring of familial POF cases carrying the DIAPH2 risk-genotype demonstrated a signiﬁcant excess of females (31 females/13 males; One-cell X-square p=0,007). Our data demonstrated that the DIAPH2 gene is involved in the pathogenesis of POF and that a functional variant in the LD block 
1 may be responsible for ovarian dysfunction.
P1122. Association of Glutathion-S-transferase M1, T1 and P1 
Gene Polymorphisms with Autoimmune Hepatitis (AIH)
L. Alidoust Masouleh1, M. Agah1,2, M. Zafarghandi1, H. Sendi1,2, M. Zali1;  
1Research center for gastroenterology and liver diseases, Tehran, Islamic Re -
public of Iran, 2Karolinska institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is a chronic inﬂammatory liver disorder of 
unknown etiology. GST (Glutathion-s-transferases) genes, enzymes metabolizing carcinogens, drug, and foreign compounds, may play a role in susceptibility to autoimmune liver disease and its severity. We determined the frequency of GSTM1, GSTT1 and GSTP1 polymorphisms in Iranian patients with AIH. METHODS: In a case-control study, we examined 64 AIH patients (49 female and 15 male), referred to RCGLD, and 100 healthy controls (70 female and 30 male), after obtaining an informed consent . The mean ages for cases and controls were 35.4 ± 13.4 and 32.1 ± 7.5, respectively. After DNA extraction by salting out method, the genetic polymorphism analysis for GST M1 and the GST T1 genes was determined in a single assay using a multiplex PCR approach. Also, PCR-RFLP method was used for detection of GST P1 gene polymorphism. RESULTS: GSTM1 and GSTT1 null genotypes (deletions) were determined in 33(51.6%) and 15 (23.4%) patients with AIH, and 56(56%) and 22(22%) controls, respectively. Comparison of patients and controls relative to GSTM1 Genetic analysis, linkage, and association325
and GSTT1 genotypes revealed no signiﬁcant difference between 
them. Regarding GSTP1 genotypes, 25(39.1%) heterozygotes, 7 (10.9%) homozygotes in the case group and 38(38%) heterozygotes, 14(14%) homozygotes in the control group were observed. The allele frequency of GSTP1 was 30.4 and 33 in patients and controls, respectively showing no signiﬁcant variation among cases and controls. 
CONCLUSION:  Our study dose not support any speciﬁc role for GST 
genotypes in AIH which may be because of the variation in ethnicity.
P1123. Investigation of common genetic factors in autoimmune 
diseases
A. Zhernakova1, A. Monsuur1, P. Eerligh2, C. Wijmenga1, B. P. C. Koeleman1,2;  
1Complex Genetics Section, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Department of Immu -
nohaematology and Bloodbank, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Different autoimmune diseases (AIDs) share part of their genetic background. T-cells are important mediators of AIDs, whereas cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (
CTLA4) and protein 
tyrosine phosphatase ( PTPN22) are both negative regulators of T-cell 
activation and proliferation. To establish the association of both genes with AIDs, we tested SNPs in 
CTLA4 and PTPN22 in three independent 
groups of AID patients.350 Type 1 Diabetes (T1D), 309 Coeliac Disease (CD) and 153 Rheumatoid Arthritis patients (RA) were tested for association in a case/control design with four SNPs in the 
CTLA4 gene region (MH30*G/C; 
-1149*C/T; CT60*G/A; JO37_3*G/A) and one coding SNP 1858C>T in the 
PTPN22 gene. In addition, 218 T1D families were tested by the 
transmission disequilibrium test (TDT).The T1D group showed strong association to 
PTPN22 1858C>T, 
both in the case/control design and by TDT (p=2x10-7 and p=9x10-9, 
respectively). The T1D group also showed association to the CTLA4  
gene (p=0.003 and p=0.02 for the most associated SNP in the case/controls and TDT, respectively). We observed an association with 
PTPN22 in the RA group (p=0.003) but found no signiﬁcant association 
to CTLA4, although there was a trend towards an increase in the T1D-
susceptible haplotype. No association between CTLA4 and PTPN22  
was observed in the CD patients. We are now investigating the 
interaction of these two genes.We conclude the CTLA4 and PTPN22 genes are associated with an increased susceptibility to some AIDs. Investigating the co-association of various genes and using stratiﬁcation protocols might provide clues to understanding the genetic basis of AIDs.
P1124. New candidate members of the HLA 8.1 ancestral 
haplotype (8.1 AH): RAGE -429C and HSP70-2G
J. Laki1, P. Kiszel1, Á. Vatay1, B. Blaskó1, M. Kovács1, A. Körner2, L. Madácsy2, 
L. Blatniczky3, Z. Almássy4, C. Szalai4, K. Rajczy5, É. Pozsonyi5, I. Karádi1, L. 
Romics1, N. Hosszúfalusi1, P. Pánczél1, G. J. Arason6, Y. Yang7, Y. L. Wu7, C. Y. 
Yu7, G. Füst1;  
1Semmelweis University, 3rd Department of Medicine, Budapest, Hungary, 
2Semmelweis University, 1st Department of Pediatrics, Budapest, Hungary, 
3Buda Children’s Hospital, Budapest, Hungary, 4Heim Pál Children’s Hospital, 
Budapest, Hungary, 5National Institute of Hematology and Immunology, Buda -
pest, Hungary, 6Landspítali University Hospital, Reykjavík, Iceland, 7Columbus 
Children’s Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United 
States.
Introduction: The 8.1. AH is common in the Caucasian population. 
This haplotype consists of the HLA-B8, HLA-DR3(17) and HLA-DQ2 alleles, and in the MHC III region contains the TNF-α -308A (TNF2), monomodular short RCCX module (MonoS) with a single C4B gene but no C4A gene. 8.1AH is found to be associated with many autoimmune 
diseases such as type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D).Methods and materials: 93 healthy Hungarians (HH), 97 healthy female Caucasians from Ohio (HFO) and 91 healthy Icelandic (HI) subjects were genotyped for TNF-α -308, HSP70 -2, and RAGE -429 polymorphisms by PCR-RFLP, and for C4A and C4B polymorphisms in the RCCX module (Blanchong et al, JEM, 2000), 196 Hungarian individuals from families affected with T1D were genotyped for the above mentioned regions, and for HLA-DR and DQ alleles by SSP-PCR. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) coefﬁcients were calculated by the 
Arlequin software.
Results:Combination of alleles HH HFO HI
TNF2HSP70-2G p=7.58×10-4p=5.32×10-4p=8.81×10-3
RAGE 
-429Cp=8.02×10-5p=2.39×10-5p=3.82×10-5
C4A*Q0 
(C4A<C4B)HSP70-2G p=1.13×10-4p=0.285 p=4.87×10-4
RAGE 
-429Cp=5.63×10-6p=0.00022 p=0.00086
MonoS-C4BHSP70-2G p=6.82×10-6p=6.08 
×10-5 p=0.0767302
RAGE 
-429Cp=7.17×10-
15 p=3.13×10-6p=1.81×10-6
Hungarian families affected with T1D
HLA-DQ2 HLA-DR17 TNF2 MonoS
HSP70-2G p=2.82×10-10p=1.57×10-9p=3.7×10-9p=1.57×10-5
RAGE-429C p=6.93×10-11p=1.07×10-19p=1.69×10-15p=5.36×10-6
Discussion: Our results indicate that there is strong LD between the RAGE -429 C and HSP70 -2G alleles with alleles known to be members of the 8.1 AH. Therefore it can be assumed that RAGE -429 C and HSP70 -2 G alleles are new candidate members of the 8.1 AH.
P1125. Absence of association between the IVS6+79G/A 
polymorphism in PROZ  and stroke
V. Obach1, X. Muñoz2, M. Revilla1, A. Chamorro1, N. Sala3, P. García de Fru -
tos4;  
1Unitat d’Ictus, Hospital Clínic-IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain, 2IDIBELL-Institut 
de Recerca Oncològica, Barcelona, Spain, 3IDIBELL-Institut de Recerca 
Oncològica, Centre de Genètica Mèdica i Molecular, Barcelona, Spain, 4IIBB-
CSIC-IDIBAPS; Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
Plasma levels of Protein Z (PZ), a vitamin K dependent protein with both procoagulant and anticoagulant properties, show a wide interindividual variation and different case-control studies have revealed contradictory results on the association between PZ plasma levels and cerebral ischemia. Recently, an association between the IVS6+79G/A polymorphism in the PZ gene (
PROZ), PZ plasma levels 
and cerebral ischemia in young individuals has been described. The proposal of our study was to conﬁrm these results in our population of 
patients with stroke.The IVS6+79G/A polymorphism of 
PROZ has been analyzed in 549 
patients with ischemic (n=387) or hemorrhagic (n=162) stroke and in 127 healthy controls, with an average age of 66, 72 and 64 years-old, respectively. The analysis has been carried out through PCR ampliﬁcation and subsequent 
HpaI restriction analysis.
The results obtained indicated that in the patients’ group neither the frequency of the A allele of the 
PROZ IVS6+79G/A polymorphism 
(q=0.19) nor the genotype distribution (GG=0.667 , GA=0.291 and AA=0.042) were signiﬁcantly different (χ
2 p>0.05) from those obtained 
in controls (frequency of the A allele=0.20; GG=0.635, GA=0.325 and AA=0.040). All the groups analysed were in Hardy Weinberg equilibrium. There was also no statistical signiﬁcance between both ischemic (q= 0.20) and hemorrhagic (q=0.15) stroke patients and 
healthy controls.From these results we conclude that the A allele of the 
PROZ  
IVS6+79G/A polymorphism is not a protective factor for stroke in our 
population.We thank ISCIII (01/1468 and C03/07) and MCYT (SAF 2001-1059-
C02) for grants.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association326
P1126. SDHD Variants Do Not Constitute a Risk Factor for 
Developing C-Cell Hyperplasia, or Sporadic Medullary Thyroid 
Carcinoma
A. Cascon1, A. Cebrian2, M. Pollan3, S. Ruiz-Llorente1, C. Montero-Conde1, R. 
Leton1, R. Gutierrez1, F. Lesueur2, R. L. Milne1, O. Gonzalez-Albarran4, T. Lu -
cas-Morante5, J. Benitez1, B. A. J. Ponder2, M. Robledo1;  
1Spanish National Cancer Centre, Madrid, Spain, 2University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 
4Hospital Ramon y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 5Clinica Universitaria Puerta de Hierro, 
Madrid, Spain.
Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is a tumor that arises from 
parafollicular cells of the thyroid gland. MTC can occur sporadically (75%), or as part of inherited cancer syndromes (25%). In most cases hereditary MTC evolves from preneoplastic C-cell hyperplasia (CCH), so early detection of this pathology would evidently be critical. A recent study described a family with CCH as being attributable to the variant c.149A>G (H50R) in 
SDHD. This gene codes for one of the 
mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase subunits and has been found altered, both in paraganglioma (PGL) and pheochromocytoma (PCC) families. We ﬁrstly studied 
SDHD in two families with hereditary non-
RET CCH, and found no alterations related to the inheritance of this disease. We then investigated whether the H50R variant could be a risk factor in the sporadic development of MTC both in Spanish and English patients. We found no evidence that the presence of the H50R is strongly associated with the risk of sporadic MTC, though we did observe an association with age at diagnosis of MTC in Spanish H50R carriers that we did not ﬁnd in English patients. Finally, we looked for evidence of CCH or any other thyroid disease in a panel of germ-line 
SDH ( B or D) mutation carriers, and found none. We conclude that 
SDHD variants do not constitute a risk factor for developing CCH, or sporadic MTC. We also point to the necessity of conﬁrming the pathogenicity of controversial variants, by means of analyze individuals 
coming from distinct populations.
P1127. CTLA4 alanine-17 polymorphism and spanish patients 
with Graves disease
D. Valverde1, P. Alvarez2, L. Constenla2, R. García -Mayor2;  
1Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Xeral-Cies, Vigo, 
Spain.
Graves disease (GD) is a pathology of autoimmune nature that is produced as result of a complex interaction among genetic and environmental factors. In the last years innumerable efforts have been done to deﬁne the genes of genetic susceptibility of this disease, nevertheless in multiple occasions the results have been scanty and even contradictory. Numerous studies have demonstrated the important role of the polymorphism of the gene CTLA4 in the susceptibility of this disease. The gene CTLA4 is placed in 2q33 and codiﬁes the T cell receptor that modulates negatively the immune response disabling to the T-cells. The aim of the present work is to determine the contribution of the A/G dimorphism at position +49 in exon 1 of the CTLA4 gene to the disease. Fifty patients with GD and 50 unrelated healthy subjects from general population were analyzed as controls. The GD was deﬁned as the presence of hyperthyroidism analytical (T4L raised and undetectable THS) together with two or more of the following criteria. Diffuse goiter, high titles of thyroid antibodies and the presence of ophthalmopathy. Restriction enzyme digestion with 
BbvI of polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) ampliﬁed genomic DNA for the A/G dimorphism was used to analyze the polymorphism. Preliminary results suggest differences in the allele frequencies between the two groups GD and controls. For the G allele we found 48% in GD patients and 35% in controls. Our preliminary results show evidence of association of any of 
the CTLA4 gene polymorphism with the disease in Spanish patients.
P1128. The leucine to proline polymorphism at aminoacid 7 
(Leu7Pro) in prepro-neuropeptide Y is more frequent in patients 
with major depression in a Danish population.
P. Koefoed1,2, D. Woldbye2, T. V. O. Hansen1, E. S. Hansen3, C. Lindberg1,2, E. 
Mellerup2, J. F. Rehfeld1, T. G. Bolwig3;  
1Department of Clinical Biochemistry, KB3013, University of Copenhagen, 
Blegdamsvej 9, 2100, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Laboratory of Neuropsychia -
try, O-6102, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Department of Psychiatry, O-6234, University of Copenhagen, Bleg -
damsvej 9, 2100, Copenhagen, Denmark.
There is increasing evidence from both animal and human studies 
that neuropeptide Y (NPY) plays a role in depression and anxiety. A polymorphism in the signal peptide of NPY that leads to substitution of leucine with proline (Leu7Pro) has previously been associated with hypercholesterolemia and alcohol dependence. The present study examined the distribution of the Leu7Pro polymorphism in a Danish population of patients with major depression (n=220) or panic disorder (n=121) and in a group of ethnically matched controls (n=730). We also studied the polymorphism in a group of schizophrenic patients (n=275). The Leu7Pro polymorphism was found to occur at a signiﬁcantly higher genotype frequency in patients with major depression (10.5%; p<0.05, chi squared test) as compared to the control group (6.4%). Frequency was also higher in panic disorder (8.3%) and schizophrenic patients (8.7%), but this did not reach signiﬁcance. In conclusion, the present study shows an association between the Leu7Pro polymorphism and depression, suggesting that the polymorphism could be involved in the 
patophysiology of depression in the Danish population.
P1129. Study for possible association of a polymorphism of 
the interleukin-6 gene promoter and premature coronary artery 
disease in the Greek population
H. Arvaniti1, M. Vasilakou1, D. Hatzipanagi1, V. Votteas2, H. Kasparian2, N. 
Pantazopoulos2, K. Peste3, M. Spyropoulou-Vlahou3, A. Stauropoulou-Gkioka3, 
K. Lamnissou1;  
1Dept of Biology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Dept of Cardiology, 
"Laiko"Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Dept of Anosology, "G.Gennimatas" Hospital, 
Athens, Greece.
The interleucine-6 (IL-6) protein is a pleiotropic cytokine which play a central role in inﬂammation. The former was suggested to be involved in the pathogenesis of different diseases, such as atheroscrerosis and coronary artery disease (CAD). In the present study we investigated the possible association between the -174G/C polymorphism of the promoter of interleukin-6 (IL-6) on risk of premature CAD in the Greek population. In a prospective case-control study, 129 CAD patients, documented by coronary angiography, aged under 58 years and 120 healthy controls were studied. To genotype the subjects we used the PCR-RFLPS method. The frequencies of GG, GC, CC genotypes were 0.66, 0.31, 0.03, respectively, in the patient group and 0.62, 0.31, 0.07, respectively, in the control group. The dada between the two groups were analyzed by chi-square test. Our results showed that there was no patient/control signiﬁcant differences and they suggest that there is no association of the IL-6 -174G/C promoter polymorphism with the 
risk of premature coronary artery disease in this Greek population.
P1130. Genetic analysis of the hypothesis of altered 
oligodendrocyte function in schizophrenia
L. Georgieva, J. Wilkinson, G. Kirov, M. Owen, M. O'Donovan;  
Department of Psychological Medicine,Cardiff University, School of Medicine, 
Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Background: Oligodendrocyte abnormalities have been implicated in schizophrenia by a diverse range of experimental approaches including gene expression analysis, neuropathology, and neuroimaging. With the aim of establishing whether such abnormalities are of primary aetiological relevance to schizophrenia pathogenesis, we are currently examining genes relevant to myelination and oligodendrocyte function for association with schizophrenia. Methods: Candidate genes are being examined in large case control and family based association samples using a combination of direct association analysis based upon de novo
 
mutation detection and also by indirect association analysis based upon dense maps of database markers. Results: Nominally signiﬁcant evidence (p<0.05) for association has been found for the 
OLIG2  
gene coding for a transcriptional factor that plays a role in terminal differentiation of oligodendrocytes. Discussion: So far, the evidence for association requires further analysis of more markers within the region as well as a replication in independent laboratories. Nevertheless, our data provide support for the hypothesis that oligodendrocyte function 
is relevant to schizophrenia pathogenesis.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association327
P1131. Linkage analysis in a family with autosomal dominant 
nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy
E. V. De Marco1, F. Annesi1, S. Carrideo1, D. Civitelli1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, P. 
Tarantino1, F. E. Rocca1, P. Spadafora1, A. Gambardella1,2, G. Annesi1;  
1Institute of Neurological Science, National Research Council, Mangone (CS), 
Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University "Magna Graecia", Catanzaro, Italy.
Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is a 
distinctive epilepsy syndrome characterized by short, partial seizures during non-REM sleep. Episodes often occur in clusters and localize to the frontal lobe. ADNFLE is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with high penetrance. Mutations in the genes CHRNA4 (ENFL1 locus) and CHRNB2 (ENFL3 locus), encoding distinct neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) subunits, have been associated with ADNFLE and account for only a minority of cases. A third genetic locus (ENFLE 2) has been identiﬁed but mutations linked to this form of the disease have not yet been found. Here we report on the results obtained by linkage analysis of the known loci performed on a family with ADNFLE coming from Calabria (Southern Italy). The affected members, previously analyzed by sequencing all coding regions and exon-intron boundaries, showed no mutations in CHRNA4 and CHRNB2 genes. The linkage analysis, performed on ﬁfteen members of the family, conﬁrmed that these genes were not involved in the pathogenesis of the disease. Moreover, we tested the involvment of the ENFLE 2 locus containing the CHRNA5/A3/B4 gene cluster and the data obtained allowed us to exclude any association between this locus and ADNFLE in our family. Currently, further linkage analyses are underway to determine whether genomic regions coding for additional nAChR subunits are associated to ADNFLE in the examined family.
P1132. Associated transmission chromosomes 3+11 in 
patients with autosomal recessive benign erythrocytosis from 
Chuvashia.
S. Tverskaya , N. Vasserman, A. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Several years ago we have demonstrated linkage of the autosomal recessive benign erythrocytosis that has a high incidence in Chuvashia on 11q23 (Lod = 6.61) but gene of this disease was not found. Using genomewide searching Ang et al, (2002) determined C598T change in 
VHL gene (3p26-25) which result in Arg200Trp 
mutation in homozygosity in all individuals affected with Chuvash 
polycythemia. VHL functions as a recessive tumor suppressor gene 
and most of mutations in this gene were found in von Hippel-Lindau syndrome in heterozygosity in all tissues but a second mutation found in tumor only. None of erythrocytosis patients who have homozygous Arg200Trp mutation in VHL gene and none of their heterozygous relatives have not any symptoms of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. On the other hand we reviled the transmission disequilibrium between chromosomes 3 and 11 in Chuvash polycythemia patients. We have investigated patients group, their healthy sibs and independent control group for associated transmission chromosomes 3 and 11 from parents to offsprings by haplotype analysis at D3S1597 - D3S1263, and D11S4111 - D11S4127 - D11S1356 markers. We determined that in 75% cases affected patients get from their parents the same chromosomes 3 and 11. This value was only 44% (χ
2=16.14; p<0.001) 
for sibs and 43% (χ2=17.91; p<0.001) for control group. We concluded 
that 3p25 and 11q23 loci transmit not independently from each other in patients group. This fact may be connecting with modiﬁcation locus on chromosome 11, which inﬂuent in 
VHL gene mutation manifestation at 
Chuvash benign erythrocytosis
P1133. Association of polymorphism within the tumour necrosis 
factor gene and childhood asthma in the north-west region of 
Russia.
T. Ivashchenko1, J. Ostankova1, L. Jelenina2, V. Baranov1;  
1Ott's institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion, 2Scientiﬁc Research Institute of Pulmonology, St.Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
BACKGROUND:Tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) is a potent modulator of immune and inﬂammatory responses, and has been implicated in a variety of autoimmune diseases, including asthma. Interindividual variation in TNFalpha levels could be genetically determined and polymorphism within the TNF gene have been associated with differences in TNFalpha production.OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of differences in asthma-related phenotypes with two biallelic polymorphisms: G to A substitution at position - 308 and G to A substitution at position - 238 of the TNFalpha gene promoter.METHODS: The regions of interest were ampliﬁed from genomic DNA by means of speciﬁc primers and PCR. The restriction enzyme digestion was used for genotyping individuals for the TNFalpha - 308 and - 238 polymorphisms.A case-control analysis was performed for 83 asthmatic and 117 non-asthmatic unrelated children.RESULTS: TNFalpha -238A allele was present at a signiﬁcantly low frequency in the patients group (OR=0.21; P=0.03) In contrast, an increased frequency of -308 A allele was found in the asthmatic group as compared to the control group (OR=2.5; P=0.03). It should be noted, that the frequency of -308 A allele in the females from study group was three time more, than in the female from control group (15% 
and 4% respectively).CONCLUSION: -308A TNF promoter polymorphism might be suspected as genetic predisposition factor to asthma especially for females in childhood age. In contrast, -238A allele TNF promoter polymorphism has same protective effect to asthma.
P1134. Linkage analysis of congenital motor nystagmus in 
Russian family
S. Gudzenko1, V. Fedotov2, O. Evgrafov1, A. Polyakov1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Diag-
nostic Centre, Voronezh, Russian Federation.
X-linked motor nystagmus is a common oculomotor disorder characterized by repetitive uncontrollable ocular oscillations with onset typically at birth. X-linked, autosomal-dominant and autosomal-recessive inheritances have been described. The molecular defect of 
the disorder is still unknown.Three loci for X-linked nystagmus have been mapped to Xp11.4-p11.3 and Xq26-q27. CDR1, SOX3, SLC25A14, SLC9A6 and FGF13 (Xq26-
q27) were studied as candidate genes, but no mutation was detected.To map and precise the genetic interval in which the gene of X-linked nystagmus is placed we investigated 45 persons from ﬁve-generation Russian family with X-linked inherited motor nystagmus, in which 9 individuals were affected (6 males and 3 females); 14 individuals, including 7 affected (4 males and 3 female) were involved in this DNA-study. The penetrance among female carriers is incomplete. Genotyping and haplotype analysis were performed using 20 polymorphic microsatellite markers from X chromosome: NDPCA (Xp11.4-p11.3) and DXS1062, DXS1192, DXS8093, DXS8044, DXS1047, DXS8071, DXS1206, DXS8068, DXS994, DXS8074, DXS8050, DXS8038, DXS8094, DXS6789, DXS6805, DXS1001, DXS1227, DXS1193, DXS8087 (Xq26-q27). The haplotype analysis revealed no evidence of linkage with marker NDPCA from the short arm of X chromosome in this family. Evaluation of haplotypes from the long arm of X chromosome showed that all affected individuals had the same haplotype with markers DXS1047, DXS8068, DXS994, DXS8071 and DXS8074. Multipoint linkage analysis using these four polymorphic markers estimated the maximum multipoint LOD-score of 2,6. Other markers from this region are in study for the ﬁne mapping.This work was support in part by President's RF grant MD-
2456.2004.4
P1135. Genotype / phenotype correlation in “atypical” CF clinical 
pictures
L. Porcaro1, M. Marchi1, P. Capasso1, M. Travi1, D. Degiorgio1, R. Padoan2, C. 
Colombo3, D. A. Coviello1, C. Corbetta4, L. Spaccini5, M. Seia1;  
1Laboratorio Genetica Molecolare, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Mi -
lan, Italy, 2Centro di supporto FC, Brescia, Italy, 3Centro Regionale Fibrosi 
Cistica,Clinica De Marchi,ICP,Università di Milano, Milan, Italy, 4Laboratorio 
screening neonatale,Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy , 5Genetica 
Medica, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy.
The clinical manifestations in Cystic Fibrosis are quite heterogeneous and descriptions of patients with atypical features have recently appeared. These patients are commonly Pancreatic Sufﬁciency, they show normal or borderline (40-60mMol/l) chloride levels in the sweat test and they have symptoms involving a single organ. One of the two CF mutations is in fact surely not severe, resulting in a residual CFTR Genetic analysis, linkage, and association328
protein expression and function. The wide range of symptoms makes 
CF diagnosis more difﬁcult and delayed. In this study we analysed the genotype and phenotype in 117 cases with monosymptomatic manifestations. The CFTR coding tract screening was performed using 
DHPLC technique and direct sequencing.The clinical presentation includes: 46 patients with respiratory involvement, 26 CBAVD, 8 with idiopathic pancreatitis, and 37 cases with clinical features not yet valuable (neonates with positive IRT and 
with borderline sweat test).
The molecular results led us to identify:53/117 (45.3%) compound heterozygous57/117 (48.7%) heterozygous; 19 of them with IVS8- T5/TG12 
haplotype2/117 (1.7%) homozygous for mild mutations5/117 (4.3%) none CFTR mutation; one of them with homozigous IVS8- T5/TG12 haplotype.The haplotype IVS8- T5/TG12 seems to be related to the pathogenesis 
of CF when occurs in these genetic pattern.These data and recent publications seem to prove that the high degree of the clinical heterogeneity in this pathology is related to the large spectrum of genetic variability which cause, rather than a loss of 
protein function, a “gradient” of CFTR dysfunction.
P1136. The glutation-S-transferaseT1 and M1 genes 
polymorphism and risk for early recurrent miscarriage.
O. Bespalova1, O. Tarasenko1, I. Vasileva2, T. Ivashchenko1;  
1Ott's institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion, 2Diagnostic medical genetical Center, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Objective: The pathogenesis of recurrent miscarriage is complex, presumably involving the interaction of several genetic and environmental factors. The frequency of clinically recognized spontaneous abortion in the general population has been estimated to range between 15-20%. The aetiology of early recurrent miscarriage remains unclear, but it may be related to a possible genetic predisposition together with involvement of environmental factors. Polymorphisms in genes can lead to differences in the level of susceptibility of individuals to potentially adverse effects of environmental inﬂuences, such as chemical exposure, on prenatal development or male or female reproductive function. The glutathione-S-transferase genes responsible for xenobiotic conjugating enzymes of Phase II detoxiﬁcation system and have been implicated as risk factors for recurrent embryo loss in early pregnancy.Materials and methods: Genetic polymorphisms of two genes GSTM1, GSTT1 in 205 patients with a history of two or more unexplained ﬁrst-trimester recurrent miscarriages and 76 women who had one or more normal pregnancies and no obstetric complications or history of 
miscarriage were studied by PCR.Results: 35 of the 205 women with recurrent miscarriage (17,1%) and 5 of the 76 control women (6,6%) were homozygous for the glutathione-S-transferase T1 null and glutathione-S-transferase M1 null alleles (GSTT10/0/GSTM10/0). The relative risks of ﬁrst-trimester recurrent miscarriages in carriers of the GSTT10/0/GSTM10/0 was 2,92 (95% CI=1,14-7,48). 28,7% of the women and 14,5% of the control have genotypes GSTT10/0/ GSTM1+ (relative risk, 2,38 (95% CI=1,14-
4,96).Conclusions: Both the genotypes GSTT10/0/GSTM10/0 and GSTT10/0/GSTM1+ are associated with ﬁrst-trimester recurrent miscarriage.
P1137. Polimorphisms of genes predisposing to cardiovascular 
disorders in group of patients with the steroid-resistant 
nephrotic syndrome
N. Poltavets1, L. Prihodina2, N. Galeeva1, S. Tverskaya1, H. Zaklyazminskaya1, 
A. Polyakov1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Re-
search Сenter of Pediatrics and Child Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation.
The steroid-resistant nephritic syndrome (SRNS) is autosomal recessive disease with an early childhood onset of proteinuria, rapid progression to the end-stage renal disease and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Mutaions in NPHS2 gene, mapped to 1q25-31, 
are the cause of the SRNS.We have examined 30 children with biopsy proven SRNS in age ranged from 9 to 17 years (SRNS group) and 50 healthy children of the same age (control group). We have used PDRF and PDAF methods for deﬁnition of the allele frequencies of several genes: PON1(R192Q), AGT(M174T and M235T), ACE(I\D 287 bp, intron 16), AGTR1(A1166C), FVII(R353Q and -353 I\D 10bp), PAI(-675 4G\5G), MTHFR(C677T), 
NOS3(T786C, 27 bp repeat, intron 4- 4a, 4b and E298D).The distribution of allele frequencies for each group was corresponding to Hurdy-Weinberg equilibrium. The distinction of allele frequencies 
between SRNS and control groups was valued using χ2 criterion.
We have determined higher frequencies of alleles: M174 and M235 (AGT); I (ACE); A1166 (AGTR1) and the lower frequencies of A2 (323 ins 10bp) and Q353 in FVII gene in SRNS group. The differences of frequencies are signiﬁcant.We have also valued the association between genotypes and the disease using odds ratio criterion. The positive signiﬁcant association was found between the SRNS and several genotypes: T174\M174 and T235\M235 for AGT; I\I for AGTR1; A1\A1 and R\R for FVII. The reliable difference between SRNS and control groups have not been found for another allele variants of genes associated with cardiovascular 
disorders
P1138. Reﬁned mapping of autosomal dominant, adult-onset, 
leukodystrophy (ADLD) in a Swedish kindred
L. Marklund1, M. Larsson1, A. Melberg2, N. Dahl1;  
1Dept. Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Dept. 
Neurology, University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.
The clinical physiopathology of autosomal dominant, adult-onset, leukodystrophy (ADLD) is characterised by a slowly progressive neurodegenerative disorder with a symmetrical, widespread myelin loss in the white matter. The initial symptoms are recognized by bowel/bladder dysfunction, loss of ﬁne motor skills, ataxia, and the disease are lethal within ~20 years from onset. We have mapped the ADLD gene to a small interval (3 Mbp, 1.6 cM) on chromosome 5q23-q31 in a Swedish kindred, extending over ﬁve generations. This reﬁned mapping restrict the ADLD mutation to a region spanning 14 genes. Further mapping is in progress using additional microsatellites, SNPs and DNA sequencing of affected and unaffected individuals.
P1139. Gene polymorphisms of neuronal and endothelial nitric 
oxide synthases and colonization of Pseudomonas Aeruginosa 
in patients with Cystic Fibrosis
N. Kelembet1, T. Ivashchenko2, T. Gembitskaya1;  
1Scientiﬁc Research Institute of Pulmonology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion, 2Ott's Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion.
Objective: NO is endogenously produced by a group of enzymes, the 
NO-synthases (NOSs). There are three isoforms of NOS encoded by different gene: NOS1, iNOS, eNOS. These genes are constitutively expressed in cells of the respiratory tract. Patients with cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) have decreased concentrations of expired nitric oxide (FeNO) as compared to healthy individuals. A number of factors, including viscous mucus as a diffusion barrier for airway NO, consumption of NO by bacterial enzymes, and decreased NO production have been 
hypothesized to account for these low levels of FeNO.Materials and methods: Genetic polymorphisms of the NOS1 gene and of the gene eNOS were studied by PCR-based assays in 37 CF 
patients and 69 healthy individuals.Results: We examined the relationship between the size of the AAT repeat polymorphism of the NOS1 gene, the 4a/4b polymorphism of the eNOS gene and colonization of the airways with Ps.aeruginosa. Colonization of the airways with Ps.aeruginosa was signiﬁcantly (p<0.05) more common in CF patients with high numbers of AAT 
repeats in the NOS1 gene (≥12) and 4b/4b eNOS.Conclusions: The results provide the evidence that the polymorphicvariants of the NOS1 gene and the eNOS gene are associated with Ps.aeruginosa colonization of airways in CF patients. We could suggest that production of NO is one of mechanisms of local lungs protection. Because of this the decrease of NO production (FeNO) leads to decrease of antibacterial lungs protection and more favourable 
conditions for the colonization of Ps.aeruginosa could be formed.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association329
P1140. A Novel Locus for Recessive Syndactyly Maps to 
Chromosome 17p13.3.
S. Mailk1, E. F. Percin2, W. Ahmad3, N. A. Akarsu4, K. H. Grzeschik1, M. C. 
Koch1;  
1Zentrum für Humangenetik, Philipps-Universität Marburg, Germany, 2Gazi Uni -
versity, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Besevler, Turkey, 
3Quaid-I-Azam University, Department of Biological Sciences, Islamabad, Paki -
stan, 4Cumhuriyet University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Orthopaedics 
and Traumatology, Sivas, Turkey.
Non-syndromic syndactyly is a common congenital malformation 
showing webbing of ﬁngers and/or toes. The malformation can be unilateral or bilateral, and the fusion within the web may be cutaneous or bony.We revise the systematics of syndactylies. The majority of them show an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance except Cenani-Lenz 
syndactyly which follows the recessive model.Previously we reported a novel syndactyly in a consanguineous Pakistani family segregating as an autosomal recessive entity with a unique combination of clinical features: mesoaxial reduction of ﬁngers with synostosis of 3rd and 4th metacarpal bearing single phalanges, clinodactyly of 5th ﬁngers and preaxial webbing of toes. Three similarly affected patients with this distinguished phenotype were observed in a large inbred Turkish family. We now localize the phenotype in the Pakistani and Turkish family to chromosome 17p13.3 (multipoint lod 
score 5.23).The identiﬁcation of a single locus for a similar complex hand-foot malformation in two families with distinct ethnical backgrounds gives evidence for a new form of syndactyly. We propose to name this phenotype mesoaxial synostotic syndactyly with phalangeal reduction (SDMS, type IX syndactyly, Malik-Percin type).The mapping of this novel locus contributes to the clinical and genetic delineation of syndactylies. Recruitment of more families with this phenotype might help to narrow down the candidate region, and the cloning of the gene would provide insight into the complex process of 
limb development.
P1141. Genomewide scan for affective disorder susceptibility 
loci in families of a northern Swedish isolated population
T. Venken1, S. Claes1,2, S. Sluijs1, A. D. Paterson3, C. van Duijn4, R. Adolfsson5, 
J. Del-Favero1, C. Van Broeckhoven1;  
1Applied Molecular Genomics Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, 
Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), University of Antwerp 
(UA), Antwerpen, Belgium, 2Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital Ant -
werp (UZA), Antwerpen, Belgium, 3Program in Genetics and Genomic Biology, 
Hospital for Sick Children and Department of Public Health Services, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Department of Epidemiology and Biostatis -
tics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 5Department of 
Clinical Sciences, Division of Psychiatry, University of Umeå, Umeå, Sweden.
We analyzed 9 multigenerational families with affective spectrum 
disorders ascertained in the geographically isolated population of Västerbotten in northern Sweden. This northern Swedish population, that originated from a limited number of early settlers approximately 8000 years ago, is genetically more homogeneous than outbred populations. Therefore, its use maximizes the probability of detecting 
genes by genetic approaches.In a genomewide linkage analysis we identiﬁed three chromosomal loci with multipoint LOD scores (MPLOD) ≥ 2 at 9q31.1-q34.1 (MPLOD 3.24), 6q22.2-q24.2 (MPLOD 2.48) and 2q33-q36 (MPLOD 2.26) under a recessive affected-only model. Follow-up genotyping applying a 2 cM density STR map conﬁrmed linkage at 9q31.1-q34.1 (MPLOD 3.22), 6q23-q24 (MPLOD 3.25) and 2q33-q36 (MPLOD 2.2) and resulted in candidate regions of 10 cM, 3 cM and 23 cM respectively.In an initial analysis aiming at identifying the underlying susceptibility genes, we focused our attention on the 9q locus. We ﬁnemapped this region at a 200 kb STR density resulting in a MPLOD of 3.70. The candidate region further decreased to 4 cM. Genealogical studies showed that 3 families linked to chromosome 9q descended from common founder couples 10 generations ago. These families enabled the identiﬁcation of an identical by descent (IBD) haplotype in patients reducing the 9q candidate region to 1.6 Mb. Further, the shared haplotype was observed in 4.2% of BPI patients but not in control individuals in a patient-control sample from the Västerbotten isolate. These results suggest a susceptibility locus on 9q31-q33 for affective 
disorder in this common ancestral region.
P1142. SNP haplotype analysis of TPH2 in northern Swedish 
unipolar and bipolar patient/control populations.
A. Van Den Bogaert1, J. Del-Favero1, S. De Zutter1, L. Heyrman1, R. Adolfs -
son2, C. Van Broeckhoven1;  
1Applied Molecular Genomics Group, Department of Molecular Genetics VIB8, 
Flanders Interuniversity Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), University of Antwerp 
(UA), Wilrijk, Belgium, 2Division of Psychiatry, Department of Clinical Sciences, 
University of Umeå, Umeå, Sweden.
Recently, Walther and colleagues (2003) identiﬁed the gene for a novel tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH) isoform, TPH2 that is encoded on chromosome 12 and is exclusively expressed in the brain. TPH is the rate-limiting enzyme for the production of serotonin from tryptophan. Serotonin is a key neurotransmitter in the central nervous system, and dysfunction of the serotonergic system has been implicated in several psychiatric diseases. We have investigated the potential inﬂuence of polymorphisms at the TPH2 locus on the development of unipolar affective and bipolar affective disorder. From the HapMap database we selected 6 htSNPs representing haplotypes with a minor allele frequency above 5%. These htSNPs plus one putative promoter SNP, (Kennedy et al. Neuropsychiatric Genet,, 2003), were genotyped in a sample of 136 patients with DSM-diagnosed unipolar affective disorder, 182 patients with DSM-diagnosed bipolar affective disorder 
and 364 healthy individuals, all of northern Swedish descent.Out of 7 genotyped SNPs, we identiﬁed one SNP that was signiﬁcantly associated with unipolar affective disorder and one SNP with bipolar affective disorder. One SNP, located in the putative promoter region, showed a p-value of 0.027 (promSNP) in our unipolar affective sample and one htSNP (rs10748185) showed a p-value of 0.048 in our bipolar affective sample. Haplotype analysis provided supportive evidence for an involvement of genetic variation at the TPH2 locus with unipolar affective disorder (p-value=0.031) and bipolar affective disorder (p-value=0.004). For both, unipolar and bipolar affective disorder, the signiﬁcant haplotypes that we’ve found were consistent with protective 
factors.
P1143. Abnormalities of ceruloplasmin gene expression in 
mammary gland associated with structure of promoter region
N. E. Gyulikhandanova , N. Platonova, N. Tsymbalenko, I. Evsyukova, L. Pu -
chkova;  
Institute of Experimental Medicine, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Copper is essential for growth and development of newborns and simultaneously it is a high toxic. In milk, copper is packed into tissue speciﬁc ceruloplasmin (Cp). Its concentration sharply drops during ﬁrst month of lactation. Likewise that copper level in newborn diet intake is controlled by Cp gene activity in mammary gland. Milk Cp and copper concentration in 5 days after postpartum and Cp promoter region structure (genetic marker) were analyzed to detect Cp sequences that effect in the CP gene expression regulation in mammary gland cells. The samples of 41 DNAs were analyzed by PCR-method using 17 pairs of overlapping primers to 5´-region 4000 bp from +192 bp. Simultaneously, skimmed milk Cp and copper concentration at the 1
st and 5th days after 
postpartum were measured by rocket immunoelectrophoresis and atomic absorptive spectrometry respectively. Two cases of abnormalities of Cp gene expression were revealed. In a one case milk Cp concentration did not decrease during 5 days and even doesn’t change after 1.5 year lactation. At the same time blood Cp concentration corresponded to average value. A substitution 
1996A/C in site for transcription factor C/
EBPbeta was found by automatic sequencing. In another case very high Cp concentration in skimmed milk was found (40 versus 14 mg/100 ml). Sequencing indicated 90(bp)-insertion in (-1639)-(-2294) bp region, which included coterminous of estrogen receptor site and site for binding YY1 protein.
P1144. Polymorphisms of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase 
gene in placentas with intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR).
O. Tarasenko , O. Bespalova, T. Ivashchenko, V. Baranov;  
Ott's institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Objective: Intrauterine growth restriction is a syndrome involving dysfunction of vascular endothelium and imbalance between Genetic analysis, linkage, and association330
endothelium derived constricting and relaxing factors. Recent 
evidence suggest a major role endothelium-derived nitric oxide (NO) plays in the regulation of vascular resistance during normal pregnancy and pregnancy with IUGR. NO is a potent vasodilator generated by the catalytic action of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) in placenta. Mutations in the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) gene may be associated with abnormal nitric oxide (NO) production. The 4a/4b genotype is know to be associated with reduced levels of 
NO metabolites (25% decrease).Materials and methods: We collected and performed PCR the 4a/4b polymorphism of the eNOS gene in placentas of 33 patients with IUGR and 35 women with one or more normal pregnancies and no obstetric 
complications.Results: The frequencies of alleles among samples with IUGR and controls were 86,3% and 82,8% respectively, for allele 4b (wild type), and 13,7% and 17,2%, respectively, for allele 4a (mutant). No association between allele 4a and IUGR was found (P>0.05, OR 1.31). The distribution of genotype were not signiﬁcantly different between the studied groups (4b/4b: 72,7%; 4b/4a: 27,3%; 4a/4a: 0%) and the 
control group (4b/4b: 68,6%; 4b/4a: 28,6%; 4a/4a: 2,8%) (P>0.05).Conclusions: The 4a/4b polymorphism of the eNOS gene is not 
implicated in increased risk of intrauterine growth restriction.
P1145. The study of the β2-adrenergic receptor polymorphisms 
in asthma patients and healthy donors from the Volga-Ural 
region of Russia
A. S. Karunas1, A. Izmaylova2, S. Z. Zagidullin2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientiﬁc Center, Russian Acad -
emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir Medical State University, 
Ufa, Russian Federation.
Bronchial asthma (BA) is a complex disorder, the development of which is determined by the interaction between genetic and environmental factors. To date, numerous DNA-loci and candidate genes have been reported to show linkage and association to asthma. The human β
2-
adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) is a target of β2-agonist drugs used for 
bronchodilatation in asthma and ADRB2 gene may be examined as 
potential asthma-susceptibility gene.This study reports the results of the investigation of the β
2-adrenergic 
receptor Arg16Gly and Gln27Glu polymorphisms in asthma patients and healthy donors from Volga-Ural region of Russia. The asthma group consisted of 140 patients; the control group included 203 unrelated nonasthmatic subjects. We have determined that the frequencies of Gly16 allele and Gly16/Gly16 genotype were noticeably higher in patients with atopic asthma (67% and 48%, respectively) in comparison with 57% and 27% for infection-dependent asthma. The frequency of Glu27 allele was signiﬁcantly greater in patients with atopic asthma (51,7%) compared with infection-dependent asthma (40%). The proportion of Glu27 homozygotes was 27,6% in atopic asthma group and 16,2% in infection-dependent asthma group. Strong allelic association was observed between Gly16 allele and Glu27 allele and between Arg16 allele and Gln27 allele (p<0,05). The combination of Gly16/Gly16 and Glu27/Glu27 genotypes occurred more frequently in atopic asthma patients (27,6%) than in control group (15,2%). 
OR=1,8 (95%Cl 0,79-3,64).The data of this study revealed differences in the distribution of polymorphic alleles and genotypes of the ADRB2 gene between asthma patients and healthy donors and between different clinical 
forms of bronchial asthma.
P1146. Association of ACE I/D  polymorphism with hypertension 
in Croatia and an isolate
M. Barbalić1, T. Škarić-Jurić1, N. Smolej Narančić1, I. Rudan2, S. Turek3, P. 
Rudan1;  
1Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 2School of Public 
Health “Andrija Štampar”, University Medical School, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Croatian 
Health Insurance Institute, Zagreb, Croatia.
The angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) takes part in the renin-angiotensin system that is one of the main regulatory systems in blood pressure homeostasis. Its inﬂuence on hypertension has been widely explored in various populations, but the results are still conﬂicting. The insertion/deletion polymorphism (ACE I/D) in intron 16 of the 
ACE 
gene is easily detectable and seems to be a good marker for ACE inﬂuence on various phenotypes. We studied ACE I/D polymorphism 
and hypertension in the general Croatian population, where we found the homozygous deletion genotype is associated with hypertension. This inﬂuence seems to be specially pronounced in men younger then 40 years. These results are compared with the results of testing the ACE I/D association with hypertension in one of the Croatian isolates - the island of Vis, which is characterized by a high prevalence of 
hypertension as well as high levels of inbreeding.
P1147. Genetic analysis of Bartter and Gitelman Syndrome in the 
Italian population
N. Borsa1, M. L. Syrèn1,2, C. Mattiello1, D. A. Coviello1, M. Travi1, A. Bettinelli3, 
S. Tedeschi1;  
1Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics and 
Neonathology, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, San 
Leopoldo Mandic Hospital, Merate, Lecco, Italy.
Bartter’s syndrome includes a group of autosomal recessive disorders caused by loss of function mutations in one of four genes: SLC12A1, KCNJI, CLCNKB and BSND encoding respectively: the sodium potassium-chloride cotransporter NKCC2 (Bartter type I), the inwardly rectifying potassium channel ROMK (Bartter type II), the basolateral chloride channel ClC-Kb (Bartter type III) and the Barttin protein, an essential subunit of ClC-Kb. The latter phenotype is associated with sensorineural deafness (Bartter type IV). All of them are expressed in the thick ascending limb of the Henle loop. Gitelman’s syndrome is a variant of Bartter’s syndrome, and is caused by mutations in the gene SLC12A3, encoding the sodium-chloride cotransporter NCCT. This 
protein is expressed in the distal convoluted tubule of the nephron.The aim of our study is the characterisation of the molecular defects of patients without sensorineural deafness, clinically deﬁned as Gitelman/Bartter syndrome. Our patient population includes a cohort of 91 subjects. On the basis of the mutations identiﬁed in the SLC12A1, KCNJI, CLCNKB and SLC12A3 genes, 55 patients showed mutations on both alleles (22 homozygous and 33 compound heterozygous mutations). On the basis of detected mutations we could deﬁne that 6 patients were affected with Bartter type I syndrome, 4 with Bartter type II, 13 with Bartter type III, and 32 with Gitelman syndrome. The complete clinical phenotype and the genotype-phenotype correlation 
will be discussed.
P1148. Polymorphism of the glutation-S-transferase P1 gene and 
early recurrent miscarriage.
I. Vasileva1, O. Bespalova2, O. Tarasenko2, T. Ivashchenko2;  
1Diagnostic medical genetical Center, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott's 
Institute of obstetrics and gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Objective: The clinical management of repeated early pregnancy wastage focuses on several etiologic factors (i.e., genetic, medical, immunologic, endocrine, psychogenic, environmental, occupational, infectious, and uterine), which have been noted to result in repeated pregnancy wastage. Genetic variability in biotransformation enzymes could be associated responsible for predisposition differences to recurrent miscarriage. The glutatione-related detoxiﬁcation system plays an important role to ensure an uncomplicated pregnancy outcome. The components of the glutatione-related detoxiﬁcation system are equally distributed among the different cotelydons in the 
human placenta.Methods: Polymorphisms in the genes of glutation-S-transferases P1 were assessed in 94 nonpregnant women with a history of early (≤ 16 weeks gestation) recurrent miscarriage (two or more spontaneous 
abortions) and 76 healthy control women.Results: The frequencies of alleles in women with recurrent miscarriage and controls were 73.4% and 70.4%, respectively, for the A allele (wild type), 18.1% and 22.4%, respectively, for the B allele (mutant), and 8.5% and 7.2%, respectively, for the C allele (mutant). The distribution of the genotypes for the glutation-S-transferase P1 gene was not signiﬁcantly different between the study group and the controls.Conclusions: We conclude that the presence of mutant alleles of glutation-S-transferase P1 gene is not a risk predictor in women with a 
history of early recurrent miscarriage.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association331
P1149. Immunogenetic studies in Hungarian patients with 
idiopathic inﬂammatory myositis
A. Ponyi1,2, A. Kapitány3, T. Constantin2, L. Gergely1, K. Dankó1;  
1Division of Clinical Immunology, 3rd Department of Internal Medicine, Medical 
and Health Science Center, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 22nd 
Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University , Buda -
pest, Hungary, 3Regional Immunology Laboratory, 3rd Department of Internal 
Medicine, Medical and Health Science Center, University of Debrecen, Debre -
cen, Hungary.
Objectives Idiopathic inﬂammatory myopathies (IIM) are rare systemic 
autoimmune diseases, characterized by progressive weakness of 
the skeletal muscles. As in other autoimmune diseases, the immune process seems to be induced by environmental factors in genetically susceptible individuals. Our aim was to extend the knowledge of ethnogeographic studies about HLA association of myositis. We investigated the presence of the HLA-DRB1, -DQA1 and DQB1 alleles in Hungarian patients with different forms of myositis.Patients and Methods 93 patients with myositis and 54 healthy 
unrelated controls were enrolled in the study. HLA genotyping was performed by polymerase chain reaction with sequence speciﬁc primers technique to determine different allelic groups (Olerup-SSP). We also assessed the relation with phenotypic features, e. g. clinical 
manifestations, autoantibodies and clinical course.
Results Among all patients with any forms of myositis, frequency 
of HLA-DRB1*0301 and the linked -DQA1*0501 were signiﬁcantly increased compared to controls. HLA-DQB1*05 alleles were also found to be increased. A signiﬁcantly increased frequency of DRB1*01 and DRB1*07 were observed in patients with myositis in overlap with another systemic autoimmune disease. The HLA-DRB1*12 appeared to provide protection against myositis. We did not found alleles that predispose for systemic manifestations. Patients with the myositis speciﬁc Jo-1 autoantibody carried DRB1*03 and DQB1*04 in higher frequency. According to the clinical course signiﬁcant differences in the 
genotype could not be detected.
Conclusion Concerning the most important genes that provide 
susceptibility to myositis, we found similar associations of HLA Class II 
alleles in Hungarian patients to other Caucasian populations.
P1150. A genome-wide search of Late-Onset Alzheimer's disease 
using homozygosity mapping shows evidence of a new locus on 
chromosome 3.
A. Arias1, K. Sleegers1, F. Liu1, P. J. Sanchez-Juan1, Y. S. Aulchenko1, G. 
Roks2, R. Rademakers3, M. Cruts3, C. V. Broeckhoven3, B. A. Oostra4, C. M. 
van Duijn1;  
1Dept. of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands, 2Department of Neurology, Elisabeth Hospital, Tilburg, The 
Netherlands, 3Dept. of Molecular Genetics (VIB8) Neurogenetics Group, Uni -
versity of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Eras -
mus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) often segregates as a dominant trait in families but a recent study, performed in an inbred community, suggested a recessive mutation (Farrer LA, et al, 2003). We studied 10 individuals affected with probable late-onset AD from 5 inbred families coming from a recently genetically isolated Dutch population. These individuals could be connected to a common ancestor in 8 generations, suggesting the presence of a recessive mutation involved in the onset of the disease. In order to identify genes implicated in the pathophysiology of AD, we performed a genome screen of AD using 420 markers on these 10 individuals and mutations on APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2 genes were excluded by direct sequencing. All probands carried the APOE 
ε3/4. Homozygosity mapping of the 10 individuals 
yielded two peaks on chromosome 3 with multipoint LOD scores of 3.1 (from marker D3S3681 to D3S1569) and 3.4 (from marker D3S3626 to D3S1262) respectively. After ﬁne mapping these regions with 10 extra markers, the ﬁrst peak could be narrowed down from ~50 to 19 cM with a maximum LOD score of 3.9 (from marker D3S1292 to D3S1549) and the second peak could be narrowed down from ~30 to 5.8 cM with a maximum LOD score of 3.2. This region included the gene Butyrylcholinesterase (BCHE). Direct sequencing of the coding region of this gene showed no variants that could explain the presence of the disease. These ﬁndings suggest the presence of a new locus on 
chromosome 3, which may involve a recessive mutation.P1151. Renin Angiotensin System polymorphisms and breast 
cancer risk
A. M. Gonzalez-Zuloeta Ladd , A. Arias Vasquez, F. A. Sayed-Tabatabaei, J. 
W. Coebergh, A. Hofman, O. Njajou, B. H. C. Stricker, C. M. van Duijn;  
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Angiotensin II has growth factor properties and may be involved in the etiology of breast cancer. The Insertion/Deletion (I/D) polymorphism in the Angiotensin-Converting-Enzyme (ACE) gene determines levels of ACE and the M235T polymorphism in the Angiotensinogen (AGT) gene accounts for the variability of AGT plasma concentrations and may produce an increase in Angiotensin II levels. These two polymorphisms were genotyped in 4117 women participating in the Rotterdam Study, including 144 patients with breast cancer. At baseline, information concerning risk factors was obtained by an interview. First, we performed a logistic regression analysis to assess the risk of breast cancer yielding an odds ratio (OR) of 1.86 (95% Conﬁdence Interval [CI] = 1.06-3.27, p-value = 0.03) for ACE DD carriers and 2.01 (95% CI: 1.34-3.01, p = 0.001) for TT carriers of the AGT M235T polymorphism. Second, a Cox survival model was ﬁtted and showed that breast cancer free survival by ACE genotype was signiﬁcantly reduced in DD compared to II carriers (HR = 1.80; 95% CI: 1.07-3.01, p-value = 0.03). We observed a similar effect for TT carriers (HR =1.80 95% CI: 1.21-2.65, p-value = 0.002). These ﬁndings were independent of known risk factors. Our results suggest that the ACE and AGT proteins and perhaps the Renin Angiotensin System in general, play a role in breast 
cancer risk in postmenopausal women.
P1152. The locus for ichthyosis prematurity syndrome is 
restricted to 231 kb on chromosome 9q34.11
M. Larsson1, J. Klar1, T. Gedde-Dahl Jr.2, M. Pigg1, A. Vahlquist3, N. Dahl1;  
1Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 
2Dermatological DNA Laboratory, Department if Dermatology, Rikshospitalet 
University Hospital, and Institute of Forensic Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, 
Norway, 3Department of Medical Science, Uppsala University Hospital, Up -
psala, Sweden.
Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI) is a group of 
keratinisation disorders, where ichthyosis prematurity syndrome (IPS) is included. IPS is rare and almost exclusively present in a restricted region in the middle of Norway and Sweden, which indicates a founder effect for the disorder. We recently reported linkage of IPS to chromosome 9q34 and we present here the subsequent ﬁne-mapping of this region with known and novel microsatellite markers. A haplotype associated with IPS was identiﬁed within the linked region on chromosome 9q34. This haplotype spans approximately 3.4 Mb and support previously suggestions of an ancient founder mutation. Based on the average length of the haplotype in IPS patients, we calculated the age of a founder mutation to at least 1500 years. The haplotype contain a core region of 231 kb consisting of three marker alleles shared by 95% of the affected individuals. This core haplotype restricts a region with seven known genes of which six are expressed 
in mature epidermal cells.
P1153. Association of some vascular genetic markers with 
different forms of preeclampsia
G. S. Demin1,2, T. E. Ivashchenko1, E. V. Mozgovaia1, O. V. Malysheva1, V. S. 
Baranov1, V. S. Baranov1;  
1Ott Institute for Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Preeclampsia is a multifactorial disease with unknown genetic compound. One of the most important clinical parameters of preeclampsia is increased blood pressure. There are some major genes, which products regulate vascular tone. In this study an analysis of the association between polymorphism of some vascular genes and 
the development of preeclampsia was carried out.I/D polymorphism of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), 4a/4b polymorphism of the endothelial NO-synthase (eNOS), I/D polymorphism of the tissue plasminogen activator (PLAT) and 4G/5G polymorphism of the plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) genes were studied by PCR-RFLP assay.There was no signiﬁcant difference between preeclamptic patients (n=117) and control group (n=79) in frequencies of genotypes and alleles of the ACE, eNOS, PLAT and PAI-1 genes. However the Genetic analysis, linkage, and association332
frequency of genotype I/I of the ACE gene signiﬁcantly increased in 
preeclamptic women with background arterial hypertension (27.5%) as compared to controls (10.3%, p<0.05). The frequencies of 4G allele of the PAI-1 and 4b allele of the eNOS gene were signiﬁcantly higher in patients with mild (75.8%) and severe (100%) uncomplicated preeclampsia, respectively, as compared to control group (58.2%, p<0.05 and 80.4%, p<0.05). Moreover the frequency of D allele of the PLAT gene was signiﬁcantly higher in the group of patients with 
preeclampsia (67.5%) as compared to population (54.2%, p<0.005).The differences in polymorphic variants of particular genes could be an evidence of the presence of several different disorders, joint by generic 
term “preeclampsia”.
P1154. Analysis of insertion/deletion polymorphisms of 
angiotensin converting enzyme and bradykinin receptor genes 
(ACE and BKR2) in children and adolescents with arterial 
hypertension from North-West region of Russia.
A. S. Glotov1, T. V. Stepanova2, G. I. Obraztsova2, T. E. Ivashchenko1, V. S. 
Baranov1;  
1Ott's Institute of Obstetrics&Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Academy, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion.
Renin-angiotensin-bradykinin system (RABS) is a regulator of 
arterial (blood) pressure and water-salt balance in human. Genetic polymorphism of this system is associated with cardiovascular diseases. The main aim of our investigation was to study the distribution of frequencies of RABS genes in children and adolescents with arterial hypertension (individuals of 9-18 age, N=176) and in population group (7-17 years, N=117) of North-West of Russia. On the basis of blood pressure load we have subdivided group with arterial hypertension into three groups: 1) without conﬁrmed hypertension (<25%), 2) with labile 
hypertension (25-50%) and with stabile hypertension (>50%).The polymorphisms of the ACE gene (I/D) and the BKR gene (I/D) were studied by PCR analysis. Distribution of genotype frequencies between groups were compared by F-test. The distribution of relevant frequencies of polymorphisms for the ACE and the BKR genes was similar in children and adolescents with hypertension compared to population group. The division of groups by sex was not found out any signiﬁcant differences in distribution of genetic polymorphisms 
between patients with hypertension and population group.Interestingly that patients with labile hypertension had signiﬁcantly lower frequency of DD genotype of ACE gene compared to children and adolescents without conﬁrmed hypertension (22% and 50%, respectively; p=0.04) and population group (22% and 38%, respectively; p=0.03) but there was no difference as compared to patients with 
stabile hypertension (22% and 33%; p=0.27).It might be speculated that I/D polymorphism of ACE gene could be 
associated with labile hypertension in children and adolescents.
P1155. Multipoint linkage analysis for a very dense set of 
markers
S. Bacanu ;  
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
Multipoint linkage methods are powerful tools that are often employed as the ﬁrst means to discover alleles affecting liability to diseases. With the advent of dense marker maps, linkage disequilibrium (LD) between markers is inevitable and it comes at the cost of bias and increased rate of false-positive ﬁndings for linkage analyses that assume alleles of different markers are independent. I propose a “multipoint on subsets” method that avoids this issue by partitioning the markers into interlaced and non-overlapping subsets. Each subset is analyzed separately, their statistics are then averaged, and the resulting average is normalized by its estimated standard deviation. In addition to being robust to the challenges induced by dependent marker alleles, data simulated under linkage equilibrium show that the proposed method does not suffer any loss of power when compared 
to traditional methods.P1156. Association of protein-tyrosine phosphatase N1 gene 
polymorphisms with type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance
D. W. Bowden , J. L. Bento, N. D. Palmer, J. C. Mychaleckyj, C. D. Langefeld, 
B. I. Freedman;  
Wake Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, United States.
Protein-tyrosine phospatase-1B (PTP-1B) protein is encoded by the PTPN1 gene on 20q13. PTP-1B negatively regulates insulin signaling by dephosphorylating the insulin receptor. We have carried out an association analysis of 35 noncoding SNPs spanning the 161 kb genomic region including the PTPN1 gene. SNPs were assessed for association with type 2 diabetes (T2DM) in two independent collections of Caucasians with T2DM and two matching control groups. Signiﬁcant evidence for association is observed, especially SNPs spanning the 3’-end of intron 1 of PTPN1 through intron 8 (P-values 0.043-0.004 in one case-control set and 0.038-0.002 in a second case-control set). Analysis of combined case-control data increased the evidence of association with T2DM (P=0.005-0.0016). All associated SNPs lie in a single 100 kb haplotype block that encompasses the PTPN1 gene. Haplotype analyses identiﬁed a signiﬁcant difference between cases and controls (P=0.0035-0.0056) with one common haplotype contributing strongly to the evidence for association with T2DM. Odds ratios are approximately 1.3 for risk haplotypes. PTPN1 was also evaluated for association with measures of glucose homeostasis in 811 Hispanic subjects in the IRAS Family Study. All SNPs with minor allele frequencies > 0.1 are signiﬁcantly associated with insulin sensitivity index (SI; P-values=0.044-0.003) and fasting glucose (P-values=0.029-<0.001); there was no evidence of association with acute insulin response (a measure of β-cell function). In haplotype analysis, the diabetes risk haplotype is associated with lower SI and higher fasting glucose (P=0.005 and P=0.00003, respectively). These results suggest that PTPN1 is a signiﬁcant contributor to T2DM susceptibility 
and insulin resistance.
P1157. SLC22A4 and SLC22A5 variants are associated with 
perianal Crohn’s disease in Belgian patients.
C. Libioulle1, J. Thyse1, F. Farnir1, O. Dewit2, J. Belaiche1, M. Georges1, E. 
Louis1;  
1Université de Liège, Liege, Belgium, 2Université Catholique de Louvain, Lou -
vain, Belgium.
Functional variants of the SLC22A4 (1672C→T) and SLC22A5 (-
207G→C) genes coding for cation transporters, were recently shown to be associated with Crohn disease (CD). A study of Armuzzi et al.(2003) presented evidence suggesting that the association might be speciﬁc for a CD subtype, namely the perianal form. In this study, we test the association of these 2 variants with clinical CD subtypes in a 
cohort of Belgian patients.We studied a cohort comprising 619 CD patients including 209 trios. Untransmitted parental chromosomes from the trios were used as controls in addition of 94 ethnically matched controls. Genotyping was done by using the Taqman technology. Allelic frequencies in cases and controls were compared using a one-sided chi-squared test. Maximum likelihood haplotype frequencies were estimated using an EM algorithm. We found no evidence for association of C1672T and G-207C with CD neither when considering each marker alone (p= 0.235; p= 0.113 respectively), nor when considering them as a haplotype. However, when we classiﬁed patients according to perianal disease at the time of diagnosis (n= 72), the corresponding analysis yielded strong evidence for an association with both markers considered separately (p= 0.009 for C1672T; p= 0.011 for G-207C) as well as jointly (p= 0.0025). The association was also strongly present in the perianal subgroup of CD diagnosed after 5 years disease evolution (n= 77; p= 0.047 for C1672T; p= 0.009 for -207G/C; p= 0.017 for TC haplotype).This study conﬁrm and reﬁne the association previously 
found between perianal CD and the IBD5 locus .Genetic analysis, linkage, and association333
P1158. L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria: identiﬁcation of novel 
mutations in the gene C14orf160 (duranin)
J. Fischer1, M. Topçu2, F. Jobard1, H. Omran3, L. Cimbalistiene4, M. Tabache5, 
S. Cure1, L. Sztriha6, M. Bataillard7, V. Kemmerich8, C. Grolik9, N. Al-Sannaa10, 
J. O. Sass11;  
1CNRG Centre National de Génotypage, Evry, France, 2Hacettepe University 
Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Child Neurology, Ankara, Turkey, 
3Zentrum für Kinderheilkunde, Klinik für Neuropädiatrie und Muskelerkrankun -
gen, Freiburg, Germany, 4Vilnius University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of 
Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 5Praxis für Allgemeinmedizin, 
Lamspringe, Germany, 6Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Department 
for Pediatrics, UAE University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates, 7Centre Hospit -
alier Inter-Communal, Department of Neurology, Montbéliard, France, 8Praxis 
für Kinder und Jugendmedizin, Weinstadt, Germany, 9Kliniken der Stadt Köln, 
Kinderkrankenhaus, SPZ, Köln, Germany, 10Clinical Medicine Department, 
Pediatric Services Division, Dhahran Health Center, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, 
11Universitätsklinikum Freiburg, Zentrum für Kinderheilkunde und Jugendmed -
izin, Stoffwechsellabor, Freiburg, Germany.
L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (L-2-HGA) is a rare neurometabolic 
disorder with autosomal recessive transmission (MIM 236792). It is characterized by progressive deterioration of central nervous system function including epilepsy and macrocephaly in 50 % of cases and elevated levels of L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid in urine, blood, and cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF). Around 75 cases of L2-HGA have been reported from different parts of the word. We have recently reported the identiﬁcation of the gene 
C14orf160  (duranin) for L-2-HGA using 
homozygosity mapping in 18 Turkish families (Topçu et al, 2004), and a second group has conﬁrmed these results genetically and 
biochemically in three other families (Rzem et al, 2004).Here we report the results of the mutation analysis in another large series of 11 additional families with different ethnic and geographic origins, from France, Germany, Iraq, Lithuania, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and Turkey. Three of the mutations previously described in Turkish patients, were found in patients from Germany, Iraq and Turkey. We identiﬁed seven novel mutations including 4 different deletions and two different nonsense mutations; one missense mutation (R251X) was the same in patients from Turkey, France and Pakistan. The functional role of this enzyme in intermediary metabolism in humans remains to 
be established.
P1159. Association between CAG repeat number in the androgen 
receptor gene and male infertility in Macedonian males
D. Plaseska-Karanﬁlska1, T. Plaseski2, C. Dimitrovski2, B. Kocevska2, G. D. 
Efremov1;  
1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Center for Genetic En -
gineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Mace -
donia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Clinic of Endocrinology and Metabolic Disoroders, 
Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
The exon 1 of the androgen receptor (AR) gene contains a polymorphic CAG repeat that codes for polyglutamine tract. The number of CAG repeats among normal population varies between 10-36 repeats. Several reports indicated an association of the high CAG repeat numbers and male infertility. The aim of this study was to evaluate the possible effect of long CAG repeats in the AR gene on male infertility in Macedonian men. A total of 196 infertile/subfertile males were studied. The patients were divided in six groups: azoospermia (n=70), severe oligozoospermia (n=33), moderate oligozoospermia (n=25), mild oligozoospermia (n=12), normozoospermia (n=39) and known cause of infertility, such as AZF deletions, XXY and XX males (n=17). The control group consisted of 111 proven fathers. The CAG repeat number was determined by ﬂuorescent PCR ampliﬁcation of exon 1 of AR gene followed by capillary electrophoresis on ABI PRISM 310 Genetic Analyzer. CAG repeats ranged from 13 to 32 in infertile/subfertile men and from 14 to 30 in the control group, with the most common allele of 21 in both groups. No difference in mean CAG number was found between infertile men (22.2
+2.9) and proven 
fathers (22.3 +2.9). A signiﬁcantly longer CAG repeats were found only 
in men with mild oligozoospermia (24.6 +3.0) when compared to the 
fertile males (p=0.022). These data indicate an association between CAG repeat length and mild oligozoospermia among Macedonian 
men.P1160. Preliminary MSX1 gene analysis results in patients with 
cleft lip with/ without cleft palate
I. Dundure , B. Lace;  
Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia.
BACKGROUND  MSX1 is a key factor for the development of teeth 
and craniofacial skeleton and has been proposed to play the main role in terminal cell differentiation. Therefor non-syndromic cleft lip with/ without cleft palate (CL/P) may be very closely conjugated with changes in MSX1 gene function. Several studies show us that mutations in the gene can inﬂuence the formation of orofacial clefts. These particular mutations are causal and they appear to contribute about to 2% of all cases CL/P 
OBJECTIVES The aim of our study was to establish role 
of the gene MSX1 in the formation of cleft lip and/or palate. MATERIAL AND METHODS 50 DNA samples were collected in collaboration 
with Riga Stradins University Institute of Stomatology, State Cleft center. The collection of data was performed according to Central Ethical Committee regulations. All the participating families signed an informed consent form. We obtained questionnaire, containing detailed information: complete genealogy, possible exposure to teratogens during pregnancy, the course of pregnancy and delivery and associated anomalies. The referent gene sequence was obtained from Internet date base http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/Blast.
cgi. The methods used included DNA extraction, PCR, agarose gel electrophoresis, sequencing and blasting of the result. RESULTS We 
have found one mutation in the intron at the position 1831where T->A, and one SNP in the second exon at the position 3969 A/G.
P1161. A common haplotype in the 5' region of the SCN5A gene 
is associated with ventricular conduction impairment
A. Pfeufer1, C. Bezzina2, S. Jalilzadeh1, T. Koopmann2, S. Perz3, J. C. Mueller1, 
P. Yang4, D. Roden4, A. A. Wilde2, H. E. Wichmann3, S. Kääb5, T. Meitinger1;  
1TU Munich, Munich, Germany, 2Experimental and Molecular Cardiology Group, 
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 3GSF Research Cen -
ter, Neuherberg, Germany, 4Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, 
TN, United States, 5LMU Munich, Munich, Germany.
Background: The SCN5A gene encodes the alpha-subunit of the cardiac voltage dependent sodium channel. Coding region mutations cause Brugada Syndrome and other familial conduction disturbances. Recent studies have suggested SCN5A promoter mutations may also contribute to arrythmias.Aim: We investigated the inﬂuence of common SCN5A promoter and gene variants on ECG parameters in a central European general population sample. Methods: We genotyped 702 individuals from the population based KORA S2000 survey for 55 SNP markers. Haplotypes were inferred by the Haploview software package.Results: We identiﬁed a block of high linkage disequilibrium extending from 10 kb upstream of noncoding exon 1 to 10 kb into intron 1. Within the block the third most frequent haplotype (hap3, AF= 16.8%) was signiﬁcantly associated with the width of the QRS complex (p=0.0075; QRS 93.4 ms in wt/wt (n=474), 96.3 ms in wt/hap3 (n=201) and 100.8 ms in hap3/hap3 (n=18)). The association was conﬁrmed in the entire sample of the KORA S2000 survey (p=0.0021). Is was stronger in older individuals and in those with preexisting cardiac and cardiovascular disease. These data support the concept that variability in channel expression by polymorphisms in the regulatory region of the gene inﬂuences cardiac conduction even in unselected individuals 
from the general population.
P1162. A high density SNP panel in the MHC region.
L. M. Galver , A. Oliphant, S. Shaw Murray;  
Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, United States.
The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a ~4 Mb gene-dense region of the human genome on chromosome 6p21. There are over 120 expressed genes in this region of which ~40% encode proteins involved in immune defense including the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) membrane glycoproteins involved in recognition of T lymphocytes. Since the classical HLA loci represent a minority of genes found in the MHC region, it is likely that many disease-causing mutations may actually reside outside one of the classical HLA genes. Therefore, since almost every autoimmune and inﬂammatory disorder is studied in this genomic region, we have developed a panel of approximately 3,000 SNPs that can be used as a cost-effective, efﬁcient method for ﬁne mapping in the region for identiﬁcation of Genetic analysis, linkage, and association334
genes associated with disease phenotypes. In addition, this panel can 
be used to discriminate between causal alleles and variation that is in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with causal alleles. The panel consists of two multiplexes, each with ~1,500 SNPs that are designed for use with Illumina’s GoldenGate
® assay and can be used either independently or 
in conjunction with one another. The ﬁrst multiplex is “exon-centric” and contains SNPs within 10 kb of coding sequences of genes in the MHC region spanning from ret ﬁnger protein (RFP) to motilin (MLN). The second multiplex consists of SNPs evenly spaced across the region with an emphasis on tag SNPs. With these two panels combined, the average spacing between SNP loci is less than 2 kb.
P1163. Identiﬁcation of the 208-2A>G " AMN " mutation in a non 
Jewish MGA Tunisian patient
C. Bouchlaka1, S. Abdelhak1, C. Maktouf1, T. Sfar2, A. Ayadi2, A. M’kaour3, M. 
Sioud3, N. Gueddich4, A. Belhadjali5, K. Dellagi1;  
1Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis Belvédère, Tunisia, 2C.H.U. Tahar Sfar, 
Mahdia, Tunisia, 3Hôpital d’enfants, Tunis, Tunisia, 4C.H.U, Monastir, Tunisia, 
5C.H.U. Aziza Othmana, Tunis, Tunisia.
Megaloblastic anemia 1 (MGA1) (MIM 261100), also known as the Imerslund-Gräsbeck syndrome (I-GS) is a rare autosomal recessive condition that is characterized by a selective intestinal vitamin B12 
malabsorption and proteinuria.Currently, more than 250 MGA1 patients have been identiﬁed worldwide, but the disease was prevalent in Finland, Norway and several Eastern Mediterranean regions. I-GS is genetically heterogeneous. It has been recently shown that the disease can be caused by mutations in either 
the cubilin ( CUBN ) or the amnionless ( AMN ) gene.
In the present study, we investigated the molecular defect underlying IG-S in 9 Tunisian patients belonging to six unrelated consanguineous families. Haplotype and linkage analyses, using the appropriate microsatellite markers surrounding both 
CUBN and AMN genes, 
demonstrated that 4 out of 6 families were likely linked to CUBN  
gene. The patients from these familes have been screened for the Mediterranean already published mutations by direct sequencing of the corresponding genomic DNA regions. No one of the screened mutations was observed in our population. One family showed a linkage analysis to 
AMN gene. Direct screening for the already 
reported of AMN mutations allowed the identiﬁcation of the 208-2A>G, 
previously described in Jewish Israeli patient from Tunisian origin. This observation suggests that the 208-2A>G mutation may derive from a single Mediterranean founder ancestor, consequence of population migration ﬂows. For the latest family, haplotype analyses excluded 
both CUBN and AMN genes suggesting the presence of a third gene 
locus that can cause I-GS.
P1164. Cytokine gene polymorphisms and risk coronary artery 
disease in Tatars
I. R. Timacheva1, G. H. Tuljakova1, T. R. Nasybullin1, K. I. Gubaev1, A. N. Za -
kirova2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1, O. E. Mustaﬁna1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkirian 
State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Cytokines are considered to be key players in the chronic vascular 
inﬂammatory response that is typical of atherosclerosis. Their genes are thus worthy candidates in studies of the genetic basis of coronary artery disease (CAD).We aimed to investigate whether tumor necrosis factor alpha (-308A/G TNFA), interleukin-1 beta (-511T/C IL1B, +3954C/T IL1B) and interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL1RA, 86-bp repeated sequence in intron 2) gene polymorphisms are associated with CAD in Tatars from Bashkortostan. Polymorphisms were detected in unrelated males without symptoms of cardiovascular diseases (127 Tatars) and CAD patients (115 Tatars) by the PCR or PCR-RFLP technique. Genotypes and allelic frequencies for these polymorphisms in both groups were compared using the Fisher’s exact test. The strength of an association was expressed in the terms of relative risk, calculated as odds ratio (OR). We found genotype frequency distribution of TNFA gene in the group of patients differed from that in control group. The frequency of GG genotype was 86.96% in CAD vs. 74.80% in control (OR: 2.25, P=0.022), correspondently in these groups frequencies of AG genotype were 13.04% and 23.62% (OR: 0.49, P=0.047) and frequencies of AA genotype were 0% and 1.57% (P=0.499). Frequencies of alleles and genotypes for IL1B and IL1RA gene polymorphisms in both groups were no signiﬁcantly different. Thus our results showed that in Tatars the -308A/G TNFA gene polymorphism was associated with CAD and genetic variation in or near the TNFA locus may predispose to CAD.
P1165. Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 gene (PLA2G7) 
and multiple sclerosis in Italian patients
M. Gomez-Lira1, G. Malerba1, L. Provezza1, C. Terranova1, M. D. Benedetti2, S. 
Ottavini2, A. Salviati2, P. F. Pignatti1;  
1Section of Biology and Genetics, Dept of Mother and Child, and Biology-Ge -
netics, Univ of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Dept of Neurological Sciences, Verona, 
Italy.
Several studies suggest that a pre-existing Lp-PLA2 deﬁciency may be a risk factor for several diseases having an inﬂammatory component such as multiple sclerosis (MS). We have evaluated the association of PLA2G7 gene polymorphisms with susceptibility to MS in a study including 95 MS patients and 114 healthy controls. A total of six single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) throughout the gene were examined: three missense polymorphisms (Arg92His, Iso198Thr, and Val379Ala), a deletion polymorphism (1190-20_23delGATT) in intron 11, and two polymorphisms (-402T>C and -209C>G) in the 5’-ﬂanking region. Single SNP frequency analysis showed a signiﬁcant association of the SNP -209C>G with MS (p=0.003; OR= 2.4, CI:1.29-4.5. Fisher exact test). Haplotype reconstruction revealed seven common haplotypes accounting for >80% of the chromosomes observed. Logistic regression analysis showed the association of a haplotype cointaining the allele -209G with MS (p=0.018 ; OR: 2.48, CI: 1.58-3.58). No other haplotype revealed any signiﬁcant association. This preliminary result suggests an association of -209C>G SNP with increased susceptibility to MS. The genotyping of a larger set of individuals may indicate possible interaction effects among the SNPs.
P1166. Linkage analysis in a large nonspeciﬁc X-linked Mental 
Retardation (MRX) family.
L. Spizzichino1, A. Terracciano1, I. Zito1, A. Feraco1, L. Ciocca1, M. Rosati1,2, R. 
Fischetto3, P. Chiurazzi1, G. Neri1;  
1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del S. Cuore, Roma, Italy , 2Os-
pedal San Giacomo, ALS RMA, Rome, Italy, 3Divisione di Malattie Metaboliche 
e Genetiche, Azienda Ospedaliera “Di Venere-Giovanni XXIII”, Bari, Italy.
X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) is a clinically heterogenous set 
of conditions responsible for a large proportion of inherited mental retardation. XLMR conditions were subdivided into speciﬁc (MRXS) and nonspeciﬁc (MRX) forms, depending on their clinical presentation. MRX families, whose only phenotypic manifestation is mental delay, can only be distinguished by their positional mapping, eventually leading to gene identiﬁcation. We here report on linkage analysis in a large family including 4 affected males with MRX and 4 obligate carrier females. Linkage analysis using 30 polymorphic markers spanning the entire X chromosome deﬁned a candidate region between DXS1003 (Xp11.3) and DXS1216 (Xq13.1). LOD scores are signiﬁcant (›2). We also studied the X inactivation pattern in this family with the methylation test of the AR gene. We found skewage of X inactivation in an obligate carrier, her carrier daughter and in a sister whose carrier status is uncertain. Her carrier aunt, mother of an affected individual, showed random X inactivation. This latter ﬁnding suggests that skewage of X inactivation is not always an indicator of carrier status in XLMR families. We are currently screening candidate genes in the approximately 20 Mb region delimited by DXS1003 and DXS1216, including 6 genes 
whose mutations have already been described in other MRX families.
P1167. Association study of Estrogen receptor-alpha gene with 
mineral bone density in a group of unrelated Italian females
E. Petrelli1, G. Malerba1, A. Sangalli1, L. Xumerle1, V. Braga2, P. F. Pignatti1, M. 
Mottes1;  
1Section of Biology and Genetics, Dept of Mother and Child, and Biology-Ge -
netics, Univ of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Rheumatology Unit, Univ of Verona,, 
Valeggio S/M, Italy.
Estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) gene variants have been widely investigated for their putative role in inﬂuencing bone mineral density. In a recent multipoint analysis with variance component that we performed on 118 Italian families recruited through an osteopenic/osteoporotic member, we found a weak linkage with ESR1 PvuII/XbaI haplotype at Genetic analysis, linkage, and association335
three densitometric sites. In a family based association study (TDT), 
we found that the T/A-PvuII/XbaI haplotype was preferentially non transmitted to affected sibs (p<0.01). An association was observed between C/G or C/A haplotypes with low BMD at spine and femur (Sangalli et al., submitted). We decided therefore to investigate further a putative association of ESR1PvuII/XbaI haplotypes with BMD in a sample of 182 peri and postmenopausal Italian women. Association analysis of the single markers with BMD values at spine and femur did not show any signiﬁcant association. Haplotypes were reconstructed and no signiﬁcant association with BMD values at the 2 distinct sites was observed. Genotyping has been extended to a larger set of 
females.
P1168. Genetic variability of mu-opioid receptor and 
anaesthesiological implication: preliminary study
A. Marolla1, A. De Capraris2, D. Sforza2, D. Sabato2, G. Cinnella2, L. Tullo2, L. 
Gesualdo3, M. Dambrosio2;  
1Department of "Scienze Chirurgiche", University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy , 2De-
partment of "Scienze Chirurgiche",division of anesthesia, University of Foggia, 
Foggia, Italy, 3Department of "Scienze Biomediche", University of Foggia, Fog -
gia, Italy.
There is interindividual variability in pain perception and sensitivity to 
analgesic agents. The opioids drugs are widely used in management of perioperative pain, but individual differences in the effectiveness and adverse effects of these drugs have been described.The μ receptor, encoded by OPRM1 locus, is the major target for endogenous and exogenous opioids. OPRM1 is a candidate gene for pain tolerance and differences in individual responses to opioids.The most frequent SNP, about 10-20% is a adenine substitution to guanine at position 118 resulting in aminoacid change at position 40 of aspartate into asparagine (ND40). In vitro, ND40 substitution displays three-fold enhanced binding of beta-endorphin that common allel. SNPs have not been studied in relation to intraoperative and postoperative response.18 healthy women who gave birth undergoing elective cesarean section under epidural anesthesia were randomized to receive either Levobupivacaine alone or levob. plus Sufentanil. Basal conditions were assessed on T0, every 5 minutes until T45min, on T6h and T24h, with measurement of physiological parameters. The post-operative pain was estimated on T6h and T24h by means of scale VAS (visual analog scale). IL-6 and IL-10 measurement were performed on T0, T45min, T6h and T24h blood samples. The coding and ﬂanking intron region of μ receptor gene was screened using DHPLC method. In our cohort we found 5 heterozygous patients for N40D change. Ours preliminary results suggest a possible correlation between ND40 change and pain control: lower increase of anti-inﬂammatory cytokines and lower VAS value are present in heterozygous subjects.
P1169. Coagulation factor polymorphisms in women with 
recurrent spontaneous abortion (RSA)
M. Volk1, B. Peterlin1, H. Meden-Vrtovec1, J. Vojtaššák2, S. Ostojič1, K. Geršak1;  
1Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology , Uni-
versity of Medical Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Department of Medical 
Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine Comenius University Bratislava, 
Bratislava, Slovakia.
Maternal coagulation factor mutations and gene polymorphisms have been associated with adverse pregnancy outcome. We conducted a case-control study to determine the association between the G20210A prothrombin and G1691A factor V point mutations, the factor VII Arg353Gln and factor XIII Tyr204Phe gene polymorphisms and the 
risk of RSA.Of a total of 54 Caucasian women with a history of three or more consecutive spontaneous abortions before the 20th week of gestation, 51 of them attended the Division of Medical Genetics, University of Medical Center Ljubljana and three of them were ascertained at the Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine Comenius University Bratislava. As a control group, 55 age and ethnicity matched controls with at least two live births and no history of pregnancy loss were included. Polymerase chain reactions were performed to analyze the point mutations of G20210A prothrombin and G1691A factor V, and the gene polymorphisms of factor VII Arg353Gln and factor XIII Tyr204Phe.We found statistically signiﬁcant differences in factor VII gene polymorphism frequencies. The frequency of factor VII Arg353Gln heterozygotes in the control group was 29% (16/55) versus 11% (6/54) in the study group (p=0.019; OR=3.28; 95% CI=1.17-9.18). No signiﬁcant differences in frequencies of genotypes of other tested coagulation factors and the occurrence of RSA were observed.Our ﬁndings implicate that Arg353 allele of coagulation factor VII might be a protection factor against RSA. Further studies comprising of larger numbers of women with RSA are needed to conﬁrm our ﬁndings.
P1170. First evidence that a rare genetic polymorphism with high 
penetrance may be involved in the aetiology of endometriosis
K. T. Zondervan1, J. Lin2, G. Dawson3, D. Zabaneh3, V. Smith3, S. Bennett3, A. 
Carey3, S. A. Treloar4, L. Cardon1, I. J. Mackay3, J. Mangion3, S. Kennedy2;  
1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Nufﬁeld 
Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Oxagen 
Ltd, Abingdon, United Kingdom, 4Queensland Institute of Medical Research, 
Brisbane, Australia.
Background - Endometriosis (the presence of endometrial-like deposits outside the uterus) is a common complex disease associated with pelvic pain and subfertility in women of reproductive age. Its aetiology remains largely unknown, although familial aggregation of the condition has been demonstrated in humans as well as non-human 
primates.
Methods - In a recently conducted genome-wide linkage study, 256 Caucasian families each containing at least 2 sister-pairs with endometriosis were recruited; 52 of these families were found to contain 3 or more affected members (41 families with 3 cases; 10 with 4; and 1 with 5). Non-parametric genome-wide linkage analyses in the 52 families were conducted in Merlin, using sex-speciﬁc recombination information from the Rutgers linkage-physical map. Parametric linkage analyses were conducted using GeneHunter.
Results - Six LOD score peaks with Kong & Cox LOD scores greater than 1 were found. One of the peaks, on chromosome 7, reached a LOD of 3.49 (simulation-based genome-wide signiﬁcance value: p=0.007). Subsequent parametric analyses provided a heterogeneity LOD of 3.92, using a model of a low frequency (0.002), highly penetrant (0.85 for heterozygotes; 1 for homozygotes) disease allele. Results of haplotype analyses using additional markers in the region, and of further phenotypic analyses exploring the presence of subfertility and 
pelvic pain, will be presented.
Conclusion  - A rare genetic polymorphism with high penetrance may 
be involved in the aetiology in a subgroup of women with endometriosis. Finding this polymorphism and its function may provide a ﬁrst insight in 
the pathologic pathway of this condition.
P1171. Evaluation of Nyholt's Procedure for Multiple Testing 
Correction
D. Y. Salyakina1, S. R. Seaman1, B. L. Browning2, F. Duidbrige3, B. Müller-Myh -
sok1;  
1Max-Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany, 2GlaxoSmithKline, Re -
search Triangle Park, NC, United States, 3MRS Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge´, 
United Kingdom.
A simple method for accounting efﬁciently for multiple testing of many SNPs in an association study was recently proposed by Nyholt (2004), but its performance was not extensively evaluated. The method involves estimating an `effective number' of independent tests and then adjusting the smallest observed p-value using Sidak's formula based on this number of tests. We sought to carry out an empirical and 
theoretical evaluation of Nyholt's method.Nyholt's method was applied to a sample of 31 genes typed at a total of 291 SNPs and permutation used to determine the type-I error rate 
for each gene.The nominal 5% type-I error rate varied from under 3% to over 7%, and was dependent on linkage disequilibrium. Theoretical considerations show further that the method can be very conservative in the presence 
of haplotype block structure.Although Nyholt's approach may be useful as an exploratory tool, it is 
not an adequate substitute for permutation tests.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association336
P1172. Familial secundum atrial septal defect maps to 
chromosome 15
H. Matsson ;  
Uppsala university, Uppsala, Sweden.
Atrial septum defect (ASD) is a common congenital heart defect affecting 
4 in 100,000 individuals. ASD of the secundum type is characterised by an incomplete coverage of the ostium secundum resulting in a left-to right shunting. The effects of the ASD range from subclinical to severe symptoms including pulmonary hypertension, arrhythmias and heart failure. ASD is mostly sporadic but several familial cases have been reported. We describe two extended Swedish families with isolated autosomal dominant ASD. Using polymorphic microsatellite markers, we performed a genome wide scan in search for chromosomal regions linked to ASD. Linkage to the previously described candidate loci including the 
COMP and GATA4 genes were excluded for the two 
families. We identiﬁed a 23 cM region on chromosome 15 (15p11-q13) which is linked to the disease phenotype. The region is restricted by recombination events between the markers D15S165 and D15S659 and we calculated a maximum cumulative LOD score for the two families of 3.6 assuming full penetrance. Candidate genes are now investigated in the linked region for structural mutations from affected 
family members.
P1173. Analysis of inﬂuence of genes involved in control of bone 
and cartilaginous metabolism on pathogenesis of idiopathic 
osteoarthritis of knee-joint
M. V. Aseev1, M. V. Moskalenko1,2, N. N. Kornilov1;  
1Ott's Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion.
We studied an association of polymorphic allelic variants of genes, involved in control of bone and cartilaginous metabolism with clinical 
course and severity of idiopathic osteoarthritis of knee-joint (IOKJ).Study group included 112 patients with idiopathic osteoarthritis of knee-joint. Patients were diagnosed according to clinical and radiographic data. According to disease anamnesis, intensity of functional abnormalities, efﬁciency of conservative methods of treatment and successfulness of clinical effect patients were divided onto three groups with different kind of IOKJ progression: slowly, moderately and rapidly progressive. Also all patients were subdivided onto three groups by stages of degenerative-dystrophic lesion of knee-joint according to clinical and radiographic classiﬁcation by Kossinskaya.The comparision of genotypes frequencies of the vitamin D3 receptor (VDR), collagen type I (COL1A1), collagen type II (COL2A1), calcitonin receptor (CALCR) and osteocalcin (BGLAP) genes in patients with IOKJ and in controls revealed an association between the TT genotype of the CALCR gene and rapidly progressive osteoarthritis of knee-joint and also an association of the hh genotype of the BGLAP gene with 
mild IOKJ.Conducted analysis of genotypes association of the VDR, COL1A1, CALCR and BGLAP genes taking into account the interaction of alleles of these genes allowed to reveal an association of the TT Tt genotype (CALCR and VDR) with rapidly progressive OA and the hh SS genotype (BGLAP and COL1A1) with severity of disorder. Thus all the genes we have studied which control bone and cartilaginous metabolism direclty or indirectly involved in pathogenesis of osteoarthritis on different 
stages of disease.
P1174. The MTHFR 677C>T/1298A>C double heterozygous 
genotype CT/AC occurred in higher frequency in the older group 
of abdominal aortic aneurysm patients
E. Strauss1, K. Waliszewski2, A. L. Pawlak1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 
2Department of General and Vascular Surgery; University Hospital nr 1, 
Poznan, Poland.
In a group of 83 males with abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA), treated with trans-abdominal surgery, the two polymorphisms of the MTHFR gene (677C>T and 1298A>C) were determined. The group has been characterized for the diabetes mellitus (DM) co-occurrence and age of the aneurysm development to diameter of more than 50 mm (at which the surgery was performed). The age range was 51-81; DM was diagnosed in 15 patients. The group of non-DM AAA patients was divided according to the age of surgery into the <=65 and >65 years old. In the older group (n=43) the frequency of MTHFR 1298 AC genotype (59%) was higher as compared to that in the younger (n=25) group (34%) (p=0,02, Fischer exact test). Also the frequency of the MTHFR 677C>T/1298A>C combined heterozygotes (CT/AC) was higher in the older group of non-DM AAA patients (36%) as compared to that in the younger group (17%) (p=0,04, Fischer exact test). The frequency of MTHFR 677 CT genotype in the older group (46%) did not differ from that in the younger group (45%). We conclude that the age of the aneurysm development as well as the DM co-occurrence may inﬂuence the assessment of the role of the the MTHFR gene polymorphisms in pathogenesis of AAA. The ﬁnding of the increased frequency of the MTHFR 677C>T/1298A>C double heterozygous genotype CT/AC in the older patients group expands also the earlier ﬁnding of the association between the AAA occurrence and the MTHFR 677CT genotype (Strauss, 2003).
P1175. Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor-1 4G/5G polymorphism 
and cardiovascular disease in Iran
S. Zare-Karizi1,2, S. M. Seifati3, S. M. Hosseini-Mazinani2, N. Hoseinpur-No -
bari2, F. Soheilifar2, M. J. Hashemi4, H. Azarnik4, J. Koochmeshgi2,5;  
1Azad University, Science and Research Campus, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 2National Research Center for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology , Teh -
ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Maybod Genetics Center, Yazd, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 4Sh. Rajaie Heart Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Research 
Institute for Life, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) molecule is primarily known for its role in counteracting plasminogen activation andimpairing ﬁbrinolysis. It has been observed that high plasma PAI-1 levels are associated with an aggravated prognosis of myocardial infarction in the acute phase. On these bases, PAI-1 has been implicated in thrombotic events and has been considered as a risk factor for cardiovascular disease. PAI-1 also plays a role in several patho-physiological processes, presumably independent of plasminogen activation: The link between PAI-1 and the metabolic syndrome has been long established. During the last decade, strong association has emerged between plasma PAI-1 levels and parameters of the metabolic syndrome (Body Mass Index, visceral fat, blood pressure, plasma levels of insulin or proinsulin, triglycerides, LDL particles, free fatty acids, and HDL cholesterol). One line of research has focused on genetic polymorphisms of PAI-1, particularly the 4G/5G insertion/deletion in the promoter region of the gene. This polymorphism affects transcription rates. 4G/5G polymorphism has been investigated in connection with cardiovascular disease in association studies in various populations with varying results. Here, we report preliminary results of our ongoing case-control association study in Iran, which point to a possible link between PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphism and cardiovascular 
disease in this population.
P1176. Haplotype analysis of tumor necrosis factor alpha / 
lymphotoxin alpha, interleukin 1, -10, and vitamin D binding 
protein in COPD patients from Russia
D. G. Yanbaeva1, G. F. Korytina1, S. Z. Zagidullin2,3, T. V. Victorova1,2;  
1Institute of biochemistry & genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir Medical 
State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Department of Pulmonology, Ufa, 
Russian Federation.
Inﬂammation plays an important role in the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). It has been suggested that the inﬂammatory mediators’ imbalance play a role in chronic inﬂammation. We investigated a panel of polymorphisms: interleukin 1b(-511C/T and +3953C/T) and the IL-1 receptor antagonist (VNTR 86 bp in intron 2), tumor necrosis alpha (-308G/A) and lymphotoxin alpha (252A/G), interleukin 10 (-592A/C and -627C/A) and vitamin D binding protein (416Glu/Asp and 420Thr/Lys in exon 11) genes in patients with COPD to determine whether haplotypes of these genes are linked to a genetic 
susceptibility to COPD.Gene polymorphisms were examined in 282 individuals affected COPD and compared with a healthy control group of 227 subjects. Polymorphisms were examined by a PCR-RFLP method. Haplotype frequencies were estimated with EH software program (Rockefeller 
University; NY).The likelihood ratio test showed a signiﬁcant linkage between the Genetic analysis, linkage, and association337
alleles of the TNF/LTA gene family, IL1 and IL10 polymorphisms both 
in patients and controls. For IL10 haplotypes differences in frequencies between cases and controls reach signiﬁcance (x2=18.58, p<0.001). The frequency of -592C/-627A haplotype was higher in COPD patients (21% versus 14% in controls, x2=6.39, p=0.01, OR=1.6, 95%CI 1.10-2.33), thus, another haplotype -592C/-627C was signiﬁcantly decreased (13% in controls versus 6% in COPD). In case of VDBP, statistically powered linkage between exon 11 polymorphisms was 
observed only in COPD patients group.Our results provide new insights on a possible involvement of IL10 gene in susceptibility for COPD even though further investigations are necessary to clarify ﬁndings.
P1177. The G2019S LRRK2 mutation in autosomal dominant 
European and North African Parkinson’s disease is frequent and 
its penetrance is age-dependent
S. Lesage1, P. Ibanez1, E. Lohmann1,2, P. Pollak3, F. Tison4, A. L. Leuteneger1, 
M. Tazir5, J. Guimaraes6, A. M. Bonnet2, Y. Agid1,2, A. Dürr1,7, A. Brice1,7, and the 
French Parkinson’s Disease Genetics StudyGroup;  
1INSERM U679 (former U289), Neurologie et Thérapeutique Expérimentale, 
Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France, 2Fédération de Neurolo -
gie, CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France, 3Département de Neurologie, 
CHU de Grenoble, Pavillon de Neurologie, Grenoble, France, 4Service de Neu -
rologie, Hôpital Haut-Lévèque, CHU de Bordeaux, Pessac, France, 5Service de 
Neurologie, CHU Mustapha, Alger, France, 6Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital de 
Egas Moniz, Lisboa, Portugal, 7Département de Génétique, Cytogénétique et 
Embryologie, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France.
Parkinson’s disease (PD), the second most common degenerative 
disorder of adulthood, is characterized clinically by rigidity, bradykinesia, resting tremor, and postural instability with good initial response to 
levodopa.Mutations in LRRK2 (PARK8) were recently identiﬁed in autosomal dominant Parkinson’s disease (ADPD), including the G2019S mutation that was found in different populations. In order to evaluate its frequency, we analyzed 200 index cases with ADPD, mostly from Europe and North Africa. Surprisingly, the frequency in North African families (41%; CI 18.4-67.1) was much greater than in those from Europe (2.8%; CI 0.9-6.5) (p<0.001). The clinical features in 21 patients, including one with an homozygous mutation were those of typical PD but with later onset and lower Mini Mental scores (MMSE). There were also 15 still unaffected mutation carriers, aged 32 to 74, indicating the existence of age-dependent penetrance. LRRK2 mutations appear to be a common cause of ADPD, particularly in North Africa.
P1178. CF modulating genes
H. Cuppens1, J. Yarden1, D. Radojkovic1, M. Jaspers1, R. Vlietinck1, C. De 
Boeck2, M. Macek Jr.3, V. Vavrova3, D. Zemkova3, P. Lebecque4, J. J. Cassi -
man1;  
1Department of Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2De-
partment of Pediatrics, UZ Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 3School of Medi -
cine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Departments of Pediatrics 
and Medical Biology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Université Catholique 
de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) is a lethal genetic disease caused by mutations in the cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) gene. Pulmonary disease in CF patients, the main cause of morbidity and mortality of these patients, is variable and inﬂuenced by secondary genetic factors as well as environmental factors. Individual genes were initially investigated in a considerable number of studies for a modulating effect on the CF phenotype. More lately, larger association studies have been set up aiming at the study of many genes for their potential modulating effect on the CF phenotype. We performed a study in Belgian and Czech CF patients, aiming at the analysis of 51 genetic variants from 22 genes. We focused on proteins that are part of the host defense/protection system and proteins that directly or indirectly interact with CFTR. It was found that genetic variants from seven genes involved in the host defense/protection system and two genes encoding proteins that interact with CFTR inﬂuence CF pulmonary function, indicating that a more efﬁcient immune system is beneﬁcial to CF patients. However, when looking at all CF associationstudies performed for any gene, a 100% consensus of a gene being a CF modulator or not, is not obtained. Most studies use different designs, and although the study-design of some studies may be questionable and therefore result in contradictory wrong ﬁndings, the ﬁndings of the different studies, especially the larger ones, will be complementary and their ﬁndings should be interpreted in that context. An overview of the ﬁndings, limitations and recommendations of CF association 
studies will be given.
P1179. Molecular analysis of eotaxin gene SNPs in Italian 
children with atopic dermatitis
L. Rigoli1, C. Di Bella1, E. Canfora1, V. Procopio1, G. Pajno1, R. A. Caruso2, C. 
D. Salpietro1;  
1Department of Paediatrics, University School of Medicine, Messina, Italy , 2De-
partment of Human Pathology,University School of Medicine, Messina, Italy.
Atopic dermatitis (AD) is often associated with a family history of atopy. Two types of AD have been identiﬁed: the extrinsic (EAD), or allergic form, and the intrinsic (IAD), or non allergic form.. In our study, the prevalence of genotypes at -426 C>T,-384 A>G and 67 G>A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) sites of eotaxin gene have been investigated in EAD and IAD children and in their relatives. Seventy and seven children (44 females and 43 males) (age range 3 months-12 years) suffering with AD were selected from 31 nuclear families (Department of Paediatrics, University of Messina, Sicily, Italy). The severity of AD was measured through the SCORAD Index. Genotyping was carried out by the PCR-RFLP method. We ampliﬁed three regions of the eotaxin gene, each of which included a SNP site,-426C>T, -384A>G, 67G>A. As regard
 the -426 SNP genotype,  a 
signiﬁcant difference was found between EAD children (p<0.05) and EAD relatives, and nonatopic control ( p<0.05 ); as well between EAD and IAD children (
P<0.01).The frequency of this SNP was no different 
between the IAD relatives and the control group. No signiﬁcant association was observed between the 67G>A and-384A>G SNPs and EAD children in respect to control group; as well between IAD children and controls. Similar results have been found in their relatives. Our data underline the possible role of some speciﬁc SNPs of the eotaxin gene in the development of extrinsic atopic dermatitis in the children with a familial occurrence of AD and/or other allergic diseases.
P1180. Analysis of genetic polymorphisms in elitè Sardinian 
(Italy) athletes.
E. M. Ghiani1, C. M. Calò2, I. S. Piras1, M. I. Cireddu2, M. Massidda2, G. Vona2;  
1Department of Experimental Biology, Anthropology Section, University of Ca -
gliari, Monserrato, Italy, 2Inter Faculty of Sport Science, University of Cagliari, 
Monserrato, Italy.
In human endurance performance capacity is characterized by a large degree of inter-individual variation in the general population and even in well-trained, athletic individuals. There is a little doubt that performance is inﬂuenced by environment, as the effects of diet and training on athletic ability have long been known, if not completely understood; however, the contribution of an individual’s genetic make up is less clear. The dominance of particular nationalities, ethnic groups, or families in various sporting events is often perceived as evidence that heritage (biological or cultural), plays a role in the development of athletic skills. Numerous researchers have attempted to elucidate the effects of genetic background on physical performance and to identify the speciﬁc genetic variants that contribute to performance. In order to contribute to estimate the importance of the genetic on endurance performance capacity, we used molecular biology and genetic advanced methods through the study of polymorphic genes in elitè athletes. The examined polymorphisms have a correlation with the physiological parameters that are involved in endurance performance capacity. 37 elitè Sardinians (Italy) athletes (10 males and 27 females) were studied. They practised hockey, soccer, rhythmic gymnastic, artistic gymnastic, and track athletic. The samples were analyzed for one Alu polymorphism (ACE) and six RFLP markers (APOE, FGB HindIII, FGA TaqI, FBG BclI, PAI HindIII, GpIIIa TaqI). The results were compared with a control samples from Centre and South Sardinia. Preliminary results showed a relevant signiﬁcant correlation between elitè athletes and ACE and GpIIIa genotypes.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association338
P1181. Interleukin 1 Alpha Gene 5’- Regulatory Region 
Polymorphism in Alzheimer's Disease
E. Dursun1, D. Gezen Ak2, T. Ertan2, B. Bilgic3, H. Gurvit3, M. Emre3, E. Eker2, 
F. Engin2, S. Yilmazer1;  
1Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 
Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, 
Department of Geropsychiatry, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, 
Department of Neurology, Behavioral and Movement Disorders Unit, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
Interleukin-1 is a pluripotent immunomodulatory cytokine that has 
an initiating role in cellular and humoral immunity in the periphery. It is reported that a polymorphism in the 5’-ﬂanking regulatory region at -889 of the interleukin-1 alpha (IL-1alfa) gene may cause an over expression of IL-1 alfa, which is also shown to be associated with inﬂammatory diseases and Alzheimer’s disease. In this preliminary study, our aim was to determine if there is an association between IL-1 alfa gene and late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. We collected blood samples from 52 cases of dementia of Alzheimer type and from 35 age-matched controls (mean ages 75.1±5.7, and 72.7±7.3, years respectively). Patients are clinically diagnosed by Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Department of Geropsychiatry and Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neurology, Behavioral and Movement Disorders Unit according to DSM-IV criterias. Salting-out method with 5M NaCl is used for DNA isolation. We used polimerase chain reaction-confronting two-pair primers (PCR-CTPP) to test for an association between Alzheimer’s disease and a polymorphism at -889 of the IL-1 alfa gene. After genetic analysis of the IL-1 alfa gene, we found 63.5% genotype C/C, 32.7% genotype C/T, 3.8% genotype T/T for patients, and 48.6% genotype C/C, 45.7% genotype C/T, 5.7% genotype T/T for healthy control. When the control and patitents were compared for C/C, C/T and T/T genotypes we saw that the distribution of genotypes and alleles did not differ according to Chi-square test (p=0.39). Our preliminary results show no signiﬁcant increase in the risk for the T/T or C/T genotype in late-onset cases. Thus, we were unable to ﬁnd an association between the C -889T transition on IL-1 alfa gene and late-onset Alzheimer’s 
disease.
P1182. A Comparison of Disease-Based linkage disequilibrium in 
HLA haplotypes of multiple sclerosis and narcolepsy patients: A novel approach for dissecting HLA associations
J. P. Rubio1,2, M. Bahlo1, R. K. Burfoot1, S. Huxtable1, J. Stankovich1, L. John -
son1, H. Butzkueven2, L. Lin3, B. Taylor4, T. P. Speed1, T. J. Kilpatrick2, E. Mi -
gnot3, S. Foote1;  
1The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Department of Ge -
netics and Bioinformatics, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 2The Howard Florey 
Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 3Center For Narcolepsy, Stanford Univer -
sity School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, 4Royal Hobart Hospital, 
Hobart, Tasmania, Australia.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) and narcolepsy are distinct neurological 
disorders, which are both associated with the HLA-DRB1*1501-DQB1*0602 (DR15) haplotype. For MS, however, strong evidence exists for another risk locus at the telomeric end of HLA complex. Thirteen microsatellite markers (D6S2236-G51152), and the DRB1/DQB1 genes, were genotyped in 166 MS simplex families from the Australian State of Tasmania, and 153 Narcolepsy simplex families from the USA. Allelic association was observed for three microsatellite markers; MOGCA (p=0.002), HLA-FCA (p=0.03) and D6S265 (p=0.05) at the telomeric end of the classical class I region only in MS families. We compared haplotype-speciﬁc linkage disequilibrium (LD) for the extended 7.1 (HLA-A*0301-B*0702-DR15) haplotype in MS and narcolepsy patients to map the telomeric MS risk locus. Haplotypes were inferred using MERLIN, and a novel algorithm (HAPLOCLUSTERS) was used to determine haplotype association across 6.79 Mb of the HLA complex. Long-range haplotype association was observed in MS families across the entire region, and association was strongest (p<0.00001) from MOGCA to G51152. Telomeric of MOGCA, association decreased gradually across the extended class I region, and D6S105 was identiﬁed as the distal boundary of the disease risk interval. In narcolepsy families, haplotype association was conﬁned to a genomic segment centromeric of D6S265 and distal of G51152. There are a number of pathologically distinct common human diseases, which are associated with the same HLA variant, or ancestral HLA haplotype. We propose that our approach to dissecting population LD from disease-based association should be broadly applicable for the genetic mapping of other HLA loci.
P1183. Genetic predisposition to atletic performance: analysis of 
ACTN3 R577X polymorphysm by real time pcr.
V. Romano-Spica, A. Paparini;  
IUSM, Rome, Italy.
Athletic performance is inﬂuenced by training, environmental factors 
and genetic predisposition. Independently by the individual attitude and skills, muscle and sarcomer proteins represent the fundament of an effective movement. Alpha-actinins (ACTN) are a family of actin-binding proteins related to dystrophin. A premature stop codon in ACTN3 gene (11q13-14) in position 1.747 on exon 16 (R577X) has been shown to play a role in sport performance, even though it seems not involved in human myopathies. ACTN3 is present only in type II ﬁbres and congenital deﬁciency involves about the 16% of the world population, suggesting that its absence at the Z lines of scheletal muscle fast ﬁbres can be compensated by other factors.We have developed a real time pcr procedure to simultaneously type R577X and Q523R polymorphisms and evaluated their distribution in the general population (n= 102) and in a sample of athletes. Data were compared with previous studies and conﬁrmed the presence of a large percentage of homozygote subjects deﬁcient in ACTN3 in the general population. In this Italian population sample we observed the following R577X polymorphism distribution: 22% XX homozygote, 47% RX heterozygote, 31% RR homozygote. Allelic frequencies did not signiﬁcantly differ in the endurance athletes even if variations were observed. Haplotype distribution conﬁrmed the presence of an interesting linkage disequilibrium. Analysis of polymorphisms at sarcomeric proteins opens up promising perspectives not only for understanding the rehabilitation process in myopathies, but also for 
shedding light on the role of genes in sport excellence predisposition.
P1184. Angiotensin I-Converting Enzyme (ACE) and Low-density 
lipoprotein Receptor-related Protein-Associated Protein 1 
(LRPAP1) gene polymorphisms in a population of northern Italy
A. Santovito1, C. Bulgarello2, M. DelPero1, M. P. Bigatti1, P. Cervella1;  
1Human and Animal Biology Department, Turin, Italy, 2Casa di Cura Hospital, 
Lecco, Italy.
In light of the signiﬁcant impact of the Angiotensin I-Converting Enzyme 
(ACE) and Low-density lipoprotein Receptor-related Protein-Associated Protein 1 (LRPAP1) gene polymorphisms on genetic susceptibility to cardiovascular diseases, the present work attempts to determine the frequencies of ACE and LRPAP1 allele polymorphisms in a control populations of Nord-West Italy (525 unrelated individual aged between 1 and 100 years, mean age 48±22.2 years). In order to analyze the relationship between ACE and LRPAP1 gene polymorphisms and age, the sample was subdivided in 3 age groups: 1-30 (n = 146); 31-50 (n = 199) and 51-100 years old (n = 117).ACE genotype frequencies were: 6,10% for 
Alu insertion genotype (I/
I), 38,10% for genotype without Alu insertion (D/D) and 55,80% for I/D 
genotype. Allele frequencies were 43,52% for the I allele and 56,48% for the D allele. Differences in D/D genotype frequency between age groups were signiﬁcant, with the lower value in the more aged group 
(χ2 test, 0.01<p<0.02). This result could suggest a selective advantage 
for I/I genotype. In the case of LRPAP1 gene, the genotype frequencies were: 1,15% for the normal genotype (I/I), 63,79% for the 25 bp double deleted genotype (D/D) and 35,06% for the I/D genotype. Allele frequencies were 26.31% for the I allele and 73.69% for the D allele. No sex differences were found. For LRPA1P1 gene the more aged group showed a signiﬁcant higher value in D/D genotype frequency (0.001<p<0.01). No signiﬁcant differences between groups were found in ACE I/I-LRPA1P1 D/D double genotype frequency.Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology339
P1185. Cystic Fibrosis is not a frequent disease in Cyprus 
except for a village with founder effect and very high carrier 
frequency of 1/14
V. Neocleous1, P. Yiallouros2, M. Zeniou2, M. Tzetis3, E. Kanavakis3,1, C. Del -
tas4;  
1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Makarios 
Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Athens University, Athens, Greece, 4University of 
Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Cystic Fibrosis is a common autosomal recessive condition in 
Caucasians, with average carrier frequency of 1/25. In the Greek-Cypriot population of about 650000 we diagnosed during the past 12 years, 27 patients, 24 of whom are alive. Thus, about 1/83 people is a carrier of a CF mutation. The most frequent mutation is F508del, accounting for 43.8% of mutant alleles. The second most frequent is L346P (12.5%), carried by 6 patients in heterozygosity. Apparently this is a Cypriot mutation, as it has not been reported in other populations, to our knowledge. It is found in compound heterozygosity with other severe mutations, and we reckon it is a mild mutation dominating over the severe one, since all patients carrying it have milder phenotypes. Other mutations are: 1677delTA (6.2%), 3849+10kbC>T, (4.2%), S549N (4.2%), N1303K (4.2%), M348K (2.1%), 2789+5G>A (2.1%), W1282X (4.2%), G542X (2.1%), Unknown (12.5%). Interestingly, in Athienou, a village of 4500 people, we located a large family with two affected siblings, presently deceased. In an epidemiological study involving more than 800 people, 1/14 was a carrier of F508del, most probably as a result of founder effect, dating back to the times that the Ottomans conquered Cyprus. The legend has it that after the Ottomans conquered Famagusta at the Southeast coast, some noble Francs who escaped the massacre, moved to a region close to Athienou. Interestingly, most of our patients, >70%, presented with dehydration and electrolytic disturbance during summer months. During the past 
years we performed 8 prenatal diagnoses.
P1186. Y-chromosome bi-allelic and STR markers in the three 
main ethnic groups of modern Bosnia-Herzegovina
D. /. Marjanovic1, S. Fornarino2, N. Bakal1, S. Montagna2, R. Hadziselimovic1, 
D. Primorac3, S. Vidovic4, N. Pojskic1, V. Battaglia2, A. Achilli2, A. Torroni2, S. 
Andjelinovic5, K. Drobnic6, A. Santachiara-Benerecetti2, O. Semino2;  
1Institute for genetic engineering and biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, 2Dipartimento di Genetica e Microbiologia “A Buzzati-Traverso”, 
Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Medical School at Split University,, Split, Croa -
tia, 4Faculty of Medicine, University of Banjaluka, Banjaluka, Bosnia and Herze -
govina, 5Medical School at Split University, Split, Croatia, 6Forensic Laboratory 
and Research Center, Ministry of the Interior, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
The variation at 28 Y-chromosome bi-allelic markers was analysed in 256 males (90 Croats, 81 Serbs and 85 Bosniacs-Muslims) from Bosnia-Herzegovina. In addition, 100 individuals (35 Bosniacs, 31 Serbs, 34 Croats) have been also analyzed at twelve Y-chromosomal short tandem repeats loci. An important shared feature between the three ethnic groups is the high frequency of the “Palaeolithic” European-speciﬁc haplogroup (Hg) I, a likely signature of a Balkan population re-expansion after the Last Glacial Maximum. This haplogroup is almost completely represented by the sub-haplogroup I-P37 whose frequency is higher in the Croats (~71%) than in Bosniacs (~44%) and Serbs (~31%). Other rather frequent haplogroups are E (~15%) and J (~7%), together with R-M17 (~14%). Hg E, almost exclusively represented by its subclade E-M78, is more common in the Serbs than in Bosniacs and Croats; Hg J observed in only one Croat, encompasses ~9% of the Serbs and ~12% of the Bosniacs, where, it shows its highest differentiation. Differently, Hg R-M17 harbours similar frequencies in all three groups. Overall, the three main Bosnia-Herzegovina groups, in spite of some quantitative differences, share a large fraction of the same ancient gene pool. At the STR analyses, 81 different Y-STR haplotypes were detected, 69 of them were unique. Six of twelve not singleton haplotypes were shared by different population groups: two of them by Croats and Bosniacs, two by Bosniacs and Serbs and the last two by Serbs and Croats, thus testifying recent gene ﬂows 
between groups.P1187. The epidemiology of Leber hereditary optic neuropathy 
(LHON) in Finland
A. Puomila1,2, S. Kivioja1, M. Savontaus1, E. Nikoskelainen1, K. Huoponen1;  
1University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Turku Graduate School of Biomedical Sci -
ences, Turku, Finland.
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) has been estimated to be one of the most common mitochondrial disorders, with a prevalence of 3.22 of 100 000. In Finland, among a population of 5.2 million individuals, we have identiﬁed 36 genealogically unrelated LHON families with at least one affected family member. During the 25-year research period, we have identiﬁed large families, collecting information mainly by going through Finnish parish records. The three primary mutations in the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and mtDNA haplogroups were determined in all families; in addition, entire mitochondrial genomes were sequenced in some patients. Heteroplasmy was detected in 14% (5/36) of the families. Penetrance values were determined for all pedigrees separately and combined; and for instance, for different 
primary mutations and genders.The total penetrance of LHON was notably higher among males (32%) than among females (10%). The male-female ratio was 3.2:1 which is in accordance with previous studies. A combined penetrance value calculated for all families varied only slightly between different primary 
mutations.
P1188. Sao Miguel: the genetic history of an Azorean island 
described by HLA Class I and Class II genes
P. R. Pacheco1,2, C. C. Branco1,2, A. Lismond1, L. de Fez1,2, R. Cabral1,2, B. R. 
Peixoto1,2, L. Mota-Vieira1,2;  
1Hospital Divino Espirito Santo, Azores, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciên -
cia, Oeiras, Portugal.
Sao Miguel is the biggest and most populated island (131,609 
inhabitants) of the Azores archipelago (Portugal). Here, we present the frequencies of alleles and haplotypes for Class I (A, B and Cw) and II (DRB1, DQB1, DPA1 and DPB1) at the DNA level in Sao Miguel. Blood samples were taken, after informed consent, from 106 unrelated blood donors, whose parents were born in the same locality. HLA typing was carried out using PCR-SSP from Olerup SSP. Statistical analysis was performed with Arlequin v.2.0. and phylogenetic trees were constructed by using the genetic distances between populations (DA) with the DISPAN software. Our data shows that the gene diversity at the seven loci is high (0.9997) and that all genotype frequencies are in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. We identiﬁed 16 HLA-A alleles, 24 HLA-B alleles, 13 HLA-C alleles, 6 HLA-DPA1 alleles, 22 HLA-DPB1 alleles, 5 HLA-DQB1 alleles and 13 HLA-DRB1 alleles, of which the most frequent are, respectively, A*02 (GF=0.2500), B*44 (GF=0.1557), Cw*07 (GF=0.3113), DPA1*01 (GF=0.4623), DPB1*0401 (GF=0.3161), DQB1*03 (GF=0.3208) and DRB1*07 (GF=0.1698). The most frequent three-locus haplotype in S. Miguel is of West European origin, HLA-A*01-B*08-DRB1*03 (HF=0.0802). We also found the Iberian-North African haplotype HLA-A*30-B*18-DRB1*03 (HF=0.0047), the Iberian-Berbers haplotype HLA-A*02-B*51-DRB1*13 (HF=0.0047) and a Mongol haplotype HLA-A*02-B*44-DRB1*04 (HF=0.0142). These observations suggest an important mixture of alleles from geographically distinct areas, which agree with the history of settlement and molecular data from Y-chromosome. The HLA data presented here will be useful to study the molecular basis of autoimmune diseases in Azores. (paularpacheco@hdes.pt) Funded by DRCT-Azores.
P1189. Demographic and baseline clinical data of 638 patients 
with Fabry disease: latest analysis from FOS - the Fabry 
Outcome Survey
A. Mehta1, M. Beck2, G. Sunder-Plassmann3, U. Widmer4;  
1Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 2University of Mainz, Mainz, 
Germany, 3Medical University, Vienna, Austria, 4University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
Background: Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by deﬁcient activity of the lysosomal enzyme α-galactosidase A. Progressive accumulation of the enzyme substrate in cells throughout the body leads to organ failure and premature death. Treatment for this disease has recently become available in the form of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). To determine the efﬁcacy and Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology340
safety of ERT with agalsidase alfa, FOS - the Fabry Outcome Survey 
- was established. The present analysis of the FOS database aims to provide demographic information and baseline data on the natural 
history of Fabry disease.
Methods: The FOS database was analysed in terms of patient 
demography and baseline manifestations of Fabry disease.
Results: As of November 2004, 638 patients (387 receiving agalsidase alfa and 251 currently untreated) were enrolled in FOS from 11 European countries. For the ﬁrst time since FOS was initiated in 2001, there are more female patients (n=324) than males (n=314); 59 of the female and 48 of the male patients are under 18 years of age. Approximately one-third of these children have signiﬁcant signs and symptoms before 10 years of age. A severity score, based on the Mainz Severity Score Index, conﬁrms the progressive nature of Fabry disease with age in both male (
r=0.53; p<0.001) and female ( r=0.48; 
p<0.001) patients.
Conclusion : FOS is providing valuable information on Fabry disease 
not only in men, but now also in women and children. The baseline data available will allow the effects of ERT with agalsidase alfa to be quantiﬁed.
P1190. Genetic diversity of the Azorean population revealed by 
13 short tandem repeats
C. C. Branco1,2, P. R. Pacheco1,2, R. Cabral1,2, L. de Fez1,2, B. R. Peixoto1,2, L. 
Mota-Vieira1,2;  
1Molecular Genetic and Pathology Unit, Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo, Ponta 
Delgada, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.
The knowledge of population history, demography and genetic structure has proven to be fundamental to address research in human genetics. Here, we describe the genetic diversity of Azorean population and its afﬁnity with other populations by the analysis of 13 microssatelite loci (TPOX, D3S1358, FGA, CSF1PO, D5S818, D7S820, D8S1179, TH01, vWA, D13S317, D16S539, D18S51 and D21S11) in 257 unrelated blood donors. These short tandem repeat (STR) markers were typed by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) with ﬂuorescently labelled primers. Allelic frequencies were statistically analysed using Arlequin v.2.0, and phylogenetic trees based on Nei’s genetic distance were constructed with the DISPAN software.Analysis of microsatellite loci shows that the Azorean population presents a very high gene diversity (1.000). For each marker, gene diversity range between 0.661 for TPOX and 0.8812 for D18S51. Heterozigosity values calculated for each STR varies from 64.2% for TPOX to 87.1% for D18S51, although the majority of markers show values superior to 80%. Moreover, allele frequencies are similar to those obtained for mainland Portugal and other European populations. This result is corroborated by the dendrogram, in which Azores clusters with Italians, Belgians, Portuguese and Spanish, apart from Moroccans and Cabo Verdeans.Taken together, these data indicate that the gene pool of the Azorean population is very diverse and are consistent with our previous results on Y-chromosome (Pacheco PR, Ann Hum Genet, 2005). Moreover, the major afﬁnity with Portuguese and other European populations is primarily guided by the settlement history of the Azores archipelago. (claudiacbranco@hdes.pt). Funded by DRCT (Azores).
P1191. The DNA bank from the population of Sao Miguel Island 
(Azores): a resource for genetic diversity studies
L. Mota-Vieira1,2, P. R. Pacheco1,2, M. L. Almeida3, R. Cabral1,2, J. Carvalho3, C. 
C. Branco1,2, C. Matos3, L. de Fez1,2, M. Loura3, B. R. Peixoto1,2, A. L. Araújo3, 
P. Mendonça3;  
1Genetics and Molecular Pathology Unit, Ponta Delgada, Portugal, 2Instituto 
Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal, 3Haematology Department, Hospital 
Divino Espirito Santo, Ponta Delgada, Portugal.
The peopling of São Miguel Island in the 15th century was made by Portuguese and settlers of foreign origin (Flemish, Jews, Moorish prisoners and black slaves). There is a signature of admixture in the settlement history of São Miguel, thus to unravel the population genetic background, we decided to establish a human DNA bank in order to characterize the population’s polymorphisms.Here, we describe the construction of the DNA bank, and analyse the information of 1000 samples obtained from healthy blood donors. The bank follows the international ethical guidelines, which include Informed Consent, conﬁdentiality, anonymity of personal data, and abandonment in case of expressed will. DNA was isolated from blood samples, coded and immediately stored in a locked refrigerator. The identiﬁable DNA bank has self-reported data concerning sex, age, birth, current place of living, and parental birthplaces. The samples are representative of all the island’s municipalities (r=0.995, p<0.01). The majority (87%) of the participants are male, with mean age of 36.3 y (18-64y). Birthplace analysis reveals that 902 (90%) have both parents born in São Miguel. Moreover, 477 (54%) have their parents born in the same locality, conﬁrming high rate of consanguinity in rural area.To date, this DNA bank was used to assess the Y-chromosome phylogeny and diversity in Azorean population (Pacheco PR, Ann Hum Genet, 2005, in press). Now, we are analysing autosomal STRs for the better understanding of the gene pool and genetic structure of the archipelago’s population. (lmotavieira@hdes.pt). Funded by DRCT, 
Azores.
P1192. Haplogroup distribution and Polymorphism in the non-
coding region of human Mitochondrial DNA in persian patients harboring LHON primary G11778A, G3460A, T14484C and G14459A mutations
M. Shafa Shariat Panahi1, M. Houshmand1, A. Tabassi2, M. H. Sanati1;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB), T ehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Farabi Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a maternally inherited 
form of retinal ganglion cell degeneration leading to optic atrophy in young adults. It is caused by four primary point mutations including G11778A, G3460A, T14484C and G14459A in the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA).The mutation rate for mtDNA is about 10 times more than nuclear DNA. The D-loop region is a hot spot for mtDNA alterations and it contains two hypervariable regions (HVS-I and HVS-II). In order to identify polymorphic sites, genetic background and also to ﬁnd out any possible association between LHON primary mutations and mtDNA haplogroups (hg), the complete non-coding region of mitochondrial DNA from 25 unrelated LHON patients harboring one of the primary mutations was sequenced.Any differences with cambridge sequence recorded as single base substitution (SBS), numerical changes in C-tract (PCT), insertions and deletions.Our results showed that majority of our patients belonged to hg J, T and HV rather than hgs U1, U3, U4, U5 and W, which found only in one patient(4%). Nucleotide substitutions make up the majority of the mutations. (94.5%) We have predominantly found transitions (79.2%) and a signiﬁcantly lower frequency of transvertions (15.3%) whereas insertions (5.5%) as well as deletions (0%) are rather rare. Ten polymorphisms were newly identiﬁed in this study not published in the mitomap database. Also PCT changes were present in all of our samples. The analysis presented here for the ﬁrst time provides evidence that there is association between G3460A with hg W and U5 and also between G14459A with hg U1.
P1193. Nijmegen breakage syndrome - inherited syndrome of 
chromosomal instability in the population of Slovakia.
K. Melterova, V. Pohanka , M. Patrik, J. Melter;  
Srobar Institute for Children's Respiratory Diseases, Dolny Smokovec, Slovakia.
Molecular genetic method was establish for simply screening detection of slavic mutation 657del5 of NBS1 gene on both alleles. We have investigated 724 samples of dry blood blots of newborns from north Slovakia, 427 samples DNA of oncologic patients, 32 persons of 7 families within 4 probands were detected as homozygots and 4 probands as heterozygots, 4 of 10 siblings were heterozygot-carriers of the mutation. Immunological and oncological parameters such as IgA, IgG, IgM, IL2, IL4, IFN, TNF, CD3, CD4, CD8, CD16, CD19, CD64 and AFP, B2MG, CEA, Ferritin were investigated in patients and 
carriers of NBS1 gene mutation.Incidence of the slavic mutation of NBS1 gene in the group occurred 1:181. The mutation of 657del5 was ﬁnd also in gipsy ethnicum. No slavic mutation of NBS1 gene was detected in the group of oncologic patients.The most frequent defects of immunity was IgA (a)hypogammaglobulinemia (IgA<0.08g/l, accompanied with the reduction of CD19+ B-Lymfocytes (BLyCD19+ <70cells/ul <10.9%, TLyCD3+ <695cells/ul <67%, TsLyCD8+ <330 cells/ul <29,4%, ThLyCD4+ <378cells/ul <44.2%). No signiﬁcant differencies in Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology341
immunity were detected in heterozygot-carriers.
High incidence of 657del5 mutation of NBS1 gene in Slovakia correspond with other slavic countries. Detection of 657del5 mutation of NBS1 gene by used PCR method is usefull to conﬁrm diagnosis of NBS and also for the screening to ﬁnd carriers of the mutation to prevent of NBS. While homozygot-patients suffer immunodeﬁciences and malignancies, heterozygot-carriers are well compensated with 
physiologic allele.The research project was sponsored by Slovak Science and Technology Assistance Agency.
P1194. FSHB gene polymorphisms and haplotype patterns in 
European, African and Asian populations
M. Grigorova , M. Laan;  
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
Follicle-stimulating hormone (follitropin, FSH) belongs to gonadotropin 
hormones family. Like all gonadotropins follitropin consists of α- and β- subunits. α-subunit is common in all gonadotropin hormones. β-subunit is hormone speciﬁc. Follicle-stimulating hormone β-subunit plays the important role in human sexual development and reproduction. Gene expression pattern is time and tissue speciﬁc. FSHB gene has highly conserved structure and function, and little non-synonymous variation. Nowadays all identiﬁed coding changes give rise to infertility. This circumstance is asserting follitropin β-subunit gene strong negative selection. Non-coding changes have high frequency in population and this circumstance refers either to polymorphisms evolutionary old-age or strong evolutionary selection. Despite of importance of FSHB gene in human reproduction, the general population variation and haplotypic 
structure of FSHB has not been investigated.This research project aims to (a) survey FSHB variation world-wide by resequencing and RFLP analysis strategy and (b) investigate whether the identiﬁed gene variants have functional consequence. In all studied populations (Estonia, Mandenka, Han, Korea, Czech, CEPH panel) the majority of identiﬁed single nucleotide polymorphisms are frequent variants (30% minor allele frequency). Only one major haplotype (A) is present in all studied populations. However, in European populations also other major haplotype (B) was found, which coincides with chimpanzee FSHB gene sequence. The tests for selective neutrality showed that this two haplotypes (A and B) have been favoured by selective pressure. Genotype data and allelic distribution of FSHB gene have shown that haplotype B is more prevalent in women with 
minimum (<3 months) time to become pregnant.
P1195. The structure and the load of hereditary diseases in 
Seversk, Russia.
L. Minaycheva , O. Salyukova, L. Nazarenko, J. Kotalevskaya;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
The results of medical-genetics investigation Seversk’s population are represented in this article. Seversk city are situated in region of inﬂuence of large nuclear-chemical complex - Siberian Chemical Plant. The number of investigative population was 117 thousand people. The 26 nosological forms of autosomal dominant diseases with 68 patients were revealed, and more often was the group of hereditary syndromes. Autosomal recessive pathology includes 26 nosological forms with 60 patients. The group of neurological diseases and the group of hereditary syndromes had the same number of nosological forms. X-linked diseases are represented 4 nosological forms, 10 affected persons were found. The load of autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, X-linked pathology was 0.89; 0.89 per 1000 individuals respectively and 0.29 per 1000 men. The hereditary pathology spectrum in the populations studied was described. The total load of hereditary diseases in Seversk’s population was 2.07 per 1000 individuals and was comparable with other Russian populations 
located in the radionuclide purity regions.
P1196. A reliable technique to identify G6PD-deﬁcent 
heerozygous subjects showing the Mediterranean or non-
Mediterranean phenotypes
A. Tagarelli, A. Piro, F. Condino, L. Bastone, G. Tagarelli;  
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy.
Differential expression due to cellular mosaicism in heterozygotes for G6PD deﬁciency is the basis for unreliable identiﬁcation. We compared two techniques for their identiﬁcation: measurement of the enzymatic activity or that of the percentage of erythrocytes without activity (cytochimic analysis). The sample comprised 105 "obliged" heterozygous (G6PD B
+/G6PD B-) having at least one normal son 
(G6PD B+; mean activity = 9.3 ± 1.0 U/gHb; 0.0% erythrocytes 
without activity), and a G6PD B- Med deﬁcient son (G6PD B- Med; 
electrophoretic mobility = 100/100; activity < 5% of 9.3 U/gHb; 99.6% ± 1.7 of erythrocytes without activity) or G6PD B
- non-Med deﬁcient 
son (G6PD B- non-Med; electrophoretic mobility = 100/100; activity > 
5% of 9.3 U/gHb; 74.1% ± 19.6 of erythrocytes without activity). The heterozygotes were subdivided into 49 G6PD B
- Med, and 56 G6PD 
non-Med with mean activities of 5.8 ± 2.3 U/gHb and 5.6 ± 1.8 U/gHb, respectively, compared with 9.6 ± 1.0 U/gHb in the normal women. The subsamples showed 51.1% ± 33.6 of erythrocytes without activity and 31.2% ± 27.3, respectively, compared with 0.0% of the normal women. By measurement of activity, 9/56 G6PD B
- Med deﬁcient heterozygotes 
and 11/49 G6PD B- non-Med heterozygotes, mimicking normal activity, 
were not identiﬁed. Test sensitivity was 80.9%. By cytochimic analysis, 2/49 G6PD B
- non-Med heterozygotes and 3/56 G6PD B- Med 
heterozygotes were not identiﬁed. Test sensitivity was 95.2%. In mass screening, the cytochimic analysis is a reliable technique to identify G6PD deﬁcient heterozygotes showing the G6PD Med or G6PD non-
Med phenotype.
P1197. Finding the needle in the haystack: Selecting Ancestry 
Informative Markers through bulk analyses.
P. Kersbergen1,2, J. K. van Duijn3,2, W. J. F. de Leeuw2, J. T. den Dunnen4, A. 
D. Kloosterman2, M. Kayser3, P. de Knijff1;  
1Leiden University Medical Centre (Forensic Laboratory for DNA Research), 
Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Netherlands Forensic Institute, The Hague, The 
Netherlands, 3Department of Forensic Molecular Biology, Erasmus MC - Univer -
sity Medical Centre Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 4Leiden University 
Medical Centre (Leiden Genome Technology Centre), Leiden, The Netherlands.
In our search for Ancestry Informative Markers (AIMs), we utilised the Affymetrix Mapping 10K array, which enables the typing of more than 10,000 Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) per individual. Only 250 nanograms of DNA are sufﬁcient enough to obtain the genotypes via restriction digest, anchor-primed PCR and hybridisation. In a screening of 76 cell lines, representing humans from six different geographical areas, we successfully scored over 10,000 out of 11,560 
SNPs (i.e. a call rate of approximately 95%).SNPs that were typed in less than 90% of the individuals were removed from the ﬁnal dataset. Further analyses were performed on the remaining 8650 assorted SNPs. The statistical program STRUCTURE was used in order to obtain an unbiased estimate of the number of genetically distinct human sub-groups. To assess which speciﬁc SNPs could differentiate between sub-groups, F
ST -values were calculated 
via different approaches (estimators) in a biased (six sub-groups) and unbiased (four sub-groups) fashion. AIMs were identiﬁed by different 
FST-estimators under pre-set restrictions, which resulted in virtually no 
SNPs in the biased, and 47 SNPs in the unbiased classiﬁcation. The 47 SNPs have a between SNP physical distance of at least 20 Mb. On the basis of these 47 SNPs STRUCTURE analysis was repeated, resulting in an identical result as obtained when using the 8650 SNP-
set.Our analyses indicate that it is not possible to identify the most optimal set of SNPs by means of a single F
ST estimator. However, AIMs could 
be successfully identiﬁed by means of a multifactorial approach.
P1198. Language and genes of the greater Himalayan region
T. Kraayenbrink1, E. J. Parkin2, D. R. Carvalho-Silva3, G. L. van Driem4, J. R. 
M. L. Opgenort4, .. Karma Tshering of Gaselô4, G. Barbujani5, I. Dupanloup5, G. 
Bertorelle5, N. M. Tuladhar6, C. Tyler-Smith3, M. A. Jobling2, P. de Knijff1;  
1Leiden University Medical Center (Forensic Laboratory for DNA Research), 
Leiden, The Netherlands, 2University of Leicester (Department of Genetics), 
Leicester, United Kingdom, 3The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, 
United Kingdom, 4Leiden University (Himalayan Languages Project), Leiden, 
The Netherlands, 5University of Ferrara (Department of Biology), Ferrara, Italy, 
6Tribhuvan University (Centre for Nepal and Asian Studies), Kirtipur, Nepal.
The greater Himalayan region includes the highest land barrier on the face of the Earth and displays a very complex socio-cultural system. It is known that populations separated by barriers (both geographical Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology342
and cultural) tend to undergo both linguistic and genetic change and, 
indeed, the greater Himalayan region is the area of the greatest 
phenotypic and linguistic diversity in the Eurasian continent.Linguistic and archaeological studies of this region have provided strong evidence that prehistoric population movements throughout the Eurasian continent have been strongly inﬂuenced by topography. However, there are several models for the peopling of Eurasia which are still debated and, unfortunately, few genetic data are available from 
the greater Himalayan region.In an attempt to shed some light on these issues, we have sampled about 1000 individuals from Nepal and 1000 from Bhutan, representing some 35 to 40 different groups (based on language, geography and/or caste). These samples are currently being analysed for genetic polymorphisms on the autosomes, the mitochondrial genome, and the Y chromosome. This will enable us to compare and test alternative 
models for the peopling of the Himalayan region.Preliminary results (on 21 autosomal- and 24 Y-chromosomal STRs) support the categorisation of Himalayan populations into a Tibeto-Burman (TB) and an Indo-European-speaking (IE) family. Based on the current results, subdivision of the TB branch is more apparent in 
Bhutan than in Nepal.
P1199. Micro-differentiation among different sub-populations in 
Corsica.
G. Sole1, V. Latini1, L. Varesi2, M. Memmi'2, G. Vona3, P. Mascia1, A. Cao1, M. 
S. Ristaldi1;  
1INN-CNR, Selargius - Cagliari, Italy, 2University of Corte, Corte, France, 3Uni-
versity of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
It is well known that genetic isolates have a great potential for the identiﬁcation of genes involved in the pathogenesis of multifactorial diseases. In these populations the disease allele reveals Linkage Disequilibrium (LD) with markers over signiﬁcant genetic intervals, therefore facilitating disease locus identiﬁcation. We have already shown a high degree of LD in populations of Corsica. In the present study we have examined the amount and decay of LD with distance in some sub-populations of Corsica (Corte, Niolo, Bozio, Ajaccio) and in the general population of Corsica to verify if there are differences 
between these subgroups .We have studied the Xq13.3 genomic region that has been widely used as a measure of general LD in a given population and to compare the 
levels of LD between populations.We have found an extreme variability of amount of LD: Bozio and Niolo show an high degree of LD while Corte, Ajaccio and the general population of Corsica show low degree of LD. The same variability characterizes the pattern of disequilibrium: distance can explain from less than 2% up to 50% of the total LD variation in these different sub-populations. These results are likely due to a different genetic structure in these isolates: number of founders, expansion rate, amount of immigration are factors that could affect the observed micro-differentiation and LD extension.Our results stress the importance of choosing the proper sub-populations to carry out association studies, because different demographic history of the isolated populations could affect the validity of results.
P1200. The penetrance of HFE C282Y mutations with respect to 
hepatocellular carcinoma is low in a U.K. population
B. A. Jennings1, V. Bardsley2, I. W. Fellows2, R. Lonsdale2, J. Z. Wimperis2, G. 
Willis2;  
1UEA, Norwich, United Kingdom, 2Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, 
Norwich, United Kingdom.
Although  most patients with hereditary haemochromatosis have HFE 
C282Y mutations, the risk to HFE C282Y homozygotes of developing 
fatal diseases such as hepatocellular carcinoma is uncertain. Our aims were to determine the proportion of diagnosed hepatocellular carcinoma patients who are homozygous for the 
HFE C282Y mutation 
and to estimate the penetrance of this genotype with respect to hepatocellular carcinoma in East Anglia.Tissue biopsies were analysed from 144 cases of hepatocellular carcinoma for 
HFE C282Y mutations. Data were retrieved from the 
East Anglian Cancer Intelligence Unit, from appropriate life tables and from our publications describing the frequency of 
HFE mutations in a 
large sample of the local population.8/144 of the cases were homozygous for the HFE C282Y mutation, 
all 8 cases were male and 6 had been previously diagnosed with hereditary haemochromatosis. The frequency of this genotype was 13.1 times higher in the male hepatocellular carcinoma cohort than in the control cohort. For this cohort, we estimate that the penetrance of 
the HFE C282Y homozygous genotype, with respect to hepatocellular 
carcinoma, was between 1.31 % and 2.1% for males and was zero for 
females.In this population, individuals who are homozygous for the 
HFE 
C282Y mutation have a small but signiﬁcantly increased risk of being 
diagnosed with hepatocellular carcinoma.
P1201. Investigation for D-loop variations, haplogroup 
association and mitochondrial deletions in Iranian patients with 
Friedreich's Ataxia
M. Rostami Kalkhoran1, M. Shafa Shariat Panahi1, M. Houshmand1, M. H. 
Sanati1, S. Naﬁsi2, A. Soltanzadeh2;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB), T ehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Neurology Department, Shariati Hospital, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Friedreich's ataxia (FA) is one of the commonest genetic cause of 
ataxia and is associated with the expansion of a GAA repeat in intron 1 of the frataxin gene.Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) could be considered a candidate modiﬁer factor for FA disease, since mitochondrial oxidative stress is thought to be involved in the pathogenesis of these diseases. The Displacement loop(D-loop),which is 1124 bp in size is a noncoding region contains two HyperVariable Segments( HVS-I and HVS-II).We studied 15 Iranian patients (9 females and 6 males) from 7 unrelated families.In order to identify polymorphic sites, genetic background and also to ﬁnd out any possible association between FA and mtDNA haplogroups(hg),the complete non-coding region of mitochondrial DNA from 15 unrelated FA patients harboring GAA trinucletide expansions was sequenced. Alignment were made upon the Cambridge Reference Sequence (CRS) and any differences recorded as single base substitu
tion(SBS),insertions,deletions and numerical changes in C-tract(PCT)PCT changes were present in all of our samples.One polymorphisms (C16176A) was newly identiﬁed in this study population,not recorded in the human genome database.(Mitomap) Our results also showed that none of our patients had association with D-loop haplogroups.Deletions were present in 75% of our patients representing mtDNA damage that may be due to Iron accumulation in mitochondria and hypersensitivity to oxidative stress.The results indicate that increased levels of HVS-I and HVS-II substitutions may be an indicator of mitochondrial DNA instability. Furthermore, mtDNA mutations may play an important role in pathogenesis of FA.
P1202. Relation between isolated orofacial clefts and maternal 
diseases in Hungary
M. Szunyogh1, E. Puhó1, J. Metneki1, J. Sandor1, A. Czeizel2;  
1National Center for Epidemiology, Department of Human Genetics and Epi -
demiology, Budapest, Hungary, 2Foundatoins for the Community Control of 
Hereditary Diseases, Budapest, Hungary.
The objective of the study was to evaluate the possible association between all maternal diseases and isolated orofacial clefts (OFC) in Hungary.The occurrence of acute and chronic maternal diseases was compared among different types of OFC, in addition between cases with OFC and population and patient controls, multiple logistic regression was used. The data set of the large population-based Hungarian Case-Control Surveillance of Congenital Abnormalities, 1980-1996, was evaluated which includes 1,975 cases with isolated OFC (1,374 cases with cleft lip ± cleft palate (CL±CP) and 601 cases with posterior cleft palate (PCP)), 38,151 matched population controls (without defect) and 20,868 patient controls with other defects. Data collection was based on medical records, maternal data by a self-reported questionnaire 
and home visits in nonrespondent families.Our study showed an increased risk for (CL±CP) in mothers with inﬂuenza, common cold, orofacial herpes and gastroenteritis and for posterior cleft palate in mothers with inﬂuenza, sinusitis and bronchitis during the critical period of these defects. Among chronic maternal diseases, epilepsy and angina pectoris showed a higher prevalence in 
the mothers of cases with OFC.Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology343
Some maternal diseases are risk factors for the pathogenesis of 
isolated OFC. It is worth considering the prevention of possible harmful effect (e.g. fever) of acute maternal diseases, such as inﬂuenza, 
common cold and others.
P1203. The elongation factor 2 - a candidate gene for the aging 
process in man?
S. Schulz1,2, C. Gläser2, N. Teichert1, I. Hansmann2, K. Werdan1, U. Müller-
Werdan1;  
1Dep. of Internal Medicine III, Halle, Germany, 2Inst. of Human Genetics, Halle, 
Germany.
The aging process is characterized by an imbalance of a variety of different metabolic processes including e.g. overall protein synthesis. The EF2, catalyzing the last step of peptide chain elongation, is moreover considered to be a candidate gene of the aging process. However, up to now it is unclear whether genetic variants of EF2 might inﬂuence its biological activity. Therefore, we screened the EF2 gene for novel genomic variants (SSCP-analysis) in 470 longstanding healthy volunteers of Central Germany (mean age: 42,5
+11,2 y, male: 
63%). Four novel genomic variants were identiﬁed in the promoter region (PM: c.- 61C>T), in exon10 (PM: c.1632T>C, mutation: c.1677G>A) and in exon12 (mutation: c.2109T>C) by use of SSCP-analyses. The two mutations (c.1677G>A, c.2109T>C) are rare and in each case only one heterozygous carrier was identiﬁed. Genotype frequencies of both the promoter-PM (CC/CT/TT: 0,63/0,32/0,05) and the PM in exon 10 (CC/CT/TT: 0,89/0,09/0,02) are in Hardy-Weinberg-equilibrium. An evaluation of the two polymorphisms in relation to the age of the blood donors revealed signiﬁcant differences in the distribution pattern only for the PM in exon 10. Homozygous carriers of TT- (38,2
+12,8y) were signiﬁcantly younger than CT- (41,2 +10,5y) 
and CC-carriers (43,2 +11,2y) (one-way-anova; p<0.047). Because of 
the higher frequency of CC-carriers at higher age, this PM could be considered to be a protective factor in the aging process. Although this PM does not result in an amino acid substitution, this genomic variant might inﬂuence the biological activity of EF2 possibly due to a change 
in expression on transcriptional and/or translational level.
P1204. Thymidylate synthase (TS), 2T gene polymorphism is a 
risk factor for acute leukemia
C. G. Ekmekci1, R. Bu2, S. Tuncer1, M. Gutierrez2, K. Bhatia2, U. Ozbek1;  
1Instıtute For Experimental Medical Research, Istanbul, Turkey, 2KFNCCC&R, 
King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Clinical and pathologic aspects of leukemia are well documented but we still need to know more about the genes that inﬂuence disease. Role of the folate pathway in leukemia susceptibility have been reported. One of the branch of folate metabolism is thymidylate synthase and it plays critical role in supplemantation of deoxynucleotides required for DNA synthesis. TS gene located on choromosome 18p11.32 and it has unique tandem repeat in the 5’UTR and this area shown to be polymorphic containing either 2 or 3, 28-bp repeats and was shown to affect gene expression in vitro- in vivo studies.We aimed to research the affect of TS polymorphism in the development of acute leukemia. Therefore we examined thymidylate synthase(TS) 28 bp repeats gene polymorphism in childhood ALL (n= 110) and in pediatric and adult AML samples(n= 126). We get DNA from each samples white blood cell and made PCR using with speciﬁc primers. Ampliﬁed PCR products were visualized on a 4%agorase gel with ethidium bromide. Results were compared with results of healty control group (n=133). Statistical analysis were made on Fisher’s exact test by 
SPSS for windows software.Table 1: TS gene polymorphism in Turkish ALL, AML, control group
Genotype ALL(n=110)(%) AML(n=126)(%) Control(n=133)(%)
2T/2T 22 (%20) 17 (%13,5) 22 (%16,5)
2T/3T 47 (%42,7) 72 (%57,1) 67 (%50,4)
3T/3T 41 (%37,3) 37 (%29,4) 44 (%33,1)
2T/2T polymorphism was found statistically signiﬁcant for the development of ALL (p=0.048, 2-sided). On the other hand, we couldn’t ﬁnd any relation in between other genotypes and acute leukemia.P1205. Investigation of Mitochondrial haplogroups among 
Iranian patients affected with pulmonary tuberculosis
B. Hooshiar Kashani1, M. M. Banoei1, M. Houshmand1, M. Mirsaeidi2, L. 
Zargari2, P. Tabarsi2, M. Amiri2, S. Mansouri2, M. H. Sanati1;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2National Research Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung Dis -
ease, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Introduction:Tuberculosis is one of the most common infectious diseases in the world. Host genetic factors play a main role in the susceptibility to infectious diseases such as this disease. Also many studies have been published about relation between mitochondrial haplogroup and 
disorders.
Method and Material:We studied mtDNA haplogroups M, N, J and K among Iranian patients affected with pulmonary tuberculosis. 54 patients with smear positive tuberculosis have been chosen randomly. All of patients were chosen based on having an Iranian nationality, age above 15 yrs and conﬁrmed smear positive pulmonary TB. Also 261 healthy controls have been 
chosen regards to ethnicities and location of patients.
Results:Our studies showed haplogroups M and N had similar frequencies between patients and normal control, so that 1.85% and 72.2% for haplogroup M and N, 2.44% and 83.3% for haplogroup M and N in patients and normal control, respectively.While frequencies of haplogroups J and K showed signiﬁcantly different among patients and healthy control. These results indicated 5.5% and 16.6% for haplogroups J and K in patients whilst we observed 9.39% and 7.14% for haplogroups J and K in controls respectively.
Discussion:So far any results have been published about role of mtDNA haplogroups in susceptibility to infectious diseases such as tuberculosis, so this might be the ﬁrst study to realize relation between haplogroups and susceptibility to diseases. Results show haplogroups J and K may involve in this susceptibility, but more patients should check for 
haplogroups J and k others.
P1206. The analysis of associations of mitochondrial DNA 
polymorphism with cardiovascular system function in Tuvinians
S. V. Buikin1,2, M. V. Golubenko1, V. P. Puzyrev1,2;  
1Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State 
Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
In studying of the widely spread diseases, one of the possible 
approaches is to investigate genetics of normal organism functioning. Among others, energy production might be one of the key factors in deﬁning function of cell. Cardiovascular system which is frequently involved in multifactorial diseases may response to deviations in mechanisms of energy production. We studied population polymorphisms in mitochondrial DNA encoding for proteins of respiratory chain in association with some parameters of cardiovascular system (blood pressure measures and electrocardiography data) in ethnically pure population of Tuvinians (people from South Siberia region). 203 inhabitants of Teely village were investigated (102 males, 101 females). For mitochondrial DNA, data on HVS-I sequence (frequent polymorphic sites), T16519C polymorphism (+HaeIII16517) and restriction-based haplogroups were used as possible inﬂuencing factors. One-way analysis of variance was used for detection of associations, and all variables were adjusted by age. The association was found for blood pressure measurements on both arms in males with HaeIII16517 polymorphism as well as with substitution in positions 16092 or 16093 (P<0.05). There were no signiﬁcant associations with ECG parameters. In addition, using abundant haplogroups as factors (haplogroups B, C, D, M) did not reveal any association either. This fact suggests that the polymorphisms in noncoding regions of mtDNA can be considered as involved into mtDNA function and, in turn, in cardiovascular system function. The study was supported by RFBR 
grant 04-04-48792.
P1207. Investigation of vitamin D receptor gene variants in 
Iranian patients affected with pulmonary tuberculosis
S. Amri1, M. M. Banoei1, B. Hooshiar Kashani1, M. Houshmand1, M. Mirsaeidi2, 
P. Tabarsi2, L. Zargari2, M. Amiri2, S. Mansouri2, M. H. Sanati1;  Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology344
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2National Research Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung Dis -
ease, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Environmental and host genetic factors involve in susceptibility to 
infection disease such as tuberculosis. Host genetic factors including vitamin D receptor gene (VDR) shows inﬂuence in susceptibility to several disease like pulmonary tuberculosis. Interaction between vitamin D receptor and vitamin D, 1, 25 dihydroxyvitamin D3 as an important immunoregulatory hormone appear on human monocytes and activated T and B lymphocytes. Variations in the vitamin D receptor gene inﬂuence in susceptibility to in fectious diseases.It was studied to ﬁnd out variants of polymorphism of this gene. 
Bsm 
I, Taq I and Fok I polymorphisms of VDR gene were studied in PTB 
patients (n= 54) and normal population who examined clinically to 
exclude any disease. All of patients were chosen based on having Iranian nationality, age above 15 yrs, conﬁrmed smear positive pulmonary TB and all of healthy controls were matched in nationality and age with samples. DNA was extracted from whole blood and PCR- RFLP technique used to determine variants of mentioned 
polymorphisms of VDR gene.Our studies showed a signiﬁcantly difference in two Taq1 and 
Bsm1  
polymorphisms between patients and healthy controls, so that the frequencies for TT, tt and BB, bb were 53.3%, 7.6% and 50%, 7.6% in patients, while these frequencies were 12.9%, 31.4% and 22.2%, 33.3% in controls, respectively. 
Fok1 polymorphism hasn’t showed 
any different among samples and controls. Our results showed that homozygocity in two Taq1 and 
Bsm1 polymorphisms can play a main 
role in susceptibility to tuberculosis in our patients.
P1208. Genetic diversity and differentiation of Y-chromosomal 
lineages in North Eurasia
V. Stepanov, V. Kharkov, M. Spiridonova, A. Marussin, V. Puzyrev;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Composition and frequency of Y-chromosomal haplogroups, deﬁned by the genotyping of 36 biallelic loci in non-recombining part of Y-chromosome, was revealed for native population of Siberia, Central Asia and Eastern Europe. Slavonic ethnic groups, which geographically represent Eastern Europe, are characterized by the high frequency of R1a1, I*, I1b, and N3a clades and by the presence of R1b3, J2, E, and G. Most frequent haplorgoup is R1a1, which comprises 44-51% of Y-chromosomes. The distinguishing peculiarity of Central Asian Caucasoids is the high frequency of Caucasoid clades R1a1, J*, J2, and the presence of R1b3 and G. Twenty-ﬁve haplogroups were found in gene pool of native Siberian populations. Only 7 of them have the frequency higher than 3%. In sum these 7 clades comprise 86% of Siberian samples. In populations of Southern Siberia the most frequent haplogroup is R1a1. The high frequency of N3a is characteristic for Eastern Siberians, and in Yakuts its frequency is almost 90%. Koryaks, Buryats and Nivkhs have the highest frequency of C3* lineage among investigated populations. Haplogroup O* revealed with variable frequency in most of Siberian. Highest frequency of Q* was found in Kets and Northern Altayans (85% and 32%, respectively).The high level of genetic differentiation of North Eurasian population on Y-chromosomal lineages was revealed. The proportion of inter-population differences in the total genetic variability of region’s population according to the analysis of molecular variance is 19.04%. Genetic differences between territorial groups took 6.9% of total genetic variability, whereas 12.8% is the inter-population differences within groups.
P1209. The involvement of estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) in 
Alzheimer ‘s disease is mediated by apolipoprotein E (APOE).
R. M. Corbo1, G. Gambina2, M. Ruggeri3, E. Broggio2, R. Scacchi4;  
1La Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, 2Verona Hospital, Verona, Italy, 3S. 
Giovanni Hospital, Rome, Italy, 4CNR Institute of molecular biology and pathol -
ogy, Rome, Italy.
In the present investigation we studied the role of ESR1 in the susceptibility to sporadic Alzheimer’s disease (AD), its interactions with APOE gene polymorphism, and its effect on APOE plasma levels. Genotype and allele frequencies of ESR1 polymorphisms PvuII and XbaI did not differ between AD patients ( n=279) and controls (n=212). The interactions between ESR1 and APOE polymorphisms in AD susceptibility were evaluated by logistic regression analysis which showed that the presence of ESR1 PP and/or XX genotypes together with APOE e*4 allele confers an elevated risk for AD (O.R. = 12.8, 95%CI 1.7-98.0, p=0.01) three times higher than that associated with the presence of e*4 only (O.R.= 3.9, 95%CI 2.3-6.5, p<0.00001). In both AD patients and controls APOE plasma levels were determined as well. AD patients carrying e*4 showed signiﬁcantly lower APOE concentrations (3.0 ± 1.2 mg/dl,) compared with non-e*4 carriers (4.1 ± 2.0 mg/dl). Considering ESR1 genotypes, PP and XX homozygotes showed signiﬁcantly reduced APOE concentrations (3.0 ± 1.4 and 3.1± 1.5 mg/dl respectively). Patients carrying both APOE e*4 allele and ESR1 PP or XX genotypes showed the lowest APOE concentrations (2.7± 1.2 and 2.8 ± 1.32 mg/dl) suggesting an addittive effect of the two genes on APOE levels. Since in brain APOE has a neuroprotective action, we suggest that the increased risk for AD associated to the presence of ESR1 PP and/or XX genotypes together with APOE e*4 allele could be explained by the remarkable reduction of APOE levels 
associated to them.
P1210. The frequency of CCR5 - Δ32 in Western Anatolia
S. Pehlivan1, M. Cilek1, M. Pehlivan2, A. Ozcan1, E. Karaca3, F. Ozkinay3, G. 
Itirli1, C. Ozkinay3;  
1Ege University, Faculty of Science, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ataturk Education and Re -
search Hospital, Department of Internal Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege Univer -
sity, Genetic Diseases Research and Application Center, Turkey, Izmir, Turkey.
It has been shown that a 32 base pair deletion in the C-C Chemokine Receptor 5 (CCR5) gene plays an important role in determining susceptibility to infection by human immune deﬁciency virus type I (HIV-1). In this study, we aimed to asses the frequency of the CCR5-Δ32 allele in healthy Turkish population living in Western Part of Turkey.The mutation was investigated in 515 noninfected unrelated (ages between 13-40, male to female ratio 1.1/1) individuals from related 
area.The frequency of the CCR5-Δ32 in study group was found to be 6.4%. This frequency was detected to be around 
≅10% in European Countries 
whereas it was 0 -4% in Southern Asia and Africa. The frequency found in Turkish population is between the frequencies described in Northern Countries and Southern Countries and supports the historical and geographial distribution of Δ32 allele of CCR5 proposed by different 
authors.This is the ﬁrst study investigating Δ32 allelic frequency in Western Part of Anatolia and shows a correlation with the study covering Ankara (Middle Anatolian) population. Further studies covering the other parts of Anatolia will contribute to demonstrate the regional differencies or correlations in Turkey.
P1211. Markedly high frequency of SMNt deletion in the Iranian 
population
T. Parsa1, M. Montazer Haghighi1, A. Ghamari1, K. Kahrizi1, M. Shahmoradgoli1, 
Y. Riazalhosseini1, A. Motamed Tehrani1, A. Urtizberea2, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2AFM, Institut de Myologie, Hospital 
de la Salpetriere, Paris, France.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a hereditary neurodegenerative disease often causing death in early childhood. This disease is caused by anterior -horn-cell death in the spinal cord leading to paralysis and skeletal muscular atrophy. The candidate gene for this disease is survival motor neuron gene (SMN) that exists in two nearly identical copies; telomeric SMN (SMNt) and centromeric SMN (SMNc). Because of gene deletion or conversion, exon 7 of SMNt gene is homozygously absent in approximately 94% of typical SMA patients. SMA affects approximately 1 in 10,000 live births with a carrier frequency of approximately 1 in 50. In this study we decided to determine the carrier frequency of this disease which is extremely common in Iran. Two hundred unrelated individuals were selected from different ethnic populations of Iran. In all individuals, exon 7 of SMN gene was ampliﬁed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and PCR products were digested by DraI restriction enzyme and then electrophoresed on 8% polyacrylamide gel. In all steps, control samples which were normal for SMN alleles, heterozygote and homozygote for the deletion of exon 7 were used. To differentiate carriers and normal individuals, the intensity of digested fragments was analyzed by LabWorks software to calculate the ratio of telomeric to centromeric portion of SMN gene. Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology345
Surprisingly, the carrier frequency of this disease seems to be around 
12%, and not evenly distributed among the ethnic subgroups that is much higher than the carrier frequency of 1/40 to 1/60 that has been reported before in the West.
P1212. Are the recommendations on the prevention of neural 
tube defects working?
C. Stoll ;  
Genetique Medicale, Strasbourg, France.
Many studies showed that reduction by an estimated 80% or more of neural tube defects (NTD) by consumption of folic acid from before 
conception is achievable.The objectives of this study were to evaluate the effectiveness of recommendations on folic acid aimed at reducing the occurrence of 
NTD in our region.Cases of NTD were ascertained among liveborn infants,stillbirths,and terminations of pregnancy.Incidences and trends in rates of NTD before and after 1992(the year of the ﬁrstrecommendations)and before and after 1995(the year of local recommendations)were obtained.The results showed that the issuing of recommendations on folic acid was followed by no detectable improvement in the trends of incidence of NTD.The rates of NTD per 10,000 were before 1992 9.7,from 1993 to 1995 10.1,and after 1995 13.6,respectively.In conclusions new cases preventable by folic acid continue to accumulate.Recommendations alone did not inﬂuence trends in NTD in our region up to nine years after the conﬁrmation of the effectiveness 
of folic acid in clinical trials.New strategies are needed.
P1213. Azorean ancestry assessed by Alu insertion 
polymorphisms
R. Palla1,2, S. Lino1,2, C. C. Branco1,2, P. R. Pacheco1,2, R. Cabral1,2, L. de Fez1,2, 
B. R. Peixoto1,2, L. Mota-Vieira1,2;  
1Molecular Genetic and Pathology Unit, Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo, Ponta 
Delgada, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.
Alu insertion polymorphisms have been extensively used to unravel the origins of populations, since they reﬂect both maternal and paternal history of a population. The Azores, an Atlantic archipelago, had no native population and were mainly populated by the Portuguese people. African slaves, Moorish prisoners, French and Spanish also contributed to the initial settlement during the 15th century. In order to characterize the population admixture we typed 7 Alu (TPA-25, ACE, APO, B65, PV92, FXIIIB and D1) in 95 unrelated Azorean blood donors. Allele frequencies were calculated by direct counting. Statistical analysis was performed using Arlequin v.2.0, and Nei’s genetic distance trees were constructed with DISPAN software by Neighbor algorithm.Hererozigosity values ranged from 0.084 for APO to 0.484 for ACE and all markers were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Average gene diversity varied from 0.1196 for APO to 0.4985 for B65. Considering all loci, gene diversity was 0.9658 indicating high variability in the Azorean population. In addition, allele frequencies are similar to those obtained for European and North African populations, except for FXIIIB which shows a much higher value (0.774). These results are corroborated by the dendrogram where Azores branches with Catalans, Andalusians, Morrocans and Algerians. Interestingly, Azores is located apart from other European populations, such as French and Germans. Moreover, the distinctive position of the archipelago also suggests that, despite the high similarity with European and North African populations explained by the historical data of settlement, the Azores presents a unique genetic signature. (claudiacbranco@hdes.pt). Funded by DRCT (Azores).
P1214. Analysis of CARD15  Mutations in Italian Inﬂammatory 
Bowel Disease (IBD) patients
V. Bianchi1, C. Caligara1, B. Brambilla1, G. Maconi2, S. Ardizzone2, E. Colom -
bo2, M. Malcovati1, G. Bianchi Porro2, M. L. Tenchini1;  
1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, Milan, Italy , 2Chair 
of Gastroenterology “L. Sacco” University Hospital, Milan, Italy ., Milan, Italy.
Crohn’s disease [CD (MIM #266600)] and Ulcerative Colitis [UC (MIM #191390)] are the two major forms of chronic inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD) with a combined general prevalence of approximately 100-200 of 100,000 people in Western countries. The aetiopathogenesis of CD and UC is largely unknown. Several lines of evidence have suggested they are multifactorial diseases in which both genetic and environmental factors appear to play a role in disease 
development. CARD15  gene (MIM *605956) has been identiﬁed as the 
ﬁrst determinant of susceptibility for CD in populations of European descent and in particular, three mutations (Arg702Trp, Gly908Arg and Leu1007fsinsC) have been strongly associated with CD younger age at onset, ileal location and a ﬁbrostenotic or ﬁstulizing disease behaviour. We therefore investigated the presence of Arg702Trp, Gly908Arg and Leu1007fsinsC in an Italian IBD population (166 and 92 patients with CD and UC respectively) Allele frequencies were compared to those observed in a control population (164 individuals). Gly908Arg and Leu1007fsinsC
 were signiﬁcantly more frequent in CD patients 
compared to healthy controls ( p<0,05 and p<0,001  respectively). 
Estimated risks (OR) for the two mutations were calculated by a logistic regression analysis (IC 95%) and data demonstrated an increased risk of developing CD in Gly908Arg and Leu1007fsinsC carriers [OR= 4.78 (CI 1.15-19.8); OR= 7.79 (CI 1.96-31.0) respectively]. As far as concerns genotype-phenotype correlation we found association with ileal location and a ﬁbrostenotic or ﬁstulizing behaviour. We ﬁnally conﬁrm the signiﬁcant association of 
CARD15  gene mutations and 
CD.
P1215. Lack of association between the polymorphisms 
Glu298Asp and 4VNTR of ENOS gene and premature coronary 
artery disease in the Greek population
K. Lamnissou1, M. Vasilakou1, C. Odiatis1, G. Dedousis2, H. Kasparian3, N. 
Pantazopoulos3, N. Sakarellou4, V. Votteas3;  
1Dept of Biology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Charocopeio University 
of Athens, Athens, Greece, 3"Laiko" Hospital, Athens, Greece, 4"Elpis" Hospital, 
Athens, Greece.
Genetic polymorphisms in the gene for endothelial nitric oxide synthase (ENOS) have been considered as a potential risk factors for the development of coronary artery disease (CAD) in some populations. We studied two polymorphisms of the ENOS gene, the Glu298Asp and the 4VNTR, in a total number of 269 individuals of the Greek population. The patient group was consistent of 187 subjects, aged under 58 years presenting with symptomatic CAD, documented by coronary angiography. The frequencies for GG (Glu/Glu), GT(Glu/Asp), TT(Asp/Asp) of the Glu298Asp polymorhism were 0.56, 0.38, 0.06, respectively, for the patient group and 0.49, 0.46 , 0.04, for the control group. The frequencies for bb, ab and aa genotypes of 4VNTR polymorphism were 0.66, 0.29, 0.04, respectively, in patients compared to 0.73, 0.24, 0.03 in controls. The statistical analysis of these results show that there are no signiﬁcant differences in the frequencies of the genotypes between patients and controls, for these two polymorhisms of ENOS gene. Thus, in contrast to some earlier ﬁndings by others from other populations, we have found no evidence for an association between the a allele of the 4VNTR polymorphism, or between the T allele of Glu298Asp polymorphism and the risk of premature coronary 
artery disease, in the Greek population.
P1216. Genescape of India, as Reconstructed from Polymorphic 
DNA Variation in the Y chromosome
S. Sengupta1, P. A. Underhill2, L. L. Cavalli-Sforza2, P. P. Majumder1;  
1Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India, 2Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 
United States.
The contemporary male gene pool of ethnic India largely comprises 
haplogroups that originated indigenously, in southeast Asia, and in west and central Asia. The indigenous haplogroup is predominant among the tribal group . The southeast Asian inﬂuence is largely on the male gene pools of Tibeto-Burman speaking tribals and Austro-Asiatic and Dravidian. The west and central Asian inﬂuence is primarily 
on caste groups - both Indo-European and Dravidian.The haplogroup diversity within the various tribal groups is lower than that within the caste groups. Analyses of molecular variance showed higher genetic variability among populations within linguistic clusters of tribals compared to castes. Moreover, the between group variability in the Indo-European caste cluster is higher than that in the Dravidian caste cluster. This may be a reﬂection of diverse ancestries, antiquities and isolation of the tribals, coupled with subsequent cultural (linguistic) homogenization. Lesser between group genetic variability in caste Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology346
groups may be a reﬂection of their recent founding history.
The complete congruence of the patterns of Y-chromosomal and mitochondrial DNA differentiation may be indicative of inﬂow of both male and female genes from similar source populations. The rank order of FST values showed that tribes and castes are most differentiated, followed by upper and middle caste, upper and lower caste and middle 
and lower caste.
P1217. Genetic polymorphism of xenobiotics metabolism 
enzymes and susceptibility to COPD and lung cancer
I. Kalina1, J. Židzik1, J. Šaalagovič1, R. Tkáčová2, V. Habalová1, B. Fleischer1;  
1Department of Medical Biology, Medical School, University P.J. Šafárik, Košice, 
Slovakia, 2The Clinic for Tuberculosis and Respiratory Medicine, Faculty Hospi -
tal, Košice, Slovakia.
Objective: Cigarette smoking is the major risk factor for the development of both chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and bronchogenic carcinoma, but only 10-20% of heavy smokers develop the diseases, which suggests the presence of genetic susceptibilty. The genetic susceptibility to lung cancer and COPD might depend on variation in antioxidative enzyme activities that detoxify cigarette smoke products such as microsomal epoxide hydrolase (mEH) and glutathione 
S-transferase M1 (GSTM1).
Methods: The polymorphisms in GSTM1 and mEH genes were examined in 156 lung cancer patients, 148 patients with COPD and 150 healthy control subjects using PCR and PCR-RFLP methods. The genotype frequencies of mEH and GSTM1 genes were compared 
between patients and controls.
Results: We suggest that the presence of at least one mEH ,,slow allele“ signiﬁcantly increases lung cancer risk (OR=1.71), especially among smokers (OR=1.83). Moreover, carriers of both slow alleles with very low mEH activity have increased lung cancer risk (OR=2.14), but signiﬁcantly only among nonsmokers. The odds ratio of individuals with both potentially risk genotypes: homozygotes for slow allele in mEH gene and for null allele in GSTM1 gene 
versus that of other genotypes 
combined was 3.53. The risk of development of COPD in lung cancer 
patients was associated only with GSTM1 0/0 genotype (OR=2.98).
Conclusions : Lung cancer risk is associated with the presence of 
slow mEH allele and GSTM1 0/0 genotype and that in patients with lung cancer the presence of at least one active allele in GSTM1 has a protective effect against the development of COPD.
P1218. DNA degradation studies on human tooth samples from 
different periods of time.
F. Stanciu1, G. Duta - Cornescu1, N. Miritoiu2, A. D. Soﬁcaru2, V. Stoian1;  
1Department of Genetics, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2Labo -
ratory of Paleoanthropology, “Franciusc I. Rainer” Anthropological Research 
Centre, Bucharest, Romania.
We propose in our study to investigate time factor inﬂuence on DNA degradation of several human tooth samples from different periods of time - Neolithic period, Bronze Age, First Iron Age, Romano-Byzantine period, the 8th-10th century and 21th century. The samples, with the exception of the most recent ones, were obtained from several archaeological sites belonging to the same geographic area (South-East of Romania). The DNA degradation degree of all of them was estimated quantitative by spectophotometric readings (informative reasons only) and qualitative by quantiﬁcation of PCR ampliﬁcation ratio of mitochondrial and nuclear DNA. We use as mitochondrial DNA markers HVR I and HVR II regions (witch were split in two fragments each) and TH01, D1S1656, D6S366, FES/FPS, Amelogenin, as nuclear DNA markers. The start hypothesis was that the number of DNA markers ampliﬁed by PCR will decrease with the oldness of samples. Our results conﬁrmed this assumption - the oldest samples are, the less positive ampliﬁcations were obtain, involving ampliﬁcation especially of mitochondrial fragments and in case of nuclear fragments 
the smallest ones.We consider this type of knowledge being of great interest because in human paleogenetics, investigations about particularities and processes involved in bone DNA degradation in time, comparatively, for example, with that about famous historical cases, are just a few, insufﬁciently for problems rise by this matter.P1219. Maternal and paternal lineages in ancient and modern 
Hungarians
E. Bogácsi-Szabó1, B. Csányi1, G. Tömöry1, K. Priskin1, Á. Czibula1, A. Csősz2, 
B. Mende2, P. Langó2, I. Raskó1;  
1Biological Research Center of Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, Hun -
gary, 2Institute of Archaeology of Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, 
Hungary.
Hungarian language represents the westernmost group of the Finno-Ugric language phylum, surrounded entirely by Indo-European-speaking populations. Their linguistic isolation in the Carpathian basin suggests the possibility that they might also show a signiﬁcant genetic 
isolation.According to historical data at the end of the 9th century Hungarian conquerors from the west side of the Ural Mountains settled down into the Carpathian Basin and took the hegemony. To determine the genetic background of Hungarians we examined mitochondrial and Y chromosomal DNA from ancient `conquerors` from Hungary, originated from the 10th century and from modern Hungarian-speaking adults from today's Hungary and Transylvanian Seklers (Romania).DNA was extracted from 35 excavated ancient bones and hair samples of 125 and 80 modern Hungarians and Seklers, respectively. Mitochondrial haplogroups were determined with HVS I sequencing and RFLP typing.The mtDNA HVS I sequences were compared with 2615 samples from 34 Eurasian populations retrieved from published data. ARLEQUIN 2.001 Software was used to estimate genetic distances between populations. The resulting matrix was summarized in two dimensions 
by use of Multidimensional Scaling.The M46 biallelic Y chromosomal marker (TAT, often called Uralic migration marker) was also investigated from 2 ancient, 34 modern Hungarian and 60 Sekler samples. Our results suggest that the modern Hungarian gene pool is very similar to other central European ones concerning the mitochondrial and Y chromosomal markers, while the ancient population contains more Asian type elements.
P1220. HFE mutations in the Sao Miguel’s population: genetic 
frequencies and geographic distribution.
L. de Fez1,2, P. R. Pacheco1,2, C. C. Branco1,2, R. Cabral1,2, B. R. Peixoto1,2, L. 
Mota-Vieira1,2;  
1Molecular Genetics and Pathology Unit, Hospital Divino Espírito Santo, Ponta 
Delgada (Azores), Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.
Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH, OMIM 235200) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by increased iron absorption. Three main mutations in the 
HFE gene (6p21.3) are implicated in HH: C282Y, 
H63D and S65C. Here, we estimated the frequencies and geographic distribution of these mutations in São Miguel’s population (131,609 inhabitants, 2001 Census). In total, 469 blood donors from the six municipalities of the island were analysed by PCR/RFLP method. The allele frequency was 5.01% for C282Y, 22.28% for H63D and 3.20% for S65C. We found twelve genotypes: wild/wild (49.89%), wild/H63D (29.64%), wild/C282Y (7.68%), H63D/H63D (5.54%), wild/S65C (2.35%), H63D/S65C (1.71%), C282Y/H63D (1.49%), S65C/S65C (0.64%), C282Y/S65C (0.43%), and C282Y/C282Y, H63D-S65C/S65D and H63D-S65C/H63D all three with a frequency of 0.21%. The six municipalities of the island show different values for the C282Y, the most severe mutation. To study the signiﬁcance of these C282Y frequency values, we carried out a statistical analysis (Fisher’s exact test). We observed a statistical difference (p=0.048) between Nordeste (9.8%) and the other ﬁve municipalities (4.6%). This result may be explained by the relative geographical isolation of Nordeste in the island, and by its reduced population (4% of total population). Considering São Miguel’s settlement history, we are genotyping the HLA-A and HLA-B loci in order to characterize the haplotypes associated with 
HFE mutations in the island. (lmotavieira@hdes.pt). 
Funded by DRCT (Azores).
P1221. Genotypes and alleles distribution of the KCNE1 (minK) 
gene polymorphism in St.Petersburg children population.
V. B. Timoshin , V. I. Larionova;  
St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation.
The protein product of the minK gene is a modulator of the potassium channel activity and plays an important role in cardiac electrophysiology. Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology347
Genetic polymorphism of the minK gene is associated with clinical atrial 
ﬁbrilation (Lai at al., 2002). We have previously reported the correlation between the minK 38G allele and the chronic atrial ﬁbrillation in the 
patients with sick sinus syndrome (Burova at al., 2004).The aim of this study was to determine genotypes and alleles distribution in St. Petersburg children population and compare at that 
of Chinese adult population.126 healthy children (62 boys and 64 girls) aged 5 to 16 were included in our study. The minK genotype was analyzed using PCR ampliphication and digestion with endonuclease MspA1I. Allele frequencies and 
genotype distribution were compared by using χ2 test.
We found no signiﬁcant differences in genotypes and alleles frequency distribution between St.Petersburg population and Chinese 
population.Our data may be used as control in investigation of minK gene polymorphism in patient with different clinical forms of heart rhythm 
disorders.
AllelesSt.Petersburg children 
population(n=126)Chinese adult 
population  
(n=108) (Lai at 
al., 2002)P-value
38G allele 
(%)162 (64,3) 136 (63,0) 0,841
38S al -
lele(%)90 (35,7) 80 (37,0)
Genotypes
38G/38G 
(%)53 (42,1) 46 (42,6)
38G/38S 
(%)56 (44,4) 44 (40,7) 0,747
38S/38S 
(%)17 (13,5) 18 (16,7)
P1222. Y chromosomal variation in the Czech Republic
F. Di Giacomo1, F. Luca2, T. Benincasa2, L. O. Popa3, J. Banyko4, A. Kracma -
rova5, P. Malaspina1, R. Brdicka5, A. Novelletto2;  
1University of Rome "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy, 2University of Calabria, Rende, 
Italy, 3National Museum of Natural History, Bucharest, Romania, 4University of 
P.J. Safarik, Kosice, Slovakia, 5Institute for Haematology and Blood Transfu -
sion, Prague, Czech Republic.
In order to analyse the contribution of the Czech Republic to the genetic landscape of Europe, we typed 257 male subjects from 5 locations for 17 Unique Event Polymorphisms of the Y chromosome. Sixteen haplogroups or sub-haplogroups were identiﬁed, with only 5 chromosomes uncharacterized. Overall, the degree of population structuring was low. The three commonest haplogroups were R1a (0.344), P*(xR1a) (0.281) and I (0.184). M157, M56 and M87 showed no variation within haplogroup R1a. Haplogroup I was mostly represented as I1b* and I1b2 was also detected in this population. Thus, the majority of the Czech male gene pool is accounted for by the three main haplogroups found in western and central Europe, the Balkans and the Carpathians. Haplogroup J was found at low frequency, in agreement with a low gene ﬂow with the Mediterranean.In order to draw inferences on the dynamics of the Czech population, we typed 141 carriers of the 3 most common haplogroups for 10 
microsatellites, and applied coalescent analyses.While the age of the I clade agreed with that reported in the vast study of Rootsi et al (2004), the ages of its sub-haplogroups differed considerably, showing that the I chromosomes sampled in the Czech Republic are a subset of those found throughout Europe. Haplogroup R1a turned out to be the youngest with an estimated age well after the Last Glacial Maximum. For all three major haplogroups the results indicate a fast population growth, beginning at approximately 60-80 
generations ago.Work supported by PRIN-MIUR 2003.P1223. Allelic polymorphisms of metabolizing enzymes in a 
Hungarian roma population
J. Beres1, O. Zsuzsa2, K. Istvan2;  
1Natoinal Center for Epidemiology, Budapest, Hungary, 2Institute of Public 
Health, Medical Faculty, Pecs, Hungary.
The roma population is the largest ethnic minority in Hungary. Their mortality structure differs from the national averages. In the present study we investigated the allelic polymorphisms of N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2), a glutathione-S-transferase M1 (GSTM1), glutathione-S-transferase T1 (GSTT1) and cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP 1A1) metabolizing enzymes in the largest group of the Hungarian romas. The allelic freqencies were compared to the data of non roma population. Sample collection was performed in the framework of Roma Project (195 blood samples), genotyping was made from perypheral leukocytes, with PCR-based methods ((NAT2: rapid and slow acetylators, GST M1 and T1: 0 and + genotypes, CYP 1A1: 
Ile/
Val polymorphism).
Our results demonstrated a difference between the allelic distributions of roma and non roma populations. Allelic frequencies of GSTM1 (OR: 2.08, 95% CI: 1.45-2.99) and NAT2 (OR: 1.42, 95% CI: 1.00-2.00) were signiﬁcantly different, while in case of GSTT1 and CYP 1A1 there was no statistically signiﬁcant difference.Since both GSTM1 and NAT polymorphisms might have an inﬂuence on susceptibility to certain cancers (e.g. colorectal, bladder and lung cancer), the found differences in the allelic distributions may contribute to the mortality diffrerences between the Hungarian romas and non roma populations. This hypothesis, however, must be conﬁrmed, e.g. by studying allelic 
polymorphisms among cancer patients from the roma population.
P1224. Prevalence of Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 in Slovenia
N. Teran1, J. Zidar2, D. Flisar3, B. Peterlin1;  
1Division of Medical Genetics, Dept. of Obstertics and Gynecology , UMC, Lju -
bljana, Slovenia, 2Institute of Clinical Neurophysiology, Division of Neurology, 
UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Department of Neurology, General Hospital Maribor, 
Maribor, Slovenia.
The discovery of the Myotonic Dystrophy type 1 (DM1) gene and the identiﬁcation of the mechanism of mutation enabled more accurate estimation of the epidemiological rates. Worldwide, the prevalence rates range from 2.2-5.5/100 000 inhabitants in Western Europe to 189/100 000 inhabitants in the Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jen region in Quebec, Canada. In the South-East of Europe, in Istria, Croatia, one of the highest prevalence rates of 18.1/100 000 has been reported. The purpose of this study was to calculate the DM1 prevalence rate in Slovenia. Patients were ascertained over a 10-year period (1994-2004) from different sources. Direct mutation analysis was the method of choice for the diagnostic testing of DM1. A total of 91 DM1 patients from 46 families were analysed. After the correction for underascertainment, the prevalence of 8.25/100 000 inhabitants was found. The prevalence rate of DM1 in Slovenia is higher than the estimated average rate in Western Europe and comparable to the prevalence rates in the North-East and Central Italy (9.31/100 000). The improved diagnostic methods provide both accurate estimation of epidemiological rates and identiﬁcation of mildly or congenitally affected patients.
P1225. BARCODE: a new software for comparative dating of 
haplotypic nested lineages
F. Luca1, M. Basile2, F. Di Giacomo3, A. Novelletto1;  
1Department of Cell Biology, University of Calabria, Rende, Italy, 2Department of 
Mechanics, University of Calabria, Rende, Italy, 3Department of Biology, Univer -
sity "Tor Vergata", Rome, Italy.
We present a new software for comparative dating estimates of haplotypic lineages deﬁned by Unique Event Polymorphisms (UEP), on the basis of linked STR diversity. BARCODE (Basic ASD Regression for COmparative Dating Estimates), applies a comparative dating approach free of assumptions on STR mutation rates to detect the linear accumulation of ASD over time. Its power relies on the exploitation of the UEP-deﬁned phylogeny, which provides a unique solution for the order of nodes in the tree to be analysed. The set of possible solutions to be tested for ASD-TIME linearity is created through an algorithm speciﬁcally created. The more the phylogeny has a nested shape, the more the dating result is robust. BARCODE allows to weight each lineage according to its frequency in the dataset, a fundamental option Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology348
when the sampled lineages include variants supposed to be ancestral 
to a demographic expansion or when dealing with data unbalanced in 
sample-size.We report the results obtained by running BARCODE on published Y-chromosomal data sets. The relative dating estimates are in general agreement with the absolute estimates originally published. The results also allow inferences on STR mutation rates (ASD-TIME regression slopes): some critical loci emerged, which show variable mutation patterns across the data sets. However, most STR loci show a similar behaviour across the data sets, thus conﬁrming their informativeness. The most commonly used STR loci can then be ranked in different classes, according to their mutation rates, independently on the 
particular data set considered.Work supported by PRIN-MIUR 2003.
P1226. A study of multiple polymorphisms of folate-dependent, 
one-carbon metabolism in a northern European population.
G. Willis1, P. Finglas2, A. Wright2, S. Clarke1, K. Smith1, D. Heron1, B. A. Jen -
nings3;  
1Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, Norwich, United Kingdom, 2Institute of 
Food Research, Norwich, United Kingdom, 3University of East Anglia, Norwich, 
United Kingdom.
Folates play a key role in disease prevention; deﬁciency is associated with increased risk of neural tube defects, vascular disease, cancer and anaemia. Many enzymes of folate-dependent, one-carbon metabolism are functionally polymorphic. Low activity forms of 
MTHFR  
have been associated with raised homocysteine and vascular disease. Folate metabolism is also a therapeutic target for drug groups that are widely used in the treatment of cancer and other chronic diseases. Polymorphisms leading to over-expression of 
TYMS have been 
associated with resistance to the chemotherapeutic agent 5FU.The study of multiple polymorphisms simultaneously will allow us to consider additive, synergistic and compensating variants of folate metabolism that may be important clinically. Therefore, we have developed allelic discrimination and gel analysis assays for functionally polymorphic forms of 
MTHFR , TYMS , DHFR , MTHFD , SLC19A1  
(REFC ), MTR, and SHMT1; most assays are for non-synonymous 
SNPs. The allele frequencies have been determined for 459 men 
(mean age 60 years; range 40 to 80 years) from Norfolk, England.
Results; loci and allele frequencies
GENE/SNP I.D. Rare allelic form Frequency of rare allele
MTHFR/rs1801133 C677T 0.33
MTHFR/rs1801131 A1298C 0.32
TYMS /promoter 2R/3R 2R 0.46
DHFR /intron 1 ins/del del 0.43
SLC19A1 /rs1051266 G80A 0.46
MTR /rs1805087 A2756G 0.18
MTHFD1 /rs2236225 A1958G 0.42
SHMT1 /rs1979277 C1420T 0.32
Conclusions
•The robust and economical methods for studying these polymorphisms 
of one-carbon metabolism are presented.
•The allele frequency data and the methods can be used in disease 
association and pharmacogenetic studies of northern Europeans.
P1227. Screening for point mutations in the LDL receptor gene 
in Bulgarians with severe hypercholesterolemia
S. Bichev1, L. Vladimirova-Kitova2, I. Tsekov1, I. Djoupanova1, V. Mihailov1, A. 
Savov3, I. Kremenski3, V. Ganev1;  
1Medical University of Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, 2Medical University of Plovdiv, 
Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 3Medical University of Soﬁa, Laboratory of Molecular Pathol -
ogy, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disease caused by mutations in the low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene. As a result, a defect in the uptake of the low density lipoprotein (LDL) and a disturbance in the lipid metabolism are present. More than 1000 mutations have been described so far (http://www.umd.necker.fr). There is a genetic variability between different populations of FH patients worldwide. It is not known much about the distribution of mutations in Bulgarian population. The purpose of this study was to deﬁne the spectrum of mutations among Bulgarians. We analyzed a group of 97 people all clinically diagnosed as FH patients. The screening of mutations was achieved by a Single Strand Conformation Polymorphism (SSCP) and samples with abnormal patterns were sequenced. In 12 cases the diagnosis FH was genetically conﬁrmed. Our results present that several exons occured to be mutation hot-spots (exons 5, 9 and 11) in Bulgarian patients with FH. We found 6 point mutations in 6 out of 14 screened exons: ex9 1195G>A in 5 patients; ex11 1646G>A in 3 patients; ex4b 590G>A, ex6 858C>A, ex8 1073G>A, ex5 761A>C and intron 7 1061-8 T>C in single cases. The mutation 1073G>A is not described in literature. In addition two polymorphisms were found: ex13 1959C>T and ex11 1646G>A. The last one, in single case, was combined with mutation ex11 1646G>A.
P1228. Thrombophilia markers in pediatric ischemic stroke 
patients
V. Djordjevic ;  
Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia and 
Montenegro.
Ischemic stroke in childhood is less common then in adults (estimates of the incidence is 0.6-1.2/100,000 per year), but is a very important cause of lifelong morbidity. It is multifactorial disease in which both acquired and genetic inﬂuences may play important roles. The role hemostasis plays in pathogenesis of stroke (esspecialy in case of 
thrombophilia) is still controversial.Aim of our study was to establish the prevalence of genetic risk factors (FV Leiden, FII G20210A, MTHFR C677T mutations) and frequent polymorphisms (PAI-1 4g/5g and ACE ID) associated with 
thrombophilia in a group of children with ischemic stroke.A study was carried out in a group of 30 children (11 girls and 19 boys, median age of ﬁrst stroke eposode 7.5 years) and 120 consecutive 
healthy blood donors.The results are shown in Table:
cases,% controls ,% OR,(95% CIs)
FV Leidenm/n 3.3 5.8 0.56,(0.08-4.71)
m/m 0 0 -
FII G20210Am/n 6.7 4.2 1.64,(0.30-8.91)
m/m 0 0 -
MTHFR C677Tm/n 60.0139.212.33,(1.03-5.28)
m/m 6.7 11.7 0.54,(0.12-2.53)
PAI-1 4g/5g5g/5g 23.3 18.3 1.42,(0.53-3.75)
4g/5g 56.7 43.3 1.71,(0.76-3.85)
4g/4g 20.0 38.3 0.39,(0.15-1.04)
ACE IDII 23.3 25.0 0.91,(0.35-2.37)
ID 50.0 56.7 0.76,(0.53-1.72)
DD 26.7 18.3 1.64,(0.63-4.21)
m-mutated allele, n-normal allele,I-insertion, D-deletion,1p=0.039
Heterozygous carriers of MTHFR C677T mutation were overrepresented in children with ischemic stroke (60% patients, 39.2% controls); while difference in frequencies of other tested genetic markers was not statistically signiﬁcant.Our study suggests that thrombophilia may not play an important role 
in the pathogenesis of stroke in children. 
P1229. HLA and surnames are compared as paradigms of the 
genetic history of Lombardy (Northern Italy)
A. Lisa1, A. De Silvestri2, A. Degiuli3, L. Mascaretti4, C. R. Guglielmino2;  
1Molecular Genetics Institute CNR, Pavia, Italy, 2Dept Genetics & Microbiology 
University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Transfusion Center AO Lodi province, Lodi, 
Italy, 4Transfusion Center S. Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy.
Background  Lombardy was a crossroad of ancient populations that 
occupied the Alps and the Po valley: Ligures, Celts, Etrurians and Romans. Aim of the present work is to study its genetic structure through two kinds of markers: surnames and HLA genes, assuming that the presence of population clusters is related to the history .
Methods. 260,732 telephone subscribers constitute the surname sample: the frequencies of 10431 different surnames are calculated Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology349
in each of the 11 provinces. The HLA sample is constituted by 33,488 
bone marrow donors born and resident in Lombardy and serologically typed for HLA-A and HLA-B loci (46 alleles). For both markers the correlations between provinces are represented by a principal coordinate (PCA) plot and the results obtained with HLA and surnames 
were compared using the Mantel test.
Results Both the surname and HLA PCA showed 3 clusters: a) the southern provinces mainly ﬂat; b) the northeastern provinces (partly occupied by the Alps) and c) the area around the Como lake also in the Northern part. The Mantel test showed that the results obtained with HLA and surnames were highly correlated (
P=0.02).
Discussion The 3 clusters, more evident with HLA genes, can be 
related to the ancient history, with a Celtic inﬂuence in the NE and Ligures-Etrurian feature in the south. The Como lake area was of Celt-Ligures origin, as demonstrated also by the dialect. The knowledge of homogeneous geographic clusters in terms of HLA gene/haplotype distribution could be useful in donor recruitment and in transplantation policy.
P1230. Molecular dissection of the Y chromosome haplogroups 
A, E and R1b
F. Cruciani, R. La Fratta, P. Santolamazza, D. Sellitto, M. E. Cefalì, F. Di 
Raimo, R. Pascone, R. Scozzari;  
Università di Roma "La Sapienza", Rome, Italy.
The male-speciﬁc region of the human Y chromosome (MSY) is characterized by a low amount of sequence diversity compared to the mtDNA, the autosomes and the X chromosome. Recently, the use of DHPLC and direct sequencing of DNA has permitted to identify more than 300 new single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the MSY. The analysis of the geographic distribution of the haplogroups identiﬁed by these markers has provided new insights in the history of human populations, at the same time, it came out that undetected Y 
chromosome SNPs still contain useful information.In this study we have analyzed the sequence variation of 60 kb of the TBL1Y gene. While previous studies have analyzed the sequence variation of the Y chromosome in a random sample of individuals, we here focus on 22 chromosomes belonging to three speciﬁc haplogroups (A, R1b and E), whose geographic distribution is relevant for the human evolutionary history of Africa and/or western Eurasia.We discovered 32 new SNPs, and placed them in the known Y chromosome phylogenetic tree: about half of the new mutations identify new branches of the tree. The geographic distribution of ﬁve new E-M78 sub-haplogroups, analyzed in more than 6,000 subjects from Eurasia and Africa, has led to the identiﬁcation of interesting 
evolutionary patterns.
P1231. Universal screening programm for early detection of 
congenital deafness in Flanders: contribution of genetic causes
J. J. van den Ende1, F. Declau2, N. Peeters1, W. Wuyts1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Wilrijk (Antwerp), Belgium, 2Department of 
Oto-rhino-laryngology, Wilrijk (Antwerp), Belgium.
Serious congenital hearing problems occur in about 1/1000 newborns. In Flanders (Belgium) about 65 children each year are born with 
congenital deafness.Early detection of the hearing loss and its cause is important. On one hand because early intervention by proper hearing aids is crucial for an optimal social, emotional, motor- and mental development; on the other hand knowing the cause of the deafness can provide information about prognosis, recurrence risk, and possibilities of prenatal diagnosis 
and about possible additional problems in the future.Since 1999 in Flanders a universal screening programm is running for newborns at the age of 4 weeks. The test consists of an AABR (automatic Auditory Brainstem Response) test, also called the Algo-
test.After 2 `refers` the patient is referred to one of the specialised centers in Flanders, where the hearing loss will be conﬁrmed, and additional diagnostic examinations are performed by a standardized protocol, in 
which a geneticist plays an important role.Untill now more than 100 children with congenital deafness were detected by the Algo-test, and the results of the additional tests will be presented, including the percentage of genetic causes that were 
found.P1232. Y-microsatellite polymorphism in Russian populations 
from nothern and southern regions of European part of Russia
A. V. Khrunin1, N. A. Bebyakova2, V. P. Ivanov3, M. A. Solodilova3, S. A. Lim -
borska1;  
1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2North 
State Medical University, Archangelsk, Russian Federation, 3Kursk State Medi -
cal University, Kursk, Russian Federation.
An information about Y-chromosome microsatellite variation in the Russians is crucial for reconstruction of population history of Eastern Slavs. Allele polymorphism and haplotypes of ﬁve Y- microsatellites (DYS 393, DYS 392, DYS 391, DYS 390 and DYS 19) were analyzed in two Russian male populations from northern (Archangelsk) and southern (Kursk) regions of Russia. Signiﬁcant differences in DYS 393 and DYS 392 allele distribution were revealed between populations tested (p = 0.003 and 0.005, respectively). The allele diversity indices for these loci were more than 1.5 times higher in Archangelsk population than in Kursk population. When evaluating genetic relationships between populations studied and some European populations, including already investigated Eastern Slavonic samples, it was shown that Archangelsk population was nearer to Finno-Ugrians (the Saami and Estonians) and the Lithuanians, whereas Kursk population was clustered together with Eastern Slavonic populations (the Russians from Novgorod region, the Ukrainians and Byelorussians), regardless of used genetic distance measure. The phylogenetic analysis of the most frequent haplotypes allowed us to demonstrate that differences between populations from Kursk and Archangelsk regions were due to high frequency of major haplotypes, typical for Finno-Ugric populations, in the Archangelsk population. It is suggested, that differences revealed can be caused by geographical speciﬁcity of demographic processes.
P1233. Familial aggregation of alopecia areata
B. Blaumeiser1, M. M. Nöthen2;  
1University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Life and Brain Center, Bonn, 
Germany.
Alopecia areata (AA) is a common dermatological disorder. The etiology remains unsolved, but there is a strong evidence indicating that it is a tissue speciﬁc autoimmune disease with a genetic predisposition. Clinically it presents as a sudden onset of patchy, non-scarring hair loss, which may be diffuse or total.Familial aggregation has been described in previous reports, supporting the genetic inﬂuence, with the rate of positive family history varying between 3-42%. Here, we report the ﬁrst family study of AA to examine ﬁrst-degree relatives by direct interview and to obtain information on affection status of second-degree relatives by interview of ﬁrst-degree relatives. Since a key issue is proper control for age, we used survival analysis methods that allow for age-speciﬁc risk calculations. Thereby we present age adjusted risks for ﬁrst and for second-degree relatives that can be used for risk counseling in families with AA.
P1234. Epidemiology of CF gene in Romania
I. M. Popa1, L. Pop1, I. Popa1, G. Benga2, Z. Popa3, M. Schwarz4, L. Tamas5;  
1Clinic II Pediatrics, Timisoara, Romania, 2Molecular Biology Department, Cluj-
Napoca, Romania, 3CF Centre, Timisoara, Romania, 4Pediatric Genetic Unit, 
Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, United Kingdom, 5Biochemistry Depart -
ment, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Romania.
Paper aim: updating information about the epidemiology of CF gene in Romania. Study group: 45 CF patients (20 males and 25 females), from different Romanian regions. Genetic tests: performed in the Pediatric Genetics Unit of Royal Manchester Children’s Hospital (UK) and in the Molecular Biology Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Cluj-Napoca (Romania). Methods used: ARMS Multiplex, PAGE, ARMS Duplex, ASO, SSCP/Heteroduplex and direct sequencing of DNA. Results: The genotype structure was: ΔF508/ Δ F508: 31,1%, ΔF508/non ΔF508: 22,2%, ΔF508/x: 4,44%, x/x: 46,6%. (x- unidentiﬁed mutation). The frequency of ΔF508 mutation was 46,6%. A number of 15 non ΔF508 alleles were also identiﬁed and their frequency analysis revealed correlations with different regions of the world: 20% of mutations being more frequent in Central and Eastern Europe, 33,3% of them being frequent in Western Europe or geographical areas far away from Romania (Canada, Israel). A number of 46,6% mutations were rare or sporadic, from which there were 2 new mutations, identiﬁed in our group and not yet presented by other researchers: 1717-2AG, Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology350
within the intron 10 and R735K within the exon 13. Conclusions: the 
frequency of 46,6% for ΔF508 mutation in our group is similar with that from the surroundings countries with majority Caucasian population; the complexity of genetic structure emphasis the heterogeneous character of Romanian population; the great number of unidentiﬁed alleles as well as the new identiﬁed mutations reveals the character of speciﬁcity of some mutations.( Study performed through a Grant Research Programme- CNCSIS/ A/1188/2004)
P1235. Analysis of VDR, COL1A1, CALCR and ER genes 
polymorphisms in the elderly people
M. V. Moskalenko1,2, O. S. Glotov1,2, V. G. Vakharlovsky1, M. V. Aseev1, V. S. 
Baranov1;  
1Ott's Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2St-Petersburg State University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
The polymorphisms of four genes (TaqI - VDR, Sp1 - Col1a1, AluI 
- CALCR and XbaI, PvuII - ER) associated with some multifactorial 
diseases (osteoporosis, arthritis, endometriosis, mioma and others) were studied by PCR-RFLP in two groups of people from the north-west region of Russia. The middle age people group included 120 (60 men and 60 women - group 1) unrelated individuals of middle age (25-45), the group of elderly included 147 people (29 men and 118 women 
- group 2) unrelated individuals elder than 70 years.We have not elucidated any authentic differences in frequencies of genotypes and alleles of VDR, Col1a1, CALCR and ER genes between group of elderly people and population (p>0.05) (tab 1). According to present data it might be speculated that group 1 and group 2 have not 
any inherited advantages for longer survival of people.
Tab 1. The frequencies of genotypes and alleles of VDR, Col1a1, 
CALCR and ER genes
GenesVDR  
(TT, 
Tt, tt & 
T, t)COL1A1  
(SS, Ss, ss, 
& S, s)CALCR  
(TT, TC, CC & T, C)ER (XX, 
Xx, xx 
& X, x)ER (PP, 
Pp, pp & P, p)
middle age people, n=120
Genotypes, 
%42.18  
42.86  
14.9662.59  
36.05  
1.3656.46  
34.01  
9.5313.61  
39.46  
46.9425.85  
51.02  
23.13
Alleles, %63.61  
36.3980.61  
19.3973.47  
26.5333.33  
66.6751.36  
48.64
elderly people, n=147
Genotypes, 
%45.30  
42.74  
11.9670.84  
28.33  
0.8358.33  
32.5 
9.1712.93  
43.97  
43.1023.27  
48.14  
27.59
Alleles, %66.67  
33.3385.00  
15.0074.58  
25.4234.91  
65.0947.84  
52.16
P1236. Issues concerning familial inheritance of Hipospadias
D. Vasilie , M. Puiu, C. S. Pop;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Hypospadias is a congenital malformation with a complex etiology 
which consist in abnormal opening of penile urethra. We have studied 756 cases of hypospadias in our clinic between 1975 -2000. This trial was statistical signiﬁcant. In order to determine the role of genetic factors familial study were performed to investigate the frequency of such malformation in relatives. An increase frequency could be explained by the transmission of an enzymatic defect in the synthesis of testosterone or decrease sensitivity of testosterone receptor. In 13.7% of cases signiﬁcant familial aggregation of hypospadias ( 2 or more members of the same family) were identiﬁed. In 3.17% of cases related malformations were found (skeletal and cardiac). In 13.49% of cases hypospadias was associated to other genital malformations. The study determines the role of genetic factors in the etiology and pathology of hypospadias . The inheritance of hypospadias ist probably 
polygenic multifactorial.P1237. Association analysis of the dopamine transporter (DAT1) 
-67A/T polymorphism with bipolar disorder.
M. R. Keikhaee1, F. Fadai2, M. R. Sargolzaee3, A. Javanbakht4, H. Najmabadi1, 
M. Ohadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Razi Psychiatric 
Center,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Psychiatry, Mashad 
University of Medical Sciences,, Mashad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department 
of Psychiatry, Mashad University of Medical Sciences, Mashad, Islamic Repub -
lic of Iran.
An imbalance in the dopaminergic system in humans has been 
hypothesized to contribute to the pathogenesis of a number of psychiatric illnesses, including bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder. We performed a case/control study on the DAT1 (HUGO approved symbol SL6A3) gene core promoter polymorphism -67A/T to analyze the possible association of either allele of this polymorphism with bipolar disorder. The allele and genotype frequencies of the polymorphism were studied in 136 patients and 163 controls, which were matched on the basis of sex, age and ethnicity. The genotype frequencies in the patients group were as follows: AA 30.9%; AT 55.1%; TT 14% vs. the genotype frequencies in the control group: AA 49%; AT 41.8%; TT 9.2% [c2=10.3, df = 2, OR = 2.15 (95% CI 1.34-3.47, p ≤ 0.006]. The T-variant of the -67A/T polymorphism revealed a ~1.4-fold excess in the patients group comparing with the controls (p ≤ 0.003). For the ﬁrst time, these ﬁndings provide tentative evidence for the contribution of the DAT1 gene core promoter polymorphism to the etiopathophysiology of bipolar disorder at least in the Iranian population that we have studied. Replication studies of independent samples and family-based association studies are necessary to further evaluate the signiﬁcance of our ﬁndings.
P1238. Consanguinity and Infertility
S. M. Seyedhassani, A. Aﬂatoonian, N. Tabibnejad, S. M. Kalantar;  
Research and clinical center for infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Introduction:  Consanguineous marriage is widespread in many 
parts of the world. There is an increased incidence of both congenital malformations and other conditions such as infertility which will present later. To assess the incidence of consanguineous marriage in Yazd province and its role in infertility.Material and Methods: We studied 5200 married deﬁned couples in 
260 randomized clusters that were divided equally in ten different areas of the province including rural and urban areas. These couples were interviewed based on using a structured questionnaire to ascertain the prevalence of consanguinity, infertility and related epidemiological ﬁndings and assessed for etiological factors.
Results:Our data showed that there were consanguineous marriage in 2153 couples (41.4%)(CI 95% from 41.2% to 42.7%) in different degrees including degree 2 (0.04%), degree 3 (27.3%), degree 4 (7.4%), 
degree 5 (6.7%).In total, 276 cases of infertility were encountered and the overall 
prevalence of infertility was about 5.3% (CI 95% from 4.7% to 5.9%).In infertile couples, 135 cases (48.9%) had consanguineous marriage 
(P=0.009; Odds Ratio=1.38; CI 95% from 4.7% to 5.9%).
Conclusion: Consanguineous marriage in couples was related to expression of infertility, but this wasn't signiﬁcantly different in female and male factors infertility.This study can assist physicians and genetic counselors to realize the incidence of consanguineous marriage in Iran and its role in expression of infertility and setting priorities for ﬁrst level prevention of it.
P1239. The Genetic differentiation and Alu insertion 
polymorphisms (ACE, TPA25, PV92, Ya5NBC27,Ya5NBC148) in the Kazakhs Population of Middle Asia
G. S. Svyatova1, A. M. Abdullaeva1, G. M. Berezina1, A. Z. Salimova2, E. K. 
Khusnutdinova2;  
1Republican Centre of Health Protection of Mother and child, Almaty, Kazakh -
stan, 2Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of the Ufa Scientiﬁc Centre of 
RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation.
The Middle Asia are an interesting regions for studying relative inﬂuence 
of linguistic variability and geographic barriers on the genetic structure of populations. Polymorphic Alu-repeats occur in non-coding regions Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology351
and are thought to be evolutionarily neutral and present the objective 
markers for human population genetics and evolution studies.
Five Alu insertion polymorphisms were examined in three rural Kazakh populations of Middle Asia, represent to Turkic-speaking ethnic groups. A total of 152 unrelated healthy Kazakh people were studied. A portion of genes (ACE, TPA25, PV92, Ya5NBC27,Ya5NBC148) from genomic DNA was ampliﬁed by PCR and analyzed on a 6% polyacrylamide gel. The distribution of the empirical genotypes and allelic frequencies of Alu-polymorphisms was completely conformed to theoretical deviation of Hardy-Weinberg (χ
2=0,253; p>0,05). The allele frequency 
distribution patterns were characterized by relatively high level of genetic diversity 
(He -0.475). The index of genetic differentiation (Gst) 
in three rural Kazakh populations was 0.0179. The highest estimate of genetic differentiation was at PV92 loci (Gst 0.042) along with relatively low Gst at the Ya5NBC27 loci -0,0007. The coefﬁcient of genetic differentiation in the three populations studied was 0,012 (G
st) 
to relatively low level of genetic subdivision of the Kazakh populations. The frequencies of genotypes and allelic variants of Alu- polymorphic genes in Kazakh population are intermediate between mongoloid (Chinese, Mongols) and classical Caucasians. Phylogenetic analysis demonstrated close genetic relationship between the Kazakh, Uigurs 
and Uzbek ethnic populations.It was conﬁrmed, that the analysis of Alu insertion polymorphisms are 
tools for reconstructing ethnogenetic history of populations
P1240. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase  gene polymorphisms 
and early human development
M. S. Nazarenko, V. P. Puzyrev, T. V. Kosyankova, S. A. Nazarenko;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Experimental data in mice and previously published results in humans point to a crucial role of NO in the course of pregnancy. It is known that variant alleles of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (
eNOS ) 
gene are associated with increased susceptibility to pregnancy disorders and fetal defects. Some polymorphisms in the 
eNOS gene 
are also implicated in the development of age-dependent diseases. The objective of the investigation was to explore the probable association between the promoter region -C691T, intron 4 VNTR and 7 exon G894T
 of the NOS gene polymorphisms and human 
spontaneous abortions. A case-control study of the prevalence NOS3 
gene polymorphisms were determined in the DNA samples from 166 embryos that had been spontaneously aborted between the 5
th and 
16th week after conception, and 188 adult controls. Preliminarily, the 
embryonic tissues were analyzed by cytogenetiñ methods and picked up the samples with normal karyotype only. The genotype frequencies for the G894T polymorphism was found to be out of Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (χ
2=3.98: P<0.05) due to heterozygotes excess (ho=0.46, 
he=0.40). The frequency of C allele -C691T polymorphism among the spontaneously aborted embryos and the control group were 91.6% and 81.4%, respectively (OR=2.48; P=0.0004). The distribution of genotype frequencies was signiﬁcantly different between the study and control groups for CT heterozygotes of -C691T polymorphism (13.3% and 35.5% respectively; χ
2=20.01; P<0.0001).  The results of the study 
indicate that the embryonic NOS3 691CT genotype may protective 
affects the fetal viability in early human development.
P1241. Genetic structure of Eurasian populations based on Alu 
insertion data
R. Khusainova1, I. Kutuev1, V. Akhmetova1, S. Fedorova2, G. Svyatova3, E. 
Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Department 
of Molecular Genetics of Yakut Scientiﬁc Center, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 
3Republican Prenatal Center of Kazakhstan, Almaty, Kazakhstan.
A total of 1049 individuals from Volga-Ural region of Russia (Turkic speaking Bashkirs, Tatars, and Finno-Ugric speaking Komis, Maris, Mordvins, and Udmurts), Central Asia (Turkic-speaking Kazakhs, Uzbeks, and Uighurs), the North Caucasus (Turkic speaking Karachays, Kumyks, Kuban Nogays, and Karanogays), and Siberia (Turkic speaking Yakuts, Tungusic speaking Evenks, Mongolic speaking Kalmyks) were analyzed using eight Alu loci (ACE, ApoA1, PV92, TPA25, NBC27, NBC102, NBC148, and NBC182). All loci were polymorphic in all populations. Genetic differentiation in various regions of the world was fairly substantial (using additional data of Watkins et al., 2003 for the same Alu loci). Basing on 8 Alu loci data Gst value for the world dataset was 0.090. The highest level of genetic differentiation is observed in East and Southeast Asia (0.083), which is very close to the world’s value. The lowest value can be seen in Central South Siberia (0.001). Principal component analysis showed that all of the Volga-Ural populations are plotted close to European populations. Populations of Central Asia and Central South Siberia forms rather distinct cluster together with Karanogays separating from populations of East and Southeast Asia. In conclusion, populations of the two boundary regions between Europe and Asia (Volga-Ural region of Russia, and populations of the North Caucasus) are more similar to European populations than to Asian populations. The North Caucasus populations demonstrated genetic pattern which is very close to Near East populations. European populations reﬂect neither geographic nor linguistic relationships. Siberian and Central Asian populations 
demonstrate more similarity and close genetic relationships.
P1242. The study of the STR polymorphism THO1 and CSF1PO 
loci in Volga-Ural populations
V. L. Akhmetova1, L. A. Zhivotovsky2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Vavilov Insti -
tute of General Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
In recent years, STR loci are used for personal identiﬁcation in the 
medical and forensic casework because of their multiallelic variation and, consequently, high level of informativeness. There are substantial differences in allele frequency distributions for independence DNA loci among ethnic groups. Therefore in each region and for each ethnic group is essential to create one's population-genetic base on allele and genotype frequencies for DNA loci used in the world-wide forensic-genetic practice. Moreover on carrying out of medico-legal statistics is important to choose representative population correctly.The polymorphism of STR loci THO1 and CSF1PO were studied in seven Volga-Ural populations: Bashkirs, Tatars, Chuvashes, Komies, Mordvinians, Udmurts and Russians. The distribution of the obtained genotypes did not deviate from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (P>0.05). Comparison of the informativeness of loci THO1 and CSF1PO allows us to consider the ﬁrst more informative by ﬁndings of statistical parameters of forensic importance: the average value of the observed heterozygosity (H) was 0.794 in THO1 and 0.734 in CSF1PO; polymorphism information content (PIC) and power of discrimination (pD) were also higher in THO1 (PIC=0.747, pD=0.896) than in CSF1PO (PIC=0.691, pD=0.880); matching probability (pM) - 0.101 and 0.121, consequently; mean exclusion chance (W) - 0.544 in THO1, 0.467 in CSF1PO; the coefﬁcient of allelic variety was 4.584 in THO1 and 3.810 in CSF1PO; index of Shennon diversity - 0.336 and 0.271, consequently.In conclusion, investigated THO1 and CSF1PO loci can serve as highly informative markers for genetic research, forensic casework 
and determination of biological relatedness of individuals.
P1243. Genotoxicological monitoring of nurses handling 
cytostatic drugs evaluated before and after taking antioxidant 
support
J. Mrđanović1, S. Jungić2, S. Šolajić1, D. Jakimov1, G. Bogdanović1;  
1Institute of Oncology Sremska Kamenica, Sremska Kamenica, Serbia and 
Montenegro, 2Clinical Hospital Center Banja Luka, Banja Luka, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina.
Purpose: The aims of this study were to evaluate genotoxic damage in nurses professionally exposed to cytostatics, and to investigate whether antioxidant treatment could inﬂuence reparation of genome damage. The inﬂuence of confounding factors, such as age, smoking 
status and duration of occupational exposure were also investigated.
Methods and patients :
Biomonitoring was performed on ﬁfteen oncology unit nurses before and six months after taking commercial antioxidant preparation 
(OLIGOGAL®-SE). Fifteen unexposed healthy volunteers served as a 
control group. The sister chromatid exchange (SCE) assay, standard cytokinesis-block micronucleus (MN) assay, and proliferating rate index were used for evaluation of genotoxic damage. There were seven nonsmokers and eight smokers among exposed workers, and 
eight nonsmokers and seven smokers among control group.
Results: Signiﬁcantly higher values of SCE and MN before (SCE Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology352
p<0.0001; MN p<0.05) and six months after antioxidant treatment 
(SCE p=0.001; MN p<0.05) were found in nurses group compared with control. Six months after antioxidant treatment SCE (p=0.001) and PI values (p<0.1) were found to be signiﬁcantly decreased.Analyses related to the smoking habits revealed signiﬁcant difference in SCE value (p<0.1) between smokers and nonsmokers in the group 
of nurses.Age and duration of occupational exposure did not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence any of the genotoxicological parameters.
Conclusion : Results of this study showed that handling with cytostatic 
drugs may cause genome damages in occupationally exposed nurses and that antioxidant support may contribute in reparation of these genotoxic damages. Study also conﬁrmed that smoking represents 
confounding factor in genotoxic risk
P1244. Preliminary results of the study methylenetetrahydrofo
late reductase enzyme polymorphism (C677T) as maternal risk 
factor for Down Syndrome among Russian women
A. Y. Belayeva, S. A. Nazarenko;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Down’s syndrome is the commonest chromosomal anomaly with an incidence of about 1:700 live births. This syndrome is a
 complex 
genetic and metabolic disorder attributed to the presence of three 
copies of chromosome 21. The extra chromosome derives from 
the mother in 93% of cases and is due to abnormal chromosome 
segregation during meiosis (nondisjunction). Except for advanced 
age at conception, maternal risk factors for meiotic nondisjunction 
are not well established. The relationship between chromosomal nondisjunction leading to aneuploidy and folate metabolism has drawn attention in the recent years. Several studies
 suggested that abnormal 
folate metabolism and the C677T polymorphism of the methylenetet
rahydrofolate reductase ( MTHFR) gene may be one of the maternal 
risk factors for Down syndrome. In order to conﬁrm this association, 
we studied the prevalence of the C677T mutation in 56 mothers who had a child with Down syndrome and 54 control mothers with healthy children. The incidence of the mutant T allele in study group (29%) was the same as in control women (34%) 
P = 0,51. MTHFR C677T  
genotype frequencies were not signiﬁcantly altered in mothers of children with Down syndrome (
P = 0.65). Our preliminary results do 
not support the presence of an increased risk of Down syndrome in mothers carriers of the T allele in Russian population. Further research 
on larger samples is needed to test our results.
P1245. Y chromosomal STR haplotypes in Iranian population
F. Moshiri , F. Mahjoubi;  
National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), T ehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
As both the Y chromosome and mitochondrial DNA show uniparental inheritance they are particularly useful for tracing the separate ancestry of paternal and maternal lineages in human populations. Y chromosome markers and their genetic diversity can be used to give information on male-speciﬁc patterns of migration and the origin and diversity of speciﬁc populations. Haplotypes based on polymorphic markers are easily constructed because of the lack of recombination 
in these genomic regions.Desirable characteristics of markers which should be used are to have a high level of polymorphism in the population, and the lowest possible incidence of recurrent mutations. The variance in microsatellite marker has been used for population genetic study. The microsatellite mutation rate is 10-3, and the rate of those on the Y chromosome has been estimated to be 2.1x 10-3 in each generation. Furthermore, it has been found that Y chromosome variants tend to be more localised geographically than those of mtDNA and the autosomes. Putting all these data together, the Y chromosome is good to study as it shows paternal/clonal inheritance, and has an effective population size that is 
only 25% that of the autosomes.For this study 8 of these widely used Y-chromosome markers
 Dys425, 
Dys426, Dys434, Dys435, Dys436, Dys437, Dys438 and Dys439 has been employed to analyses almost 300 males from 21 populations in Iran. These markers showed a good efﬁciency to discriminate between different ethnic groups. P1246. Mitochondrial DNA polymorphism in three population 
samples of Tuvinians
M. V. Golubenko1, S. V. Buikin1,2, A. N. Kucher1, V. P. Puzyrev1,2;  
1Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian Medical 
University, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
To study mtDNA polymorphism in Tuva Republic (South Siberian region 
of Russian Federation), HVS-I sequencing and restriction haplogroup conﬁrmation was performed in three population samples of Tuvinians: Bai-Taiga administrative area (west of the region, N=169), Todja area (north-east, N=130) and Shinaan area (south-east, N=147). In total, 90 different HVS-I lineages were revealed, belonging to 17 different haplogroups, and West Eurasia-derived haplogroups encompass 7.5% of all mtDNAs. Low frequency of interethnic marriages in Tuvinians suggests that most of “European” lineages are not due to recent admixture. The most abundant and heterogenous haplogroup in Tuvinians is haplogroup C, which encompasses about one-half of their mitochondrial gene pool. More than 1% frequency estimates were obtained for haplogroups A, B, D, F, G, H, J, U and for 22 HVS-I lineages in total, but in particular areas these lineages were not always the same. Only 5 haplogroups and 4 haplotypes had more than 5% frequencies in total sample. 29 of 90 haplotypes were common with previously studied Tuvinian sample (Derenko et al. 2003) whereas only 8, 10 and 14 haplotypes were shared with Yakuts, Altaians, and Buryats, respectively. Analysis of migrations has shown that the genetic diversity in Todja population increased due to migrants from other areas of Tuva who brought 17 new haplotypes into this area population. Such effect has not been shown for Bai-Taiga and Shinaan populations. According to the results, Tuvinians constitute quite isolated and slightly subdivided population, with high haplogroup C prevalence. 
The work was supported by RFBR grant 04-04-48792.
P1247. Friedreich spinocerebellar ataxia in Romania
D. Coprean1, S. Lerintiu1, M. Popescu2, B. Bosca1;  
1"Iuliu Hatieganu" UMPh, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2"Radu Horia" Center of Neu -
romuscular Pathology, Vâlcele, Romania.
Introduction: Friedreich spinocerebellar ataxia is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease, characterized by progressive evolution, pyramidal cerebellar phenomena, suppression of osteotendinous reﬂexes and deep sensitivity of lower limbs, ataxic gait, dysarthrias, cardiomyopathies, slow speech, dysmetria associated 
with hypermetria, diabetes mellitus.Material: We investigated 142 patients with Friedreich spinocerebellar ataxia admitted to the ,,Horia Radu” Center of Neuromuscular Pathology, Vâlcele, Covasna county.Methods: history, clinical examination, family inquiry, genetic record, reconstruction and analysis of pedigrees of the families included in the study; the biostatistical method, which allowed us to establish the frequency of the heredo-collateral history of Friedreich ataxia, the sex distribution of the cases included in the study, the frequency of Friedreich ataxia among the cases of the Center of Neuromuscular Pathology, as well as the incidence of the disease in the different 
Romanian counties.Results: The analysis of pedigrees conﬁrms the autosomal recessive inheritance of Friedreich ataxia; only 38.1% of patients presented a heredo-collateral history of Friedreich ataxia; the study of sex distribution shows that 45.1% of cases were females and 54.9% males; the distribution of cases according to the onset age shows a 58.2% frequency in the age group 10-15 years; the cases of Friedreich ataxia represent 7.03% of all cases of neuromuscular diseases admitted in the same period: the highest incidence of Friedreich ataxia was found in Brasov, Sibiu, Bihor, Timis, Botosani counties.Conclusion: The incidence of this disease can be reduced by the detection of carriers of gene X25, prenatal diagnosis by DNA analysis 
and genetic counseling.
P1248. Molecular genetic studies of sporadic spinocerebellar 
ataxia (SCA) in the cypriot population
A. T. Georghiou , M. Tsingis, T. Kyriakides, M. Pantzaris, S. Papacostas, E. 
Zamba-Papanicolaou, K. Christodoulou;  
The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA) form a heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders that primarily affect the spinal cord, Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology353
the cerebellum and brainstem. Autosomal dominant and recessive 
inheritance has been detected in families and sporadic cases have also been reported. The main clinical features include gait difﬁculties, ataxia and dysarthria. The age of onset is usually within the 4
th decade. 
Several associated features may present in different patients that include optic atrophy, peripheral neuropathy, retinal degeneration, and dementia. Several attempts to clinically classify SCA patients have proved to be unsuccessful due to the overlapping features seen within the same SCA type and in many cases within the same family. Many SCA loci and genes have recently been identiﬁed that prove the extensive genetic heterogeneity of this group of degenerative disorders. The most frequent mutation is a CAG repeat expansion, which causes a polyglutamine expansion at the protein level. Fifty sporadic patients that clinically conform to the diagnosis of SCA have been identiﬁed in the Cypriot population. Due to the high prevalence of FRDA in the western part of the island we initially analysed the above patients at the FRDA gene. All patients were negative for the FRDA expansion. SCA patients were then analysed for a mutation in the SCA1, SCA2, SCA3, SCA6, SCA7, SCA8, SCA12, SCA17 and DRPLA genes. No expansion has been detected. We, therefore, conclude that SCA in the cypriot population is not caused by any of the most frequent SCA 
mutations detected in other populations.
P1249. Decreased frequencies of ABCA1 polymorphisms R219K 
and V771M in Hungarian patients with coronary heart disease 
and stroke
H. Andrikovics1, E. Pongrácz2, Á. Kalina3, C. Aslanidis4, G. Schmitz4, A. Tor -
dai1;  
1National Institue of Hematology, Budapest, Hungary, 2Central Hospital of Min -
istry of Interior, Budapest, Hungary, 3Hospital of National Railways, Budapest, 
Hungary, 4University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
Genetic polymorphisms of ABC-transporter A1 (ABCA1) may alter the regulation of plasma HDL-level, promoting or protecting from arteriosclerosis. Recently, several common SNPs have been recognised in ABCA1, but their effects on protein-function or their role 
are still controversial.We investigated 244 unrelated, randomly selected patients with ischemic stroke, 150 patients with coronary heart disease (CHD) and 193 blood-donors for allele frequencies (AF) of three common ABCA1-polymorphisms (R219K, V771M, I883M). Compared to control (30.8±4.7%; 4.9±2.2%), decreased AF were found in both patient groups for R219K, and V771M (stroke:28.7±4.1%; 3.1±1.6%, CHD:25.7±5.0%; 1.3±1.3%). Upon stratiﬁcation by age of onset, more pronounced AF-decreases were observed. In a subset of stroke patients younger than 50, both variants occurred in signiﬁcantly lower frequencies (22.4±5.5%; 1.8±1.7%). Similarly, among CHD-patients younger than 60, AF of R219K and V771M (22.6±7.5%; 0±1,6%) decreased. V771M was almost exclusively (35/36) found in individuals carrying the R219K allele. The allele frequency of the third variant, I883M did not show signiﬁcant differences in the groups and subgroups studied. Our data conﬁrm earlier observations that ABCA1 R219K and V771M polymorphisms may be associated with a protective role against CHD and extend those to another important pathologic condition namely stroke. These protective effects seem to be more 
pronounced in subsets of patients with younger ages.
P1250. Malignant course of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in 
India
R. T. Rishikesh1, A. S. Durgaprasad1, B. Thakkar2, N. Calambur3, S. B Raju3, 
P. Nallari1;  
1Department of Genetics, Osmania University, Hyderabad, India, 2Cardiovascu -
lar thoracic surgery unit, KEM hospital, Mumbai, India, 3Cardiology unit, CARE 
hospital, Hyderabad, India.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a heart muscle disorder exhibiting pronounced phenotypic variation in clinical features ranging from benign to malignant forms and with high risk to heart failure and sudden death. HCM is familial in majority of cases and is transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait. Sudden death in HCM can be initiated by several different triggers which include ventricular arrhythmia, atrial ﬁbrillation, myocardial ischemia, abnormal vascular control and autonomic dysfunction. The aim of the present study was to identify the percent of sudden death associated with the subtypes of HCM and the possible mechanisms leading to sudden deaths on a preliminary 
data.95 conﬁrmed cases of HCM were considered in the present study of which 43 had obstructive type of HCM. Our study revealed an increased preponderance of the condition among the males (3.5:1) when compared to previous studies. Of the 95 probands, 3 died due to HCM in a follow up of 2 years. The family history of sudden death was found to be 7% among non-obstructive HCM and 14% among obstructive HCM. This frequency of 21% (pooled) is very high compared to 12% sudden death reported from earlier studies. Further the history of syncope was also found to be double among the obstructive HCM cases compared to the non-obstructive form. In conclusion, autonomic dysfunction and abnormal vascular control could be acting as possible independent triggers of sudden death in obstructive HCM, whereas hypotension and myocardial ischemia could be playing a role in non-
obstructive HCM related sudden deaths.
P1251. Are ACA- and GGC-divergent MJD haplotypes the 
signature of de novo  mutational events?
S. Martins1,2, C. Gaspar3, I. Silveira4, A. Brice5, N. Wood6, L. Ranum7, G. Rou -
leau3, P. Coutinho8, A. Amorim1,2, J. Sequeiros4,9;  
1IPATIMUP, Porto, Portugal, 2Fac Ciências, Univ Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Cen 
Research in Neuroscience, McGill Univ and Montreal General Hosp, Montreal, 
PQ, Canada, 4UnIGENe, IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 5Lab Médecine Experimentale, 
INSERM U 289, Hôp Salpétrière, Paris, France, 6Neurogenetics, Inst Neurolo -
gy, Univ London, London, United Kingdom, 7Depart Neurology and Inst Human 
Genetics, Univ Minnesota, Minnesota, MN, United States, 8Serv Neurologia, 
Hosp S Sebastião, Stª Mª Feira, Portugal, 9ICBAS, Univ Porto, Porto, Portugal.
The autosomal dominant neurodegenerative Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) has been reported worldwide in families from very distant origins. A previous haplotype study encompassing the expanded (CAG)
n 
region within the MJD1 gene and three intragenic biallelic markers has 
shown the ACA and GGC haplotypes in 94.4% of the 72 informative MJD families, collected from 15 different countries. In order to clarify whether other expanded chromosomes with haplotypes different from these two most common are the evidence of different MJD mutational origins, or just the result of recombination and/or recurrent mutations at analysed biallelic markers, we have (1) extended the SNP-based haplotype study, genotyping three additional markers; (2) calculated gene diversity indices based on four ﬂanking microsatellites, less than 250 kb apart from the (CAG)
n repeat, and (3) allele-speciﬁcally ampliﬁed 
and sequenced a 4 kb region from expanded chromosomes of 8 MJD patients with the AGA, GGA and still undisclosed (A/G)GC haplotypes. Newly studied SNPs did not discriminate additional MJD lineages, although, in some cases, complete haplotypes were not assessed due to the observed heterozygosity. Results from microsatellites’ typing in these eight patients have, however, shown the highest molecular diversity (0.44) when compared to that found in the rest of the analysed chromosomes carrying either ACA (0.39; n=91) or GGC (0.25; n=61) haplotypes. Sequence differences were also observed throughout the 4 kb analysed region, although a comparison to the control data is still in course. Present results suggest that different MJD origins may be underlying the haplotypes other than the ACA and GGC.
P1252. Type 2 Diabetes mellitus and PPARγ and CAPN-10 genes 
polymorphism in the Northern Greek population
A. Kouvatsi, A. Tichalas, S. Pappa, C. Triantaphyllidis;  
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus is the most common form of diabetes worldwide, affecting approximately 4% of the worlds’ adult population. It is multifactorial in origin, with both genetic and environmental factors contributing to its development. Genetic polymorphism in different genes has been associated with the disease in a number of 
populations.Known polymorphisms in the genes coding for the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) and the cysteine protease calpain-10 (CAPN10), were analysed in 92 patients with type 2 diabetes and 100 healthy individuals (control sample), all coming from 
Northern Greece.The polymorphism Pro12Ala (exon B) in the PPARγ gene was analysed by the PCR-RFLPs method. The results obtained suggest that the Pro12Ala polymorphism protects against type 2 diabetes Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology354
mellitus in the studied population and affects some clinical traits in 
diabetic patients.
Five single nucleotide popymorphisms, designated as SNP-19 (intron 6), SNP-43 (intron 3), SNP-44 (intron 3), SNP-63 (intron 13) and SNP-110 (exon 10) in the CAPN-10 gene, were analysed by PCR-RFLPs or MS-PCR method. The statistical analysis indicated that the genetic variation in the ﬁve CAPN-10 SNPs is not associated with type 2 
diabetes mellitus in the studied population.Additional studies based on a larger population group will provide a better understanding of the contribution that these genes make to 
diabetes risk in the Greek population.
P1253. Familial amyloid polyneuropathy V30M in Portugal: 
evolutionary dynamic of a disease in expansion
A. Sousa1,2, A. M. Silva2,3, I. Fonseca2,4, T. Coelho2,5;  
1ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 2Familial Amyloidosis Clinical Unit, Hospital Santo 
António, Porto, Portugal, 3Neurology, Hospital Santo António, Porto, Portugal, 
4Nephrology, Hospital Santo António, Porto, Portugal, 5Neurophysiology, Hospi -
tal Santo António, Porto, Portugal.
Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) type I is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in the transthyretin (TTR) gene. With the exception of a few families, Portuguese focus is associated with the V30M mutation. FAP is highly prevalent in Portugal, where Andrade ﬁrst identiﬁed it in 1939. We reviewed our register that includes 2029 patients observed between 1939 and December 2003. Of these, 1900 patients have (or belong to families with) molecular conﬁrmation of V30M mutation. 70% of the patients (53% of the families) have been diagnosed in the last twenty years Families were classiﬁed as ‘de novo
 
families’ or ‘previously undiagnosed families’ according to absence or presence of similar disease in previous generations. Absence of the disease is due to incomplete penetrance, not to de novo mutations. 
De 
novo families predominates among recently diagnosed families (67% versus 42%). Age-of-onset (in yrs) is signiﬁcantly signiﬁcantly higher in index cases of de novo families (45.5 ± 11.8) than in index cases of 
undiagnosed families (32.1 ± 7.7). New families with a previously silent mutation are diagnosed every year. FAP is a disease in expansion in Portugal. The evolutionary dynamic of FAP gene is discussed.
P1254. New SNP in the exon two of gene encoding neutrophil 
elastase II in Iranian population
G. Ahangari1, A. Farhoudi2, Z. Chavoshzadeh3, S. Jamshidi1, M. Kaeyhani1, A. 
Ramyar2;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Children Medical Center, Tehran Medical University, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 32Children Medical Center, Tehran Medical University, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The gene for human neutrophil elastaseII, a powerful serine protease carried by blood neutrophil and capable of destroying most connective tissue proteins, was cloned from a genomic DNA library of normal individual. Peripheral blood obtained from 30 normal individuals. Total RNA was isolated from fresh-polymorph-prep separated cells by using RNA standard techniques. RNA was analyzed by employing PCR ampliﬁcation of reverse transcribed using a total of ten speciﬁc primers. Mutational analysis was performed by bidirectional sequencing methods.we ampliﬁed ﬁve exon of ELA2 gene separately and sequenced each exon. We have found new SNP in exon two codon number 44. It was a silent mutation C to A substitution but no changes in amino acid sequence Alanine has induced. The codon sequence 
was GCG that has been changed to GCA.
P1255. An investigation of the FRAXA intermediate allele 
phenotype using the ALSPAC cohort
S. M. Ennis ;  
Genetic Epidemiology & Bioinformatics Group, Southampton, United Kingdom.
The FRAXA trinucleotide repeat at Xq27.3 gives rise to fragile X 
syndrome when fully expanded and both premature ovarian failure (POF) and fragile X tremor and ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) when in the premutation range. Reports of phenotypic effects extending into the intermediate repeat range are inconsistent but some studies suggest that these smaller expansions predispose to special educational needs (SEN). This study utilises the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC) cohort to investigate cognitive and behavioural variables that might be associated with FRAXA intermediate alleles.The current study fails to ﬁnd any strong evidence of association of FRAXA intermediate alleles with SEN, behavioural problems or cognitive difﬁculties. However, we have found some suggestive evidence of an association between Pervasive Developmental Disorder (PDD) and intermediate alleles. Our ﬁndings illustrate some of the difﬁculties encountered in identifying individuals with SEN. The power to identify speciﬁc components of cognitive and behavioural difﬁculties was reduced due to elective drop-out which is characteristic of longitudinal studies. Our results demonstrate the non-random loss of participants from this cohort and highlight problems that may arise 
when such data are used in genetic association studies.
P1256. Frequencies of the C598T mutation in VHL associated 
with autosomal recessive erythrocytosis
N. Vasserman , S. Tverskaya, R. Zinchenko, A. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Familial benign polycythemia (OMIM 263400) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder that is characterized by erythrocytosis, normal leukocyte and platelet counts, and increased erythropoietin production. There are more than 100 patients who are Chuvash by nationality and 
lived in northern-east part of the republic.Ang et al (2002) identiﬁed substitution C598T in homozygouse state in polycythemic Chuvashs. This substitution lead to amino-acid Arg200Trp change in 
VHL gene in all individuals affected with Chuvash 
erythrocytosis.We investigated DNA from 34 patients and 40 healthy relatives from 14 families. All patients are homozygouse in respect to C598T mutation 
in VHL gene. Moreover we examined DNA from 422 healthy unrelated 
Chuvashs. 14 heterozygouse and 1 homozygouse carriers were among them. So allelic frequency of C598T mutation is 2% for Chuvashs, and 
frequency of the disease in Chuvash population must be 1:2500.We investigated presence of C598T mutation in neighbouring populations and Russians. We discovered 6 heterozygouse carriers among 344 Mary (allelic frequency 1%, calculated disease frequency 1:10 000), 2 heterozygouse carriers among 221 Udmurth (allelic frequency 0.5%, calculated disease frequency 1:40 000). There was no C598T mutation among 271 Russians.Individuals affected with Chuvash erythrocytosis discovered in Chuvash population. Affected individuals among Mary population did not discover in spite of relatively high calculated frequency of erythrocytosis. This can be explained by benign course of the disease, that clinicians did not always identify, or by modiﬁer genetic factor that 
present in Chuvash population.
This work was support in part by RHF grant 04-01-00262a
P1257. Heritability of complex traits in an Italian genetic isolated 
population .
A. Crispo1, P. D'Adamo1, C. Lanzara1, A. Ferrara1, C. Specchia2, M. Carella3, P. 
Gasparini1;  
1Telethon Institute for Genetic and Medicine, Naples, Italy, 2Università di Bres -
cia, Brescia, Italy, 3IRCSS C.S.S., San Giovanni Rotondo-Foggia, Italy.
The molecular bases of complex and quantitative traits can be better identiﬁed studying genetically isolated populations. The aim of present study is to investigate heritability of the most common complex and quantitative traits in Carlantino, a small village from Southern Italy. Data from 1,417 individuals were collected and used. Traits include blood pressure, height, weight, body mass index, waist to-hip-ratio, uric acid, cholesterol, triglycerides, glucose, Na, K, Cl, Mg, P, LDH, CPK, alkaline phosphatase, AST, ALT, bilirubine, blood formula. The variance component method implemented in SOLAR was used to estimate heritability (h2r) that represents the total additive genetic heritability after the effect of all covariates has been removed. Covariates included were sex, age or any phenotypes (other than the trait), and/or interactions of these. After analyses traits with a highest heritability value were: Height (0.70, SE=0.05, p<0.0001) Triglycerides (0.69, SE=0.07, p<0.0001) Uric Acid (0.60, SE=0.03, p<0.0001), MPV (0.61, SE=0.01, p<0.0001), MCH (0.59, SE=0.02, p<0.0001), MCV (0.56, SE=0.09, p<0.0001); these three last traits as expression of the signiﬁcant proportion of thalassemic cases in the population. Absence of any statistical signiﬁcance was obtained for creatinine, alkaline phosphatase, gammaGT, and WHR (Waist to-hip-ratio). In conclusion, Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology355
our study is the ﬁrst report on heritability of such large number of 
traits in a genetically isolated population. Our ﬁndings suggest that a substantial part of variance of some traits is explained by genetic factors, thus helping us on focusing the search for corresponding 
genes on those traits with a strongest heritability component.
P1258. The load of hereditary pathology in Tomsk, Russia
L. Nazarenko , O. Salyukova, J. Kotalevskaya;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Medical genetic study of the population of Tomsk, Russia had been performed. The population sample comprised 412 720 subjects. For each nosological group, the loads of Mendelian pathology with different modes of inheritance had been determined. 71 autocomal dominant diseases had been found in a total of 454 patients, with hereditary syndromes being the most prevalent. Autosomal recessive pathology was represented by 69 diseases found in 376 patients, hereditary syndromes being the most prevalent too; and X-linked pathology, by 11 diseases in 89 patients. The prevalence rate had been calculated for each nosological form. The loads of autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive and X-linked diseases were 1.48 and 1.35 per 1000 people and 0.66 per 1000 men. The spectrum of hereditary pathology in Tomsk population was described. Migration was the major factor inﬂuencing the prevalence rates of hereditary pathology.
P1259. Analysis of GSTM1 and GSTT1 genes polymorphisms in 
newborn, middle age and in elderly people from the North-West 
region of Russia
O. S. Glotov , N. Y. Shved, G. S. Demin, V. G. Vakharlovsky, T. E. Ivashchenko, 
V. S. Baranov;  
Ott's Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
The polymorphisms of metabolic genes (GSTM1, GSTT1) responsible 
for xenobiotic conjugating enzymes of Phase II detoxiﬁcation system were studied by PCR in three groups of people from the North-West region of Russia. The newborn group consisted of 57 children born in Ott's Institute - group 1, the middle age cohort included 83 unrelated individuals of middle age (25-45) - group 2, the group of elderly people were represented by 147 unrelated individuals elder than 70 years. The frequencies of GSTM1 0/0 genotypes were similar in all three groups (45.7%, 45.8%, 44.0%, respectively). Low frequency of null allele homozygotes for GSTT1 gene in the group 1 (14%), middle (18%) - in the group 2 and rather high (28%) in the group 3 were found. The difference in the frequencies of null allele homozygotes between the newborns and elderly people was signiﬁcant (χ
2=3.96, p<0.05)). 
The frequencies of null alleles of both GSTT1 and GSTM1 genes were increased, but not signiﬁcantly, in the group 3 (13.6%) compared to group 2 and group 1 (9.6%, 8.7% respectively). It might be speculated that people homozygous for null allele of GSTT1 gene passes some 
metabolic advantages which support their longer survival.
P1260. Familial aggregation of common forms of migraine in a 
group of Portuguese families
C. Lemos1, M. Castro1, J. Barros2, C. Fraga2, L. Guimarães3, P. Maciel4, I. Sil -
veira1, J. Sequeiros1, J. Pereira-Monteiro2, A. Sousa1;  
1UnIGENe, IBMC and ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 2Serviço Neurologia, HGSA, 
Porto, Portugal, 3Fac. Ciências Saúde, Univ. Fernando Pessoa, Porto, Portugal, 
4ICVS, Univ. Minho, Braga, Portugal.
Migraine is a common neurological disorder, with a complex mode of inheritance. Migraine with aura (MA) and migraine without aura (MO) are the two most common forms of this disease. Several studies have described an increased risk in relatives of migraineurs and suggest that genetic factors may be implicated in both subtypes. We studied familial aggregation of MA and MO in 171 Portuguese families of probands with MA, MO or both. Relatives were diagnosed according to the criteria of the International Headache Society.Familial aggregation was evaluated by estimating the relative risk of the disease, ﬁrst in the total number of relatives and then in relatives, according to their degree of relantionship to the proband. Risk in the general population has been estimated previously at 8,8%. We also estimated the risk for spouses to disentangle the inﬂuence of genetic 
and environmental factors in migraine.RelativesRisk Estimate  
(Odds Ratio)
Total 4,68
Parents 5,60
Siblings 7,28
Children 7,86
Grandparents 3,35
Uncles 4,61
Cousins 3,99
Nephews 2,06
Spouses 1,08 (not signiﬁcant)
Odds ratio was signiﬁcant for all types of relatives and increased with degree of kinship to the proband, whereas the risk for spouses was 
not.These results point out to familial aggregation in our sample and suggest a genetic component involved in the two common subtypes 
of migraine.
P1261. Investigation deletion GSTT1 gene in Ukraine
A. F. Melnyk, L. A. Livshits;  
Institute Molecular Biology and Genetics, Kiyv, Ukraine.
Glutathione S-transferase T1 (GSTT1) gene ensure the synthesis of the relevant enzyme product, that belong to the Phase II detoxiﬁcation system responsible for biotransformation and degradation electrophilic xenobiotics. For this gene known nonfunctional null allele (0), which is 
formed as a result of extended deletion.GSTT1 null genotype is known as a risk factor predisposition to lung and bladder cancer as well as to some other environmentally induced diseases such as chronic bronchitis, bronchial asthma, alcoholic 
cirrhosis.Analysis GSTT1 null genotype was performed by PCR in the group of 71 healthy volunteers from Ukraine. The frequency of the GSTT1 null genotype is 21 % (n = 15). This frequency is comparable to population controls obtained in studies for population of the UK (61/325, 19%) and USA (20/98, 20%) but it is higher then Russian population (7/72, 
9.7%).The result of our research can be the background for genetics testing and consulting individuals from chemical pollutant area of Ukraine and for precise therapy of patients with high risk of development GSTT1 
associated pathologies.
P1262. Advances in association mapping of disease genes using 
linkage disequilibrium maps.
N. Maniatis, N. E. Morton, A. Collins;  
Human Genetics Division, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, SO16 
6YD, United Kingdom.
We have developed a simple yet powerful approach for disease gene association mapping by linkage disequilibrium (LD). This method is unique since it applies a model with evolutionary theory that incorporates a parameter for the location of the causal polymorphism. The method is based on single marker tests and LD maps, which describe the pattern of LD by assigning a location in LD units (LDU) for each marker. As a proof of principle, we tested our method using 27 SNPs that cover an 890 kb region ﬂanking the CYP2D6 gene with known location. Four functional CYP2D6 polymorphisms cause the poor drug metabolising phenotype. Previous LD mapping studies using single markers and haplotypes have identiﬁed a 390 kb region associated with this phenotype. Using a metric LDU map, the commonest functional polymorphism within the gene was estimated to be located only 14.9 kb from its true location, surrounded within a 95% conﬁdence interval of 172 kb. Using same modelling procedure, the kb map had a relative efﬁciency of 33% compared to the map in LDU. Our ﬁndings show that the support interval and location error are smaller than any published results on these data. Despite the low resolution and the very strong LD in the region, our results provide evidence of the substantial utility of LDU maps for disease gene association mapping. These tests are robust to large numbers of markers and are applicable to haplotypes, 
diplotypes, whole-genome association or candidate region studies.Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology356
P1263. Interparalog gene conversion patterns of HBII-52 C/D box 
snoRNAs cluster at 15q11-q12
M. Ogorelkova, P. Martinez, X. Estivill;  
CRG, Barcelona, Spain.
Brain expressed, paternally imprinted C/D box HBII-52 snoRNAs are 
organized in a ~99 Kb cluster of 47 copies on chromosome 15q11-q12. They are suggested to post-transcritionally modify 5HT2C receptor transcripts by affecting the (A) to (I) editing and/or alternative splicing. The HBII-52 copies share high homology with each other (>98%), and over half of them are expected to be functionally active. Due to high level of sequence identity, gene conversion is anticipated to occur between snoRNA homologues.In order to study the patterns of gene conversion of the HBII-52 snoRNAs cluster we have analysed the DNA variability of 23 presumably functional copies in 70 Spanish individuals. Our preliminary data indicate that the snoRNAs are characterized by high nucleotide diversity, high overall gene conversion rates for the region and multiple gene conversion hot-spots. In 40 chromosomes analysed so far we have identiﬁed 31 SNPs, 20 of which are located at potential gene conversion sites with tract length of 5 bp or more. Four gene conversions between homologues that involve more than one paralogous sequence variant (PSV) were detected, with gene conversion tracts between 6 to 31 bp. We have detected HBII-52 snoRNAs haplotypes that are marked by several gene conversion events and have accumulated minor alleles 
for multiple SNPs.Multiple SNPs are found at the proximal and distal parts of the snoRNAs cluster while central copies are devoid of variants suggesting that some 
homologues might represent gene conversion hot spots.
P1264. Human von Willebrand factor gene STR polymorphism 
(vWFII) in Russian, Belorussian and Kalmyk and Yakut 
populations.
D. A. Verbenko1, T. V. Lopatina1,2, V. A. Spitsyn3, N. A. Bebyakova4, L. A. Tar -
skaya1, M. V. Sorensen5, A. I. Mikulich6, S. A. Limborska1;  
1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 
Russian Federation, 2Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
3Medical and Genetics Scientiﬁc Centre, Russian Academy of Medical Scienc -
es, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4North State Medical Academy, Arkhangelsk, 
Russia, Arkhangelsk, Russian Federation, 5McGaw Medical Center, Northwest -
ern University, Chicago, IL, United States, 6Institute of Arts, Ethnography and 
Folklore, National Academy of The Republic of Belarus, Minsk, Belarus.
An STR polymorphism in Human von Willebrand factor gene (vWFII) 
possess high individual discrimination power and have an application in medical, forensic and population genetic studies. The variability of this DNA marker have been studied in different ethnic groups of Eastern Europe: Russians (Arkhangelsk and Kursk regions), Belarussians (Woodland region), Kalmyks (Elista region) and Yakuts (Central region of Sakha Republic). Allele typing was performed using the PCR and subsequent electrophoresis followed by silver staining. Nine alleles of the locus were noted in populations studied. Allele frequency distributions are in agreement with Hardy-Weinberg expectations in all populations. The level of observed heterozygosity was high and varied from 0.65 to 0.79. In contrast with other hypervariable STR markers studied in these populations, observed allele frequency distributions in distant ethnic groups from Eastern Europe show no statistically signiﬁcant difference, whereas there is signiﬁcant differentiation for Yakut population from Asia. This may reveals conservative ﬁtness action on the gene, because of the gene product importance for 
survival.
P1265. Population structure of Dagestan mountain isolates 
based on Alu insertion and Y chromosome data
B. Yunusbaev1, I. Kutuev1,2, R. Khusainova1, M. Reidla2, S. Rootsi2, E. Met -
spalu2, T. Kivisild2, R. Villems2, E. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Estonian 
Biocenter, Tartu, Estonia.
Mountain inhabitants of Dagestan speak North Caucasian languages 
and are known to be characterized by extreme linguistic diversity in a relatively small geographic area. In addition to small population size most ethnic groups tend to live isolated. 8 Alu insertion polymorphisms (PV92, ACE, APOA1, B65, A25, NBC27, NBC123, and TPA25) were typed in a total of 390 unrelated individuals from 7 autochthonous populations of Dagestan. Populations of Avars, Chamalals, Bagvalals, Andis, Lezgis, Dargwasses and Tabassarans inhabiting mountain part of Dagestan were analyzed. The overall pattern of the MDS analysis suggests that mountain isolates of Dagestan like other Caucasus populations clustering with West Eurasian populations being closer to Middle East populations. A large proportion of Y chromosome haplogroups deﬁned using 46 NRY biallelic markers are those considered to have originated in the Middle East. It has been shown earlier based on mtDNA and Y chromosome variation analysis that mountain inhabitants reveal great distinction which is in good agreement with the language differentiation pattern of the region. But what regards autosomal variation, estimates based on our Alu data set shows extremely low genetic differentiation (Fst = 0,008). In general lower values compared to those obtained by uniparentally inherited markers are expected but the amount of difference is somewhat striking possibly explained to some extent by marker characteristics itself. Anyway autosomal variation reﬂects shared genetic background suggesting recent common ancestral population in the past. Contemporary genetic structure has been 
primarily shaped by genetic drift.
P1266. Glucokinase mutations in women with gestational 
diabetes mellitus selected by clinical criteria
M. Żurawek1, E. Wender- Ozegowska2, D. Januszkiewicz- Lewandowska1, A. 
Zawiejska2, J. Nowak1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Science, Poznan, Poland, 
2University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Maturity- onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically and clinically heterogeneous form of non- insulin dependent diabetes mellitus, characterized by early onset, usually before 25 years of age, an autosomal dominant inheritance and primary defect in insulin secretion. Mutations in at least six genes have been shown to underline MODY, including 
GCK mutations (encoding glucokinase). Glucokinase- 
related MODY 2 is a common form of this disorder, especially in children with mild hyperglycemia and in women with gestational diabetes and a family history of diabetes. The purpose of this study was to estimate the prevalance of MODY 2 in Polish gestational diabetic patients. Selected gestational diabetic women fulﬁlled the following criteria: age<35 years, BMI< 25, a small increment (<3 mmol/l) during 2-h oral glucose tolerant test and a history of type II or gestational diabetes in a ﬁrst or second-degree relatives. The PCR- SSCP analysis involving coding regions of the 12 exons and the intron-exons boundaries of 
the GCK gene was used. In 12 probands (10%) of the 119 patients 
we detected two novel GCK mutations: G448fsinsG, E312Q, two 
previously reported S383L, Y215Y and four intronic variants: IVS2-12C>T, IVS3-8G>A, IVS4+26C>A, IVS7-13A>G. All mutations were absent from 120 control subjects. We found previously reported polymorphism IVS9+8C>T. The frequency of the C and T alleles was respectively 0.8 and 0.2.The obtained results indicated on relatively low prevalence of MODY 2 in Polish gestational diabetic patients.This work is supported by Ministry of Sciences and Informatics grant 
no PO5E09326
P1267. Polymorphism of the MTHFR gene and serum lipid levels 
in Serbian child population
T. M. Damnjanovic , I. Novakovic, L. Lukovic, V. Bunjevacki, S. Cvijeticanin, B. 
Jekic;  
Institute of Human Genetics, Belgarade, Serbia and Montenegro.
As it is known thermo labile polymorphism C677T of the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene has been shown to result in increased total homocysteine concentrations caused by a decreased enzyme activity. Homocysteine could act as inhibitor or promoter of oxidation LDL cholesterol.The aim of this study was to determine C677T genotype in 609 (310 boys and 299 girls) healthy children and investigate a possible association among the TT genotype and serum lipid levels. C677T polymorphism was genotyped by PCR ampliﬁcation of speciﬁc fragment of genomic DNA followed by digestion with the HinfI restriction enzyme. We have found that genotype was wild type CC in 260 (42, 7 %), heterozygous CT 268 in (44, 0 %) and homozygous mutant TT in 81 (13, 3%) children. Total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol and triglycerides were determined for each MTHFR genotype group (CC, CT, and TT) in boys and girls. LDL cholesterol are signiﬁcant higher (p<0, 02) in TT Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology357
group of children. Also, in boys levels of both total and LDL cholesterol 
among the CT and TT groups differed signiﬁcantly (p<0, 02, p<0, 05). We did not ﬁnd any signiﬁcant association between the homozygous genotype (TT) and HDL cholesterol and triglycerides level in both 
sexes.
P1268. mtDNA hypervariable regions in determination of local 
human populations diversity after war resettlement
N. Pojskic ;  
Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina.
Comparison between the genetic data sets collected before and after the war proved signiﬁcant inﬂuence of war in Bosnia and Herzegovina 
1992-1995 on genetic structures of local human populations.MtDNA hypervariable regions HV1 and HV2 diversity of three local human populations in alpine area of B&H was investigated. Molecular diversity indices and genetic structure parameters were calculated for three subdivided populations based on their spatial isolation and effects of war resettlement. Because of its developed infrastructure and connections with urban area, one of the investigated villages Dejcici is the center of refugees’ repatriation after four-year exodus. Present population of this village includes returnees that originate from several other villages in the same mountain area. Populations of the two other villages Bobovica and Lukomir were expelled and returned home following the seize of atrocities. The named populations were 
compared against standard Bosnian population.Usefulness of mtDNA hypervariable regions in determination of local human population after the war resettlement was tested using different diversity measures as well as with adapt speciﬁc population genetics measures. Comparison with result of short tandem repeats analyses of the same populations have been done in order to determine the level of differences of these genetic markers for using in determination of local human populations diversity.
P1269. Cross-Population Mapping Genes for Schizophrenia-
Spectrum Disorders in Daghestan Genetic Isolates
K. B. Bulayeva1, S. J. Glatt2, O. A. Bulayev1, T. A. Pavlova1, M. T. Tsuang2, R. 
M. Kurbanov3, Y. Aulchenko4, C. van Duijn4;  
1N.I. Vavilov Institute of General Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Behavioral Genomics; Department 
of Psychiatry; University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States, 
3Daghestan State Psychiatric Hospital, Makhachkala, Daghestan, Russian 
Federation, 4Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Erasmus Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Schizophrenia presents across a wide clinical spectrum, and a large number of genes are presumably involved. Genetic isolates may be used to reduce the genetic and clinical heterogeneity of these complex schizophrenia-spectrum disorders. A genome-wide linkage scans for schizophrenia susceptibility loci in pedigrees from Daghestan genetic isolates provided highly signiﬁcant evidence of cross-population differences in linkage patterns. We present the ﬁndings of a parametric linkage analysis of families from four primary and secondary genetic isolates. We found strong evidence for linkages with schizophrenia-spectrum disorder at two regions of chromosome 22 (22q11, with maximum heterogeneity α=1.00 and a LOD score of 8.7, and 22q13, with α=0.75 and a LOD score of 6.7). Furthermore we conﬁrmed a locus on chromosome 17 (17p11.1-p12) with a LOD score of 5.03 (α =1.00) that replicated earlier reported our results in a single pedigree. These ﬁndings should provide sufﬁcient rationale for subsequent ﬁne mapping and positional cloning efforts at these loci in order to elucidate 
the underlying susceptibility genes.
P1270. Real-time proﬁling of miRNAs from single cells
D. Ridzon , A. Broomer, H. Zhou, C. Chen;  
Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States.
A new miRNA quantitation method has been developed using stem-loop primers for reverse transcription (RT) followed by real-time TaqMan®. A total of 240 miRNA assays were designed and tested using as few as single cells or as little as 25 pg total RNA. The C
T 
values correlated (R2 = 0.999) to the copy number over seven orders of magnitude. The expression of miRNAs varied greatly from 0 to 32,091 copies per cell in mouse tissues. Presence of genomic DNA did not affect the miRNA quantitation. The assays discriminated between two miRNAs that differed by as little as a single nucleotide, and between mature miRNAs and their precursors. This method allows accurate and sensitive miRNA expression proﬁling, uncovers precise changes of miRNA expression during stem cell differentiation, and identiﬁes potential miRNA markers speciﬁc to particular cell type and cancer. Comparison of miRNA expression proﬁles between normal and cancer 
tissues will be presented.
P1271. Sub-classiﬁcation and molecular characterization of 
early stage breast carcinoma using Applied Biosystem Human 
Genome Survey Microarrays
Y. Wang1, T. Sorlie2, C. Xiao3, A. Borresen-Daleb4, G. Schroth1, R. Samaha1;  
1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Departments of Genetics 
and Surgery, The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Celera Genom -
ics, Rockville, MD, United States, 4The Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo, 
Norway.
DNA microarray technology has shown great promises in deciphering 
molecular phenotypes of breast cancer. In this study, we proﬁled gene expressions on 20 biopsy tissues of early stage breast carcinoma using Applied Biosystem’s Human Genome Survey Microarrays. Two main previously deﬁned clinically relevant subtypes of breast tumors, Luminal A (longest survival time) and Basal (shortest survival time) were identiﬁed. Statistical analysis identiﬁed 1210 genes as signature genes characterizing the two subtypes of breast cancer. Panther
TM 
functional classiﬁcation and biological pathway analysis on these signature genes depicts a more detailed molecular portrait of these expression-based subtypes: Signature genes of Luminal A subtype were over-represented by biological function/processes such as cell structure and amino acid metabolism, while genes over expressed in the Basal subtype were over-represented by oncogenes, cell cycle 
signaling pathways.In an attempt to identify the best set of genes as potential biomarkers for sub-classifying breast cancer, the same 20 patients samples were analyzed using Stanford cDNA Arrays and Agilent Human Whole Genome Arrays. The results from the three microarray platforms were found to be highly correlated. Using PAM analysis, a minimal numbers of genes were selected to best characterize and distinguish the Luminal A and Basal subtypes of tumors. These classiﬁer genes were further veriﬁed by TaqMan assays. Validated by multiple gene expression platforms, the classiﬁer genes identiﬁed in this study deﬁned potential 
prognostic molecular markers for breast cancers.
P1272. High-resolution molecular characterization of 16p13.3 
and 11p15.5 rearrangements causing alpha- and beta-
thalassaemia by multi-color Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Ampliﬁcation.
C. L. Harteveld1, A. Voskamp1, M. Phylipsen1, N. Akkermans1, S. J. White2, P. 
C. Giordano1;  
1Hemoglobinopathies Laboratory, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Human and Clini -
cal Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Genomic deletions involving the α-globin gene cluster on chromosome 
16p13.3 are the most common molecular cause of α-thalassemia (approx. 85% of cases). Rearrangements in the beta-globin gene cluster on 11p15.5 account for approx. 10% of all beta-thalassemia mutations and for the majority of Hereditary Persistence of Fetal Hemoglobin (HPFH) syndromes. The molecular tests commonly used to identify deletion types of alpha- and beta-thalassaemias and HPFH at present are gap-PCR, Southern blot analysis and Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH) analysis. However, the applicability of these techniques is limited to known deletions, dependent upon the hybridization probes available and may involve time consuming and laborious cell culture to generate metaphase chromosome spreads. We have developed a rapid and simple technique based on Multiplex Ligation-Dependent Probe Ampliﬁcation to detect rearrangements in the alpha- and beta-globin gene clusters. MLPA allows the precise quantiﬁcation of up to 51 probe sequences within a nucleic acid sample using a single tube assay. We describe the design of two sets of 35 and 51 probes, covering a region of 700 kb of the alpha- and 250 kb of the beta-globin gene cluster respectively, ampliﬁed by primers Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics358
labeled with up to three different ﬂuorophores. Besides the detection 
of the most common deletions, several alpha- and beta-thalassemia causing deletions, not previously described, were found using this assay. Because of its robustness and simplicity, this technique should become the standard for the detection of (large) rearrangements causing hemoglobinopathies and other diseases in laboratories capable of performing automated DNA fragment analysis.
P1273. The inﬂuence of neuropeptide ‘Semax’ on the synthesis 
of neurotrophic factors in rat retina and brain
T. Agapova, Y. Agniullin, M. Shadrina, S. Shram;  
Institute of Molecular Genetic, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Glaucoma is a group of optic nerve progressive neuropathies which is followed by the morphological alterations of the optic nerve disk. The main elements damaged under this disease are ganglion cells of retina. Glaucoma is characterized by different microcirculatory changes, ischemia of the retina and neuron death. Intranasal introduction of ‘Semax’ is used in ophthalmologic practice for the treatment of glaucoma. According to the one of hypothesis ‘Semax’, the physiologically active analogue of adrenocorticotropic hormone (4 - 10), stimulates the production of neurotrophic factors BDNF and NGF in the glial cells of the neural tissue and increases the vital capacity of the neurons. We observed its inﬂuence on the expression of BDNF and NGF in rat retina and some parts of brain under the different types of the peptide introduction. The PCR analysis showed that under the subconjunctival introduction ‘Semax’ caused the increase of the mRNA expression of neurotrophic factors in the retina. Under the intranasal introduction the level of the expression of BDNF and NGF mRNA decreased for 40 % in the retina. This level of BDNF mRNA increased for 30% in hippocampus under such conditions. Expression of NGF mRNA in hippocampus and visual region of cortex increased for 40% and decreased for 20% in thalamus. We hypothesized those therapeutical effects of ‘Semax’ as intranasal medication was not directly connected with the activation of neurotrophic factors synthesis 
in retina.
P1274. Universal Primer APEX: a ﬂexible and large-scale 
genotyping platform
K. Krjutskov, M. Remm, A. Kurg, T. Puurand, H. Uibopuu, A. Metspalu;  
Institude of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia.
Our purpose is to work out universal primer APEX and then greatly increase throughput and precision of large scale genotyping, while reducing cost. In the present project we will attack several limiting key factors for such analyses, including design oligonucleotide primers, parallel analyses of large sets of genetic markers, and array-based genotype scoring platform. These technologies are expected to enable whole-genome association studies for mapping candidate genes for 
common diseases.We use restrictase and universal adapter ligation procedure for ampliﬁcation of target-DNA from genomic DNA. Before PCR with universal primer we reduce genomic DNA complexity on highly speciﬁc afﬁnity array. In this step we hybridize probe-speciﬁc DNA to on an array oligonucleotides and remove unbound material during washing step. After eluation of hybridized DNA from pound oligonucleotides, we run PCR with universal primer and primer extension on array.Our ultimate purpose is to work out high-throughput and ﬂexible genotyping platform that uses a one universal primer assay to genotype 15,000 SNPs per individual on a single oligonucleotide array.
P1275. Expanding the scope of molecular analysis
S. Johnson, D. Marshall, G. Harms, C. Miller, J. R. Prudent ;  
EraGen Biosciences Inc., Madison, WI, United States.
Recently, a new set of tools has emerged that simpliﬁes certain aspects of molecular testing and provides additional beneﬁts. Called MultiCode® (for multiple coding), these tools evolve around the idea that genetic material is not limited two base pairs. Indeed other base pairs could exist chemically and one additional base pair now does exist commercially. The components required to advance the commercialization potential, such as triphosphates for enzymatic incorporation of this base pair have recently become available for isoguanine (iG) and 5’-methyl-isocytosine (iC). This presentation will discuss current and potential areas of interest for this base pair as they pertain to human genetic testing. Speciﬁcally, two platform technologies have recently emerged using iC and iG; MultiCode RTx for solution based quantitative analysis and MultiCode PLx for solid phase multiplexed end-point analysis. Together, these two platform technologies will be applicable to some +90% of all genetic testing. This presentation will focus on our experience using the MultiCode PLx for human genetic detection. The presentation will discuss reports using a highly multiplexed PLx assay for analysis of the CFTR gene and using lower complexity PLx assays to target various other human 
genes developed as "home brews".
P1276. In silico  identiﬁcation of transcription factors involved 
in cellular differentiation by promoter analysis of co-regulated 
genes
P. A. 't Hoen , J. Hou, R. X. de Menezes, E. Sterrenburg, J. T. den Dunnen, G. 
J. van Ommen;  
Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Having analysed changes in gene expression during the differentiation of human primary skeletal myoblasts on microarrays, we aimed for the identiﬁcation of the transcription factors responsible for the observed changes in gene expression. To this end, upstream sequences of co-regulated genes were retrieved and aligned with 322 recognition sequences of vertebrate transcription factors (TFs). The majority of differentially expressed genes included in the search had not previously been associated with myogenesis. Still, we observed that their promoters were signiﬁcantly enriched in regulatory elements binding myogenic TFs, such as MEF2, SRF and Msx, when compared to control promoter sequences or promoters from genes with unchanged expression. This demonstrates the power of the algorithm in the identiﬁcation of relevant TF binding sites. In addition, we found that promoters of up-regulated genes were signiﬁcantly enriched in binding sites for TFs that have not or have only recently been implicated in myogenesis. Among these are Forkhead transcription factors and the PBX/MEIS1 heterodimer. Their binding sites were also signiﬁcantly over-represented in the homologous mouse promoter sequences, further substantiating their functionality. Binding sites for mentioned transcription factors are often found together in the same promoter. These clusters of binding sites can be used to predict involvement of genes not measured on the microarray in myogenesis. The approach developed can be extended to expression datasets coming from other cell models, and will be helpful to distill candidate TFs responsible for 
the observed co-regulation of gene expression.
P1277. Comparative use of 10-mer DNA oligonucleotides and 
DNA:LNA oligonucleotides for sequence analysis by arrayed 
primer extension
M. Nelis1, M. Teder2, A. Kurg1, L. Nagirnaja1, A. Metspalu1;  
1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian Biocentre, 
Tartu, Estonia.
The ability of DNA microarrays to measure thousands of binding 
interactions simultaneously has led to their rapid adoption in many applications. One opportunity is to synthesize a universal array containing all 4
N possible oligonucleotides of length N. Due to the 
potential complexity of the large number of different oligonucleotides on chip, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd optimal reaction conditions. One way to stabilize A:T and G:C-rich duplexes is to incorporate chemically modiﬁed nucleotides in short universal primers. The aim of current study was to test 10-mer oligonucleotides for sequence analysis by arrayed primer extension (APEX) method in microarray format on glass slides. In the next stage we investigated the use of modiﬁed Locked Nucleic Acid (LNA) monomers in constitution of 10-mer APEX primers at different positions. Theoretically addition of a single LNA base in DNA/RNA oligonucleotide can raise Tm value of 
the duplex by 4 - 9°C.Contrary to the expected rise of APEX signals the effect of inclusion of LNA monomers into DNA oligonucleotides resulted in signiﬁcant deterioration of the signals of APEX reactions. The hybridization experiments performed in microchip format revealed either no effect or higher thermostability of modiﬁed oligonucleotides compared to the DNA tenmers. Inclusion of LNA monomers into DNA oligonucleotides probably interferes in DNA polymerase reaction with chimeric 
oligonucleotides.Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics359
From the results it can be concluded that the incorporation of LNA 
monomers in short oligonucleotide primers is perspective for hybridisation based microarray methods but not effective for APEX 
reaction based methods.
P1278. ATM Gene Mutations Detection, Haplotype Analysis, 
mt-DNA and D-loop Variation in Iranian Patients with Ataxia-Telangiectasia
.
M. Sanati, B. Bayat, B. Houshiar, M. Houshmand, A. Isaian, M. Shafa Shariat -
panah, A. Farhoodi, M. Moin;  
NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Ataxia-Telangiectasia is an inherited autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by defect in a number of distinct organ systems. Symptoms include progressive cerebellar ataxia, telangiectasia, immunodeﬁciency, chromosomal instability radiation sensivity and increased incidence of malignancies. The ATM gene of human chromosome 11q22.3 has been identiﬁed as the gene responsible for human recessive disease ataxia-telangiectasia .ATM is encoded in 66 exons and spans 150kb of genomic DNA. In this study 20 families with at least one affected child with clinically suspect for ataxia-telangiectasia were examined and extracted DNA was ampliﬁed by 
using standard methods.Three exons which were hot spot for point mutations in ATM gene were detected by PCR-RELP and SSCP. The polymorphic bands sequenced to detect the possible point mutations. In this manner, mt-DNA was tested by 6 primers for existence of any mitochondrial deletions. We also ampliﬁed and sequence the D-loop of these patients by standard sequencing techniques. Likewise four molecular markers: D11S2179, D11S1787, D11S535, D11S1343 were genotyped in A-T families. Those markers were ampliﬁed using extracted sequence primers from Gene Bank. The ampliﬁed products were separated using denaturing PAGE gels, and the data were analyzed to detect their pattern of inheritance in each family. We have found three mutations (insertion, substitution)in the examined exones and mtDNA deletions including 2 individuals with 7.5kb deletions, one with 5kb together with a 9.0kb deletion for all. The samples were then sequenced to admit deletion breakpoints. Also the results of the D-loop variations related to A-T 
patients have been discussed in the presentation.
P1279. Identiﬁcation of p53 genotype among Iranian Ataxia-
telangiectasia (A-T) patients
M. Banoei, F. Biramijamal, B. Bayat, M. H. Sanati, A. Isaian, M. Moin, A. Far -
hoodi;  
NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Recent studies showed an association between the speciﬁc diseases and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a cancer-prone and radiation-sensitive syndrome. It is also, a recessive multi-system disorder caused by mutations in the ATM gene at 11q22-q23. The risk of cancer is substantially elevated in A-T patients. It is reported that the ATM/p53 signalling pathway is altered by a very low ATM expression or by the presence of a mutated p53. In the absence of ATM, humans show a primary immunodeﬁciency that 
includes low serum antibody titers.To investigate the relationship between p53 codon 72 polymorphism and risk for AT, we collected samples from AT patients and healthy population from different region of Iran with different ethnicity groups (Fars, Mazandarani and Turk). The 
p53 Pro72Arg genotypes were 
determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) and direct DNA sequencing analysis in 207 healthy controls and 19 AT patients. Among the patients and healthy subjects with Fars, Mazandarani and Turk ethnicity, the genotype frequency of 
p53 Pro72Arg were 15.8% and 34.8% for Arg/Arg, 73.7% 
and 45.9% for Arg/Pro, 10.5% and 19.3% for Pro/Pro, respectively. Signiﬁcance differences were found for p53 allele distribution among patients and healthy individuals. Our ﬁnding suggested that the frequency of Arg allele is more than healthy Iranian population.P1280. Investigation of NQO1 genotype polymorphisms between 
Iranian healthy population and Ataxia- telangectasia ( A-T) 
patients
B. Bayat, F. Biramijamal, M. Banoei, M. Sanati, A. Isaian, M. Moin;  
NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Ataxia -telangectaisa ( A-T) is a cancer - prone and radiation sensitive syndrome. The A-T patients are hypersensitive to radiation, free radicals are generated by radiation. The NAD(P)H: quinine oxidoreductase (NQO1) enzyme prevents redox cycling which leads to generation of free radicals. It has been reported that this gene has a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) at site of codon 187 (nucleotide 609). A 
Pro to Ser substitution at codon 187 of the NQO1 gene is associated 
with a loss of NQO1 protein and enzyme activity. To investigate the relationship between 
NQO1 codon 187 (nucleotide 609) polymorphism 
and risk for A-T patients. We collected samples from AT patients and healthy population from different region of Iran with different ethnicity groups( Fars, Mazandarani, Turk). The NQO1 Pro187Ser genotypes were determined by polymerase chain reaction - restriction fragment length polymorphisms ( PCR- RFLP) for 206 healthy control and 20 AT patients. We found only 20 Iranian A-T patients. Among the patients and healthy controls (with Fars, Mazandaran and Turk ethnicities) the genotype frequency of 
NQO1 Pro187Ser were 70% and 67% for Pro/
Pro, 25% and 28.2% for Pro/Ser, 5% and 4.8% for Ser/Ser, respectively. No signiﬁcance differences were found for NQO1 genotype distribution among patients and healthy individuals. Our ﬁnding suggested that 
NQO1 genotype does not play an important role in developing Ataxia 
-telangectaisa.
P1281. Application of an integrated Bayesian approach to the 
detection of copy number changes in arrayCGH images.
N. M. Haan , G. Snudden;  
BlueGnome Ltd., Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Bayesian methods have been widely applied to data analysis problems in the life sciences. Their application to copy number change detection has however been limited to the post processing of primary data extracted from microarray images by traditional black box image processing techniques. This combination of Bayesian and black box approaches is sensitive to variability; both from experimental and 
operator sources in the primary data.In this presentation we describe a novel approach which combines the three major stages of arrayCGH analysis; extraction of primary data, normalisation and copy number change detection, in a single integrated solution. The Bayesian model based approach is introduced as a means of improving the measurement of the underlying biological quantities while at the same time estimating the likely variability associated with those measurements. The importance of a single statistical framework as a means of carrying forward knowledge of this variability through to the detection of copy number changes is illustrated by examples of how detected copy number changes may be qualiﬁed by conﬁdence 
estimates; meaningful within the clinical context.The presentation will also illustrate how an integrated Bayesian approach removes operator intervention from the analysis of arrayCGH data thereby making this powerful technology accessible to individuals without a strong background in microarray image analysis and the 
associated mathematical techniques.
P1282. Deletions of the SHOX gene in patients with Leri-Weill 
dyschondrosteosys evidenced by the MLPA approach.
L. Stuppia , V. Gatta, O. Scarciolla, I. Antonucci, G. Calabrese, G. Palka;  
G. D'Annunzio University Foundation, Chieti, Italy.
The human SHOX gene (Xp22 - Yp11.3) is involved in the pathogenesis 
of diseases characterized by the presence of short stature, being rearranged in up to 70% of patients with Leri Weill dyschondrosteosys (LWD) and in up to 12% of patients with idiopathic short stature. In the majority of cases, the SHOX gene alterations consist of large deletions, detectable by FISH or molecular analysis of intragenic CA repeats. However, FISH is a low throughput technique and is able to detect only large deletions, and analysis of CA repeats can be performed only when DNA of the parents of the proband is available. In recent years, the Multiple Ligation Probe Ampliﬁcation (MLPA) technique has demonstrated to be a useful tool in the study of deletions of several genes. In this study we used the MLPA approach for the detection of Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics360
SHOX deletions in 14 patients affected by LWD (9 of which previously 
analysed by FISH) and 20 with idiopathic short stature (15 of which previously analysed by FISH). MLPA analysis evidenced SHOX deletions in 6 LWD patients (43%), and in no case with idiopathic short stature. In all cases, MLPA analysis conﬁrmed results previously obtained by FISH. Interestingly, MLPA analysis showed two alternative proximal breakpoints, producing two different deletions of 2.3 Mb and 500 kb, respectively. These results demonstrate that MLPA analysis is an useful tool in the study of SHOX gene, showing a reduced labour intensity as compared to FISH and providing more information about 
the breakpoints of the deletion.
P1283. Genomic organization and classiﬁcation of conserved 
non-coding sequences in vertebrates reveals distinct classes of 
genes
R. Sanges, E. Stupka ;  
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy.
The increasing number of available sequenced genomes is enabling researchers to determine with increasing conﬁdence the presence of conserved non-coding sequences. We have focused our efforts on understanding the evolution and the genomic organization of these regions relating them to the function and structure of neighboring genes comparing ﬁve vertebrates genomes in two phyla.We have mapped CNSs to the exon-intron structure of the genes and classiﬁed each analyzed gene on the basis of CNS localization and GO classiﬁcation. We have also attempted to cross phylum boundaries by analyzing the fragmentation of mammalian CNSs in ﬁsh.Preliminary results suggest that the density of conserved sequences is higher in introns with respect to ﬂanking regions in most of the analyzed genes. Furthermore CNSs seem to be present in higher number in the ﬁrst intron within the coding region as compared to other introns, and 
this seems to be related to an increase in intron size.Our GO classiﬁcation suggests that the minority of genes that show a higher number of CNS in the ﬂanking regions has a statistically signiﬁcant enrichment for genes involved in development and transcription, suggesting a different regulation mechanism for this class of genes. Moreover genes without CNSs (but conserved in all ﬁve vertebrates) show a statistically signiﬁcant enrichment for involvement in biosynthesis and metabolism indicating a much simpler regulation mechanism. Moreover we show that it is important to take into account fragmentation of non-coding sequences when comparing them across 
longer evolutionary distances.
P1284. Rapid mutation detection method of complex genes by 
Heteroduplex Analysis with Capillary Array Electrophoresis
E. Velasco1, M. Durán1, E. Esteban-Cardeñosa1, M. Infante1, E. Lastra2, C. 
García-Girón2, C. Miner1;  
1Universidad de Valladolid, IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital General Yagüe, 
Burgos, Spain.
Scanning for mutations in complex genes in a large number of samples is 
hampered by the large size of these genes and the scattering of mutations all over their coding sequences. We have transferred Heteroduplex Analysis (HA) by Conformation Sensitive Gel Electrophoresis (CSGE) of the two major breast cancer predisposing genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2, to a multicapillary DNA sequencer in order to increase the throughput of this technique. This new method, that we have called Heteroduplex Analysis by Capillary Array Electrophoresis (HA-CAE), is based on the use of multiplex-PCR, different ﬂuorescent labels and heteroduplex analysis in a 16-capillary DNA sequencer. To date, a total of 114 different DNA sequence variants (19 insertions/deletions and 95 single nucleotide substitutions -SNS-) of BRCA1 and BRCA2 have been successfully detected by HA-CAE. In addition, we have optimised the multiplex-PCR conditions for the colorectal cancer genes MLH1 and MSH2 in order to analyse them by HA-CAE. Both genes have been ampliﬁed in 13 multiplex groups which contain the 35 exons and their corresponding ﬂanking intronic sequences. MLH1 and MSH2 have been analysed in nine Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC) patients, and we have found six different DNA changes: one complex deletion/insertion mutation in MLH1 exon 19 and another ﬁve SNS. Only the complex mutation and one SNS may be classiﬁed as cancer-prone mutations. Our experience has revealed that HA-CAE is a simple, fast, reproducible and sensitive method to scan the 
sequences of large multi-exon genes.P1285. Elaboration and usage of point mutation detection 
technology based on AS-PCR using automated DNA analyzer.
O. V. Vanyusheva1, I. A. Shilov2, A. S. Karyagina2;  
1Moscow Lomonosov State Academy of Advanced Chemical Technology, Mos -
cow, Russian Federation, 2R&D ﬁrm “ATG-Biotech”, Moscow, Russian Federa -
tion.
We developed a new method of point mutation detection based on 
allele-speciﬁc PCR using capillary electrophoresis for PCR-product analysis. It consists of a reaction with three primers where two of them are allele-speciﬁc and third is common primer. Allele-speciﬁc primers with different length of 5’-terminal sequences are used for development of the AS-PSR products with different lengths that allow us to detect a heterozygote. Length standards are used for exclusion of false results and for increasing method reliability. The standards are special synthesized DNA fragments lengths of that are intermediate between AS-PSR product lengths. In case of capillary electrophoresis with ﬂuorescent detection the length standards and the PCR fragments are labeled with different ﬂuorophores and analyzed in the same capillary.The elaborated technology was used for development of the tests for detection of mutations in several genes which are responsible for thrombosis: C677T mutation in MTHFR gene, Leiden mutation in factor V gene and G20210A mutation in prothrombin gene. Also the method was used for detection of M235T, T174M and G(-6)A mutations in angiotensinogen gene, which are responsible for essential hypertension and for detection of Sp1 (ColIα1), BsmI (VDR), XbaI and 
PvuII (ERα) polymorphisms concerned with osteoporosis.The elaborated technology is appropriate for clinical usage and large-
scale polymorphisms analysis.
P1286. A new approach to argue causality of FBN1 mutations in 
UMD-FBN1
G. Collod-Beroud1, M. Y. Frederic1, C. M. Monino1, C. Beroud1, D. Hamroun1, 
M. Claustres1, C. Boileau2;  
1Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire, Montpellier, France, 2Laboratoire cen -
tral de Biochimie, d'Hormonologie et de Genetique Moleculaire, Hopital Am-
broise Pare, Boulogne, France.
Mutations in the ﬁbrillin-1 gene (FBN1), the major component of extracellular microﬁbrils, are associated with Marfan syndrome (MFS), but also with a spectrum of conditions phenotypically related to MFS called type-1 ﬁbrillinopathies. To facilitate mutational analysis at the molecular level and to provide the tools to search for genotype/phenotype correlations, a Locus Speciﬁc DataBase UMD-FBN1 was created in 1995. Among the 711 mutations indexed, the global analysis revealed two classes of mutations. The ﬁrst one (40.89%) corresponds to mutations predicted to result in shortened ﬁbrillin-1 molecules: nonsense mutations, splicing errors, insertions, duplications and deletions. The second one (59.11%) corresponds to missense mutations. Since in vitro validation of these nucleotide variations is not possible in diagnostic settings, indirect arguments must be accumulated to deﬁne if these missense mutations are really causative. In this context, we have annotated the FBN1 sequence for Highly Conserved Domains (HCD). These data list for a given position the known arguments such as: cysteines implicated in disulﬁde bonds, amino acids implicated in calcium-binding, N-linked glycosylation, furine/Pace sites, metalloproteases sites, RGD, or very conserved amino acids of unknown function in cb EGF-like, TGFBP, EGF-like modules, as well as in ﬁbulin-like (Cterm) and in LTBP-like (Nterm) modules newly described. The new annotation of the FBN1-HCDs shows that 83% of missense mutations are localized in one of these HCDs even if numerous parts of the protein remain to be functionally annoted. Thus up to 90% of all FBN1 mutations can be 
considered as pathogenic, even in the absence of validation.
P1287. Sequencing the short arm of human chromosome 21
R. Lyle1, K. Osoegawa2, B. ten Hallers2, B. Zhu2, E. Eyras3, R. Castelo3, C. 
Bird4, M. Cruts5, S. Dahoun1, X. She6, C. van Broeckhoven5, E. Eichler6, R. 
Guigo3, J. Rogers4, P. de Jong2, S. E. Antonarakis1;  
1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Children's 
Hospital Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, CA, United States, 3Centre for 
Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 4Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cam -
bridge, United Kingdom, 5University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 6University 
of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States.
The sequence of the euchromatic portion of the human genome Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics361
is essentially complete. However, large regions of the genome, 
comprising ~5-7% of the total, remain to be sequenced. These regions include the short arms of the acrocentric chromosomes (13, 14, 15, 21 and 22). The acrocentric chromosomes are of great interest as they are involved in many translocations causing human genetic disease. Human chromosome 21 has special signiﬁcance because of its involvement in Down syndrome. The sequence of the short arm of Hsa21 (21p) would thus be important not only for understanding chromosome 21 genetics and disease, but an important step in the characterisation of these unexplored regions of the genome and toward the completion of the human genome project. We have constructed a BAC library containing human sequence from only Hsa21 and shown that it contains clones from 21p. So far we have generated approximately 1.3 Mb of new sequence from 21p (estimated to be 10-15% of the total), which shows that 21p contains regions which have the characteristics of euchromatic sequence. Gene prediction by EST and in silico based methods, followed by conﬁrmation of ~30% gene models by rtPCR in 24 human tissues, indicates the presence of many expressed sequence on 21p. In this project, we aim to produce a sequence contig of 21p and characterise 21p with respect to genes 
and repeat content.
P1288. Anti-iNOS locus in the human genome: structure and 
potential role in natural antisense RNA mediated regulation of 
iNOS expression
S. A. Korneev1, E. I. Korneeva1, G. Critchley2, M. O'Shea1;  
1Sussex Centre for Neuroscience, University of Sussex, Brighton, United King -
dom, 2Hurstwood Park Neurological Centre, Brighton and Sussex University 
Hospitals NHS Trust, Haywards Heath, United Kingdom.
Recently we have demonstrated that DNA inversions, mutations 
involving major rearrangements of the genome and usually regarded as catastrophic to gene function, can have an important role in the creation of novel genes (Korneev & O’Shea, J Mol Biol Evol, 2002). We suggested that these genes form a special class of genetic elements capable of producing antisense RNA molecules. Speciﬁcally, using a molluscan model system we have shown that nitric oxide synthase (NOS)-related antisense RNAs can function as speciﬁc negative regulators of NOS gene activity. Our experiments indicate that this novel mechanism of gene regulation is important for learning and memory formation (Korneev et al., J Neurosci, 2005). By employing computational methods of analysis we have started our search for similarly organised elements in other species including human. Here we report on our discovery of a locus in the human genome whose structure appeared to have been affected by an internal DNA inversion. This region of the genome has the highest similarity to the gene encoding inducible isoform of nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). Furthermore, by analysing the human EST databases, we have identiﬁed a transcript produced from this locus. We refer to this transcript as anti-iNOS RNA. As expected the anti-iNOS RNA contains a region, which exhibits approximately 90% complementarity to iNOS mRNA and therefore it can be considered as an example of natural 
trans-encoded antisense 
RNA. Moreover, by using RT-PCR we conﬁrmed that the anti-iNOS 
locus is transcribed in the human brain.
P1289. Some 10% of L1-mediated retrotranspositions are 
associated with signiﬁcant genomic deletion in humans
J. M. Chen1, P. D. Stenson2, M. A. Batzer3, D. N. Cooper2, C. Férec1;  
1INSERM (Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale) U613 
– Génétique Moléculaire et Génétique Epidémiologique, Etablissement 
Français du Sang – Bretagne, Université de Bretagne Occidentale, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire, Brest, France, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Department of Biological Sciences, Center 
for BioModular Multi-Scale Systems, Lousiana State University, Baton Rouge, 
LA, United States.
Analysis of L1 elements engineered for retrotransposition in cultured 
cells has revealed that ~6% of L1 retrotranspositions resulted in signiﬁcant deletions of genomic DNA (Gilbert et al. and Symer et al. Cell 2002). The frequency of L1 retrotransposition in humans has been estimated to be between 1/2 and 1/33. If sizable deletions were to accompany even 1-5% of L1 retrotranspositions in vivo, the cumulative effect upon genome structure over evolutionary time would be very substantial. An analysis of recently integrated L1Hs Ta elements in the human genome has suggested that the frequency of DNA deletions created upon L1 retrotransposition is 3.4% at the most (Kazazian and Goodier, Cell 2002; Myers et al. AJHG 2002). However, “even the youngest of the polymorphic Ta sub-family L1s in the draft human genome sequence must be thousands of years old”. An analysis of recently integrated Alu sequences concluded that only ~0.8% (2/244) of Alu retrotranspositions were associated with genomic deletions (Salem et al. MBE 2003); but the ﬁrst case appears to occur through gene conversion whereas the second would have occurred through double-stranded DNA break repair. It is potentially more instructive to analyze insertions that have occurred into mammalian genomes in the past 100 years. However, no deletions were found to be associated with the 14 original pathological L1 insertions examined (Kazazian and Goodier 2002). Here we reported that some 10% of L1-mediated retrotranspositions are associated with signiﬁcant genomic deletion in humans through a meta-analysis of all reported L1-mediated events 
causing human genetic disease.
P1290. Investigation of mutations involved in macular corneal 
dystrophy in Iranian patients
m. S. Z. H. Ataii ;  
NRCGEB, Teharn, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Macular corneal dystrophy (MCD) is an inherited autosmol recessive disorder, which is clinically characterized by progressive corneal 
stroma clouding in both eyes.MCD is subdivided three Immunophenoty (MCD types I, IA and II),some mutations in the carbohydrate sulfotrans ferase 6 genes (CHST6) were identiﬁed to cause MCD.The CHST6 genes mapped on chromosome 16q22.That encoded a 
protein with the some name.DNA was extract from 17 blood samples from suspected of MCD patients. PCR method was used to ampliﬁed regions three common 
MCD point mutations which is hot spot for this disease.
Sequencing method was used to identify new point mutations.We found new mutations in some patients that none of these mutations 
was detected in the control group. 
P1291. The Cypriot and Iranian National Mutation databases
M. Kleanthous1, P. C. Patsalis2, A. Drousiotou3, M. Motazacker4, K. Christo -
doulou1, M. Kariolou1, E. Baysal5, K. Khrizi4, B. Moghimi4, S. van Baal6, H. 
Najmabadi4, G. P. Patrinos6;  
1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Department of Molecular 
Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, 
Departments of Cytogenetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3The Cyprus Institute of Neurol -
ogy and Genetics, Department of Biochemical Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Ge-
netics Research Center, Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences University, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Genetics Research Center, Social Welfare 
and Rehabilitation Sciences University, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 6Erasmus 
University Medical Center, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, MGC-De -
partment of Cell Biology and Genetics, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
The exponential discovery rate of new genomic alterations, leading 
to inherited disorders, as well as the need for comparative studies of different populations mutation frequencies necessitates recording their population-wide spectrum, in online mutation databases. The National Mutation Databases are continuously updated mutation depositories, which contain extensive information over the described genetic heterogeneity of an ethnic group or population. Here, we report the construction of the Cypriot (http://www.goldenhelix.org/cypriot) and Iranian National Mutation databases (http://www.goldenhelix.org/iranian), both derived from an academic effort to provide high quality up-to-date information on the underlying genetic heterogeneity of inherited disorders in the Cypriot and Iranian populations respectively. Both databases have been built and maintained online using the 
specialized ETHNOS software (Patrinos et al., 2005) and contain 
brief summaries of the various genetic disorders included within each database. Additionally, an easy-to-use query interface provides instant access to the list and frequencies of the different mutations responsible for the inherited disorders in these countries. Furthermore, numerous links to the respective Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) entries and, when available, to the locus-speciﬁc databases fruitfully integrate the databases content into a single web site. Both databases can serve as valuable online tools for molecular genetic testing of Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics362
inherited disorders in these countries and could potentially motivate 
further investigations of yet unknown genetic diseases in the Cypriot 
and Iranian populations.
P1292. Human gene MOB, a member of yet unknown 
evolutionarily conserved gene family, codes for sphingomyelin 
synthase.
I. P. Vladychenskaya, L. V. Dergunova, V. G. Dmitrieva, S. A. Limborska;  
Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Prior investigation of human brain cDNA libraries revealed an 
evolutionarily conserved gene MOB that has been cloned in silico 
on chromosome 10. Analysing hypothetical primary structure of the transmembrane peptide product proposed for the 
MOB major 
transcript we have found it to be identical with the newly describer primary structure of human sphingomyelin synthase 1 (SMS1); now we consider 
MOB as a gene encoding SMS1. In human, two yet 
uncharacterized genes paralogous to MOB ( SMS1) were revealed. 
These genes termed par1 MOB and par2 MOB are localized on 
chromosomes 4 and 10, respectively; together, they represent a novel gene family. MOB, p1 
MOB and p2 MOB orthologs of conserved 
genomic structure were found in warm-blooded animals; orthologs of 
p2 MOB were also found in D. melanogaster  and C. elegans . We have 
examined MOB ( SMS1) transcription activity; expression levels of 
the major MOB transcript (transcript encoding SMS1) were assessed 
among different human tissues by means of semi-quantitive RT-PCR. Comparing to the maximal expression level detected within the brain tissues, transcript abundance within kidney is one and a half times less, within lung and liver - two times less, within spleen and lymphatic node - seven times less. We have also analysed the expression pattern of the alternative 
MOB transcript lacking the longest coding exon VII and 
found it to be similar with that of the major transcript.
P1293. Structural organization of the human complexin 2 gene 
(CPLX2) and aspects of its functional activity.
L. V. Dergunova1, N. M. Raevskaya1, I. P. Vladychenskaya1, M. V. Oborina1, A. 
B. Poltaraus2, S. A. Limborska1;  
1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Engelhar -
dt's Institute of Molecular Biology RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Using in vitro and in silico  approaches we have characterized the 
organization of the human complexin 2 ( CPLX2) gene. This encodes 
for a protein of 134 amino acid residues, contains ﬁve exons, is 
localized on human chromosome 5q35.3, and spans more than 87 kb. We performed in silico  analysis of the 
CPLX2 5' untranslated 
region (UTR) and propose an alternative variant of the gene transcript. Compared to the mRNA reported earlier, this transcript bears a partly altered 5'-UTR associated with the same open reading frame. Both 
CPLX2 transcripts share exons III-V; the alternative transcript is devoid 
of exons I and II, and includes exon A instead. Exon A is localized 
within CPLX2 intron 2 about 7 kb upstream to exon III. Using reverse 
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) we detected both types of transcripts in human cerebellar mRNA. In silico  data suggest 
that two alternative TATA-less promoter regions separated by 74 kb govern the expression of two 
CPLX2 transcripts. Several potential 
transcription start sites were detected by primer extension for each of two alternative 
CPLX2 transcripts. Activity of the promoter proximal 
to the translation start site is believed to be mediated by a GAGA-box. Analysis of extended 
CPLX2 transcripts revealed several 15-
LOX-DICE-like elements as well as K-box and GY-box functional sites within their extended 3'-UTRs. These elements may be involved in the processes of stabilization and post-transcriptional regulation of the gene activity. Structurally, the organization of 
CPLX2 transcripts is 
conserved in human, mouse and rat.
P1294. Improvement of the sensitivity of DNA methylation 
analysis using the Pyrosequencing real time sequencing 
technology
J. M. Dupont1,2, J. Tost2, H. Jammes3, I. G. Gut2;  
1Laboratoire d'Histologie Embryologie Cytogénétique, CHU Cochin Port Royal, 
AP/HP-Université Paris 5, Paris, France, 2Centre National de Génotypage, 
Evry, France, 3Génomique et Epigénétique des Pathologie Placentaires, IN -
SERM-Université René Descartes, IFR Alfred Jost, CHU Cochin Port Royal, 
Paris, France.Pyrosequencing is a real-time sequencing technology that can overcome the tediousness of current DNA methylation analysis procedures when several CpGs are to be studied. Quantiﬁcation of the methylation at each cytosine is conducted during the sequencing process by analysing the proportion of C and T (or A and G) nucleotide 
after bisulphite treatment.Several reports have demonstrated the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of Pyrosequencing for quantifying SNPs. This capacity has been extended to methylation analysis of 2 to 6 successive CpGs in a single run. We sought to improve read-length of this technology to facilitate the mapping of differentially methylated regions (DMRs) in the genome.By using an improved enzyme mix and adding single stranded DNA binding protein to the reaction, we obtained reproducible results for as many as 10 successive CpGs in a single sequencing reaction spanning up to 80 nucleotides. A minimum amount of 10 ng of bisulphite treated DNA is necessary to obtain good reproducibility and avoid preferential ampliﬁcation.We applied the Pyrosequencing technology to analyse the methylation proﬁle of 4 DMRs in the vicinity of the imprinted genes H19 and IGF2 in human lymphocytes and showed that reproducible variations of the 
methylation status of consecutive CpGs do exist in these regions..Conclusion: Pyrosequencing is a reliable and straight forward technology for DNA methylation analysis with several improvements 
when compared to other existing procedures.
P1295. Towards automated provision of comparative positional 
candidates for deafness and blindness: Oxford grids and the 
comparative prediction of orthologues
J. H. Edwards1, S. Gregory2, F. W. Nicholas3;  
1Biochemistry Dept, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Australian 
National Genomic Information Service (ANGIS), University of Sydney , Sydney, 
Australia, 3Reprogen, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Sydney, Syd -
ney, Australia.
There are many inherited forms of deafness and blindness that have not yet been characterized at the molecular level. A powerful strategy for molecular characterisation of any inherited disorder involves the identiﬁcation of comparative positional candidates from comparative 
maps.Deafness and blindness are ideal disorders for comparative analysis as, at any rate in the young, most non-environmental forms are Mendelian recessives and are likely to block the same pathways in all mammals. While RNA analysis offers a more direct approach to candidate loci, it depends on biopsies which, for the eye or ear, are rarely ethical. Comparative mapping offers an alternative route to likely 
candidates.Astute observations on the mouse, cat and dog, combined with induced mutation in the mouse, provide extensive comparative data for identifying the molecular basis of inherited forms of sight and hearing 
disorders in humans.As a step towards automating the identiﬁcation of comparative positional candidates, we have developed software for drawing electronic Oxford grids and for comparative predictions of orthologues. Grids involving cat, dog, human, mouse and rat, together with comparative predictions 
of orthologues, are viewable at http://oxgrid.angis.org.au.
P1296. Loci of recurrent segmental aneuploidy in the genome of 
healthy and mentally retarded subjects detected by Array-CGH
M. Poot , M. J. Eleveld, H. K. Ploos van Amstel, R. Hochstenbach;  
UMC Utrecht, 3508 AB Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Using a 3,700 BAC array we performed Array-CGH on over 100 
children suspected of chromosomal disorders and some of their unaffected parents. Per individual we found on average statistically signiﬁcant aberrant signals with 28 BACs. In 6% of our patients some of these signals represented pathogenetically relevant aberrations. In the remainder of our subjects these aberrant signals appeared independent of clinical symptoms and occurred with a frequency of 2% to 49%. In the patient and in the healthy subject subset of our study population the same BACs occurred with similar frequencies as loci of recurrent segmental aneuploidy (RSA). In total more than 500 BACs indicated loci of RSA, which covered in total 2.1% of the euchromatin. Approximately 25% of loci of RSA occurred as duplications only, 37% as deletions only, and 38% as both deletions and duplications. The Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics363
genomic distribution of loci of RSA varied widely among autosomes, 
with a preponderant location in the Giemsa-light, gene-rich bands. Approximately 30% of loci of RSA contained no genes at all, 8% contained only enzymes, and the remainder mixtures of genes from different classes, including numerous transcription factors. We conclude that loci of RSA occur frequently in the general population. Since loci of RSA segregated from healthy parents to affected children, we speculate that they confer no apparent clinical consequences, and 
may be neutral to evolutionary pressures.
P1297. Different CFTR genotypes induce dissimilar expression 
patterns in CF putative modiﬁer genes
S. Gambardella1, M. Biancolella1, M. D'Apice1, F. Amati1, F. Sangiuolo1, G. 
Castaldo2, P. Pignatti3, F. Salvatore2, G. Novelli1;  
1Tor Vergata, Department of Biopathology, Rome, Italy, 2University Federico II, 
Department of Biochemistry, Naples, Italy, 3Sect Biol e Genetics, Verona, Italy.
Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF; #219700) is a disorder caused by mutations in the 
CFTR gene. Although a strong genotype-phenotype relationship in CF has been observed, signiﬁcant clinical variability exists among CF patients carrying the same genotype or the same class of mutations. While some of the variability is undoubtedly caused by environmental factors, genes other than CFTR likely modify phenotypes. Even if a certain number of putative gene modiﬁers have been investigated in CF, none are clearly substantiated.We built an home made cDNA microarray containing a large number of genes involved with intracellular processes in cells where CFTR is normally expressed and genes occurring in cells that respond to abnormalities caused by CFTR defect (i.e. inﬂammatory, ion ﬂux), to identify genes and pathways interacting or compensating CFTR functions. We studied the expression proﬁles of a total of 150 selected candidate genes in two different human epithelial bronchial-derived cell lines (CuFi1, F508del/F508del; CuFi3, F508del/R553X). We observed change in the expression in 40 genes (27%) of the examined active in the inﬂammatory response, in protein degradation, in molecular chaperone actions, in ion ﬂux and in CFTR physical interaction. A few of these, shared the same expression pattern in the two cell lines (i.e. S100A8, S100A9, SMAD3, SMAD4, ENaC), whereas others showed a different expression pattern (AP1M2, AP3B1, AP1S1). These data demonstrate that different CFTR mutations cause diverse genomic response, and indicate strategies to develop therapeutic targets that may beneﬁt speciﬁc patients with disease associated to a particular 
genotype.
P1298. High throughput experimental veriﬁcation of predicted 
tissue and tumor speciﬁc splice isoforms
O. Mueller1, D. Zink2, S. Haas3, R. Salowsky1, B. Korn2;  
1Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany, 2RZPD Ressourcenzentrum für 
Genomforschung, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular 
Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
Any failure or error in the splicing control mechanism can be 
involved in a number of pathological processes, such as cancer or neurodegenerative diseases. Therefore, splice isoforms that are disease speciﬁc could serve as excellent diagnostic markers, which are easily identiﬁable by PCR.A computational prediction strategy was used based on the genomic mapping of EST consensus sequences and library annotation provided in the GeneNest database. Out of 427 genes with at least one tissue speciﬁc transcript as well as 1120 genes showing tumor speciﬁc isoforms, a subset of predicted isoforms were experimentally veriﬁed by an RT-PCR screening approach. An experimental strategy has been set-up that allows to screen expression of genes in 112 different human tissues of multiple developmental stages and cell lines. Within this project, the electrophoretic separation of RT-PCR products turned out to be the bottleneck impeding the switch from a medium to a high throughput strategy. To circumvent the limitations of slab gel analysis, a lab prototype of an automated on-chip electrophoresis system that allows high throughput analysis of DNA fragments was implemented in the workﬂow. In our experimental set-up, we analyzed RT-PCR samples on 4 x 96 well plates within a deﬁned sequence of consecutive one-on-one measurements. The high throughput experimental veriﬁcation of computationally predicted tissue speciﬁc isoforms revealed a high success rate in conﬁrming their expression in the respective tissue. The combination of computational prediction of alternative splicing events with high throughput experimental veriﬁcation facilitates the efﬁcient detection of tissue and tumor speciﬁc transcripts.
P1299. In vitro transfer of ceruloplasmin polypeptide into rat 
mitochondrial matrix
A. Vasin1,2, S. Klotchenko1,2, N. Platonova2, N. Tsymalenko2, L. Puchkova1,2;  
1St-Petersburg State Polytechnical University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion, 2Research Institute of Experimental Medicine RAMS, St-Petersburg, Rus -
sian Federation.
Ceruloplasmin (Cp) is a key participant of copper and iron metabolism. There is a single copy of Cp gene in haploid genome, but its tissue-speciﬁc isoforms of transcripts and proteins were found at different stages of ontogenesis. Research is devoted to search of novel Cp isoforms in rat cells. Cp polypeptides were found in mitochondrial matrix of brain, liver, testicles and mammary gland, but not in heart and spleen. It was also shown that Cp isoform (mtCp), not sequestered into secretory pathway membranes, was synthesized in cytoplasm. In vitro [125I]mtCp is transferred to mitochondrial matrix. It was registered based on the data of radioautography of immunoprecipitates, analyzed using SDS-PAGE. The transfer is ATP energy consumption process; it concentrationally depends on the presence of soluble factors of cytoplasm. Mitochondria swelling, valinomycin and oligomycin treatments, as well as removal of labile copper ions and copper ions of active centers from Cp molecule have no inﬂuence on Cp transfer. Both translocators of outer and inner mitochondrial membranes participate in the transfer, but [I125]Cp is also successfully transferred to mytoplasts, obtained after digitonin treatment. Computer analysis of rat chromosomal Cp gene revealed the existence of open reading frame (75 bp) with exon 3 in intron 2 and the upstream localized potential promoter. Predicted Cp-mRNA isoform corresponds to mtCp. RT-PCR analysis with speciﬁc primers for mtCp-mRNA detected the predicted isoform in liver and brain, but not in heart and spleen. Direct sequencing of PCR-product showed that mtCp-mRNA contained intron 
2 region.
Supported by RBRF03-04-48748;Integration I0064.
P1300. Structural and functional characterization of the human 
SOX14  promoter
J. Djurovic , I. Petrovic, M. Seovic, M. Stevanovic;  
Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia and 
Montenegro.
SOX14 is a member of SOX gene family of putative transcriptional 
regulators implicated in the control of diverse developmental processes. Although 
SOX gene expression patterns suggest tissue- 
and development stage-speciﬁc control of gene expression, little is 
known about mechanisms responsible for expression of these genes.In order to elucidate the molecular mechanisms controlling the expression of the human 
SOX14 gene, we have determined the 
transcription start site using primer extension method and carried out the structural and functional analysis of the regulatory region responsible for its expression. Our result indicates that the transcription of the 
SOX14 initiates at the single major site at the guanine residue 
251 bp upstream of the start codon, although the existence of a minor 
transcription start site can not be excluded.To identify the DNA regions responsible for the control of 
SOX14 gene 
transcription we have analyzed the ability of truncated fragments from the 5' ﬂanking region of the 
SOX14 gene to drive expression of CAT 
reporter gene. Functional mapping of the 5' regulatory region revealed that the sequence between -470 and +201 bp is essential for minimal 
basal activity of the SOX14 promoter.
We have identiﬁed that NF-Y transcriptional factor binds to the CCAAT box motif present in the regulatory region of the 
SOX14 promoter. By 
mutation analysis we have shown that CCAAT box motif present in 
the SOX14 promoter plays a functional role in the transcription of this 
gene.Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics364
P1301. Functional characterization of the human SOX3 
promoter: Identiﬁcation of transcription factors implicated in 
basal promoter activity
N. Kovacevic Grujicic, M. Mojsin, A. Krstic, M. Stevanovic;  
Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia and 
Montenegro.
Sox genes constitute a large family of developmentally regulated genes 
involved in the decision of cell fates during development and implicated in the control of diverse developmental processes. 
Sox3, an X-linked 
member of the family, is expressed in the brain from the earliest stages of development. It is considered to be one of the earliest neural markers in vertebrates playing the role in specifying neuronal fate. The aim of this study has been to determine and characterize the promoter of the 
human SOX3 gene and to elucidate molecular mechanisms underlying 
the regulation of its expression. We have identiﬁed the transcription start point and carried out the structural and functional analysis of the regulatory region responsible for 
SOX3 expression in NT2/D1 cell line. 
Using promoter-reporter constructs we have determined the minimal 
SOX3 promoter region that confers the basal promoter activity. We have investigated in detail the functional properties of three conserved motifs within the core promoter sequence that bind transcription factors Sp1, USF and NF-Y. By mutational analysis we have shown that all three sites are of functional relevance for constitutive 
SOX3 expression 
in NT2/D1 cells. Taken together, data presented in this paper suggest that transcription factors such as Sp1, USF and NF-Y could function as 
key regulators for the basal activation of the human SOX3  gene.
P1302. Interspecies variance of Alu elements in the galectin-1 
gene correlates with splicing isoforms pattern.
N. Bruzzese, F. Censi, D. Taruscio;  
Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
LGALS-1 gene codiﬁes the 14-kDa galactose-binding lectin galectin-1. The protein own multiple cellular functions spanning cell-cell and cell-matrix interaction, cell differentiation, pre-mRNA maturation, and apoptosis induction. Exon skip alternative mRNA of the gene was found in human tissues as well as in normal and tumor cells. Alternative isoform bears premature truncation codon that might inﬂuence protein 
expression.Previously we suggested that the presence of Alu-S elements in the human gene, one upstream and two others downstream the skipped exon give rise to a stem-loop conﬁguration of the primary transcript affecting mRNA maturation, due to their arrangement in opposite directions (Bruzzese et al., ESHG 2004). Here we report comparative analysis of gene expression that further underlines how Alus pairing drives folding of mRNA and may cause exon skipping.Human gene expression pattern shows normal product, a shorter one lacking the skipped exon and a larger isoform, likely an intermediate mRNA which include introns or part of them.In monkey the galectin-1 gene possess one Alu-S in the upstream intron, but three in the downstream intron all belonging to the S family and also oriented in inverse direction with respect to the ﬁrst one. Expression pattern displays normal and exon-missing mRNAs, however it shows two larger transcripts, presumably explained by an augmented potentiality of combinations between the Alus to form 
secondary structures.On the contrary, mouse posses only the Alu element in 5'- and none in the 3'-intron, however exon sequence are highly comparable. Noticeably, gene expression completely lost the alternative isoforms.
P1303. Semax increases BDNF expression in ischemized rat 
brain.
V. V. Stavchansky1, L. V. Dergunova1, A. Y. Botsina2, I. A. Platonova2, T. Tvo -
rogova2, E. F. Shaykhutdinova1, E. L. Voloshenyuk1, V. I. Skvortsova2, S. A. 
Limborska1;  
1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian 
State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Neurotrophic factors (e. g. brain-derived neurotrophic factor, BDNF) are known as natural neuroprotectors envolved in proliferation, differentiation and survival of neuronal and glial cells. Analysis of neurotrophins mRNA expression is a convenient tool to assess therapeutic efﬁciency of the anti-stroke drugs. It was revealed that 
BDNF expression was increased in rat cultured glial cells under treatment by the neuroprotector Semax (synthetic polypeptide Met-Glu-His-Phe-Pro-Gly-Pro; its N-terminus represents a fragment of adrenocorticotropic hormone). We have analyzed the effect of Semax 
upon BDNF expression within cerebellum and forebrain cortex of the 
rats subjected to global brain ischemia. After 15 minutes of irreversible bilateral common carotid artery occlusion the animals were subjected to intraperitoneal injection of Semax or 0,9% NaCl. Animals were decapitated 30 minutes /1 hour / 2 hours after the operation. Sham-operated animals were used as a control. 
BDNF mRNA expression 
level was assessed by semi-quantitive PCR. Under experimental conditions, the sham-operated and ischemized rats treated with 0,9% NaCl did not demonstrate the difference between 
BDNF expression 
levels within investigated brain regions. BDNF expression within the 
cerebellum of the ischemized rats also was not inﬂuenced by Semax. At the same time, comparing to the ischemized animals treated with 0,9% NaCl, expression level of 
BDNF within forebrain cortex of the 
animals treated with Semax was increased. Maximum of the BDNF  
expression was detected within the forebrain cortex 30 minutes after occlusion. Possibly, therapeutic effect of Semax is mediated by the 
increased production of BDNF  within brain cells.
P1304. Gene Filter:  a software tool for high throughput sequence 
selection and analysis.
A. Weinhaeusel, A. Kriegner, E. Dilaveroglu, I. Visne, K. Vierlinger, C. Noe -
hammer;  
Seibersdorf research, Molecular Diagnostic Unit A-2444 Seibersdorf, Austria, 
Seibersdorf, Austria.
For research organisations with limited bioinformatics support, there 
are time restrains in the analysis of large numbers of target sequences. Gene Filter is a user-friendly java software for high throughput 
sequence selection and analysis for multiple purposes such as the design of customized oligo microarrays. The current release includes 
Gene Finder  and Sequence Extractor. 
Gene Finder is a search engine that queries NCBI and UCSC databases for gene related information, chromosomal coordinates and strand orientation for a large number of user deﬁned search identiﬁers such as GenBank, RefSeq, UniGene, GeneSymbol, CytLocus or nucleotide sequences. Search terms are either loaded from plain text ﬁles or directly pasted into the program window. Results are displayed in the program window. Several user deﬁned selection features allow additional ﬁltering of search results.Sequence Extractor is an automated sequence deriving routine that uses the strengths of UCSC Table Browser and NCBI Map viewer to extract multiple sequences and annotations for Gene Finder deﬁned 
genome regions.Userfriendly batch processing of hundreds of sequences can be performed very efﬁciently for high throughput sequence analysis.Further program packages for the design of gene expression-, SNP-, 
CGH-, and methylation microarrays are under development.
P1305. Simple solutions for multiplexed real-time PCR with 
Promega’s new Real-Time PCR System
G. Madsen ;  
Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, United States.
Join Promega for the introduction of our new Real-Time PCR 
Technology, Plexor™ System . Based on the expanded genetic 
alphabet, the system allows simple design of multiplexed real-time PCR assays for genotyping and quantitative analysis. Data will be presented on new assay designed for RNA or cDNA gene expression analysis, SNP genotyping, mutation detection and detection of bacteria/virus. Understand how the system will simplify your assay development, allow you to develop high performance primers on our website, give you the ability to run high multiplexed quantitation with one chemistry on any real-time PCR instrument and enhance your data analysis with 
the straightforward system software.
P1306. Impact of genetic polymorphisms on birth weight
R. J. Sram , J. Dejmek, B. Binkova, I. Chvatalova, I. Solansky;  
Institute of Experimental Medicine AS CR and Health Institute of Central Bohe -
mia, Prague 4, Czech Republic.
All studies from Poland and the Czech Republic indicate the relationship between ambient air pollution and an increase of DNA Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics365
adducts in maternal and cord blood and/or in placentas, as well as 
the relationship of these biomarkers to the development of newborns. Therefore we studied the impact of genetic polymorphisms on pregnancy outcome as a part of EC CHILDRENGENONETWORK project. DNA was isolated from placenta samples collected in polluted regions (Teplice and Prague) and control region (Prachatice). Polymorphisms of metabolic genotypes (GSTM1, GSTP1, GSTT1, EPHX3, EPHX4, CYP1A1 Ile/Val and CYP1A1-MspI) were determined in 1014 placenta samples. The consequence of genotypes to birth weight as well as category LBW+prematurity (low birth weight < 2500 g, prematurity < 37 weeks) was determined. Using multiple regression analysis, CYP1A1-MspI mutation decreased the newborn birth weight of smoking mothers in Teplice ( -315 g, P<0.05). GSTM1 nulll genotype signiﬁcantly increased LBW+prematurity in all three groups (AOR = 1.33, P<0.05, especially at Teplice AOR = 1.54, P=0.01 and Teplice-nonsmokers AOR = 1.53, P<0.05), CYP1A1 Ile/Val polymorphism in smoking mothers in the ﬁrst trimester (AOR = 2.89, P<0.05) and smoking mothers in the ﬁrst trimester at Teplice (AOR = 2.91, P<0.05). Other signiﬁcant predictors were exposure to carc-PAHs, maternal smoking, passive smoking. Combination of different polymorphisms is further analyzed. Our results indicate that genetic polymorphisms may affect birth weight in newborn children, if combined with air pollution 
and/or lifestyle (smoking).Supported by the Czech Ministry of Environment VaV/740/5/03 and by the EC QLK4-CT-2002-02198.
P1307. Analysis of iNOS expression in rats under brain 
experimental ischemia
V. G. Dmitrieva1, L. V. Dergunova1, A. Y. Botsina2, I. A. Platonova2, T. Tvorogo -
va2, E. F. Shaykhutdinova1, E. Torshina1, V. I. Skvortsova2, S. A. Limborska1;  
1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian 
State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Stroke is the second or third leading case of death in many countries. Although the underlying mechanisms of this disease are not fully understood, it has been shown that nitric oxide (NO) overproduction and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) overexpression play important roles in producing injury caused by hemorrhagic shock. To investigate the proﬁle of 
iNOS expression during the ﬁrst 24 hours 
after ischemia we took advantage of the experimental model of the global brain ischemia in rats. Ischemized animals were decapitated 30 minutes /1 hour / 2 hours / 4 hours / 8 hours / 12 hours / 24 hours after irreversible bilateral common carotid artery occlusion. Forebrain 
cortex iNOS mRNA expression level was assessed by RT-PCR. iNOS  
low-level expression was ﬁrst observed 8 hours after the operation; we did not detect any expression activity of the gene immediately after the operation. Within 12 and 24 hours after the operation the level of 
iNOS  
expression was increased insigniﬁcantly. Thus we demonstrate that under the experimental conditions used the level of 
iNOS expression 
is low throughout ﬁrst 24 hours after the operation.
P1308. Validation of the novel chemiluminescent microarrays 
using real-time RT-PCR
D. Kemming1, N. Tidow2, B. H. Brandt1;  
1University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany, 2GeneSys Laboratory, Dermabel 
GmbH, Muenster, Germany.
Over the recent years, gene expression proﬁling has become a 
promising tool for the risk assessment and therapy prediction of cancer. In contrast to the ﬂuorescent technology used by other platforms, the novel Applied Biosystems 1700 chemiluminescent microarray analyzer uses a chemiluminescent substrate following digoxigenin-labeling and incubation with anti-digoxigenin-alkaline phosphatase antibody. Chemiluminescent detection increases the sensitivity of expression analysis, and the use of 60mer oligonucleotides supports high speciﬁcity.We have tested the precision and accuracy of this novel microarray system. Total RNA was isolated from fresh frozen tumour samples of 7 patients with ductal invasive breast cancer. All samples were analyzed with the Applied Biosystems Human Genome Survey Microarray (HGSM). Technical replicates (n=5) showed high reproducibility of the array results. Real-time RT-PCR was used as an independent method to validate the gene expression levels found by microarray analysis. For real-time RT-PCR 71 breast cancer-related genes were selected and analysis was performed using the gene expression assays on demand (Applied Biosystems). For the comparison of HGSM data and RT-PCR a Pearson-correlation of 0.92 to 0.63 was found for the established cancer genes, e.g. EGFR, erbB2, estrogen receptor α (ESR1), progesterone receptor (PGR), urokinase-type plasminogen activator (PLAU, uPA), and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (SERPINE1, PAI).In conclusion, the novel 1700 chemiluminescent microarray analyzer generates highly reliable and accurate data when performing whole genome expression proﬁling. Therefore, highly sensitive and speciﬁc 
microarrays may become a useful tool for clinical applications.
P1309. Different quantitative traits of gene expression in 
idiopathic dilated, hypertroﬁc and restrictive cardiomyopathy
N. Marziliano , M. Grasso, E. Porcu, M. Pasotti, E. Disabella, C. Lucchelli, C. 
Pellegrini, M. Viganò, L. Tavazzi, E. Arbustini;  
IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
Background . The ability to quantitate the expression levels of speciﬁc 
genes has always been central to any research into gene function 
and gene-to-gene interactions. We tested the hypothesis that different gene expression of cytoskeleton, contractile proteins MMP and related TIMP characterise idiopathic dilated, hypertroﬁc and restrictive cardiomyopathy, demonstrating that gene expression proﬁling of myocardium may meet clinical parameters and is feasible in the 
cardiological setting.Material and Methods. Total RNA was extracted from 70 myocardial samples (both left and right ventricles) obtained from hearts excised at cardiac transplantation (San Matteo hospital). cDNAs were analysed by real time PCR for the following genes: MYH7, MYBC3, TNNT2, ANGPT2, GAA, TIMP1, TIMP4, MMP1, MMP2, MMP9, MMP10, MMP11, MMP12, MMP14. The between-group differences were analysed using the by Mann-Whitney U test. Age, gender, and hemodynamic differences of the samples did not affect the proﬁle’s accuracy in stratiﬁed analyses. We also correlated the gene defects 
with the expression patterns.Results and Conclusions . We found a substantial over expression 
pattern of the cytoskeletal/contractile proteins MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNT2 in the groups but with a number of quantitative differences. Moreover, the over expression of ANGPT2, GAA, TIMP2 and TIMP4 proﬁles the hypertrophic pattern while the over expression of MMP1, MMP2, MMP9, MMP10, MMP11, MMP12 and in particular MMP14 characterises the dilatative pattern (p<0.01). We also found that gene proﬁling is speciﬁc to disease stage, and it is unaffected by differences in clinical characteristics. Finally, these studies may prompt further pharmacological investigations in identifying speciﬁc pathways for 
therapeutic targeting.
P1310. Non-enzymatic labeling of nucleic acids using 
The Universal Linkage System (ULS™) in DNA Microarray 
applications
S. Snoeijers, A. McGeever, D. Postma, T. Van der Lende ;  
KREATECH Biotechnology B.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
The Universal Linkage System (ULS™) is a (platinum-based) labeling 
technology that allows labeling of biomolecules like RNA, DNA and proteins with a large variety of widely used haptens and ﬂuorophores.In DNA microarray applications the ULS™ system demonstrates one of its key advantages: direct labeling of nucleic acids in their natural form, e.g. genomic DNA, total RNA or its mRNA fraction.Current labeling methods in microarray experiments rely on enzymatic conversion of the original target into labeled cDNA or aRNA. Apart from being time consuming, costly and error-prone, valuable information is lost due to bias introduced by the enzymes. Using ULS™ to directly label natural targets circumvents this problem and also gives major advantages in studies to e.g. splice variants or microRNAs. Here data will be shown in which the ULS™ arrayCGH ﬂuorescent labeling kit has been evaluated for direct genomic DNA labeling used for BAC array hybridizations and compared with standard enzymatic random-
prime labeling.Since the available amount of total RNA can be limiting, some applications require linear target ampliﬁcation. ULS™ offers the possibility to enzymatically generate unmodiﬁed linear ampliﬁed aRNA samples which can be used or labeled as required. Importantly, by avoiding the use of modiﬁed nucleotides in the IVT reaction, RNA Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics366
samples will be ampliﬁed with much higher yields and better size 
distribution of the ampliﬁed product. Data will be presented where the ULS™ aRNA ﬂuorescent labeling kit is compared to a commercial 
aminoallyl labeling product.
P1311. Segmental duplications of human chromosome 8p23.1: 
multiple copies of a new gene showing variability in copy 
number in humans and other primates
N. Bosch, L. Armengol, X. Estivill;  
Genes and Disease Program, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG); Experi -
mental and Health Sciences Department, Pompeu Fabra University (UPF); 
Barcelona Biomedical Research Park (PRBB), Barcelona, Spain.
Segmental duplications (SD) are paralogous segments of high sequence identity that account for about 5% of the human genome. Due to the high level of identity, these regions are susceptible to illegitimate recombination. Genomic architecture of cytogenetic band 8p23.1 is of special interest due to the presence of low copy repeats located at their boundaries. This particular organization increases the vulnerability of the region to undergo rearrangements, such as a polymorphic inversion found in about 25% of the general population. In this study, we focus on a multiple copy gene distributed in different clusters along the 8p23.1 low copy repeats. Different polymorphic clusters in copy number of a novel gene with unknown function, have been detected by in silico analysis of the 8p23.1 region. These results have been conﬁrmed by pulsed ﬁeld gel electrophoresis in several subjects of the general population, as well as in chimpanzee, gorilla and orangutan. However, although it is also present in great apes, the organization and copy number of the different clusters are signiﬁcantly different between humans and great apes. Further exploration of the region 8p23.1, and specially these gene clusters, is of great interest, due to its possible evolutionary implications. Moreover, gene expansion phenomena has been described as a main evolutionary force driving speciﬁc traits of the human lineage. Therefore, a better characterization of the human chromosome 8p23.1 region, taken as an example of gene expansion, should lead to a better understanding of common 
mechanisms underlying evolution of primates and humans.
P1312. 'arrayCGHbase': a freely available and versatile tool for 
data mining and visualisation of arrayCGH and SNP chip data
B. Menten1, F. Pattyn1, K. De Preter1, P. Robbrecht1, G. Mortier1, A. De Paepe1, 
S. Van Vooren2, J. Vermeesch3, Y. Moreau2, B. De Moor2, F. Speleman1, J. 
Vandesompele1;  
1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, Gh -
ent, Belgium, 2Department of Electrotechnical Engineering, Faculty of Applied 
Sciences, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, Heverlee, 
Belgium, 3Center for Human Genetics, Leuven University Hospital, Herestraat 
49, Leuven, Belgium.
The availability of the human genome sequence as well as the large 
number of physically accessible oligonucleotides, cDNA, and BAC clones across the entire genome has triggered and accelerated the use of several platforms for analysis of DNA copy number changes including microarray comparative genomic hybridization (arrayCGH) and SNP chip analysis. One of the challenges inherent to this new technology is the management of large numbers of data points generated in each individual experiment. We have developed arrayCGHbase, a comprehensive analysis platform for arrayCGH experiments. ArrayCGHbase consists of a MIAME (Minimal Information About a Microarray Experiment) supportive MySQL database underlying a data mining web tool, to store, analyze, interpret, compare, and visualize arrayCGH results in a uniform and user-friendly format. Following its ﬂexible design, arrayCGHbase is compatible with all existing and forthcoming arrayCGH platforms. Data can be exported in a multitude of formats, including BED ﬁles to map copy number information on the genome using the Ensembl or UCSC genome browser. ArrayCGHbase is web based and platform independent and therefore allows users to access the analysis suite through the internet or a local intranet after installation on a private server. We will present the major features of the tool as well as illustrate the potential for custom and future options. ArrayCGHbase is freely available at http://medgen.ugent.be/
arrayCGHbase/.P1313. The Regulation of Spermatogonial Stem Cell-Speciﬁc 
Genes by Piwil2 Protein
J. H. Lee, W. Engel, K. Nayernia;  
Institute of Human Genetics, Goettingen, Germany.
Although spermatogenesis is essential for reproduction, little is known about spermatogonial stem cells. These cells provide the basis for spermatogenesis throughout adult life by undergoing self-renewal and by providing progeny that differentiate into spermatozoa. Members of piwi gene family play essential role in self-renewal of germline stem cells. Piwil2 is one of three mouse homologues of piwi. Piwil2 was found in germ cells of adult testis, suggesting that this gene functions in spermatogonial stem cell self-renewal. In order to ﬁnd molecular mechanisms underlying stem cell activity, in vitro gain of function cell culture model was established. Messenger RNAs isolated from cells expressing Piwil2 and mRNAs isolated from cells without Piwil2 expression were compared using a stem cell array technique. It was shown that Piwil2 modulates expression of stem cell speciﬁc genes, including Pdgfrb, Slc2a1, Gja7and spermatogonial cell surface markers Thy-1 and Itga6. These molecules play essential role in non-germinal 
stem cells.
P1314. The role of the general transcription factor NF-Y in the 
regulation of the expression of human Sox3 gene
A. Krstic , N. Kovacevic Grujicic, M. Mojsin, M. Stevanovic;  
Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia and 
Montenegro.
Early neurogenesis and neuronal differentiation are precisely controlled by a series of genes. Sox3 is expressed in the brain from the earliest stages of development. It is considered to be one of the earliest 
markers in vertebrates playing the role in specifying neuronal fate.In order to elucidate molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of the human SOX3 gene expression, computer prediction software was used to search the matrix database and to identify potential transcription binding sites in the human SOX3 promoter. The number of putative consensus binding sites for known transcription factors was identiﬁed in the 5’ noncoding region of the human SOX3 gene. The presence of three evolutionary conserved CCAAT boxes, representing the putative binding sites for the general transcription factor NF-Y, suggests the potential importance of this factor in the regulation of the human SOX3 gene expression. EMSA and “supershift” experiments are performed to prove the speciﬁcity of the NF-Y binding to all three identiﬁed CCAAT control elements.To examine whether the putative CCAAT box is functional, site directed mutagenesis was done. The ability of the mutant and its wild-type counterpart to drive expression of the cat reporter gene was compared in NT2/D1 cell line. We have shown that mutagenesis of the CCAAT box (-101 bp to -105 bp) reduced the expression of the reporter gene more than 5-fold when compared to the wild-type expression. This result indicates that the CCAAT box motif present in the SOX3 
promoter plays a functional role in the transcription of this gene.
P1315. Microrrearrangements of human chromosome 15q11-q13 
in families with autistic disorder
C. Cerrato , M. Ogorelkova, M. Gratacós, X. Estivill;  
Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Barcelona, Spain.
Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder exhibiting complex genetic etiology. Human chromosome 15q11-q13 is a candidate region to autism based on linkage, linkage disequilibrium, cytogenetic abnormalities, and maternal duplications at this locus in patients with autism and autism-related phenotype. Chromosome 15q11-q13 contains several imprinted genes expressed in the brain, including small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) genes, and is rich in segmental duplications. These sequences promote fairly frequent 15q11-q13 rearrangements resulting in Prader-Willi syndrome, Angelman syndrome, mental retardation and autism spectrum disorder. Among plausible candidate genes for autism in this region is the cluster of the gamma-aminobutiric acid (GABA) receptor genes. In order to detect possible duplicon-mediated submicroscopic rearrangements of 15q11-q13, we have performed the analysis of microsatellite markers in Spanish autistic families, and multiplex families of autistic probands from the Autism Genetic Resource Exchange (AGRE) and control samples. We have found frequent microduplications at 15q11.2 region and at GABA locus Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics367
in autistic patients and control samples. Two patients have a paternally 
inherited microduplication between the genes GABRA5 and GABRG3 whereas other two patients have a maternally inherited duplication within the D15S1021 marker. All the other duplications are the novo microrearrangements. Using quantitative PCR, PFGE, additional microsatellites and single nucleotide polymorphisms in the region we are currently deﬁning the size of these rearrangements, which should help to delineate the relationship between 15q11-q13 alterations and autistic disorder.
P1316. Transcriptional activation via bidirectional RNA 
polymerase II elongation over a silent transposon promoter
B. Conrad ;  
Dept. of Genetic Medicine & Development, University of Geneva Medical 
School, Switzerland.
Transcriptional interference denotes negative cis-effects between 
promoters. Here we show that it can act positively. Bidirectional RNA polymerase II (pol II) elongation over the silent HERV-K18 promoter representing 10
4 similar promoters genomewide activates 
transcription. In tandem constructs, an upstream promoter activates HERV-K18 transcription, which is abolished by a polyA signal in-between, and restored by polyA signal mutants. TATA-box mutants in the upstream promoter reduce HERV-K18 transcription. Experiments with the same promoters face to face produce similar effects. A small promoter deletion partially restores HERV-K18 transcription, consistent with activation resulting from repressor repulsion by the elongating pol II. Transcriptional elongation over this class of intragenic promoters will generate regulated sense-antisense transcripts, or alternatively initiating transcripts, thus expanding the diversity of mechanisms capable of organismal complexity.
P1317. Genome-wide re-sequencing using Cloned Single-
Molecule ArraysTM
S. T. Bennett ;  
Solexa Limited, Saffron Walden, United Kingdom.
Revolutionary new technologies capable of transforming the economics 
of sequencing are providing unprecedented opportunities for whole genome re-sequencing, as well as genome-wide transcription, 
epigenomics and genome structure analyses.Solexa’s single-molecule array technology for whole-genome sequencing promises minimal (one-tube) sample preparation, ultra high feature densities and greatly reduced costs, and is ultimately capable of reaching up to ﬁve orders of magnitude improved efﬁciency over current methods. To enable single-molecule methods, we have developed a very robust four-colour DNA sequencing-by-synthesis technology that employs reversible terminators with removable ﬂuorescence. This novel sequencing biochemistry has now been shown to support up to 25 cycles with high ﬁdelity, both in solution and on surfaces. A 25-mer read length represents a key milestone towards accurate human whole genome re-sequencing in that 25 bases permits alignment to the human reference sequence, as shown by a recent 
study conducted in silico by Solexa.To enable earlier applications of our sequencing platform, we have chosen to leverage our proprietary sequencing biochemistry into cloned single-molecule arrays, which are formed using the surface-ampliﬁcation method developed by Manteia SA. We have made signiﬁcant progress in the preparation of such cluster arrays from randomly cut genomic DNA samples and in adapting our single-molecule-compatible surface chemistry to improving the methodology. The clusters arrays have been used with our sequencing-by-synthesis technology, a ﬂuorescence microscope and automated ﬂuidics to sequence small genomes. Our current capabilities in this area will be described, highlighting the number of features analysed, attainable read length and the measured sequencing accuracy.P1318. Prioritization of positional candidate genes in common 
complex diseases using gene networks
L. Franke1, L. Fokkens1, M. Egmont-Petersen2, R. Malik2, H. H. M. J. van Ba -
kel1, C. Wijmenga1;  
1Complex Genetics Section, DBG-Dept Medical Genetics, University Medical 
Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Large Distributed Databases Group, 
Computer Sciences Department, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Although the majority of common diseases are complex, resulting from many different genes with weak effects, there will only be a limiting number of molecular pathways contributing to disease aetiology. Linkage studies have led to the identiﬁcation of considerable numbers of susceptibility loci, but lack behind in pinpointing true candidate genes from these regions because they usually span 10s of Mb’s. To aid in the identiﬁcation of causative genes we propose a prioritization method for positional candidate genes, by assuming that the majority 
of causative genes are functionally closely related.We used a Bayesian framework to generate a gene network, based upon data from GO, KEGG, BIND, HPRD, several protein-protein interactions experiments, approximately 6,000 microarray experiments and data-mining results from PubMed abstracts. We tested the gene network in over 80 heritable disorders for which at least three disease genes have been identiﬁed. Artiﬁcial susceptibility loci (~10 Mb) were constructed around each causative gene and the gene network was 
used to predict per disorder per locus the positional candidate genes.For nearly half of the disorders the analysis of the loci using the gene network performed well, i.e. the true causative genes were identiﬁed from the artiﬁcial linkage regions.We have shown that by assuming that causative genes in a speciﬁc disorder are usually functionally related, we are capable of predicting the correct positional candidate genes when analyzing susceptibility loci. This method therefore could be valuable for analyzing common disease loci in which the causative genes have not yet been identiﬁed.
P1319. Expression proﬁles of the recovering gut in coeliac 
disease patients points towards the molecular aetiology
B. Diosdado1, H. van Bakel1, M. C. Wapenaar1, L. Franke1, J. W. R. Meijer2, C. 
J. J. Mulder3, C. Wijmenga1;  
1Complex Genetics Section, DBG-Dept. of Medical Genetics, University Medi -
cal Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2Department of Pathology, Rijn -
state Hospital, Arnhem, The Netherlands, 3Department of Gastroenterology, VU 
Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Coeliac disease (CD) is a common autoimmune disorder affecting the small intestine, and patients show an immunological response to the common food protein gluten, which is present in wheat. They suffer from severe malabsorption due to a dramatic restructuring of the mucosa, but on a gluten-free diet they show clinical improvement accompanied by gradual recovery of the mucosa, as judged by the sequential disappearance of the disease’s hallmarks (villus atrophy, 
crypt hyperplasia, and lymphocytosis).We performed microarray expression proﬁling on duodenal biopsy samples from 48 CD patients, across all stages of remission, and 21 control individuals to gain insight into the molecular pathology and the 
driving genetic factors.Gene-expression proﬁling yielded 118 differentially expressed genes (p<0.05), of which 78 were up-regulated and 40 down-regulated. These genes can be grouped into a limited number of different processes. In general, remission is a gradual process leading to down-regulation of immune-related genes and up-regulation of genes involved in re-establishing the normal homeostasis of intestinal mucosa. The picture that emerges is that CD is not only an inﬂammatory condition that affects the absorption of nutrients, but that underlying this impairment is the lack of terminal differentiation of the enterocytes. Many of the clinical features and complications of CD can be directly linked to molecular pathways highlighted in our study.Interestingly, some of these genes are located under linkage peaks shared between other autoimmune disorders and CD, suggesting these genes might be implicated in common pathways and considered 
as potential primary genes in autoimmune disorders.Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics368
P1320. Identiﬁcation of transcription start sites in retinal 
expressed genes
R. E. Carpio1, V. Roni1, W. Raffelsberger2, A. Mukhopadhyay3, B. Wissinger1;  
1Molecular Genetics Laboratory, University Eye Hospital, Tuebingen, Germany, 
Tuebingen, Germany, 2Genetics and Molecular and Cellular Biology, IGBMC, 
Strasbourg, France, 3Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Cen -
tre Nijmegen,, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
The aim of this study is the identiﬁcation of transcription initiation 
sites of two retinal expressed genes RDH12  and SLC24A2 in order to 
evaluate the reliability of 5´ ends provided by refseq database entries. 
RDH12  codes for a photoreceptor speciﬁc retinal-dehydrogenase 
and is implicated in Leber congenital amaurosis. SLC24A2  codes 
for a potassium-dependent sodium-calcium exchanger in cone photoreceptor.Our experimental method employed EST sequence database mining and cross-species comparisons to perform in silico  assembly 
and analysis of 5´ transcript termini. In addition mRNA from human retina was used for Cap Finder RACE experiments to study and characterize the 5´ end of the genes of interest. This led us to deﬁne additional transcribed sequences extending to the 5´of the reference sequence entries of the two genes which was conﬁrmed by RT-PCR experiments. Moreover, we also found additional exons that were not present in the databases. The new model for 
RDH12  contains three 
new 5´ untranslated exons , one of which occurs in two different splice variants. The new model for 
SLC24A2  predicts two sites of transcription 
initiation as well as two additional exons that are alternatively spliced. Experimental analysis of the transcripts proved to be essential for the ultimate mapping of the initiation site. This information constitutes the basis for further exploration of the promoter and other cis-regulatory 
sequences at the 5´end of these genes.Supported by the European Union Research Training Network ‘RETNET’ MRTN-CT-2003-504003
P1321. Interactions of 4F2hc and y+LAT1 in forming a cationic 
amino acid transporter
J. Salmi1, M. Kleemola1,2, O. Simell3, J. Mykkänen2, K. Huoponen1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Turku 
Centre for Biotechnology, Biocity, Turku, Finland, 3Department of Paediatrics, 
Turku University Central Hospital, Turku, Finland.
4F2hc and y+LAT1 form together a transporter for cationic amino acids 
located mainly in the basolateral membrane of epithelial cells in the small intestine and kidney tubule. Mutations in y
+LAT1 cause lysinuric 
protein intolerance (LPI, OMIM #222700), which is due to a defect in the absorption of cationic amino acids in the small intestine and the proximal kidney tubule. 4F2hc, which is a 529 amino acids long glycoprotein, interacts with y
+LAT1 with its carboxyl terminus, but the 
precise regions taking part in the interaction are still unknown.We made four different-sized deletion constructs (262, 278, 321 and 404 amino acids) of 4F2hc to identify the most necessary regions of the carboxyl terminus in the interaction with y
+LAT1. The signiﬁcance of 
the disulﬁde bridge between 4F2hc and y+LAT1 was also examined by 
mutating the bridge-forming cysteine residues into alanines. In order to study the interaction of the subunits we labelled the C-terminal end of 4F2hc with a DsRed1 tag and y
+LAT1 with an EGFP tag and studied 
the trafﬁcking of the two proteins to the plasma membrane in the HEK 293 cells with a confocal microscope. The most important regions of the carboxyl terminus of 4F2hc included amino acids 279-321 and 405-529. The absence of the disulﬁde bridge did not have any effect on the trafﬁcking of the transporter to the plasma membrane. Currently, we are making a more detailed deletion analysis of the C terminus of 
4F2hc in order to locate the most important interaction region.
P1322. Highly conserved noncoding DNA sequences within 
introns are controlling in cis the expression of GLI3
Z. Paparidis1, E. de Graaff2, G. Elgar3, K. H. Grzeschik1;  
1Zentrum für Humangenetik, Philipps-Universität, Marburg, Germany , 2Depart -
ment of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Nether -
lands, 3MRC Rosalind Franklin Centre for Genomics Research, Genome Cam -
pus, Hinxton, United Kingdom.
Limb defects present an excellent model for the study of signaling pathways in humans. Molecular clues involved in limb patterning are similarly used to direct the development of other parts of the body. The products of the GLI gene family translate signals of the sonic hedgehog protein (SHH) into speciﬁc patterns of gene expression. Their co-ordinated function appears to determine a GLI-code which, in the limb, directs pattern formation in posterior-anterior direction. Factors controlling the localized and timely expression of GLI genes 
are unknown.We report the identiﬁcation and functional analysis of cis-regulatory 
elements controlling expression of GLI3.The genomic sequence upstream of exon 1of human GLI3 is predicted to contain a promoter sequence. By deletion analysis, we identiﬁed a 300 bp minimal promoter region with a high capacity for transcriptional activation of a luciferase reporter gene in cell culture. To assay the involvement of trans-active factors, predicted binding sites within this region are modiﬁed by mutagenesis.Comparison of the human, mouse and fugu genomic GLI3 sequences showed regions of very high conservancy residing in intronic regions. Three such segments were tested for their potential to regulate luciferase expression in cell culture. Two segments differing in these properties were further analyzed for their ability to control time and localization of beta-galactosidase reporter gene expression in 
transgenic mouse embryos.The detection of sequence elements controlling in cis the expression of GLI3 contributes to the understanding of pattern formation and addresses the question of highly conserved noncoding DNA sequences 
in vertebrate genomes.
P1323. SOX gene expression analysis by non-radioactive RNA-
RNA in situ hybridization
D. Drakulic , G. Nikcevic, M. Stevanovic;  
Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia and 
Montenegro.
RNA-RNA in situ hybridization is reliable method for studying tissue and 
cell speciﬁc gene expression, which enables visualization of labeled antisense RNA probe hybridized to speciﬁc mRNA. In this study we have employed non-radioactive RNA-RNA in situ hybridization using biotin- or digoxigenin-labeled RNA probes in order to detect SOX gene expression in carcinoma cell lines. By applying this approach we conﬁrmed results obtained by Northern blot analysis, where presence of SOX2 mRNA in NT2/D1 and SOX14 mRNA in HepG2 cells has been shown. Our aim was to set up RNA-RNA in situ hybridization method in in vitro cultured cells in order to further analyze SOX gene 
expression on various normal and cancer tissues.
P1324. A subset of miRNA genes are associated with CpG-
islands
S. Holstebroe, N. Tommerup;  
Wilhelm Johannsen Centre, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen N, Den -
mark.
Micro-RNA (miRNA) genes encode small RNA molecules involved in mRNA translation and degradation by the RNA interference (siRNA) machinery. CpG-islands are CpG-rich regions that are common near transcription start sites, often associated with promoter regions, and some of which may be hypermethylated in cancer. We have found a highly signiﬁcant proportion of miRNAs (11.5%) embedded within CpG islands. This includes has-mir-212 and has-mir-132, which are located in the CpG-island of HIC1 (hypermethylated in cancer 1). Although CpG-islands are frequently associated with the 5'-region of known genes, 8000 of the 27000 CpG islands in the genome are located in between genes. We found that a subset of the miRNAs are intimately associated with these non-genic CpG-islands as well, with a signiﬁcant bias towards a location of the CpG-island within a 5 kb upstream region of the miRNAs. Thus, a subset of miRNA genes are associated with CpG-islands, suggesting a potential role of these miRNAs in CpG-
island methylation, in development and in carcinogenesis.
P1325. UMD-FBN2: A New Locus Speciﬁc DataBase (LSDB) for 
mutations in the FBN2 gene
C. M. Monino1, M. Y. Frederic1, C. Beroud1, D. Hamroun1, C. Boileau2, M. 
Claustres1, G. Collod-Beroud1;  
1Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire, Montpellier, France, 2Laboratoire cen -
tral de Biochimie, d'Hormonologie et de Genetique Moleculaire, Hopital Am-
broise Pare, Boulogne, France.Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics369
Congenital Contractural Arachnodactyly or Beals-Hecht syndrome is 
a heritable connective tissue disorder caused by mutations in FBN2 gene. It is related to Marfan syndrome (MFS) which is due to mutation in another member of the same family, FBN1. Main symptoms of CCA are skeletal features as arachnodactyly, dolichostenomelia, pectus deformities and kyphoscoliosis. This disease is associated with a relatively good prognostic because of the rare occurrence of cardiovascular manifestations as aortic dilatation or dissection and mitral valve prolapse, responsible for the most important mortality in MFS. The incidence of CCA is unknown, but it is rarer than MFS which incidence is 1/10, 000. FBN2 is a 127,6 Mb gene in 5q23-31 encoding ﬁbrillin-2. It shares with FBN1 an interesting structure of tandemly repeated modules. Because of the high similarity between these two genes, it seems to us interesting to be able to compare their mutations. For this purpose, we have constructed, as for FBN1 in 1995, a locus speciﬁc database with the UMD software. The database curently contains 22 FBN2 mutations, 21 of which are clustered in exons 24 through 34. They include 1 nonsens and 8 splice site mutations predicted to result in shortened ﬁbrillin-2 molecules. We have annotated the FBN2 sequence with described Highly Conserved Domain (HCD). These data allows us to list missense mutations as following: 3 mutations are in amino acids implicated in ca2+ binding, 8 mutations modify cysteines implicated in disulﬁde bond, and 1 mutation is in a conserved amino acid in TGFBP modules.
P1326. Visualization of 1039 chromosomal breakpoints in 
Mendelian Cytogenetics Network database (MCNdb) associated 
with mental retardation
M. Hjorth , E. Engenheiro, S. Holstebroe, I. Bache, M. Bugge, Z. Tümer, N. 
Tommerup, Mendelian Cytogenetics Network;  
Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functionel Genome Research, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
Mental retardation, affecting 2-3% of the population, is an extremely heterogeneous condition where probably hundreds if not thousands of genes might be involved. Mendelian Cytogenetics Network is a collaboration of >300 cytogenetic laboratories that submit disease-associated balanced chromosomal rearrangements (DBCRs) to a central database MCNdb (http://www.mcndb.org). Presently, there are 2852 DBCRs in MCNdb and the most common trait is mental retardation (1039 DBCRs ~36% of DBCrs in MCNdb). We have initiated a systematic analysis of this subgroup in order to identify good candidates for further molecular mapping by using tools available within MCNdb. The tool Genome Link displayed 2237 breakpoints in the UCSC Genome Browser, facilitating the detection of breakpoint clusterering. At the genome level, the 5 largest clusters involved 7q11, Xp11, 7p16, 2q31 and 7q22. The tool Trait Compare compared clinical traits within selected clusters in order to detect potential identical syndromes. We applied general network theory to search for co-occurrence of mental retardation with any other trait. Breakpoints involving chromosome 1 were most frequently associated with speech defects, behaviour disorders and hypotonia, whereas breakpoints involving chromosome 2 were most frequently associated with dysmorphic facies, seizures and paresis of ocular muscles. Furthermore, we used the tool Check OMIM to link the breakpoints and associated traits in speciﬁc cases to known loci in Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man. Our data supports that virtual analysis of DBCRs associated with MR by the tools available within MCNdb can identify candidates for further mapping studies and 
clinical re-examination.
P1327. Expression analysis of human INSL3-LGR8 system
P. Dabrilli , E Ferraresi, L Bartoloni, A Garolla, A Ferlin,C Foresta;  
University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
INSL3 is a member of the Insulin-like family of peptide hormones. It’s mainly produced by Leydig cells in prepubertal and adult testis. This peptide is involved in transabdominal descent of testes acting through its only G-protein coupled receptor LGR8. A paracrine role is described in preventing male germ cell apoptosis in rat. INSL3 and LGR8 mutations are described in patients affected by cryptorchidism.We analyzed INSL3-LGR8 system expression, both at RNA and protein level, in various tissues and we tested the hypothesis of imprinting in 
INSL3 studying three frequent polymorphisms.INSL3 and LGR8 transcripts were contemporary found in different tissues (skeletal muscle, ovary, testis and pituitary gland) thus 
suggesting new paracrine roles of the peptide-receptor system.In testis, ovary and lymphocytes, INSL3 presents an additional transcript due to an alternative splicing introducing a 95bp fragment between exons 1 and 2. Probably this new exon comes from an ALU sequence. The additional transcript is not present in other tissues. Both INSL3 alleles are expressed in patients’ cDNA, thus excluding 
imprinting hypothesis.The putative INSL3 peptide translated from the alternative transcript, and seen by Western Blot, shares the C-term sequence with JAK3 (Janokinase 3) protein. JAK3 and INSL3 are contiguos genes in 19p13 sharing one exon. Normally this exon is translated in the two proteins with different frames. The alternative INSL3 transcript uses the JAK3 frame. This might suggest a common mechanism involving JAK3 and INSL3 minor form. It might also be just a not useful transcript induced by the ALU insertion.
P1328. Regulation of alternative splicing in the MID1 gene 
causing Opitz BBB/G syndrome
S. Roepcke, S. Krause, M. Vingron, S. Schweiger, J. Winter;  
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
Clinical features of Opitz BBB/G syndrome are conﬁned to defects of the developing ventral midline, whereas the causative gene, 
MID1 , 
is ubiquitously expressed. We have shown previously that the MID1 protein function is restricted to the developing ventral midline by a large number of alternatively spliced transcripts that function in a negative 
regulation mode.Analysing the alternatively transcribed exons in more detail, we have now discovered that two of them are partially derived from ALU repeats. Point mutations have led to splice donors and consequently to novel gene products in the human lineage. Moreover, we have detected 30 additional ALU sequences within the genomic sequence of the 
MID1  
gene, two of them resembling the exonized ALU’s. These sequences are currently tested for potential expression using RT-PCR. However, aberrant expression pattern of alternatively spliced transcripts are a promising pathomechanism in those patients with X-linked Opitz BBB/G syndrome that have no detectable mutations in the open reading frame of the 
MID1 gene. Thus, to identify regulatory regions we conducted a 
thorough analysis of exonic and intronic DNA sequences based on the conservation pattern between six vertebrate species. In addition, we searched the exons for potential binding sites of splicing enhancers. In total, we have identiﬁed 40 signiﬁcant sites on which two prediction methods agree. Eight of these are evolutionarily conserved and thus represent good candidates for functional regulatory sequences. The set comprises binding sites of SRp40, SRp55, ScR35 and SF2/ASF. Mutation analysis and binding tests of the respective sequences are 
ongoing.
P1329. MAPH as a robust and convenient assay for assessing 
gene copy number
J. G. Tyson, C. N. S. Archer , H. Bulsara, T. M. O. Majerus, J. A. L. Armour;  
Institute of Genetics, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
DNA copy number variation is an important cause of genetic disease. Multiplex Ampliﬁable Probe Hybridization (MAPH), a method patented by the University of Nottingham, is a versatile and simple technology for assessing gene copy number. Ease of probe design and manufacture makes MAPH a particularly adaptable technology. Custom probe sets can be rapidly created to target copy number changes not catered for 
by other tests.MAPH has proved reliable in research but in order to bridge the gap between its current status as a laboratory test and its projected role in routine clinical diagnosis, a thorough and systematic experimental testing of the assay was needed. A 2-year Wellcome Trust project speciﬁcally designed to improve the reproducibility and robustness of MAPH has shown remarkable progress in the precision and reliability of the test. Prior to this development work, measurement errors (expressed as standard deviations) for subtelomeric copy number were generally in the range 10-15%; by adopting an updated, simpliﬁed protocol, standard deviations below 7% are consistently achieved on 95% of 100 tests attempted. Other achievements to date include reduction of the amount of DNA required per test, improved probe sets and adaptation to a 96-well plate format. Probe sets have been Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics370
validated for loci and genes including subtelomeric regions (ST3F), 
BRCA1, HNPCC, PMP22 and TBX5.This project is near completion and has demonstrated MAPH has the potential to work as a diagnostic test and as a complementary technology to conﬁrm results found by other methodologies.
P1330. Large scale SNP genotyping using APEX technology on 
an in situ synthesized microarray
J. Pullat1, M. Beier2, J. Hoheisel3, A. Metspalu1;  
1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2LUMA Biotech, Heidel -
berg, Germany, 3Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, Germany.
Arrayed primer extension reaction (APEX) technology was designed as a method for SNP genotyping, mutation detection and DNA resequencing. The capacity for large-scale genome analyses is still critical to many potential applications keeping in mind large number of the good quality SNPs in the databases. For the spotted arrays selection of informative and well-working SNP is still costly and time-
consuming process.We present the different approach that solves the problem by using in situ synthesized (5´-3´) oligonucleotide arrays on GeniomOne platform of LUMA biotech (Germany) for the assay development. We could easily design the set of oligonucleotides and quickly generate as well to test them, and then only informative and well-working SNPs will be selected for the spotting. Spotted arrays are much more economical to use in the large-scale studies compared to Geniom platform. In this way we will save the cost of the oligonucleotides (40 EUR per SNP) which will be discarded after 50 to 100 experiments because they are either monomorphic in population under study or do not work in the 
particular assay (10-20%).We introduce steps of the ﬁnal array design as well as ﬁrst results in designing enzymatic reaction on in situ synthesized oligonucleotide microarray. To achieve positive proof for APEX experiments on GeniomOne, were designed chip, which contains different test-probes (15-25 nt) coding for the same SNPs and negative control-sequences. As a result of the negative (without template) APEX, detected signals were speciﬁc and indicated the higher signal for longer hairpin with 
higher GC-content.
P1331. CGHPRO - A comprehensive data analysis tool for array 
CGH
W. Chen, F. Erdogan, H. Ropers, S. Lenzner, R. Ullmann;  
Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
DNA array based comparative genomic hybridisation (array CGH) is a high resolution screening technique for the genome wide detection of 
chromosomal imbalances.In order to cope with the increasing amount of array CGH data we have developed a user-friendly and versatile tool for the normalization, visualization, breakpoint detection and comparative analysis of array CGH results. The program called CGHPRO is a stand-alone JAVA application that guides the user through the whole process of data analysis. The import option for image analysis data covers several data formats. Various graphical representation tools assist in the selection of the appropriate normalization method. Intensity ratios of each clone can be plotted in a size-dependent manner along the chromosome ideograms. The interactive graphical interface offers the chance to explore the characteristics of each clone, such as the involvement of the clones sequence in segmental duplications. Circular Binary Segmentation and unsupervised Hidden Markov Model algorithms facilitate objective detection of chromosomal breakpoints. The storage of all essential data in a back-end database allows the comparative analysis of different cases. The diverse display options not only ease the deﬁnition of shortest regions of overlap, but also simplify the identiﬁcation of patterns of chromosomal aberrations. A special script is dedicated to the recognition of clones that are mismapped or 
repeatedly show unreliable ratios.CGHPRO is a comprehensive and easy-to-use data analysis tool for array CGH. Since all of its features are available ofﬂine, CGHPRO may be especially suitable in situations where protection of sensitive patient 
data is an issue.P1332. Array CGH reveals accumulation of chromosomal 
breakpoints in regions with high content of low copy repeats in 
mentally retarded patients
R. Ullmann1, F. Erdogan1, M. Kirchhoff2, R. Schulz1, I. Müller1, W. Chen1, C. 
Hultschig1, C. Lundsteen2, H. Ropers1;  
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Rigshospitalet, 
Kopenhagen, Denmark.
In a recent publication chromosomal aberrations were reported in 24% of mentally retarded patients investigated. In this array CGH study we analysed a set of 29 patients with mental retardation, who were pre-selected for the presence of abnormal karyotypes by chromosomal HR 
(High Resolution)-CGH.We started with a 1Mb resolution for the whole genome (4225 clones; 20 cases) and subsequently supplemented this array with the tiling path for the chromosomes known to be affected (14182 BAC clones; 
9 cases).Array CGH conﬁrmed all aberrations detected by HR-CGH, including a 1.7 Mb deletion on chromosome 17, which was already suggested 
by HR-CGH.Although this proved HR-CGH to be highly sensitive, array CGH enabled a more precise localisation of the breakpoints and provided a better understanding of the complexity of chromosomal rearrangements, 
which was underestimated by HR-CGHin some cases. Using our array CGH analysing software CGHPRO and a customized script to screen against the segmental duplication database, we examined the distribution of low copy repeats in the regions of chromosomal breakpoints in those nine aberrations that were detected at the tiling path resolution. In 5/9 cases both breakpoints were characterised by an increase of low copy repeats in the breakpoint ﬂanking region, in a further 2/9 cases the regions 
around one breakpoint showed this feature.This study represents not only a direct comparison between chromosomal and array CGH techniques, but also demonstrates the potential of array CGH to provide quick insights into the most probable 
causes of the chromosomal rearrangement.
P1333. Mutational Proﬁling of Human Disease Genes
S. Nidtha1, R. R. Bennett2, K. Poulter1, R. Fang1, R. Nutter1, P. Baybayan1;  
1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Children's Hospital, Bos -
ton, MA, United States.
Identiﬁcation of mutations in human genes to determine the genetic basis of common disorders such as cancer, neurological diseases, autoimmune diseases, and cardiovascular is a challenge. The use of single-nucleotide polymorphisms
 (SNPs) as markers in complex 
disease genes, and initiatives devoted to the identiﬁcation and 
mapping of SNPs throughout the human genome are ongoing. 
SNPs or insertions and deletions in populations are detected by a combination of techniques such as sequencing and hybridization. Sequencing is the preferred method to discover and conﬁrm genetic variation. Researchers who have chosen to sequence their gene of interest have to invest considerable amount of time testing the primers they designed. To eliminate the time consuming step of designing, optimizing and validating of PCR primers for human disease genes, Applied Biosystems has developed VariantSEQr™ Resequencing System. Mutation proﬁling in humans by resequencing has been made simple by this system since it can be easily integrated into any sequencing pipeline. The system takes advantage of the automated capillary electrophoresis platform, as well as reagents and SeqScape® 
v2.5 software for mutation detection and report generation.The universal PCR condition and sequencing protocol allows 
researchers to:1. Study genes with dense mutation spectrum and polygenic 
diseases
2. Under take case-control studies.Variations in sequences known or suspected to exist in the human genome can be detected easily and cost effectively. We describe a new tool for mutation and SNP discovery that is simple and easy to adopt, but most importantly employs a proven technique such as 
sequencing.Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics371
P1334. Detailed 5kb density Haplotype Map of Chromosome 2 
and 4p
A. Verner, M. Leboeuf, F. Chagnon, M. S. Phillips, V. Ferretti, T. J. Hudson, A. 
Montpetit;  
McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Montreal, Canada, 
Montreal, PQ, Canada.
Whole-genome association studies of common complex traits require 
genotyping of a large number of genetic markers, which makes such an approach expensive and time- and labour-consuming. Many studies have shown highly signiﬁcant levels of linkage disequilibrium and strong association between neighbouring single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). These blocks of SNPs create haplotype blocks in the human genome. Generating the map of such haplotype blocks will decrease the number of SNPs needed for genotyping and, therefore, greatly facilitate the mapping and identiﬁcation of disease-causing genes. The HapMap project is collaboration between 8 groups located in China, Japan, UK, USA and Canada. Our group focuses on creating the haplotype map of chromosomes 2 and 4p. These regions account for 10% of the genome. In the Phase I of the project, we have genotyped about 100 000 SNPs to complete a map with a density of 1 SNP for every 5kb in four populations: CEPH samples from Utah, Yoruba from Ibadan, Nigeria, Han Chinese from Beijing and Japanese from Tokyo. All data are available to the public at http://www.hapmap.org/. To manage the genotyping project from sample management to optimal SNP selection, data extraction and analysis our group has developed a web-based application, Nanuq. An algorithm has been implemented to select the best set of tag SNPs from the HapMap data for ﬁne mapping and candidate gene genotyping approaches. Phase II of the project will concentrate on better deﬁning haplotype blocks by creating higher density map of one SNP per 1kb.
P1335. Genomic organisation and expression analysis of the 
murine basonuclin 2 gene
E. Mihailov1, A. Reigo1, K. Kallassalu1, A. Metspalu1,2;  
1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian Biocentre, 
Tartu, Estonia.
We describe molecular characterization and expression pattern of the mouse basonuclin 2 gene, a member of the basonuclin zinc-ﬁnger family. The gene has been located in mouse chromosome 4, region C4 and we have found that it contains at least 8 exons spanning approximately 405 kb of genomic DNA. The longest transcript of the mouse basonuclin 2 gene encodes a putative 1106 aa protein with six C2H2 zinc ﬁnger domains arranged as three adjacent pairs. The basonuclin 2 protein has also other functional domains, such as 3 
nuclear localization signals and a serine stripe.We have detected mouse basonuclin 2 mRNA expression in 3T6 and NIH/3T3 cells using Northern blot hybridization and RT-PCR. Whole mount in situ hybridization revealed expression in 10.5 and 11.5 day mouse embryos, subsequent section of whole mount embryos demonstrated speciﬁc expression in ventral dermomyotome and branchial arch region. Mouse MTC panel conﬁrmed expression in 11.5 day embryos and also in 7, 15 and 17 day mouse embryos. In adult mouse we have detected expression in a variety of tissues at different 
levels.
P1336. Human Whole Genome CGH Arrays Can Detect Copy 
Number Changes in a Variety of Human Samples
R. H. Argonza-Barrett , C. Robbins, J. Bailey;  
Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, United States.
DNA copy number changes have been implicated in causing 
human inherited disorders and cancer. Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) allows whole genome coverage and ease of use compared to BAC arrays. Agilent’s CGH arrays offer high reproducibility and sensitivity due to major technological improvements in the array slide surface, production robotics, labeling chemistry, and software for quantiﬁcation and data analysis. The introduction of optimized reagents and protocols for target preparation, hybridization and labeling as well as software for data extraction and analysis has made the detection of changes in copy number such as duplications and gross deletions highly reproducible and extremely sensitive. The sum of these improvements now permits the high throughput analysis of various human DNA samples. Here we describe and demonstrate the utility of Agilent’s whole genome CGH system using cell lines, complex tumor samples, buccal swabs, and whole blood. Comparison with known BAC array data was noted where possible. The whole solution of genome-wide coverage on 44K arrays and optimized reagents and protocols has implications for future diagnostic and prognostic use for speciﬁc inherited diseases and cancer.
P1337. Molecular characterization of human Hubert gene located 
on chromosome 5p13.2
K. Kallassalu1, T. Haller2, E. Mihailov1, A. Reigo1, A. Metspalu1,3;  
1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Massachusetts Insti -
tute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States, 3Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, 
Estonia.
We have found a novel human gene disseminated over 105 kb genomic DNA in chromosomal region 5p13.2. The gene has 40 exons and it encodes a putative protein Hubert (Human Uncharacterised But Eventually Reasonable Transcript) of 2325 amino acids. Transcription of the Hubert gene occurs in the direction from centromere to telomere. There are three alternative polyadenylation signals (AAUAAA) 
downstream the stop codon in the sequence.To investigate the genomic organization of mouse and rat Hubert genes, we performed searches in mouse and rat genome databases. The localization on mouse chromosome 15A2 and rat chromosome region 2q16 is in conserved synteny with the localization of human 
Hubert on chromosome 5p13.2.The novel gene is located between genes nucleoprotein (NUP) 155 and NIPBL, the latter being mutated in individuals with Cornelia de 
Lange syndrome (CdLS).RNA in situ studies were performed on mouse embryos at E9.5, E10.5 
and E11.5. Our study demonstrated that Hubert is expressed in E10.5 and E11.5 mouse embryos, but not in E9.5. Expression was detected in cephalic mesenchyme tissue only.Analysis of gene expression proﬁles across different tissues was performed using RT-PCR and Northern Blot.We have not found any conserved domains or motifs in Hubert sequence on protein level using in silico  analysis. From the experiments 
and computer analysis performed so far we are not able to predict the function of this novel gene and its protein product. Further analysis is 
necessary to elucidate the function of Hubert.
P1338. The EMBL-Bank database, and related EBI resources
R. J. Vaughan, G. Cochrane, N. Faruque, V. Lombard, T. Kulikova, W. Zhu, R. 
Apweiler;  
European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom.
The EMBL-Bank database is maintained at the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI), and stores nucleotide sequence data and associated annotation. EMBL-Bank is part of the International Sequence Database Collaboration (INSD), sharing data with both Genbank and DDBJ. Nucleotide sequence data can be submitted to EMBL-Bank via a dedicated web-based submission system, Webin, and data can be retrieved via FTP, or using SRS, an advanced search system allowing 
complex cross-database queries.In addition to the EMBL-Bank primary dataset, several related databases and services are available, including the Third Party Annotation dataset, the EMBL-Align database, the completed genomes webserver and Genome Reviews. The Third Party Annotation dataset allows researchers to add annotation and/or sequence data to nucleotide sequences where they were not the original submitter (something which is not permitted within the EMBL-Bank primary dataset). Submissions must be published in a peer-reviewed journal, and must include new experimental evidence. The EMBL-Align database provides a public repository for both protein and nucleic acid sequence alignment data, storing alignments in a format which is both human and computer readable. The complete genomes server gives access to hundreds of completed genome sequences, all of which are linked to either the original EMBL-Bank entries or Ensembl, while Genome Reviews provides complete genomes with additional manually annotated data derived from the UniProt Knowledgebase, InterPro and the GOA project, providing enhanced annotation of 
coding sequence features.Genomics, technology, gene function, bioinformatics372
P1339. Expression proﬁling of peripheral blood cells in patients 
with different subtypes of spinocerebellar ataxias
M. Walter , S. Pots, H. Stappert, L. Schöls, O. Riess, M. Bonin;  
Dept. of Medical Genetics, University of Tübingen, Tuebingen, Germany.
Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are dominant, late onset hereditary 
disorders characterized by a progressive ataxia that is variably associated with other neurological symptoms. The clinical hallmarks result from a progressive degenerative process that mostly affects the cerebellum, brainstem and spinal cord. To date at least 25 different loci are associated with SCAs and related diseases. A large number of SCAs are caused by expanded CAG repeats within protein coding 
regions leading to polyglutamine tracts.Early detection of these disorders would enable both more effective diagnosis and treatment as well as a better understanding of pathogenesis and pathophysiological processes. Therefore, we need easily accessible markers, which should i) differentiate between patients with different SCA types and ii) be detectable allready in a 
preclinical state of disease progression.To achive this goal, we collected peripheral blood (PaxGene) of patients with six different SCA types as well as controls for expression proﬁling. Here we report the results for SCA1, 2, 3 and 6. First, we established a protocol to reduce the globin messages with magnetic beads. After hybridization of the U133 plus 2.0 Affymetrix array, expression proﬁles for both controls and SCA patients were analysed. Differentially expressed genes were determined that can distinguish between control samples and SCA patients as well as a set of genes which seperates SCA3 from SCA6 patients. Microarray results were validated using real-competitive RT-PCR.
P1340. Mirror Image DNA (L-DNA) For Improved Studies onZip-
Coded Universal Microarrays
R. Samaha1, N. C. Hauser2, R. Martinez3, J. Hoheisel3, K. Bashar Mullah1, K. J. 
Livak1, B. G. Schroeder1, S. Matysiak1;  
1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Genomics-Proteomics-
Screening, Fraunhofer IGB, Stuttgart, Germany, 3Functional Genome Analysis, 
German Cancer Research Centre, Heidelberg, Germany.
Universal zip-codes are a means to combine reactions that occur in solution with the ability to separate molecules on solid support such as DNA-microarrays. To this end, the reactive partners - oligonucleotide primers in our case - are attached each to a unique DNA tag-sequence, whose complement (zip-oligomer) is presented on the surface of the array. Due to their speciﬁc tag-sequences, the primers bind to distinct microarray positions and can thus be analysed independently. One difﬁculty is the selection of the tag sequences. The more complex the mixture of reactive partners gets the more unique sequences are required. In addition, cross-reactivity to the DNA- or RNA-analyte has to be avoided. We present here a zip-code universal array platform based on mirror image DNA (L-DNA). The advantage of the L-DNA derivative used here is the fact that there is no interaction between the L-form sequences and natural (D-form) nucleic acids. In consequence, cross-hybridisation is eliminated, while nevertheless strong and sequence-speciﬁc binding occurs between tag and complementary zip-probe. Synthesis of hybrid molecules of normal and L-form DNA is 
done using chemical standard procedures.We show here the results of two basic applications of L-DNA universal microarrays. In an epidemiologically motivated project, we analyse candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that are likely to be disease-relevant by incorporation of labelled dideoxy-nucleotides. For transcriptional proﬁling of pathogens, gene-speciﬁc primers with the zip-code complement attached to their 5'-end are used for the production of zip-tagged, labelled cDNA, following a two-dye 
competitive hybridisation approach.
P1341. The role of viruses in reproduction and aneuploidy
V. Culic , G. Mijaljica, S. Miškovic, Z. Zegarac, M. Glavina, S. Culic, D. Pri -
morac;  
Pediatrics Clinic, Department for Medical Genetics, 21 000 Split, Croatia.
Each chromosome contains two centrioles which adhere to each other through the cell cycle and normally separate only once during the G1-to-S cell cycle transition, resulting in centrosome duplication. Centrosome duplication is regulated by many intracellular events that are essential in maintaining genomic stability. Abnormal centrosome duplication is tightly linked to aneuploidy. Spontaneous abortions appear with the incidence of 12-15% in population. In spontaneous abortions there are 25-60>% of chromosome abnormalities, and in most cases there are triploidies, tetraploidies and polyploidies. The genes associated with cell cycle abnormalities are p53, Brca1, Brca2, Gadd45, human papillomavirus type E6 and E7 also leads to mitotic defects. The theory of “two hits” for one unstable cell cycle resulting with aneuploidy is still in bases of these events. From the couples in the genetic counselling process with normal karyotype and aneuploidy in aborted material analysed by ﬂow cytometry, we found CMV and EBV reactivation or new infection in both parents before and/or during pregnancy. We analysed those with aneuploidy in aborted material and signiﬁcant serologic ﬁndings in both parents. A retrospective analysis was done over 500 couples with one or more spontaneous abortion and 296 parafﬁn embedded samples were found. 41 placentas was analysed by ﬂow: 27 (66%) diploid and 14 (34%) aneuploid. From 290, 88 (30%) had IgM or/and high IgG for EBV and 12 (4%) for CMV. HPV positive diploid parafﬁn embedded sample from one couple with three 
consecutive spontaneous abortions was found.
P1342. First Cuban Predictive Testing Experience For 
Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 2: A Psychological Follow-Up One Year Later.
M. Paneque Herrera1, N. Santos Falcón2, L. Prieto Avlia2, L. Velázquez Pérez2, 
J. Sequeiros1, M. Fleming1;  
1ICBAS-IBMC-CGPP, Porto, Portugal, 2Clínica para la Investigación y Rehabilit -
ación de las Ataxias Hereditarias, Holguín, Cuba.
Objectives. The  psychological  impact evaluation after the predictive 
experience on descendants at risk of Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 
2, as well as the description of the social and demographic proﬁle of the participants in the Cuban program. Methods. A descriptive investigation of series of cases was carried out with 150 individuals at risk who received molecular diagnoses during the predictive protocol started April 2001 and carried out until May 2002. 
Results The 
average age of the participants was 39 years old, 65,3% of them were women. 83,6% of the participants were married or lived with a partner and 78,3% of them had at least one child. The anxiety and depression levels decrease signiﬁcantly with time, in direct relation with negative diagnoses in the case of anxiety. Conclusions. The psychological 
well-being indicators improve signiﬁcantly a year after the predictive experience, which psychosocial impact is favorable. At the same time, the participants assessment on their own experience is satisfactory .
P1343. Investigations of parmacogenetic features are an 
important part of predictive genetic counselling
M. O. Mkheidze ;  
Medical Academy for postgraduate education, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion.
In memoriam Professor Eugene I. SchwartzInformation on individual pharmacogenetic features (IPGF) as a part of the genetic predictive counseling is the essential basis for prevention of various complications induced with medicines.. The aim of this study is to quantify the rate of four IPGF among St. Petersburg population: butyrilcholinesterase (CHE, EC3.1.1.8, loci CHE1, CHE2), arylamine N-acetyltransferase (AT, EC2.3.1.5), angiotensin-1-convering enzyme (ACE, EC3.4.15.1). Materials and Methods. Random blood samples 
(1350) were analyzed using routine agar gel screening test for CHE1S and CHE1D, spectrophotometric methods for identiﬁcation of CHE1U, CHE1D, CHE1F, CHE1S; electrophoretic separation in 7,5%PAAG for identiﬁcation CHE2(5+), Sulfamethazine acetylating method for acetylator phenotype (AT); insertion(I)/deletion(D) polymorphism of the 16
th intron of the human Ace gene was determined by PCR with 
DNA extracted from white blood cells and the product of ampliﬁcation was analyzed with 8% PAAG electrophoresis and ethidium bromide 
visualization Results. The frequencies of four PGICH are the 
following: CHE1U - 0.980, CHE1D - 0.012, CHE1F - 0.008, CHE2(5-) - 0.961 and CHE2(5+) - 0.039; AT rapid allele - 0.272, AT slow allele - 0.728; AceD allele - 0.491 AceI allele - 0.453. Groups of potential risk have been determined and genetic individual information have been registered using special certiﬁcate. Hitherto, unfortunately, individual pharmacogenetic information is unclaimed by most our physicians and medicinal management is done with ignorance of IPGF.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy373
P1344. PKU neonatal screening in Leningrad province
I. A. Ivanov1,2, T. S. Sova1,2, L. A. Ryamo1,2, M. O. Mkheidze1;  
1Medical Academy for postgraduate education, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion, 2District Children Hospital, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation.
In memoriam Dr. Sophia P.Maximova
PKU neonatal screening has been put into practice by medical genetics service to have been stationed at District Children Hospital. Every year cohort of newborns includes about 10-12 000 persons. Now 98-99% of the infants are examined through PKU neonatal screening with blood dried on ﬁlter paper. The incidence of PKU is estimated at 1:6600 - 1 : 12262 live births in Leningrad province. Dietary management with modern Russian and import products like “Tetraphen”, “Phenyl-Free” etc. is neonatally started. The goal for management of the infant with PKU is to achieve and maintain blood PHE concentrations between 2-6 mg/dL. All children with PKU (27) have long-term dietary management and PHE level monitoring. Families with PKU probands have a chance to look through a new brochure “Phenylketonuria” written by M. Mkheidze (PhD, MD). DNA analysis and prenatal diagnosis are available with support of Laboratory of prenatal diagnosis (Chief of Laboratory - academician, professor V. S. Baranov) of Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS. 10 children of our cohort with PKU 
have molecular diagnosis.
P1345. Disease knowledge, reproductive attitudes, and 
compliance to treatment among cystic ﬁbrosis families in 
Brittany (France).
M. De Braekeleer1, G. Rault2;  
1Faculté de Médecine & CHU Morvan, Brest, France, 2Centre de Perharidy, 
Roscoff, France.
Cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) has an incidence of 1 in 2636 live births and a carrier 
rate of 1 in 26 inhabitants in Brittany. A questionnaire was distributed to the 506 patients (children, adolescents and adults) and/or their parents followed by the CF centers in Brittany and Loire-Atlantique. The return rate was 40.9%. The knowledge of clinical signs was rather good among patients and their parents (50-68.7%), but that of the genetic transmission was much better (81.4-93.7%). The knowledge of the recurrence risk by the parents resulted in deciding against further progeny or in reducing the number of children. 95.1% of the parents were in favor of prenatal diagnosis, 41.2% having used it. 76.2% would interrupt the pregnancy should prenatal diagnosis revealed that their fetus had CF. All 123 respondents thought that genetic counseling was useful but only 87.1% knew of its availability.Some 97% of the 207 respondents agreed that the prescribed treatment was very important to maintain their health condition or that of their child. However, 41.1% thought that they or their child took too many drugs. Adolescents and adults were more likely than parents to regularly forget some part of the whole treatment. Compliance to physiotherapy declined among the three categories (from 95.2% to 72.2%). The quality of the relationship between the patient and the health professionals can have a major impact in attaining a better 
knowledge and a higher compliance to treatment.Supported by grants from the “Fondation du Centre Hélio-Marin” in Roscoff and the “PHRC”
P1346. GENETICS MADE EASY: free divulgative web about 
human genetics
M. T. Solé-Pujol1, J. M. Carrera-Macia2, J. M. Cantú-Garza3, F. Solé-Ristol4, J. 
Antich-Femenias1;  
1Centro Genética Médica, Barcelona, Spain, 2Instituto Universitario Dexeus, 
Barcelona, Spain, 3Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Guadalajara, Mexico, 
4Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain.
Genetics Made Easy, http://www.geneticsmadeeasy.comis a non-proﬁt informative web on human genetics that has been written with the aim of bringing the scientiﬁc community closer to the general population. The web is a very useful teaching tool to clinicians and other healthcare professionals, in order to complement personal consultations as you will see throught the index web, regardless of their area of expertise, as genetically inherited disorders are known 
across all medical specialties.The web contains all the information that any couple may need to know before embarking in parenthood, regardless of whether their children 
were normal or born with any hereditary malformation or disease.Following a very easy index. Bartolo our owl teacher introduce us from the origin of life to the last new technologies by means of very clear and simple language aided by useful static and ﬂash animated pictures.
The index web is:
* Introduction* The origin of life
* Cell specialization
* Chromosomes
* How do we acquire our inheritance
* What is heredity* Types of inheritance
* Why do disorders develop* What happens when our recipes combine with our partner´s 
recipes?.* And how can we use this vast knowledge and beneﬁt from it?.
* Origin of hereditary disorders.
* Prenatal diagnosis techniques.* Gene Therapy
* Cloning
* Questions
* Links of interest
* Further reading
* Foreword
* FORUMAt this moment http://www.geneticsmadeeasy.com is currently 
available on the Net in English and Spanish. Chinesse during 2005.
P1347. Genetic screening for hereditary haemochromatosis 
in secondary schools: attitudes of the school community in 
Victoria, Australia
M. Aitken1,2, S. A. Metcalfe1,2, M. B. Delatycki1,3, K. J. Allen1,4, A. A. Gason1,2;  
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2University of Mel -
bourne, Department of Paediatrics, Parkville, Australia, 3Bruce Lefroy Centre for 
Genetic Health Research, Parkville, Australia, 4Department of Gastroenterology 
and Nutrition, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Australia.
Community genetic screening programs can be offered in a variety 
of settings. Genetic screening for hereditary haemochromatosis has been the subject of signiﬁcant debate in the literature. Nevertheless, it is the best example of a preventable disease for which genetic predisposition testing is available. Secondary schools are a possible site to offer genetic susceptibility screening, as carrier testing for Tay Sachs disease and cystic ﬁbrosis are currently successfully offered in this setting. Screening within the school system, as an alternative to the current workplace setting, could vastly increase the number of individuals exposed to both the education and the opportunity to be tested. Therefore, we aimed to determine the attitudes of the secondary school community towards a haemochromatosis genetic susceptibility screening program for students without offering testing. Students aged 16-17 completed a questionnaire both before and after an educational session during school time. Parents and teachers received written educational material and returned a questionnaire via mail. Results from the questionnaire study revealed a positive attitude toward genetic testing in schools and a high knowledge level for all participants. In conclusion, comprehensive education is essential to inform students, parents and teachers of all relevant information. The results could inform future implementation and policy development 
through consideration of community attitudes.
P1348. Genetic Tests under Scrutiny. Development of Criteria 
Integrated in a Questionnaire in an Interdisciplinary Austrian Working Group
S. Jonas1, S. Schneider-Voss2, G. Endel3, E. Leitgeb4, S. Näglein3, D. Vybiral5, 
K. Wimmer6;  
1Institute of Technology Assessment, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, 
Austria, 2dialog gentechnik, Vienna, Austria, 3Association of Social Insurance 
Institutions, Vienna, Austria, 4Patients Representatives, Vienna, Austria, 5Fed-
eral Ministry of Health and Women, Department of Biotechnology & Genetic 
Engineering, Vienna, Austria, 6Institute of Medical Biology, Medical University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
In the coming years the number of DNA tests that predict the risk of the 
development of disorders with genetic inﬂuence will increase. Improved technology will make DNA testing more accessible. According to Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy374
consumer protection and socio-economic implications there is a need 
for regulating the approval procedure and cost transfer of those tests. In order to assess the potential beneﬁts and risks an interdisciplinary working group conceptualised a questionnaire regarding evaluation 
criteria for (predictive) genetic tests.Under the aspect "Think genomically, act locally!"  39 questions based 
on the established ACCE* criteria were adapted for the situation in Austria. The questionnaire consists of various questions concerning the diagnosis of the disease, test parameter settings, the analytical and clinical validity, as well as clinical utility, and legal and social implications. The preceding preamble gives a short introduction of the detailed work of the participants, an overview of the actual situation of genetic tests and the legal situation regarding the approval of genetic tests in Austria.The replies of the applicants to these developed questions may help decision makers in health policy to form an opinion about the acceptance or refusal of genetic tests and should help to make the application and decision process more transparent. Also the way (discussion in an interdisciplinary working group) that was used to deal with these circumstances (approval of genetic tests) could be a prototype of how to handle the discussion between different interest 
groups.
*Analytic and clinical validity, clinical utility, ethical, legal and social 
implications
P1349. External Quality Assessment in classical cytogenetics: 
the Italian experience
G. Floridia , V. Falbo, M. Salvatore, F. Censi, F. Tosto, N. Bruzzese, C. Maron -
giu, D. Taruscio;  
Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy.
Genetic testing services in the EU have substantially increased their 
activity in the past few years.In 2002 Italian laboratories performing cytogenetic tests were 158, with an increase of 12% from 2000 (1); cytogenetic analyses performed in 
2002 increased of 34% from 2000(1).The Italian External Quality Assessment (IEQA) in classical cytogenetics is an activity ﬁnancially supported by the Italian Ministry of health and 
coordinated by the Istituto Superiore di Sanità, (ISS).Cytogenetic Public Laboratories have been enrolled upon voluntary partecipation, covering all Italian regions(2). Four trials have been performed until now and the number of participating laboratories has been increasing (35 in 2001, 46 in 2002, 49 in 2003, 2004-trial in progress). The EQA covers both prenatal and postnatal diagnosis, 
including cancer cytogenetics.Laboratories send to ISS Jpeg images and the correspondent written report. A panel of experts evaluate the analytical and the interpretative 
performances.Overall images had a good level of quality, while reports were not homogenous and often missing important information. A standard report format, in constitutional cytogenetics, has been proposed by consensus by the ISS and national experts. An overview of all results will be illustrated and effects of the IEQA will be discussed.1. Dallapiccola et al., Analysis 2/3. 2004: 301-304-available at http://sigu.univr.it2. Taruscio D. et al., Clin Chem Lab Med 2004; 42: 915-21.This work is funded by the Project “Test genetici: dalla ricerca alla 
clinica”, Italian Ministry of Health (2003-2005)
P1350. Genetic analysis for cystic ﬁbrosis: does it suit me? A 
blueprint for an interactive educational software
C. Castellani, B. M. Assael;  
Cystic Fibrosis Centre - Ospedale Civile Maggiore, Verona, Italy.
In the latest years there has been a huge hike in the number of Cystic Fibrosis (CF) carrier tests. Ideally, any genetic test should be linked to an individual genetic counselling session. However, as the number of genetic tests available for clinical use continues to rise, the need for alternative educational and counselling methods is becoming more and more pressing, both for CF and for other inherited diseases. Booklets and videotapes have been used with some success, but they lack interactivity, and often do not include sufﬁcient information to meet the requirements of informed consent. A computer-based program, although not a replacement for genetic counselling, may be an asset. This kind of tool offers several advantages, like interactivity, adaptiveness, privacy, assessment, and vividness. At present, the plot of the program has been created, and it will be presented. It provides information about CF, genetic risk and genetic testing, and encourages participant interaction by asking users to respond to questions, choose among various options within the program, and access information in the sequence and depth that they desire. Potential users of the CF carrier test should, after using the program, be able to consciously choose whether they want to take the test or not. Steps involving graphic design and software engineering are in progress. Ultimately, a randomized trial comparing education by the computer with education 
by trained genetic counselors will be performed.
P1351. Cancers, co-morbidities and ageing in people with Down 
syndrome
A. H. Bittles1, E. J. Glasson1,2, S. G. Sullivan1,3, R. Hussain1,4;  
1Edith Cowan University, Perth, Australia, 2University of Western Australia, 
Perth, Australia, 3Chinese Center for Disease Control, Beijing, China, 4Univer -
sity of New England, Armidale, Australia.
The prevalence of malignancies in people with Down syndrome is controversial, in part because of their major increase in life expectancy over the last 50 years. In a comprehensive study of intellectual disability in Western Australia, linked health databases were used to determine the incidence of speciﬁc cancers in 1,298 individuals with Down syndrome (725 males and 573 females) during the years 1982 to 2001. No signiﬁcant difference was observed between the 21 cancers diagnosed in the Down syndrome cohort and the 19 cases expected in the general population (SIR = 1.10; 95% CI, 0.68-1.68). As in other populations, there was a highly signiﬁcant increase in childhood leukaemias (n = 12) among Down syndrome patients (SIR = 61.61; 95% CI, 31-84-107.62). Eight other malignancies were diagnosed: cancers of the gastrointestinal system, malignant melanoma, malignant brain tumour, testicular teratoma, cancer of the conjunctiva, and Waldenstrom’s macroglobinaemia. The median life expectancy of people with Down syndrome in Western Australia now exceeds 58 years, and many of those diagnosed with cancer had additional health problems, including diabetes, hypothyroidism, epilepsy and musculoskeletal disorders. It has been suggested that the cellular microenvironment in Down syndrome can protect against the development of certain solid tumours, such as breast cancer. However, with their continuing marked increase in life expectancy, it seems probable that in future years people with Down syndrome will exhibit a higher incidence of adult-onset cancers and non-malignant disorders associated with advanced age. This poses serious problems 
both for Genetic Counselling and public education programmes.
P1352. Education of Medical Genetics in Czech Republic
P. Goetz1, I. Barta2, M. Cervinka3, R. Gailyova4, V. Jüttnerova3, M. Kohoutova5, 
J. Reischig6, J. Santavy7, Z. Sedlacek1, E. Seemanova1, I. Subrt6, A. Svoboda4;  
1Charles University, 2nd Medical School, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Charles 
Univeristy, 3rd Medical School, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Charles University, 
Faculty of Medicine, Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic, 4Masaryk University, 
Faculty of Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic, 5Charles University, 1st Medical 
School, Prague, Czech Republic, 6Charles University, Faculty of Medicine, 
Plzen, Czech Republic, 7Palacky University, Faculty of Medicine, Olomouc, 
Czech Republic.
Historically the ﬁrst three medical genetics lectures appeared as a part of the curriculum in Paediatrics at the former Faculty of Paediatrics 
(now 2nd School of Medicine) in Prague in 1967.At present there are seven medical schools in the Czech Republic, teaching medical genetics to a variable extent. Most schools teach 
medical genetics on two levels: First, in the
theoretical part of the curriculum (1st and 2nd year), medical
genetics is integrated in "Biology". Practicals are implemented to train students in methods like pedigree analysis and risk assessment, methods of molecular genetics and cytogenetics and interpretation of their results, etc. Second, some medical schools implemented obligatory subject "Clinical Genetics" into the clinical part of the curriculum, where students solve practical problems, and learn about the importance of genetics in medicine. In addition, students are also offered optional courses like "Advances in Molecular Genetics", "Genetic Counselling and Clinical Cytogenetics", "Reproduction Medicine and Reproduction Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy375
Genetics", etc.
The 3rd Medical School in Prague has a different, problem-oriented curriculum. Medical genetics is taught in the ﬁrst cycle of integrated study (1st and 2nd year) within "Biology of the Cell" and "Genetics", 
and in the praeclinical part (3rd
year) within "Theoretical Foundations of Clinical Medicine".We have a 3-year postgraduate training programme in clinical genetics for MDs specialized in paediatrics, internal medicine, obstetrics etc. Similar programmes exist for non-medical graduates working in 
cytogenetic and molecular genetic laboratories.Medical geneticists are also involved in the education of the public, 
and in various self-help groups.
P1353. Written informed consent in predictive cancer genetic 
testing: challenges and pitfalls in clinical practice
M. Welkenhuysen1, M. Lacroix2, Y. Joly2;  
1Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium, 2Centre de 
recherche en droit public, Montreal, PQ, Canada.
Obtaining informed consent is a legal and ethical requirement for genetic testing for late-onset diseases, including hereditary cancers. However, laws and professional norms concerning written informed consent in clinical practice are often lacking. To explore written informed consent procedures in predictive genetic testing for cancer, semi-structured interviews were conducted with 11 genetic counselors from Toronto, Ottawa, Vancouver and the province of Quebec.Whereas the process of obtaining informed consent in cancer genetic counseling was homogeneous, variability prevailed in the type of informed consent forms used: the genetic center’s own form, a third party’s form (from a hospital lab or a commercial lab), a research form, or no form at all. The use of third party forms complicates the issue of 
the responsibility of clinical geneticists versus that of DNA-labs.Each participant described the goal of obtaining written informed consent in ethical and/or care related patient-centered terms, stressing that the form cannot replace the informed consent process. Most counselors were reluctant to consider written informed consent as offering legal protection to genetics professionals. Overall, the advantages of written informed consent were perceived as outweighing its disadvantages. Potential for improvement was mentioned, such as more room for patients’ wishes regarding re-contact and disclosure to relatives and/or health care professionals. The need for simple language and short 
forms was emphasized.Our results show that a more consistent approach is needed for obtaining written informed consent. To meet this requirement, the goals of written informed consent and the ensuing responsibilities involved require clariﬁcation.
P1354. Opinions about predictive testing for hereditary breast 
cancer and Huntingon’s disease in several groups in Flanders.
M. Welkenhuysen, G. Evers-Kiebooms ;  
Center for Human Genetics, University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium.
Sixty percent of eligible general practitioners (GPs), 37% of nurses/
midwives, 34% of scientists/technicians in human genetics, 44% of members of patient support groups for breast cancer (BC-group) and 78% of members of the Flemish Huntington association (HD-group) expressed their opinions regarding predictive testing for hereditary breast cancer (HBC) and/or Huntington’s disease (HD) (1) in an adult, (2) in a 5-year old child at the parents’ request and (3) in a 16-year old adolescent at his/her own request. In total, 777 respondents completed 
a questionnaire.In each group of respondents, the acceptability ratings for predictive testing for HBC and HD in an adult and in an adolescent are predominantly favourable. Predictive testing for HBC in an adult is rated as more acceptable than testing for HD, mainly because prevention and treatment exist for HBC. In their spontaneous explanations of their ratings, prophylactic mastectomy is mentioned in a negative way by almost half of the GPs, nurses/midwives and the BC-group and by one quarter of the scientists/technicians. Favourable ratings for testing an adolescent were mostly explained by respect for personal autonomy .
Everyone in the HD-group gave a negative rating for predictive testing in a child at the parents’ request, whereas negative ratings were observed for 45%-66% of the other groups. Respondents’ negative opinions about testing a child at the parents’ request were motivated by the child’s right not to know, as well as by psychological and medical 
arguments.
Implications for genetic education in these groups will be discussed.
P1355. Genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity in Primary 
Hyperoxaluria type I in Northern Israel
T. Falik-Zaccai1, M. Khayat2, H. Mandel3, I. Weissman4;  
1Institute of Medical Genetics, Western Galilee Hospital, Naharia and Rappa -
port faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, 
Western Galilee Hospital, Naharia, Israel, 3Pediatric Metabolic unit, Rambam 
medical center and Rappaport faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel, 
4Pediatric Nephrology unit, Western Galilee Hospital, Naharia and Rappaport 
faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel.
Primary hyperoxaluria type I (PH1) is a rare autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism presenting clinical and genetic heterogeneity. PH1 is highly prevalent in Northern Israel with approximately 2-3 new cases each year.We present 40 patients from 13 Muslim and Druze families. The diagnosis was established based on the clinical presentation, biochemical proﬁle and molecular genetic analyses. Eight different mutations were identiﬁed including 6 novel mutations. Patients from eleven families were homozygous for the causative mutation while patients from 2 families were found to be compound heterozygotes. Inter and intra familial phenotypic differences related to age of onset and severity of disease, were observed among patients who shared 
an identical genotype.Molecular diagnosis of PH1 was established in 4 patients avoiding liver biopsy, and 1 prenatal diagnosis performed via CVS.Population screening for the PH1 local causative mutation was performed in two villages. In the ﬁrst, 190 individuals were tested, and 6 carriers identiﬁed, resulting a carrier frequency of 1/31. In the second, 300 individuals were tested, 23 carriers were identiﬁed to result a carrier frequency of 1/13. Two couples at risk were identiﬁed and prenatal diagnosis (PND) offered.The high prevalence of PH1 in our region is probably the result of consanguineous marriages. Molecular analysis enables accurate diagnosis and comprehensive genetic counseling for families of affected individuals and couples at risk regarding the options of pre implantation and PND. If PND is undesired pre-emptive liver transplantation is performed preventing end-stage renal disease and 
improving quality of life.
P1356. Who is developing UK human genetics policy?
B. G. Williams, F. L. Ticehurst, P. S. Harper;  
Wales Gene Park, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Science knowledge and development of technologies in genetics are changing rapidly which means that policy and legislation concerning 
human genetics need to be up to date and responsive.In the UK, there is a wide range of both government bodies and professional organisations who contribute to forming guidelines and policy recommendations which may subsequently lead to legislation 
on human genetics.Knowledge about the policy makers and understanding the policy processes involved will help different groups in the UK to access, participate in and become a part of the policy making community. Such groups include those representing families affected by genetic conditions and those involved in genetics research and clinical services. This knowledge is also of interest and relevance to groups 
outside the UK.This presentation will describe the main government bodies and professional organisations, their relationships and their roles within the 
policy making process of human genetics in the UK.
P1357. The Iranian Human Mutation Gene Bank website
M. Neishabury, Y. Shafeghati, K. Kahrizi, K. Jalalvand, S. Bany Hashemi, S. 
Arzhangi, Z. Zahedi, M. K. Javan, H. Najmabadi;  
Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci -
ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The website of the Iranian Human Mutation Gene Bank represents a comprehensive source of information on DNA samples collected in this bank during the last 6 years. These include DNA of individuals with genetic disorders displaying Mendelian mood of inheritance studied in Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy376
Iran. A group of samples have been assigned to common, rare or novel 
mutations and some others belong to patients with clinical proﬁles associated with particular genetic diseases but unidentiﬁed mutation. The new version of the software presents different grouping of genetic disorders including Hemoglobinopathes, Neuromuscular disorders, Mental Retardations and Hearing loss. Apart from the personal data, which is strictly kept conﬁdential, clinical proﬁle for each individual and genetic data, including pedigree for each family is presented in this database. In order to facilitate collaboration with other scientists in the world with the same interests, we also display the information regarding our experimental projects at this center on some of these genetic disorders. This DNA bank offers a free of charge sample resource from a large heterogeneous population to all the scientists in the world, who are working on various aspects of genetic disorders from prenatal diagnosis to gene structure and function. No commercial beneﬁt is involved in establishment of this DNA bank. Please visit our under construction website on http://www.IHMGB.com (Its link is also available in HUGO ofﬁcial website).
P1358. Solving genetic counselling dead end in two Duchenne 
muscular dystrophy families with the help of three novel 
microsatellite markers.
P. Khau van Kien , D. Thorel, C. Saquet, M. Claustres, S. Tuffery-Giraud;  
CHU, Montpellier, France.
Despite important progress in direct Becker/Duchenne muscular Dystrophy (B/DMD) diagnosis, genetic counselling is occasionally limited when the causative mutation could not be identiﬁed. In such circumstances, indirect diagnosis is the only one feasible but can also be seriously hampered by the huge size of the B/DMD locus and its high recombination rates. This is particularly true in the 3' second part of the DMD gene where only few markers of low informativity are available. All of these drawbacks are illustrated in the two families we report here: index case deceased without available material, high Bayesian estimated risk for the female relatives and absence of informativeness of the markers located in the 3' region of the B/DMD locus. To solve the genetic counselling in both families we performed a systematic search of short tandem repeat sequences in the 3' region to detect novel polymorphic markers. Three sequences were selected: in intron 67 (IVS-67), intron 76 (IVS-76) and in the 3' untranslated region, 250kb downstream of the stop codon (3'-UTR). Labelled primers DNA were designed to amplify these sequences from DNA of 78 control subjects given a total of 108 chromosomes that were studied with standard procedures. Observed allele numbering and frequencies allowed inferring each marker's informativeness with calculation of the heterozygosity and the Polymorphic Information Content (> 0.6). Their use allows to increase the reliability of the haplotypic analysis in the two families and to reasonably exclude risk in the female relatives. These markers provide new tools for efﬁcient indirect diagnosis of B/
DMD.
P1359. The Iranian Human Mutation Database
M. M. Motazacker1, E. Taherzadeh1, Z. Husseini2, M. Kamyab2, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tebyan IT Institute, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Regional genetic databases provide scientists all over the world with the valuable resource of speciﬁc information about the genetic structure of people from particular regions of the world in order to promote the diagnosis, treatment and basic research of genetic disorders. The Iranian population consists of different races, tribes and religions and has a highly heterogeneous gene pool and mutation spectrum, which, in many cases, can also be extrapolated to the mutation spectrum of people in the neighboring countries within the Middle East. The Iranian Human Mutation Database (IHMD), established in February 2004, is a collection of information about reported (published or submitted) mutations and related polymorphisms found within the Iranian population. We have created it to make this wealth of genetic data more available to researchers, healthcare providers and to patients and their families. The IHMD is accessible through the World Wide Web at: http://www.uswr.ac.ir. So far, data have been submitted regarding more than 392 mutations related to 95 genetic diseases with distinct 
genes. References and authors are also listed by the mutation.P1360. Results of the Medical Genetics services in the South-
Western part of Romania
D. Stoicanescu, C. Gug, M. Mihaescu, M. Puiu, S. Farcas, V. Belengeanu;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
The results of medical genetics investigations in the population of the 
South-Western part of Romania in the last 5 years are presented. Individuals were referred to the Medical Genetics services from Timisoara by medical personnel or came without any referral. Familial pedigree analysis, clinical, paraclinical and cytogenetic investigation 
revealed:- A genetic cause in the majority of investigated couples with sterility and infertility.- Androgen insensitivity and congenital adrenal hyperplasia as the 
prevalent causes of intersexualities.- Turner syndrome and its variants followed by Klinefelter syndrome as 
the cytogenetic causes of hypogonadism.- Considering single-gene disorders, different types of osteocondrodysplasia were predominant, followed by storage disorders and cystic ﬁbrosis. Due the severity of the phenotype and the psychological impact of the defects, rare disorders were diagnosed: Floating-Harbor and Ambras syndromes.- As we expected, the main cause of mental retardation was Down 
syndrome, followed by single-gene disorders.- Among non-syndromic birth defects, limb defects were most 
frequent.- The majority of hematological malignancies were CML, followed by acute leukemias. Conventional cytogenetic analysis was used for monitoring these patients every 6 months.Conclusions: Couples with sterility and infertility represented the majority of investigated persons, their number increasing every year. The vast majority of patients came for cytogenetic analysis. An important percent of persons came without any referral, knowing about the genetic services from mass-media or 
web-sites.
P1361. The Nowgen Network: an on-line system to promote 
national and international collaboration within the human 
genetics ﬁeld
A. C. Rose1, W. S. Johnson2, G. Wainwright2, J. McQuillian2, R. McDermott1, H. 
R. Middleton-Price1, D. Donnai1;  
1Nowgen, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2MerseyBIO, Liverpool, United King -
dom.
The ﬁeld of human genetics clearly beneﬁts from the exchange of 
information and the thorough debate of new developments. However, due to the rapid evolution of the area, there are problems associated with the identiﬁcation and dissemination of information and with the practicalities of debate with interested parties. To address these issues, Nowgen and its partner MerseyBIO have worked together to develop a technologically advanced website. Within the site, virtual communities of experts have been formed to support inter-institutional and interdisciplinary genetics initiatives. Members of the Nowgen team work closely with these “Nowgen Network” communities to support their use of the system. Initially, a number of pilot communities have been established to focus on clinical, ethical, legal, scientiﬁc and educational issues associated with genetics. From a single point of access, users can utilise powerful web-based tools, allowing them to identify partners, obtain expert advice, debate issues and retrieve personalised, current information. Automatic information retrieval tools use advanced software that can search web pages and many different ﬁle types. Community interactions are supported by features that allow on-line collaboration, including multi-user, real-time conferencing and chat facilities. Importantly, the website can accelerate information retrieval, support collaborations and debate without geographical limitations and facilitate the dissemination of knowledge in support of the worldwide genetics community.
P1362. Genetic education. Acceptance to testing for genetic 
predisposition - part 3 - The Final
A. Shopova , S. Shopova, G. Stoyanova;  
Medical University, Soﬁa, Soﬁa, Bulgaria.
This presentation is the third closing part of ﬁve-year study over attitude of Bulgarian people towards the possibilities and achievements of 
genetic science.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy377
The ﬁrst part, that included women, health-care workers (non-genetics) 
was "Acceptance of testing for genetic predisposition to breast cancer: 
1.The attitude of medical professionals."The second part covered the opinion of medical or biological students and was titled " Acceptance of testing for genetic predisposition: 2.The attitude of academical youth to PS DNA t for autosomal dominant 
inheritable late onset diseases.At this third level we expanded our study in the base genetic aknowledgments of pupils from specialized in biology high schools 
and their tutors.In conclusion this study compares the three groups - doctors, students 
and pupils mainly towards:
1. Information sources2. Level of attractiveness of the genetics as a ﬁeld for future work
3. Personal choice in genetic case situation
P1363. Lack of evidence for association of the endothelial nitric 
oxide synthase gene polymorphisms 4VNTR and Glu298Asp and 
idiopathic recurrent miscarriage.
M. V. Vasilakou1, E. Konstantakou1, E. Konstanti1, V. Velissariou2, A. Hatzaki3, 
K. Lamnissou1;  
1Dept of Biology, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Dept of 
Cytogenetics"Mitera" Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Dept of Molecular Biology, 
"Mitera" Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Lack of endothelium-derived nitric oxide is associated with vasospasm and vascular infraction. In the present study we investigated the relationship between idiopathic recurrent miscarriage and two polymorphisms (4VNTR and Glu298Asp) of the gene encoding for endothelial nitric oxide synthase (ENOS). In a prospective case-control study, 126 women with idiopathic recurrent miscarriage and 161 healthy controls were studied. We used the PCR method to identify the different alleles of the intron 4 VNTR polymorphism of ENOS gene and PCR-RFLPs method to genotype the individuals for the Glu298Asp polymorphism of the same gene. For the 4VNTR polymorphism the frequencies of bb, ab, aa, were 0.75, 0.24, 0.01 in the patient group and 0.73, 0.24, 0.03 in the control group, respectively. For the Glu298Asp polymorphism the frequencies of the three genotypes (GG, GT, TT) were 0.42, 0.45, 0.13, respectively, for the patient group and 0.49, 0.46, 0.04, for the control group. The dada between the two groups 
were analyzed by chi-square test.We found no signiﬁcant differences in the frequencies between the patient group and the control group for both the studied polymorphisms. Conversely to previous results by others, the dada of this work do not support a role for the 4VNTR or Glu298Asp polymorphisms of ENOS gene as a genetic determinants of the risk of idiopathic recurrent 
miscarriage.
P1364. Molecular study in Brazilian cochlear implant recipients
E. L. Sartorato1, T. V. Christiani1, R. Leite2, P. Porto2;  
1Universidade Estadual de Campinas/CBMEG, Campinas - São Paulo, Brazil, 
2Universidade Estadual de Campinas/Disciplina ORL-HC, Campinas - São 
Paulo, Brazil.
The most common form of non-syndromic autosomal recessive deafness is caused by mutations in the GJB2 gene (encoding connexin 26). Recently, a deletion truncating the GJB6 gene (encoding connexin 30), near GJB2, called del (GJB6-D13S1830) has also been described normally accompanying mutations in another allele of the GJB2 gene. Amongst all the mutations described to date, 35delG in the GJB2 gene is the most common and has been found in virtually all of the populations studied. Preliminary data suggest that pathologic changes due to GJB2 mutations do not affect the spiral ganglion cells, which are the site of stimulation of the cochlear implant. Besides, the survival of the spiral ganglion cells is believed to be an important determinant of the outcome after surgery. Therefore, we have studied 42 nonsyndromic deaf patients with unknown etiologies in order to determine the prevalence of GJB2 and GJB6 gene mutations in patients undergoing cochlear implantation surgery. As a result, we found 13 individuals with GJB2 mutation including two new mutations in the gene (W172X and K168R), and one patient homozygous for the del(GJB6-D13S1830) mutation. In a follow-up study, the cochlear implant patients with positive mutations will be compared to a group of deaf individuals with unknown etiologies aiming at analysing the performance of speech regarding near future studies. Concluding, these results establish that genetic screening can provide an etiologic diagnosis, which highlights a counseling importance, and may provide a prognostic on performance after cochlear implantation, as has been 
hypothesized in previous studies.
P1365. Unstable aberrations as biomarker of exposure in 
workers handling X-rays machines
M. M. Noditi ;  
Institute of Public Health, Timisoara, Romania.
Biologic effects seen after moderate and low doses of ionizing radiation are almost invariably the result of damage to the genetic apparatus.Workers, including those handling X-rays machines as part of their jobs are routinely monitored. The chromosomal aberrations analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes could be an important source of information for cytogenetic injury following occupationally exposure to ionizing radiations. Chromosome breaks can interact pairwise in an exchange in an asymmetric fashion to form dicentrics, rings, and 
interstitial deletions.Blood samples were collected from 40 workers and chromosomal aberrations were analyzed from 500 metaphases per person. The results were compared with those obtained from 60 control individuals selected to match at least the age and sex and who had never been occupationally or therapeutically exposed to ionizing radiation, non-ionizing radiation or chemical mutagens. The total frequency of chromosomal aberrations and the frequency of dicentrics and acentric fragments were higher in the exposed group than in controls. Dicentrics were not recorded in 29 occupationally exposed people within the imposed number of scored metaphases. The highest value of 2 dicentrics in 500 metaphases was found in one case. Dicentrics frequency was not directly correlated with the duration of employment 
in the exposed group.Analysis of chromosomal aberrations could be used in the assessment of possible damages to cell genome that may occur in occupational 
exposure to ionizing radiation.
GroupNo. 
cellsChromatid 
aberrations  
(% ± SD)Chromosomal aberrations  
(% ± SD)  
Total breaks dic ace
Control 30,000 1.54 ± 0.070.53 ± 0.03 0.11 ± 0.02 0.01 ± 
0.006 0.23 ± 0.03
Exposed 20,000 1.59 ± 0.091.38 ± 0.08 0.33 ± 0.04 0.07 ± 
0.02 0.98 ± 0.07
P1366. 'Three years of genetic counseling experience in Firat 
University Medical Genetics Department'
H. Akin1, I. Tekedereli2, F. Ozkinay1;  
1Ege University Medical Faculty, İzmir, Turkey, 2Firat University Medical Faculty, 
Elazig, Turkey.
Genetic counseling is the communication of information and advice about inherited conditions and a person seeking such advice is called a consultand. Our basic principal for genetic counseling process is to collect the patients or consultands data, illuminate the consultands without being directive, thus, provide making their own decisions. In the light of this principal, the main objective of this study is to determine the factors affecting their decisions and the harmony of the consultands with process and counselor, to achieve the data to reveal counseling feasibility and ﬁnally, share this experiences 
with other counselors.One hunred sixty seven consultands who were referred to our medical genetics department for genetic counseling from July 2001 to May 2004, were taken into the study.We have analyzed the data for parameters such as gender, referral status, number of sessions, satisfaction, harmony and consent for prenatal 
diagnosis and selective termination.It has been evaluated the status of harmony of the consultands using a questionnaire including accepted criteria, 89.8 % of the consultands seemed to be harmonious with the counselor and his explanations , but 10.2 % of the 
consultands were inharmonious.In this study, we have also evaluated the consultands’ information status and affecting factors about their condition before their genetic conseling sessions.We have determined that 61.7% of the consultands had no information, 24.6 % of them partially and 13.8% of them fully informed. It has been emphasized striking ﬁndings about our genetic counseling experience Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy378
P1367. The Italian External Quality Assessment in molecular 
genetic testing coordinated by the Istituto Superiore di Sanità
D. Taruscio, V. Falbo, N. Bruzzese, F. Censi, G. Floridia, M. Salvatore, F. 
Tosto, G. Vincenti;  
Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy.
During recent years, there has been a growing interest in quality 
assurance of genetic testing There are several EQA schemes funded either by international groups or by national governments or by private subscription(1). The Italian External Quality Assessment (IEQA) in molecular genetic testing is ﬁnancially supported by the National Health 
System and coordinated by the Istituto Superiore di Sanità (ISS).Public Laboratories have been enrolled, covering all Italian regions and participation is voluntary(2). The IEQA scheme covers Cystic Fibrosis, Beta-Thalassemia and Fragile-X, for which gene testing is requested very often in Italian laboratories,(3) and the adenomatous 
polyposis coli gene.Four trials have been performed and the number of participating laboratories has been increasing (41, 50, 56 in 2001, 2002, 2003 
respectively; 2004 trial ongoing).Laboratories have to i) test, for each disease, six validated samples ii) send back to ISS, within two months, raw data, interpretation of results and a ﬁnal written report.
For each disease, a panel of national experts evaluated all data.Overall the evaluation reveals that analytical accuracy is good; however, written reports were not homogenous and often missing important information. A standard report format has been proposed by consensus by the ISS and national experts. An overview of all the 
results will be illustrated.
(1) Ibarreta D. et al., Nat.Biot. 2004(2) Taruscio D. et al., Clin Chem Lab Med 2004.(3) Dallapiccola et al., Analysis 2/3. 2004This work is funded by the Project “Test genetici: dalla ricerca alla 
clinica”, Italian Ministry of Health (2003-2005).
P1368. An External Quality Assessment scheme for genetic 
testing of Fragile X syndrome.
V. Biancalana1, P. Steinbach2, S. Stenhouse3, S. Patton4, R. Elles4;  
1Laboratoire Diagnosic Génétique, Strasbourg, France, 2Abteilung Humange -
netik, Ulm, Germany, 3Molecular Genetics, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 4National 
Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Fragile X syndrome (FRAXA) is the most common cause of inherited mental retardation with an incidence estimated at 1 in 4000-9000 males and 1 in 7000-15000 females. The most frequent mutation seen in FRAXA is an expansion of a CGG repeat in FMR1 gene. Genetic testing for this expansion is routinely offered in diagnostic molecular genetic laboratories. In 2001, a pilot External Quality Assessment (EQA) scheme for FRAXA was offered by the European Molecular Genetic Network (EMQN) and 16 laboratories from 16 countries applied to take part. Since this successful trial, the number of participants has increased each year with 54 participants from 22 countries in 2004. A wide variety of methods is used and two different marking criteria were applied for the laboratories which perform the full genotyping (usually by Southern blot) and the laboratories which only perform a pre-screeening by PCR method. Each year 3 DNA samples were sent out for analysis, some of the cases were chosen in order to give the opportunity to the participants to appreciate particular problems in genotyping. Error rates were calculated from the total number of alleles analysed by all laboratories. The scheme will be described in full and the results of both genotyping and interpretation will be discussed. Lessons drawn from the development of the scheme should be useful for laboratories involved in this ﬁeld.
P1369. Intrafamilial variability in autosomal dominant tibial 
aplasia with ectrodactyly.
A. Bohring1, H. H. Wetz2, J. Horst1;  
1Institut für Humangenetik, Westfälische-Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Mün -
ster, Germany, 2Klinik für Technische Orthopädie und Rehabilitation, West -
fälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, Germany.
Aplasia of the tibia with ectrodactyly (OMIM 119100) is a rare 
malformation. In most families this disorder follows an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. The phenotype of affected individuals within a family is highly variable and even obligate gene-carriers without symptoms are described. This markedly reduced penetrance makes counselling difﬁcult since the cause of the disorder is still unknown and no diagnostic test is available. Here we report on a large Iraqi family with affected members in at least 3 generations. We describe and illustrate the variability of phenotypical and radiological ﬁndings. The most severe affected person has bilateral tibial aplasia with club-foot deformity and oligodactyly but normal upper limbs. Milder affected individuals have uni- or bilateral split hands with or without hypoplastic big toes. The mildest manifestation reported in this family was an individual with abnormal big toes only. In addition an obligate carrier without clinical symptoms who has 3 affected children was identiﬁed. As a consequence, regarding genetic counselling we suggest to evaluate the family history very carefully in patients with only minimal symptoms like short big toes. Furthermore, if an apparently unaffected person has an affected parent or if one of his parents can be assumed to be a gene-carrier, the risk for an affected child is maximally 8.6% per se [Majewski et al., Hum Genet 70:136-147, 1985] but could be 50% at worst. Therefore, prenatal ultrasound examination is important also in unaffected parents with that familial constellation.
P1370. Cystic Fibrosis: an interactive educational software for 
teaching the disease
C. F. Amaral, C. H. Lambrea, D. Tavares, D. Uzeda, D. Puntar, E. Monteiro, C. 
L. A. Paiva ;  
Genetics and Molecular Biology Unit, UNIRIO, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is a severe chronic autosomal recessive disease, with an incidence of up to 1:2000 in Caucasian populations. Since Brazil is a multiracial mixed population, we have investigated the notiﬁcation of CF as primary cause of death in Brazil. We came to the conclusion that CF was underestimated mainly in inland parts of the country. One explanation was that CF symptoms, such as pulmonary infection, diarrhea and malnutrition, were also common causes of death of non-CF infants in Brazil; and another possibility was that the physicians working in the interior of Brazil were not acquainted with the disease. In order to divulge the disease, we have developed easy educational software, in Portuguese language, for teaching the signs, symptoms and the molecular basis of the disease. For that, we have developed an interactive software using the following programs: Microsoft Power Point, Corel Trace, Corel Draw, WindowsMetaFile and Flash Player version 5.0 r 30 (Macromedia
, Inc.). The software 
was totally produced by a group of six undergraduate medical students as an activity of the Molecular Biology Course. The presentation, in Power Point, had 19 slides with theoretical text on CF, x-ray images of normal and CF lungs, microscopic images of CF pancreas and three original interactive animations showing the mechanism of action of CFTR (Cystic Fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) protein. Therefore, the slide show saved on CD disc can be easily replicated and used for teaching transport across cell membrane and also as 
divulgation of CF to Health Care professionals.
P1371. The European Skeletal Dysplasia Network (ESDN) 
- A model for increasing access to genetic testing of rare 
conditions.
J. Taylor, ESDN project administrator, on behalf of:1, M. Briggs2, R. Elles1, 
G. Jackson1,2, G. Mortier3, P. Coucke3, M. Wright4, J. Goodship4, J. Bonaven -
ture5, M. Le Merrer5, V. Cormier-Daire5, L. Ala-Kokko6, M. Mannikko6, M. Ma -
java6, B. Zabel7, J. Spranger7, G. Wildhardt7, A. Superti-Furga8, L. Bonafe8, A. 
Zankl8;  
1National Genetics Reference Laboratory (Manchester), Manchester, United 
Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust Centre For Cell Matrix Research, The University of 
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium, 4International Centre for Life, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom, 
5Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 6University of Oulu, Oulu, 
Finland, 7Children’s Hospital, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 8Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Skeletal dysplasias are a diverse group of genetic diseases affecting 
the development of the osseous skeleton. Because skeletal dysplasias are rare and exhibit extensive clinical variability and genetic heterogeneity, accurate diagnosis is a challenge for the non-expert. To provide equity of access to diagnostic experts we have established the European Skeletal Dysplasia Network (ESDN). The ESDN has Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy379
adopted two approaches; the research component of the project 
focuses on identifying the genes, mutations and disease processes that underlie skeletal dysplasias, whilst the diagnostic component integrates a network of expert clinicians and laboratories. Since January 2002 the ESDN has received 1513 patient referrals from 23 EU and 10 non-EU countries. The causative mutations have been identiﬁed in 503 patients following 1066 diagnostic tests. Furthermore, the development of a custom built secure web-based case management system allows clinicians to refer cases to the ESDN from anywhere in the world. Through the ESDN Case Manager, a clinical description and x-rays are assessed by the ESDN’s panel of expert reviewers and an initial clinical diagnosis is conﬁrmed or suggested. Patient DNA samples are then sent to the appropriate ESDN partner laboratory for molecular diagnosis. This is the ﬁrst pan-European approach to the diagnosis of rare diseases, and therefore has major implications for the delivery of diagnostic services in the EC for the 21
st Century. 
The model established by the ESDN is applicable to the diagnosis and 
management of any group of rare disease.www.ESDN.org
ESDN is funded by the European Union and the Swiss Government
P1372. The Canadian Molecular Cytogenetics Platform : 
Developing Informatics Security and Access Resources
C. Chassigneux, R. Duaso Calés, M. Lacroix, B. Knoppers, P. Trudel;  
Centre de Recherche en Droit Public, Montréal, PQ, Canada.
The Canadian Molecular Cytogenetics Platform (CMCP) is an 
infrastructure partnership of 13 major research facilities that supports the research of leading clinical investigators and basic scientists. For example one of its projects, Genomic Tools for Diagnosis and Evaluation of Mental Retardation, aims to evaluate high-resolution BAC microarray comparative genomic hybridisation as an alternative method of identiﬁcation of chromosomal abnormalities in individuals with mental retardation. It will compare samples from affected individuals, mostly children, and their family members with those from an ethnically diverse group of unaffected adults.The CMCP is building a system for the collection, storage and sharing of clinical and research data and specimens from 18 centres throughout Canada. Before research is undertaken, an Informatics Security and Access Platform is being developed by the Genetics and Society Project of the Centre de recherche en droit public at the Université de Montréal. Its goal is to ensure that the research supported by the CMCP is conducted in accordance with current legal and ethical standards. Can such a collaborative network creating both local and centralised databases adequately protect participants and yet ensure the highest scientiﬁc quality ? Beginning with an analysis of potential risks with regard to conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability of data, the informatics access and security resource is deﬁning the necessary safeguards for samples and data. A code of conduct, of principles and policies; standard operating procedures; conﬂict of interest and copyright/intellectual property guidelines; and an informed consent 
template and process are being developed.
P1373. St.Petersburg society of the parents with PKU children 
(ORDI-PKU)
A. I. Ivanova1, T. I. Sokolova1, O. S. Egidarova1, M. O. Mkheidze2;  
1ORDI-PKU, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Medical Academy for post -
graduate training, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
In memoriam Irina V. ButomoThe society of the parents with PKU children (ORDI-PKU) was founded in 2002 in Saint-Petersburg, Russia. Cooperation of PKU families is a very important fact in St.Peterburg history of PKU. The main aim of ORDI-PKU is to create adaptation system for children with PKU, to co-ordinate parents activity and to make a bridge between PKU families and geneticists and other physicians.Only ﬁfty two families with PKU children are members of our society. Only 30% of them are the active members and participants of the different projects of our society. Our close cooperation with the Center of Medical Genetics, the Department of Medical Genetics of the Medical Academy for Postgraduate Training ensures modern medical and diet management. We have ﬁnancial support for purchase different Phe-free powders. All children with PKU are under geneticists observation, this medical care is free of charge. Unfortunately, there is no possibility to hospitalize an infant with PKU for initiation dietary management. There is no solution of the serious problem of the atypical and maternal PKU in St.Petersburg. Maintaining lifelong compliance with Phe-free formula is not discussed. Amino acid analysis of high quality and DNA analysis for conﬁrming PKU diagnosis are rare and very expensive. There is no constant team recruited different specialists, including dietician, for long-term contact. Some parents and probands do not understand PKU problems clearly and accurately. To have own web site, newsletter, modern handbooks, booklets, hot-phone number is the requisite condition of successful 
management of PKU families
P1374. Inheritance Pattern in Congenital Heart Disease
S. M. Kalantar1, S. M. Seyedhassani1, M. Behjati2, M. Rﬁee2;  
1Research and Clinical Center for Infertility of Yazd, Yazd, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 2Hear research and Clinical Center of Yazd, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background: About 0.8% of live births are complicated by 
cardiovascular malformations. Most of these anomalies appear to have a multifactorial or polygenic etiology. About 5-7%of cardiovascular malformations result from a chromosomal defect and about 3% of them has a single gene disorder. The aim of this study is to determine genetic patterns inﬂuencing congenital heart disease (CHD).Materials & Methods: We studied 203 consecutive patients suffered from CHD being referred to cardiovascular research center during 10 months. Familial pedigree, Clinical and paraclinical data of patients 
were evaluated.
Results: There were 90 male and 113 female in this study (mean age = 5.48).The most common malformations were VSD (19.2%), ASD (11.8%), PDA (11.2%) and TOF (10.3%). Of these patients, 70 patients had a positive familiar pedigree with CHD. About 71% were born from consanguineous marriage of different degrees (76% third degree). In 67%of cases at least one more relatives had the same problem while in one family another 4 relatives found to have CHD. The highest inbreeding coefﬁcient (13.28) was found in one family and 39.9% had 6.25=<F. The inheritance pattern in this patients included Autosomal Dominant (5.7%), Autosomal Recessive (5.7%), Sex Linked (2.9%) 
and positive pedigree without inheritance pattern (86%).
Conclusion:  The result can help to physicians and genetic counselor 
to realize the contribution of inheritance pattern in congenital heart disease and in to recognition and prevention of subsequent CHD and 
in setting priorities of screening in individual cases.
P1375. The Inheritance Pattern of Blind People Supported by 
Rehabilitation Organization
M. R. Besharati1, S. M. Seyedhassani1,2, S. M. Kalantar1,2, J. Effati3,2;  
1Research and Clinical Center for Infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
2PAYAM an N.G.O for prevention of infermities, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
3Rehabilitaion organization, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Objective: Visual loss is one of the most important of inﬁrmities, affecting about 514000 people in Iran. The aim of this study was to explore the frequency of the types of blindness and the role of inheritance patterns 
implicating autosomal and X-linked disorders in this.Materials & Methods: In this clinical and cross sectional study, a genetic counseling program was performed for patients that were supported by the Yazd Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Organization, The subjects were referred to Genetic Counseling Center during 9 months by Yazd Blind’s N.G.O. Based on genetic counseling, familial pedigree and other clinical and paraclinical data, containing ophthalmologic 
assessments were accumulated.Results: In 109 patients, 73 and 36 patients were males and females, respectively. The mean age was 24.62 (SD=10.49). In these patients, 66 had a positive pedigree of blindness. 66.1% (72 patients) were born from a consanguineous marriage in different degrees (58.1% in third degree). There was inheritance pattern in these cases with autosomal dominant (10.6%), autosomal recessive (56.1%), sex linked (15.1%), positive pedigree without inheritance pattern (18.2%). There were 13 blinds in familial pedigree as autosomal dominant inheritance in one proband. The most common types of blindness were retinitis 
pigmentosa (32.1%), and microphthalmia (16.5%).Conclusion: Familial marriage was related to in expression of blindness in our patients. (P = 0.00 & odds ratio = 2.75).The results provide information for physicians and genetic counselor to realize contribution 
of inheritance pattern in blindness.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy380
P1376. Thalassemia and Prenatal Diagnosis: Example of Iran, 
prevention program & its peculiarities
M. T. Akbari1,2;  
1Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Depart -
ment of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of T arbiat 
Modarres, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Molecular genetic testing in Iran was initially introduced in 1992 
through performing prenatal diagnosis (PND) of β-thalassemia. This acted as a catalyst for thalassemia prevention program. When we started doing PND inside the country, the need to provide PND as the ultimate preventive measure was evident. However, the legal, religious and ofﬁcial frameworks to deal with the aftermath of such a diagnosis; i.e. abortion therapy were not sanctioned yet. β-thalassemia with over 15000 registered cases, 5000 more non- registered cases, estimate of three million carriers, expensive treatments and stigmas and psychosocial problems made it an obvious target for prevention. A thalassemia prevention program was in action since early 1990s. The aim of that program was to identify the at-risk carrier couples by blood testing premaritally and persuade them not to get married. Nevertheless, the outcome was not satisfactory : less than a third of the couples accepted the recommendation and the majority went ahead with their marriage options. So, the risk of affected newborns remained, and ineffectiveness of the program made itself apparent. This was because it lacked the offer of PND to the at-risk couples. This defect was ﬁnally rectiﬁed in 1997 and the offer of PND to the at-risk couples was incorporated in the program. Adoption of such a policy has paved the way for a more comprehensive approach in prevention of genetic disorders in general. This article provides an account of the past and present situation of prevention program for genetic disorders 
in Iran.
P1377. Estonian Womens´Attitude to Prenatal Diagnosis
K. Muru, T. Reimand, M. Sitska;  
Medical Genetics Center, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia.
Aim: To investigate pregnant womens´ experience prenatal counselling 
in connection with prenatal diagnosis (PND).
Methods: We gave questionnaires to two group of pregnant women: group A - women aged 37 years and over; group B - women under 37 years who had received II trimester biochemical serum screen-positive 
result.
Results: Most of the women of group A and half of group B knew about PND before pregnancy. The main source of information had been gynaecologists and midwives. The main reasons for having an invasive procedure were the assurance for having healthy baby and the doctor’s advice. The women in group A were more satisﬁed with the information given at genetic counselling, than group B. 99% of women in group A and 71% in group B knew about methods and risks of PND. All women in group A and 91% in group B asked for genetic counselling. The main feelings after the procedure was satisfaction with decision and that the procedure wasn’t so harmful. Most of the women said that they would undergo PND during another pregnancy. At the time of the test, more than half of participants (55%) would choose a legal abortion if the test 
indicated an abnormality in the foetus.
Conclusion : Women in the age risk group are satisfactorily informed 
probably because PND is well known among them. For group B PND came unexpectedly and it is most probably difﬁcult to cooperate for amniocentesis because of fear. However all women were sure, that prenatal diagnosis was necessary.
P1378. Quality Management and Quality Assurance in Molecular 
Genetic Testing Laboratories.
E. Dequeker1, S. Berwouts1, J. J. Cassiman1, M. A. Morris2;  
1Department of Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Belgium, 2Medical Ge -
netic Service, Geneva University Hospital, Switzerland.
Genetic testing services in Europe have substantially increased their 
activity in the past few years. Testing for genetic diseases has rapidly moved from the laboratory into medical practice and, in this process, issues of quality require adequate attention. The organization of annual external quality assessment schemes in Europe, complemented by regional workshops on quality, has demonstrated that quality assurance is essential in order to minimize errors in genetic services. It has been conclusively shown that errors and deﬁciencies can occur everywhere during the processes of sampling, genetic testing, interpretation, and 
reporting of results.The introduction of international standards for quality and competence in laboratories, together with a growing interest in accreditation of laboratories, has increased the need for a better understanding of quality management and quality assurance. The International Organization for Standards (ISO) deﬁnes quality as ‘the degree to which a set of inherent characteristics fulﬁls requirements’. The EUROGENTEST network aims to help and guide medical genetic laboratories in order to better understand this type of ‘standards language’ that is used by 
accreditation bodies.An educative website will be constructed with links for each EU country to relevant information on accreditation bodies, contact persons, coordinates of the national standardization institutes, and explanations of terminologies. Furthermore, a database will be prepared to publicize with relevant information on quality assurance in European laboratories. Finally, a study is planned to calculate the ‘real cost’ for implementing and maintaining a quality management system in a genetic service laboratory.
P1379. Telegenética: an online consultation service for health 
proffessionals.
M. Del Campo Casanelles, B. Gener Querol, J. Del Valle Dominguez, V. Ro -
driguez, L. A. Perez Jurado;  
Genetics Unit. Department of Experimental Science, Universitat Pompeu 
Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.
Telegenetica is an online consultation service in clinical genetics open to registered professionals who seek diagnostic support or speciﬁc information for a patient, in spanish. The website contains speciﬁc forms to guide non-genetics specialists in clinical interview and examination. The consultations are directly replied by two certiﬁed genetics specialists. For those cases without a ﬁrm diagnosis, the patients are included in an online discussion board of collaborating genetics specialists. The program is directly linked to Orphanet, the European online database in rare disorders, coordinated in Spain by this same group. During the initial 18 months of Telegenetica, 179 health professionals have registered: 142 physicians, 14 biologists, 3 pharmacists, 3 teachers, 2 psychologists and 2 nurses. Pediatricians, obstetricians, geneticists and family doctors submitted most consultations. The service is presented to the patient as a conﬁdential and anonymous specialist consultation, but the referring doctor is responsible for providing genetic counselling or referring the patient to a Clinical Genetics service. A speciﬁc diagnosis has been established for over 50% of cases submitted. A satisfaction questionnaire for participating professionals and patients, and a pilot study for the blind evaluation of the patients referred online has been completed and reﬂects high levels of diagnostic efﬁciency, as well as physician and patient satisfaction. The referring physicians perceived this service as a diagnostic support but also as a valuable educational tool for acquisition of basic knowledge in clinical genetics. The specialists discussion board has provided new diagnoses and fulﬁlled the 
educational expectations of the participants.
P1380. Is consent required for immunohistochemistry and 
microsatellite instability testing of tumour samples?
C. L. Gaff1,2, I. Frayling2, A. Clarke1, M. T. Rogers2;  
1Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Insti-
tute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
One central purpose of the informed consent process in the delivery of genetic testing within clinical services is to help ensure that the client understands the personal, medical and familial implications of performing the test. Written consent is a prerequisite for cancer genetic 
testing and is usually provided after genetic counselling.Immunochemistry for mismatch repair proteins (IHC) and microsatellite instability (MSI) testing of tumours suggest if mismatch repair gene defects contributed to a family history of HNPCC-related cancers and are particularly useful for assessment of families who do not meet the modiﬁed Amsterdam criteria. Therefore, they may be considered screening tests as they identify a subgroup of individuals eligible for diagnostic genetic testing. The All Wales Cancer Genetic Service provides IHC and MSI testing after genetic counselling and written 
consent is obtained.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy381
It is not feasible for genetic services to see all individuals who may 
be eligible for MSI/IHC. Testing could be initiated by a surgeon on the basis of suggestive family history, by a pathologist for tumours showing features consistent with an HNPCC phenotype or as part of a program to test all colorectal tumours diagnosed under a speciﬁed age. The consent process in each of these settings differs from standard 
practice in genetics.We consider the practice and purpose of consent in each of these settings. We ask if there should be consistency in the consent process, regardless of the context in which MSI and IHC are initiated, or if the different settings require different approaches to consent.
P1381. Education, Genetic Counselling & Congenital 
Malformaitons in Iran
R. Mokhtari1, A. Bagga2;  
1NON, Tehran - iran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2University of Pune, India - Pune, 
India.
The central place in bioethical decisions actually belongs to the patient. The research was undertaken studying 800 cases from different areas of Tehran in two year's span of data collection with the aim of studying the role of education of the parents in preventing the spread of certain genetic disorders in Iranian population. And also to study the present 
position of genetic counseling in Iran and their utility by people.Analysis of data on educational level of the patient's parents who consulted genetic clinics revealed that around 41% had secondary level of education. 15% were well educated while 12% were illiterates. Majority (98.8%) of them referred to these clinics by their consulting doctors. 1.2% who went on their own had certain level of education, 
majority were well educated and professionals.In one of the main genetic centers, a total of 2246 patents came for genetic counseling before marriage and mostly were related. Nearly 23%came for reconﬁrming the abnormality of their affected child. 16% came for having repeated abortions. 15% came because of being infertile and wanted to know if there is any genetic cause behind that. 12% came for counseling as they already had an affected child and 
wanted to have another child again.Central to prevention is the recognition of causes, which in Iran emerges out to be predominantly consanguinity in Marriage partners. Best of programs are bound to fail if they lack attention to development of positive attitudes towards prevention in both the people and the 
professionals.
P1382. BRCA analysis - pitfall in ﬁnding the index patient
B. Welling , T. Neumann, I. Kennerknecht, S. Preisler-Adams, B. Dworniczak, 
J. Horst;  
Institut für Humangenetik, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, Ger -
many.
We report on a family with breast cancer affected members in two generations. The usual procedure after respective genetic counselling is to test an “index patient” within the family who is an affected ﬁrst or second degree relative of the risk asking woman. Our chosen index patient (maternal aunt to risk asking woman) who had breast cancer at age 49 years showed no mutation in the BRCA1/2 genes. In concordance with the usual German genetic test criteria we offered no further analyses in this family. A few months later the younger sister of our risk asking woman was diagnosed with breast cancer at the age of 45 years. She is the ﬁrst affected family member in the third generation. We decided to offer a gene test although no mutation was found in the ﬁrst index patient. Surprisingly we found a mutation in the BRCA2 gene. A subsequent analysis in our risk asking woman showed the same mutation. Since the father of the sisters who is still alive does not carry the mutation it must have been inherited maternally. Therefore, the breast cancer disease in our ﬁrst analysed index patient seems not to be related to the inherited form of breast cancer in this family. Because of this pitfall in choosing the “right” index patient it seems to be of interest to discuss whether the German genetic test criteria should be extended in the sense of testing every affected family member.P1383. Diagnostic procedure for the assessment of hereditary 
prosopagnosia
M. Grueter, B. Welling, J. Horst, I. Kennerknecht, T. Grueter;  
Institut für Humangenetik; Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, Ger -
many.
Prosopagnosia is a selective impairment in the visual learning and recognition of faces. There is a hereditary type of prosopagnosia without any detectable brain damage or malformation, which has an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. It is the only known hereditary disorder of higher visual cognitive functions. There has been no standard diagnosic procedure so far for this disorder, because most researchers only saw single cases. We assessed 36 cases of hereditary prosopagnosia in order to develop a standard diagnostic procedure. We compiled a checklist of symptoms in three groups: Group one contains six leading symptoms, where at least ﬁve must be present. Group two contains ﬁve facultative symptoms, of which at least two must be present. Group three is a list of symptoms, which are usually not associated with isolated prosopagnosia. If three or more of these symptoms in the latter group are present, a face recognition deﬁcit is probably not caused by hereditary prosopagnosia. The diagnostic procedure has been veriﬁed independently by other researchers. It could be shown, that the subjective symptoms are indeed accompanied by an objective face recognition deﬁcit. This is the ﬁrst diagnostic checklist for the hereditary prosopagnosia and can help to establish a standard diagnostic procedure for this common hereditary disorder.
P1384. Biological Effects and Health Risks of Cell Phone 
Radiation
R. M. Rodrigues1, C. L. Campanhol1, V. C. O. Franco1, M. G. Lins2, J. K. Hein -
rich1;  
1CAISM/UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 2CPqD Foundation, Campinas, Brazil.
Concerns about non ionizing radiation have been reported, especially considering possible biological effects and health risks to individuals exposed to this sort of radiation. The objective of this study was to accomplish a critical and systematical review of published articles and to analyze, qualitatively, the in vitro
, in vivo and epidemiological results 
about the effects of the non ionizing radiation in cells, individuals and populations. Two hundred and twenty one Medline-indexed scientiﬁc articles were reviewed. In vitro ﬁndings reported DNA and protein 
expression damage, increasing cellular proliferation as well as the increase in aneuploidy of certain chromosomes and cell division asynchrony even that the majority of results are yet conﬂicting. DNA damage was also veriﬁed by the REFLEX study (in a joint effort from European countries) and is also supported by our study considering effects in cells and tissues caused by non ionizing radiation. Epidemiological studies pointed to other effects, as headaches, sleeplessness, dizziness and cognitive effects, which were found, also, in in vivo studies. Some studies suggest that this kind of radiation 
might induce acoustic neuromas (a benign tumor). Although there are plenty of data about the problem, few conclusions could be delineated. It was proved that radiation induces a biological response but it is still unclear if it is a real health risk. As the radiation problem is still new for the population to know its effects, users and governments should take a precautionary approach until its major effects could be ﬁnally 
understood.SUPPORT: FUNTTEL
P1385. 'To know yet not to know': preimplantation genetic 
diagnosis of inherited prion diseases
V. Meiner, N. Weinberg, A. Safran, I. Lerer, M. Sagi, M. Sagi, H. Rosenmann, 
D. Abeliovich, N. Laufer, A. Simon;  
Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel.
Genetic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is a fatal degenerative 
brain disorder with autosomal dominant inheritance and near 100% penetrance. Jews of Libyan origin have an increased incidence of CJD due to a common founder mutation. We report preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) by exclusion for CJD in embryos from a daughter of an affected patient. The daughter did not wish to learn her carrier status, yet wanted to have non-carrier children. Following an IVF procedure, embryos that inherited the non-affected parent's haplotype were identiﬁed and transferred. PGD by exclusion for CJD provides a Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy382 Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy
non routine option for individuals who wish to avoid the transmission of 
the mutant gene without revealing their own carrier status.
PGD by exclusion is a signiﬁcant option in light of potential discrimination and fear of stigmatization of the Libyan Jewish community where the incidence of CJD is 100 times higher than worldwide incidence (50 per million as opposed to 0.5 per million).
 By implementing such 
technology these families may be able to halt the transmission of this devastating, non-treatable disease and to avoid ethical dilemmas 
concerning predictive testing.
P1386. Developing curricula based on learning needs: genetics 
education for specialist registrars in non-genetics specialties.
S. Burke1, P. Farndon2, H. Thomas1;  
1Centre for Research in Medical and Dental Education, Birmingham, United 
Kingdom, 2NHS Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, 
United Kingdom.
Background: In June 2003 the Department of Health, England, published a White Paper, “Our Inheritance, Our Future”, setting out a strategy to prepare the NHS for changes in healthcare that could result from the Human Genome Project. It recognises a need for improved 
genetics training at all levels of medical education.Summary of Work: The study aim was to develop a genetics curriculum for specialist registrars in dermatology, cardiology and neurology. Curriculum development was informed by three sets of data. Firstly, a mapping exercise of current genetics education, including curricula analysis, interviews with educators, and a survey of specialist registrars in the selected specialties. Secondly, focus groups with specialist registrars in the selected specialties in the West Midlands and South Western deaneries. Thirdly, an online modiﬁed Delphi survey of a 
national sample of consultant geneticists and specialty consultants.Summary of Results: Collection of the three sets of data enabled an evaluation of the synergy between current teaching of genetics up to SpR grade and their identiﬁed learning needs in the modern health service. Priority areas for teaching and learning have been identiﬁed and strategies for effective delivery developed.Conclusions: Curriculum development is often based on the opinions of a small number of experts. This project demonstrates an alternative model, in which curriculum development draws on a wide range of data sources. Such an approach has highlighted the need for genetics education for specialist registrars to be based on learning needs, focused on agreed priorities, and made relevant to each specialty .
P1387. Genetic services in public health
O. Timchenko1, V. Galagan1, O. Lynchak1, T. Pokanevych2, O. Gorina2, O. 
Metenko2, O. Tkachenko2;  
1Institute of Hygiene and Medical Ecology, Kiev, Ukraine, 2Centre of protection 
of mother's and children's health of Kiev region, Kiev, Ukraine.
Purpose: the improvement of public health in ﬁeld of medical 
genetics.Methods. Genetic monitoring system works since 1999, it consists of territorial (Kyiv and Kyivska region) registers of newborns birth defects (2840 cases), spontaneous abortions (3363 cases), sterile marriages (1268 cases, sterilitas I). Risk factors inﬂuence was estimated by odds ratio (OR) with 95% conﬁdential interval.Results. The number of patients for genetic consulting has increased 1,5 times during the studied period. Time for congenital pathology diagnostics decreased. It was ﬁnd out that parents infectious diseases increase probability of birth defects among newborns, spontaneous abortions, sterile marriages (OR=3,42 (2,38-4,97); OR=4,56 (3,23-6,37); OR=17,79 (12,31-24,50) correspondingly). Endocrine pathology also increases such risks: OR=3,17 (2,26-4,45); 2,78 (1,93-4,00); 5,78 (3,84-8,68) correspondingly.It was detected that spontaneous abortions (till 12 weeks of gestation) risk increases of women live in the radioactive polluted regions of Kyivska region (OR=1,36 (1,09-1,71), and mechanisms of this 
phenomenon should be investigated.Conclusions. Concerted action of doctors, health care managers and scientists within genetic monitoring system allowed to decrease foetus reproductive losses risk 1,36 times (1999-2003 in comparison with 1994-1998): spontaneous abortions rate decreased 1,45 times, stillbirth rate and early neonatal (ﬁrst 6 days) death rate decreased 1,12 and 1,48 times correspondingly.P1388. Genetic counselling for thalassemia and 
haemoglobinopathies for immigrants in Emilia-Romagna and 
north-east Italy
M. Lucci , A. Sensi, A. Venturoli, B. Dolcini, M. Taddei-Masieri, C. Trabanelli, A. 
Ravani, P. Prontera, A. Ferlini, E. Calzolari;  
Genetica Medica, Ferrara, Italy.
Immigration in the European Community, either from countries of other continents or from other part of Europe, implies that the national health systems should face speciﬁc problems considering the cultural differences in the ethnicities. Hemoglobinopathies, one of the most common autosomal recessive disorders in the world, is a disease to deal with preventive actions, identifying the carriers and providing genetic counselling. In the last ﬁve years, 210 counselling sessions for risk of thalassaemia and haemoglobinopathies have been performed for immigrants at the Medical Genetic Service of Ferrara, for residents in Emilia Romagna and in North Eastern Italy. This group is about 10 % of the total counselling provided for these diseases in the considered period. 59 % of immigrants are of African origin (in particular countries of Guinea Gulf and North Africa), 21% are European (mostly from Albania), 13 % are Asiatic, 7 % are from central and south America. 12% of total consultations were performed for singles, 14% for couples prior to pregnancy, 74% for couples during a pregnancy (49% of the couples of this group resulted at reproductive risk). The request for prenatal diagnosis was different between the European group and the African one: a uniform choice for prenatal diagnosis in the European group, a more articulated request in the African one. The collected data about the wide spectrum of molecular defects, the different pregnancy’s time of referral to counselling and the previous knowledge of risk seem to condition differently the reproductive choices in various ethnic groups.
P1389. Do midwives think genetics is important? Implications 
of their views and conﬁdence for the provision of genetics 
education.
C. Bennett1, A. Metcalfe2, J. Haydon1, P. Farndon1;  
1Centre for Education in Medical Genetics, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2Uni-
versity of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
In the UK, midwives are the primary healthcare providers for women 
during pregnancy, childbirth and the early postnatal period. An understanding of genetics is therefore important. However, studies have shown that midwives receive little genetics education. To inform the development of relevant genetics education, this study examined midwives’ views of the importance of genetics and their conﬁdence.A questionnaire was sent to all midwives in four maternity units in the West Midlands (N=817). Clinical scenarios covered genetic conditions relevant to midwifery practice (cystic ﬁbrosis, Turner syndrome, Duchenne muscular dystrophy). Genetic activities were listed for each scenario, such as “Explain to Kelly how cystic ﬁbrosis is inherited” and “Identify whether Sarah should be referred to specialist genetics services”. For each, midwives rated the importance to midwifery clinical practice and their personal conﬁdence to carry out the activity using a 
bipolar rating scale.The response rate was 51%. Questions were categorised into ‘clinical’, ‘psychosocial & ethical’ and ‘biological’. Midwives rated all categories important in clinical practice. However, personal conﬁdence was rated low or fairly low. Conﬁdence was lower for biological and clinical questions than psychosocial questions. Most (89%) were interested or very interested in genetics courses. There was no signiﬁcant difference for interest in genetics education with age, clinical grade, maternity unit, education background or previous genetics education. Those with some genetics education were more interested in longer courses than 
others.These ﬁndings have been used to provide genetics courses for 
midwives that enable them to meet the demands of their role.
P1390. The psychological effect of BRCA1/2 genetic testing: A 
prospective study
E. Dagan1, S. Gil2;  
1Dept of Human Genetics, Rambam Medical Center and Dept of Nursing, Uni -
versity of Haifa, Haifa, Israel, 2Dept of Nursing and Social Work, University of 
Haifa, Haifa, Israel.
The long-term psychosocial effects of genetic counseling and testing for families at high risk for developing breast/ovarian cancer are important 383
issues relevant for applied clinical research. 160 high risk Jewish 
women, were pre and post counseling evaluated regarding distress levels, coping style usage and social support. Mean age ranged from 32.7+4.7 (for the asymptomatic BRCA1/2 mutation carriers) to 54.4+12.9 (for non-carriers diagnose with breast cancer), with signiﬁcant differences (F=18.7; p<.001). Ethnic origin was attributed by country of birth of the case, her parents and both sets of grandparents. Based on results of genetic testing, participants were divided into four subgroups: breast cancer-affected BRCA1/2 mutation carriers (n=16), breast cancer-affected non-carriers (n=66), asymptomatic BRCA1/2 
mutation carriers (n=16) and asymptomatic non-carriers (n=62).Pre- genetic testing analysis showed that, breast cancer-affected women expressed the highest levels of distress (0.8+0.3 for mutation carriers and 0.8+0.7 for non-carriers) and social support (5.6+0.6 for mutation carriers and 5.1+0.6 for non-carriers). Whereas, post genetic testing results showed that only asymptomatic BRCA1/2 mutation carriers were effected by genetic testing as reﬂected in increased levels of somatization (1.3+0.9), depression (1.3+0.8), anxiety (1.3+0.8), and on the GSI (Global Severity Index) (0.8+0.8), and use the avoidance coping style (4.9+0.5). Regression analysis revealed three predictors of distress levels: breast cancer status, mutation carrier status, and 
use of the avoidance coping style.These ﬁndings indicate that in Israeli asymptomatic BRCA1/2 mutation carriers, oncogenetic counseling and testing has profound psychosocial effect. This subset of individuals should be targeted in future studies 
aimed at stress reduction.
P1391. X-linked mental retardation Italian network
I. Meloni1, C. Pescucci1, F. Mari1, I. Longo1, F. Ariani1, M. Bruttini1, E. Scala1, R. 
Caselli1, K. Sampieri1, A. Renieri1, X. L. M. R. Italian network2;  
1Medical Genetics, Dept. of Molecular Biology, Universtiy of Siena, Siena, Italy, 
227 clinical centers and 9 laboratories as found at http://www.xlmr.unisi.it, Italy, 
Italy.
The X-linked mental retardation Italian network includes 27 clinical centers and 9 laboratories. It collects clinical information and biological materials of mentally retarded males negative for FRAXA and chromosomal and subtelomeric rearrangements. The following XLMR genes are presently analyzed: RSK2, ARX, IL1RAPL, XNP, 
OPHN1, ACSL4, AGTR2, FMR2, SLC6A8, MECP2, NLGN3 NLGN4, 
PQBP1. Whenever possible, enzymatic tests or metabolite dosage are employed. If mothers’ DNA is available, X-inactivation status is analyzed. In familial cases, exclusion mapping or classic linkage analyses are performed. A dedicated web site has been created for the network (http://www.xlmr.unisi.it). General information on the site is publicly available. Speciﬁc information can be accessed only from network members and includes: 1-Detailed clinical data; 2- Location of biological samples; 3- Laboratory results. At present, the network has collected DNA and lymphoblastoid cell lines of 103 XLMR cases (28 familial, 13 likely familial and 63 sporadic). Linkage analysis allowed to deﬁne a possible new locus in Xq27 in a family. Exclusion mapping in small families allowed to exclude several loci addressing mutation analysis to the remaining genes. Skewed X-inactivation in the mother was found in 5 sporadic and 8 familial cases, addressing mutation analysis to speciﬁc genes. Creatine blood dosage was elevated in 4 cases suggesting a 
SLC6A8  mutation. Creatine dosage in urine of 
these patients will conﬁrm this hypothesis. Standard mutation analysis of the other genes has been performed in 1/3 of the cases and no mutations have been found until now. Telethon (n°GTF02006) and Fondazione Mariani grants to A.R.
P1392. The NHS National Genetics Education and Development 
Centre: principles and challenges
P. A. Farndon , H. Burton, M. Kirk, A. Li Wan Po, H. Thomas;  
NHS Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, United King -
dom.
The Department of Health in England is developing a strategy to prepare for healthcare changes that could result from the Human Genome Project. Recognising a need for improved genetics training at all levels of the NHS, it has established the National Genetics 
Education and Development Centre to provide a focal point.The Centre has a large task ahead, but has identiﬁed key principles, designed to recognise and engage the everyday practice of healthcare professionals. They include understanding what patients expect to ﬁnd out about genetics from the different health professionals they meet, and using patients’ experiences to demonstrate the clinical utility of 
genetics.The Centre has a collaborative multidisciplinary team with expertise in educational theory and practice, communications, information technology, evaluation and event management. Initial work programmes centre on three NHS staff groups (medical practitioners; nurses, midwives and health visitors; and pharmacists) and focus on assessing genetics educational needs, developing and evaluating curricula, competency frameworks and educational resources; encouraging the integration of genetics into pre- and post-registration 
courses and continuing professional developmentRecognising the need to work through the existing professional bodies, providers of training and education, and not overloading curricula, the Centre is working in close co-operation with many organisations. It is especially important to keep responsibility for provision of education within current mechanisms and providers. Through being based in a regional genetics service, we can incorporate rapid advances in 
genetic practice into the educational initiatives.www.geneticseducation.nhs.uk
P1393. EuroBioBank, the leading European Network of DNA, 
Cell and Tissue Banks for Rare Diseases: results of the ﬁrst two years of activity.
L. Politano1, C. Angelini2, F. Bignami3, O. Cohen4, J. H. Di Donato5, A. Felice6, 
C. Guitart Arnau1, C. Guitart Arnau7, M. Izquierdo8, V. Karcagi9, J. C. Laurent10, 
H. Lochmuller11, H. Lochmuller11, M. Meznaric Petrusa12, M. Moggio13, M. 
Mora14, M. Posada8, F. Salama3, C. Verellen Dumoulin15, C. Jaeger16;  
1Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy, 2University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 
3Eurordis, Paris, France, 4TIMC, Grenoble, France, 5Genethon, Evry, France, 
6University of Malta, La Valletta, Malta, 7Teamlog Sa, Grenoble, France, 8IIER, 
Madrid, Spain, 9NCPH, Budapest, Hungary, 10BET, Marseilles, France, 11MTCC, 
Munich, Germany, 12University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 13IRCCS, Mi -
lan, Italy, 14INNCB, Milan, Italy, 15UCL, Brussels, Belgium, 16AFM, Paris, France.
EuroBioBank (EBB), the leading European network of DNA, Cell and 
Tissue Banks for Rare Diseases was established in 2000 thanks to the collaboration of 16 partners from 8 countries, in order to improve 
accessibility of human biological resources.The project was funded by the EC in 2002 for 3 years, under the 5
th 
Framework Programme (QLRI-CT-2002-02769).The expected results are: to optimise the use of existing collections and encourage the creation of new ones; to enhance collaborations in medical and scientiﬁc communities in the ﬁeld of rare disorders affecting about 30 million citizens in Europe; to develop speciﬁc research and diagnostic tools; to deﬁne new therapeutic methods.The ﬁrst 2 years were dedicated to identifying and localising the existing biological material, to standardising and promoting quality banking practices, developing a network Charter, Material Transfer Agreement and Standard Operator Procedures, to distributing quality 
material and associated data to users.A web site dedicated to the network activities (www.eurobiobank.org) was created with a restricted area reserved to communication and collaborations among partners of the network (EBB Intranet). Information on the EBB network has circulated through leaﬂets, articles in patient magazines and posters or oral communications at international congresses. Several scientiﬁc papers have also 
acknowledged EBB.The EBB network is a successful, structural model for supporting scientiﬁc exchanges and cooperation. It was awarded the "
Newropeans 
2004 Grands Prix" for "Research and Technology", for having signiﬁcantly contributed to the democratization of the European Union, 
closing the gap between European citizens and the EU construction.
P1394. The EMQN pilot external quality assessment (EQA) 
scheme for the spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs)
J. Sequeiros1, S. Seneca2, J. Cerqueira3, P. Magalhães3, I. Silveira1, R. Elles4, 
M. Morris5, S. Patton4;  
1IBMC and ICBAS, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Vrije Universiteit Brussel, 
Brussels, Belgium, 3IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 4EMQN, Manchester, United King -
dom, 5Hôp. Univ. Genève, Genève, Switzerland.
In 2004, a pilot EQA scheme for the SCAs was organized for EMQN. Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy384
This was the ﬁrst EQA to deal with a group of related disorders (as 
opposed to single diseases or methodologies). Thirty-three labs, from 17 countries (from Europe, Israel and Canada) participated. Three mock clinical cases were used: one conﬁrmation and one exclusion of a clinical diagnosis of MJD(/SCA3), and a presymptomatic test for SCA2 (the two most frequent spinocerebellar ataxias); 32 labs sent in their reports, and many included raw data and a brief description of methodology, as requested. There was a wide variation in size of the (normal and expanded) repeats, but only one gross genotyping error (in the PST for SCA2). Two labs determined repeat size but did not report it, while four may not have assessed it at all. We checked reports for the presence of essential items, such as major identiﬁers, referral information, methods, results, interpretation and recommendations, and general layout. Just 14/32 labs included all major report items, and only four respected all desirable items: one lab included only one identiﬁer; three labs did not identify clearly both alleles; two did not have a clear analytical result; all included some kind of clinical interpretation, but seven did mention the implications for relatives, three did not recommend counselling and two did not recommend further testing, where appropriate; seven labs apposed only one signature. Some labs inappropriately genotyped other (unrequested) loci. Genotyping and interpretation scores were devised to help assess this year’s full scheme.
P1395. Population genetics: governing international endeavors
M. Deschênes, C. S. Sallée ;  
Centre de recherche en droit public, Montréal, PQ, Canada.
In an era where biobanking activities are developing at an increasing pace, research being undertaken not only on small cohorts for speciﬁc diseases but also at the level of whole population or communities to explain human genetic variation, the need for researchers to go beyond their national boarders and collaborate in international endeavours is accrued. Several international research projects, are engaging in an effort to promote the exchange of scientiﬁc knowledge and technologies, and the advancement of genomic research. The Public Population Project in Genomics (P3G) wishes to connect leading population projects and create a common ground for exchanging and comparing datasets through the establishment of a knowledgebase for voluntary sharing of research tools with a view to possible harmonization in order to increase statistical power, cross talk between studies and validation 
of results.Large-scale population biobanks pose ethical, legal and social challenges, success resting on public trust through the implementation of balanced transparent and accountable governance and monitoring structures. For international initiatives such as P3G, the international exchange of data raises multiple and complex issues. For instance, the governance structure, management and monitoring mechanisms must not only comply with national standards and policies and the structure of the individual projects involved but must also be compatible with its international vocation while ensuring public adherence. This poster will identify these and other challenges for the P3G consortium and propose potential avenues for proper transparency, accountability and 
monitoring of such international projects.
P1396. A sustainable community process to improve availability 
of appropriate, veriﬁed quality control (QC) materials for genetic 
testing
L. V. Kalman , B. Chen, I. M. Lubin, J. Boone;  
National Center for Health Marketing, Division of Laboratory Services, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States.
The expansion of molecular genetic testing in clinical and public health 
practice has increased the need for appropriate, veriﬁed quality control (QC) materials for quality assurance, test validation, proﬁciency testing (PT), and development of new genetic tests. However, despite the growing test volume and the rapidly increasing number of tests being offered, the necessary QC materials are not available for many tests. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), in collaboration with members of the genetic testing community, including commercial and academic genetic testing laboratories, government agencies, professional organizations, industry, academic institutions, cell banks and proﬁciency testing (PT)/external Quality Assessment (EQA) programs, has developed a program to improve public availability of QC materials and facilitate information exchange and communication on QC materials development, contribution, veriﬁcation, distribution, and needs assessment. This CDC based Genetic Testing Quality Control Materials Program (GTQC) has designated a QC Materials Coordinator (QCMC) who will provide continuing support and coordination to improve QC material availability. The QCMC will 1) facilitate the identiﬁcation, procurement, development, veriﬁcation and distribution of needed QC materials; 2) facilitate exchange of QC-related information; and 3) explore collaborative efforts for ongoing needs monitoring and materials development. A GTQC website, available in March, 2005, will serve as an interactive communication tool to link users, providers, potential contributors, developers, and resources of QC materials and to inform the community about the 
availability of QC materials of clinical and public health interest.The CDC convened three working meetings in 2003/04 to identify speciﬁc areas of need, develop recommendations for practical approaches and establish a sustainable, collaborative process to make QC materials available to the genetic testing community.These efforts will provide a sustainable, community-based process to make veriﬁed quality control materials available to the genetic testing community.
P1397. A quantitative approach to estimation and interpretation 
of pheno-caryotype relations in chromosome syndromes
V. I. Ivanov , S. D. Nurbaev, L. Y. Levina, V. G. Antonenko;  
Natl.Res.Centre Med. Genet., Moscow, Russian Federation.
Application of principal component method of multifactorial analysis to real estimation of phenotypic variation in patients with partial autosomal aneusomies is described. Data on 2345 respective patients from earlier elaborated database “CHRODYS” were used. Phenotypic correlations between the examined chromosome disorders were quantitatively estimated. By means of the applied analysis integral “portraits” of each kind of the examined autosomal aneusomies could be revealed. The applied method differentiated up to 87 % of the aneusomies in the sample by the ﬁrst three principal components. Speciﬁc differences between the integral phenotypes of the aneusomies were found. Unique diagnostically signiﬁcant combinations of birth defects and microanomalies could be revealed for all the studied kinds of partial autosomal trisomies and/or monosomies distinguishing not only the chromosome number, but the chromosome arm, too. These combinations of traits were found in the great majority of patients with the given kind of chromosome disorder. High diagnostic value of the method in distinguishing the chromosome syndromes was shown. The obtained results may serve a basis, alongside with genetic, cytogenetic, and molecular genetic data, for the development and optimisation of diagnosing and monitoring of patients with chromosome disorders in 
genetic clinics.
P1398. Clinical beneﬁt of Fabrazyme® (agalsidase beta) in Fabry 
disease: Results of the Phase 4 Study
R. J. Desnick1, J. Bultas2, S. Waldek3, W. Wilcox4, C. Whitley5, M. McDonald6, 
R. Finkel7, S. Packman8, D. Bichet9, D. Warnock10, B. Brenner11, M. Banika -
zemi1;  
1Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 2University Hos -
pital, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Hope Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 
4Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 5University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States, 6Duke University, Durham, NC, 
United States, 7Children's Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 8University 
of California, San Francisco, CA, United States, 9Hospital du Sacre-Coeur, 
Montreal, PQ, Canada, 10University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL, United 
States, 11Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States.
Fabry disease is an X-linked recessive disorder in which deﬁcient activity of α-galactosidase A leads to pathogenic accumulation of neutral glycosphingolipids, primarily globotriaosylceramide. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with Fabrazyme® has been shown to reduce accumulations in plasma and in lysosomes of renal, cardiac, and dermal cells. To assess clinical outcomes, a Phase 4 multinational, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial was conducted in Fabry patients who exhibited mild-to-moderate renal disease but had no prior ERT. Using 2:1 randomization, 51 patients Therapy for genetic disease385
received biweekly infusions of 1 mg/kg Fabrazyme and 31 received 
placebo, with a median treatment period of 18.5 months. The primary efﬁcacy endpoint was time to ﬁrst clinically signiﬁcant renal, cardiac, or cerebrovascular event. Results showed that Fabrazyme reduced the risk of any clinically signiﬁcant event by 43% in the Intent-to-Treat population (including all randomized patients; n=82) and 46% in the Per-Protocol population (excluding major protocol violators; n=74). Baseline proteinuria was the most predictive factor for occurrence of renal (p=0.001) and all (p=0.015) clinically signiﬁcant events, and, after adjusting for the baseline imbalance in proteinuria between the Fabrazyme and placebo groups, the risk reduction for Fabrazyme-treated patients increased to 53% (p=0.058) in the Intent-to-Treat and to 61% (p=0.034) in the Per-Protocol populations. Beneﬁcial effects of Fabrazyme on serum creatinine levels and estimated GFR were more pronounced in patients who began ERT at less advanced stages of renal dysfunction. These ﬁndings indicate that Fabrazyme therapy exerts a positive impact on clinical outcomes and emphasize the beneﬁt of early therapeutic intervention in Fabry patients.
P1399. Overall efﬁcacy of agalsidase alfa in Fabry disease: 
results from FOS - the Fabry Outcome Survey
M. Beck1, A. Mehta2, G. Sunder-Plassmann3, U. Widmer4;  
1University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 2Department of Haematology, London, 
United Kingdom, 3Medical University, Vienna, Austria, 4University of Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
Background: Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by deﬁcient activity of the lysosomal enzyme α-galactosidase A. This multisytem progressive disorder leads to major organ failure and premature death. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) is now available, and FOS - the Fabry Outcome Survey - has been established to monitor the efﬁcacy and safety of such therapy with agalsidase alfa.
Methods: FOS data were analysed to determine the effect of agalsidase alfa on the kidneys and heart and on health-related quality 
of life (HR-QoL).
Results: As of November 2004, 638 patients were enrolled in FOS from 11 European countries. Multivariate analysis of all the available creatinine data in FOS (n = 2800 measurements) showed a signiﬁcant negative correlation between serum creatinine levels and the duration of agalsidase alfa treatment. Additionally, longitudinal data from 12 patients with a baseline GFR of 60-90 ml/minute revealed a signiﬁcant decrease in renal function in the year before treatment, which was halted by 1 year of treatment with agalsidase alfa. Importantly, renal function was maintained in the second year of treatment. Cardiac structure (left ventricular mass and mean ventricular wall thickness) and function (midwall fractional shortening) were also signiﬁcantly improved after 1 and 2 years of agalsidase alfa treatment. Sustained improvements in HR-QoL, assessed using the European Quality of Life 
Questionnaire (EQ-5D), were reported during 2 years of treatment.
Conclusion : Analysis of FOS data has conﬁrmed the signiﬁcant clinical 
beneﬁts of ERT with agalsidase alfa in patients with Fabry disease.
P1400. Retrospective overview of 412 cases of hemangiomas
C. Jurca, M. Bembea, A. Jurca, S. Bembea, C. Skrypnyk, O. Mitisor;  
Clinical Children Hospital, Oradea, Romania.
Background: Hemangiomas are frequent during infancy. These are benign lesions which in some instances are difﬁcult to classify either 
as tumors, hamartomas or malformations.Objective: To identify clinical, genetic, and evolutive forms of hemangiomas as well as complications and therapy-related 
problems.Lot of Study and Methods: We observed 412 cases of hemangiomas during 20 years (1984-2004) at the Clinical Children’s Hospital Oradea. For each case, we made a clinical, genetic, therapeutic and evolutive 
evaluation.Results: We classiﬁed our cases using three criteria: 1. clinical forms (tuberous, cavernous and angiomatous); 2. number of hemangiomas (single vs. multiples); 3. solitary hemangioma(s) vs. those associated with certain syndromes. We also divided cases by length of observation time: ﬁve, ten and more than ten years of follow-up. A large majority of hemangiomas are tuberous, single and solitary. The evolution was with partial or complete spontaneous resolution in the ﬁrst ﬁve years in more than 90% of cases. Therapeutic intervention was required in only 9% of cases, and complications developed in less than 1% of cases (ulcerations, infections, invasion of profound tissues).Conclusions: Although prognosis is usually excellent in the vast majority of cases, certain patients with hemangiomas may develop 
severe complications and/or need serious medical interventions.
P1401. Inhibition of KRIT1 Expression in Endothelial Cells by 
RNA interference: A Model of Cerebral Cavernous Malformation
O. Guzeloglu Kayisli1, M. Gunel2, G. Luleci1;  
1Akdeniz University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and 
Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Yale University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of 
Neurosurgery, New Haven, CT, United States.
Mutations in KRIT1 gene (Krev1 Interaction Trapped gene 1) cause 
familial Cerebral Cavernous Malformation (CCM), an autosomal 
dominant disorder affecting primarily the central nervous system vasculature. CCM is characterized by a single layer of endothelium without normal intervening brain parenchyma or mature vessel wall elements. Despite the identiﬁcation of 
KRIT1 as the gene mutated in 
CCM1, the function of KRIT1 remains elusive. Recent studies aimed at understanding the function of the KRIT1 have demonstrated that it encodes a microtubule-associated protein and that it also interacts with ICAP-1α. These data place KRIT1 at the cross-roads of signaling between the cytoskeleton and the ECM, potentially mediating the complex interaction between the extracellular and intracellular milieu. To gain a better understanding of a detailed description of the role of KRIT1 during cellular process, we inhibited KRIT1 expression in bovine aortic endothelial and HeLa cells by RNA interference. Using this technology, we explored the possibility that KRIT1 is involved in capillary tube formation. We found that suppression of KRIT1 expression resulted in decreased invasion, cell proliferation and increased apoptosis of endothelial cells. Interestingly, reduced KRIT1 expression also promoted decreased capillary tube formation in 3 dimensional culture system as one of the best model of in vitro angiogenic system. Based on these results, KRIT1 may take an active role in capillary formation. Furthermore, reducing KRIT1 expression in endothelial cells showed that utilization of siRNA oligonucleotides to reduce expression of KRIT1 may be a useful approach to understand 
the pathogenesis of cerebral cavernous malformation.
P1402. Reversal of gene expression proﬁles in the 
Phenylketonuria mouse by adeno-associated virus mediated 
gene therapy
H. J. Oh1, H. J. Lee1, J. W. Park2, H. S. Lee3, S. K. Koo1, S. C. Jung2;  
1Division of Genetic Disease, National Institute of Health, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea, 2College of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea, 3Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder caused by a deﬁciency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). The accumulation of phenylalanine leads to severe mental and psychomotoric retardation, and hypopigmentation. Phenylalanine restriction diet prevents irreversible damage if instituted from birth. Besides dietary therapy, several studies including gene therapy have been performed to develop methods that can efﬁciently remove excess phenylalanine. In this study, we identiﬁed transcription changes in effective treatment of PKU by the AAV-mediated delivery of a human PAH transgene. Oligonucleotide arrays were used to deﬁne gene expression proﬁles of 
Pahenu2 mice treated with and without AAV- 
mediated gene therapy. Therapeutic effectiveness was veriﬁed by enzyme activity and plasma phenylalanine level (253.3 ± 104.9 μM) before microarray analysis. The gene expression proﬁle, involved in cell cycle, immune reaction, cell adhesion, Ca
++ transport, lipid metabolism, 
oxidative stress response and reproduction, was altered in the brain of untreated mice. In accordance with phenotype reversal, this altered gene expression pattern was reversed in the brain of 
Pahenu2 by AAV-
mediated gene therapy. Actually, many similarities were observed in expression patterns between in treated 
Pahenu2 mice and wild type 
mice. This study may provide more comprehensive understanding about molecular level of PKU pathogenesis, results in possibility of 
better therapeutic approach.Therapy for genetic disease386
P1403. Phase II Trial of Pirfenidone in Adult Patients with 
Neuroﬁbromatosis Type 1 and Paraspinal and Plexiform Neuroﬁbromas
D. Babovic-Vuksanovic, K. V. Ballman, V. V. Michels, P. S. McGrann, N. M. 
Lindor, B. F. King, J. Camp, V. Micic, N. Babovic, P. K. Edwards, R. J. Spinner, B. P. O'Neill; 
 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.
Neuroﬁbromatosis Type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant, progressive 
genetic disorder characterized by diverse clinical manifestations. Plexiform neuroﬁbromas are major cause of morbidity in patients with NF1. The histopathology of these tumors is complex, with diverse cellular content and large amount of ﬁbrous tissue, suggesting that events related to ﬁbrogenesis might constitute a point of molecular vulnerability. Pirfenidone is a novel agent that exhibits potent anti-ﬁbrotic activity in vitro and in vivo. We performed a pilot, open-label phase II trial of pirfenidone in adults with NF1 and paraspinal and plexiform neuroﬁbromas to determine the effect on tumor size and to evaluate toxicities of this agent when taken on chronic schedule. Pirfenidone was administered orally in dose of 2400 mg/day for 24 months. Tumor size was monitored by a 3-D Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Seventeen patients completed 2 years of treatment. Six patients had symptomatic improvement of pain, three had improved neurologic function, while others remained stable without evidence of disease progression. One patient developed malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor after completed 24 months of therapy. Seven patients were excluded from the study: three due to toxicity, two due to lack of compliance with follow-ups, and two due to persistent pain. Overall, pirfenidone was well tolerated. Lack of disease progression during 24-months of therapy in majority of patients is reassuring. However, given unknown natural history of these tumors, longer follow-up and larger population of treated patients are needed to determine the role 
of pirfenidone in therapy of NF1-related tumors.
P1404. Investigation of gene delivery with branched polylysine-
based carriers
P. L. Il'ina1, A. A. Egorova1, I. I. Tarasenko2, A. N. Baranov3, E. A. Lesina4, A. V. 
Kiselev3, I. A. Gur'janov2, G. P. Vlasov2, V. S. Baranov3;  
1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2In-
stitute of Macromolecular Compounds, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
3Ott Institute for Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion, 4Saint-Petersburg State University,Ott Institute for Obstetrics and Gynecol -
ogy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Search for efﬁcient carriers, which are able to deliver genes into eukaryotic cells and to provide their expression seems to be very important for gene therapy. Our study relates to two groups of branched polypeptide compounds (superbranched polylysines and dendritic polylysines). All vehicles were tested for their ability to bind and protect DNA from enzymatic degradation and for their transfection capacities in vitro. Modiﬁcation of the basic carrier D1 (K
16-K8-K4-K2KA) with 
palmitoic acid residues resulted in increased transfection efﬁciency. Modiﬁcation of D1 with arginine and amphipatic peptide fragment (compound DFP4) and increasing of generation number up to ﬁve (compound D5) did not lead to signiﬁcant augmentation of transfection efﬁcacy. Transfection efﬁcacy of compound from the second group - superbranched polylysine - was very low ( 0,1%). The analysis of intracellular distribution of certain biotinilated DNA-carrier complexes suggests hampered DNA translocation from endosomes to cytosol as one of the main reasons for such low transfection capacity. Actually, the addition of endosomolytic agents - chloroquine or endosomolytic peptide JTS-1 - to the composition of polymer DNA-vehicles results in 5- to 50-folds increase in transfection efﬁciency. Thus modiﬁcation of polypeptide structure provides a perspective tools in development of effective modular DNA vehicles.
P1405. The role of sterol 27-hydroxylase in atherosclerosis: 
bone marrow transplantations in genetically modiﬁed mice
M. Shaham, K. Meir, L. Weiss, S. Reich, M. Zeira, E. Butbul, E. Leitersdorf, V. 
Meiner ;  
Hadassah University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel.
Sterol 27-hydroxylase (CYP27A) is a mitochondrial enzyme involved 
in bile formation, however its extrahepatic expression has been implicated in novel mechanisms of cholesterol efﬂux. CYP27A deﬁciency is found in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis and leads to cholesterol and cholestanol accumulation in peripheral tissues resulting in neurological manifestations and possibly premature atherosclerosis. We overexpressed the human 
CYP27A in mice (CYP27tg) and 
examined whether crossing these animals to apoEKO mice would 
reduce atherosclerosis. These studies showed a non signiﬁcant reduction in atherosclerosis in CYP27
tg on an apoEKO background as 
compared to littermates without CYP27A  overexpression.
In order to focus on the contribution of macrophage CYP27A to 
atherosclerosis we performed bone marrow transplantations from 
CYP27tg, C57BL/6J, and apoEKO donors into apoEKO recipients.
Apo E expression levels in bone marrow derived macrophages from CYP27
tg and C57BL/6J animals was sufﬁcient to reduce 
hypercholesterolemia (190mg/dl and 200mg/dl compared to 1740mg/dl). Mean lesion area from cross sections showed reduced atherosclerosis in CYP27
tg bone marrow recipients as compared 
to C57BL/6J recipients (65μm2 and 533 μm2, respectively). No 
Sudanophilic aortic lesions were demonstrated in either CYP27tg or 
C57BL/6J recipients. IL6 assays suggested a borderline shift towards an inﬂammatory pattern in CYP27
tg recipients.
Although apoE expression levels in macrophages from CYP27tg and 
C67BL/6J donors were sufﬁcient to reduce hypercholesterolemia and thus decrease atherosclerosis in apoE deﬁcient mice, preliminary measurements suggest an atheroscleorsis protective role for CYP27A. On the other hand, excess oxysterols in macrophages may promote IL6 secretion and contribute to inﬂammation in addition to their putative role in cholesterol efﬂux.
P1406. First cases of biotinidase deﬁciency in Russia
S. V. Mikhaylova1, G. V. Baydakova2, E. Zakharova2, E. Il'ina1;  
1Russian Child Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research centre for 
Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Biotinidase deﬁciency (BD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of biotin recycling. The clinical features of untreated individuals commonly include seizures, hypotonia, alopecia, developmental delay, ataxia, breathing problems, hearing loss, optic atrophy and skin rash, ketolactic acidosis and organic aciduria. The disease can be treated successfully with biotin supplementation (between 5 and 20 mg per day). The most common mutation that causes profound BD is a deletion/insertion 
(G98:d7i3).In the recent two years in our neurological department 3 patients have been detected with profound BD. The disease was conﬁrmed by enzyme studies and mutation analyses in the BD gene. Two patients with zero activities were homozygous for the G98:d7i3 mutation and one was compound geterozygous for frequent mutations G
98d7i3/
R538C. Clinical symptoms in our patients are similar: onset of disease on ﬁrst months of life, combination of neurological symptoms (seizures, hypotonia, developmental delay, stridor, hearing loss) and cutaneous ﬁndings. All patients have demonstrated the dramatic improvements after two weeks of biotin (10mg/day) therapy. First the cutaneous symptoms and the seizures resolved, than signs of visual and hearing 
improvement began to be seen.No clear genotype/phenotype correlation was detected. One of the patients homozygous for the frameshift muation G98:d7i3 showed severe and the second one - mild clinical symptoms and better response for therapy.These are ﬁrst three cases of profound BD which were diagnosed and 
successfully treated in Russia.
P1407. Enzyme replacement therapy in Fabry disease : 
beneﬁcial clinical effect in a patient with severely impaired 
kidney function.
D. P. Germain ;  
Department of Genetics, HEGP, Paris, France.
Fabry disease (FD, OMIM 301500) is an X-linked lysosomal storage 
disease caused by a deﬁciency of alpha-galactosidase. Two recent randomized trials have underlined the beneﬁcial effect of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) on biochemical parameters in patients with FD. However, although several case reports and uncontrolled studies have claimed clinical beneﬁts, very few controlled data on clinical efﬁcacy have been documented yet.We report the case of a 46-year male patient whose severely impaired Therapy for genetic disease387
renal function was stabilized with enzyme replacement therapy 
(ERT).Results : Prior to enzyme replacement therapy, kidney function deteriorated rapidly from normal (serum creatinine : 125 µmol/L in July 1999) to moderate (creatinine 275 µmol/L in April 2002) and severe kidney insufﬁciency (serum creatinine 382 µmol/L in December 2002) when ERT was initiated. The patient was subsequently followed during 26 months of ERT with algasidase beta (Fabrazyme®). The dose recommended by the manufacturer (1mg/kg of body weight every other week) was initially administered during 6 months. Serum creatinine reached a peak of 562 µmol/L in June 2003. A doubling in the regimen (1 mg/kg weekly) was initiated for another 20 months in an attempt to rescue the kidney function. It is remarkable that although kidney function is still slowly deteriorating (creatinine value : 541 µmol/L in January 2005) the patient is still not on dialysis.To our knowledge this is the ﬁrst observation of clinical efﬁcacy of ERT in in a Fabry patient with severely impaired renal function, potentially 
emphasizing the importance of the dose administered.Therapy for genetic disease