Plenary Lectures 
Plenary Lectures
PL01. Establishment and hereditary transmission of epigenetic 
modifications and pathological developments: the mouse model
F. Cuzin ;  
Unité 636 de l’Institut de la Santé et, de la Recherche Médicale, Nice, France.
No abstract available as per date of printing. Please check www.eshg.
org for updates in the online database.
PL02. DNA Repair, genome maintenance and human disease
M. Radman ;  
Faculté de Médecine, Necker, Université Paris 5, Paris, France.
No abstract available as per date of printing. Please check www.eshg.
org for updates in the online database.
PL03. Human neuroimaging - contributions to neurogenetics
R. Frackowiak ;  
Wellcome Department of Imaging Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, UCL, 
London, United Kingdom.
Voxel based morphometry (VBM) is a new way of analysing structural 
MR images. VBM can characterise differences in structural MRI scans 
of diseases influenced by genetic variation. In X-linked Kallmann’s syn -
drome there is selective hypertrophy of the pyramidal tract in patients 
with mirror movements compared to those without. In a dominantly 
inherited, dyspraxic, language-impaired family, gene penetrance is 
full and associated with abnormal structure and function of the cau -
date nucleus and other areas. Atrophy of the caudate in affected fam -
ily members is associated with task-related hyperactivity, suggesting 
functional compensation. Presently unaffected individuals from fami -
lies of Huntington’s patients show caudate atrophy that correlates with 
genetic status. Caudate atrophy correlates with clinical score and CAG 
codon repeats on chromosome 4. Studies with Turner’s and partial 
Turner’s patients have identified focal structural brain abnormalities. 
Candidate regions on the X-chromosome have been found that influ -
ence amygdala and orbital frontal cortex development. A structural 
amygdala abnormality in patients predicts failure to recognise fear in 
photographs of faces; a prediction that is now confirmed. These stud -
ies suggest that imaging is an efficient way of associating candidate 
genes with quantitative measures of brain structure and function and 
that informative intermediate phenotypes can be described that predict 
future disease in asymptomatic at-risk individuals.
PL04. Neurodegeneration in lysosomal storage diseases is 
associated with impairment of autophagy
A. Fraldi1, C. Settembre1, C. Spampanato1, R. de Pablo1, D. L. Medina1, L. Jah -
reiss2, A. Lombardi1, C. Venturi3, C. Tacchetti3, D. C. Rubinsztein2, A. Ballabio1,4;  
1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Naples, Italy, 2Depart -
ment of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University 
of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Department of Experimental 
Medicine and §MicroSCoBiO Research Center and IFOM Center of Cell Oncol -
ogy and Ultrastructure, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 4Medical Genetics, 
Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
Autophagy is the mechanism responsible for the turn-over of intra -
cellular organelles and digestion of protein aggregates which are se -
questered by autophagosomes and degraded upon the fusion of the 
autophagosome with the lysosome. Several neurodegenerative dis -
orders, such as Alzheimer, Parkinson and Huntington diseases are 
associated with an impairment of autophagy. We have analyzed the 
autophagic pathway in two different murine models of lysosomal stor -
age disorders (LSDs), Multiple Sulfatase Deficiency (MSD) and Muco -
polysaccharidosis type IIIA (MPS-IIIA). Western blotting, immunofluo -
rescence and immunohistochemical analyses using anti-LC3 antibod -
ies demonstrated a significant intracellular accumulation of autophagic 
(LC3-positive) vacuoles in MEFs as well as in several brain regions of 
both MSD and MPS-IIIA mice. Accumulation of autophagosomes was 
also confirmed by ultrastructural analysis. Co-staining of MEFs using 
both anti-LC3 and anti-LAMP2 antibodies demonstrated that autopha -
gosomes do not co-localize with lysosomes, suggesting the presence 
of a fusion defect. As a consequence of an impairment of autophagy, 
a massive intracellular accumulation of ubiquitin-positive aggregates 
and an increased number of mitochondria with altered membrane po -
tential were detected in the brain of both MSD and MPS-IIIA mice. In -
terestingly, the build-up of polyubiquitinated proteins and dysfunctional mitochondria has been associated with neuronal cell death in neuro -
degenerative diseases. Taken together our data indicate that accumu -
lation of storage material, due to the lysosomal enzyme deficiency, 
causes a lysosomal dysfunction which affects the autophagic pathway, 
and more specifically the formation of autophagolysosomes. We pos -
tulate that neurodegeneration in LSDs is caused by secondary storage 
of toxic protein aggregates due to an impairment of autophagy.
PL05. Identification of 3 novel genes that cause X-linked mental 
retardation; AP1S2, CUL4B and ZDHHC9.
F. Raymond1, P. Tarpey2, G. Turner3, R. Stevenson4, C. Schwartz4, J. Gecz5, P. 
Futreal2, M. Stratton2, on behalf of the GOLD (Genetics of Learning Disability) 
study;  
1Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 
2Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3University of Newcastle, New -
castle, Australia, 4JC Self Research Institute of Human Genetics, Greenwood, 
SC, United States, 5University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
Phenotypic variability, genetic heterogeneity and the high number of 
disease genes estimated to be involved has made the identification of 
causative gene abnormalities in X-linked mental retardation complex. 
To identify further novel disease genes we have used a systematic 
mutational screen of the X chromosome in 250 families with multiple 
affected members with mental retardation.
We report the identification of 3 novel genes that cause X-linked men -
tal retardation.
AP1S2 encodes the sigma 2 subunit of the adaptor protein 1 complex. 
We have identified 3 truncating mutations associated with mental re -
tardation, hypotonia, delayed walking, absent speech and aggressive 
behaviour. The AP1 complex is present in endosomes and the trans-
Golgi network and binds vesicle cargo proteins destined for transport 
into different cellular compartments.
CUL4B is an ubiquitin E3 ligase subunit involved in targeting of pro -
teins for intracellular degradation. We have identified 8 mutations, 5 
truncating and 3 conserved missense mutations. Additional clinical 
features include macrocephaly, central obesity, hypogonadism, pes 
cavus and tremor were observed in some of the affected individuals 
but not all.
ZDHHC9 is a palmitoyltransferase that catalyses the post-translational 
modification of NRAS and HRAS. The phenotype associated with the 
2 truncating and 2 conserved missense mutations found were mental 
retardation and a Marfanoid habitus.
This systematic strategy has identified 3 entirely novel disease caus -
ing mechanisms which would not have been predicted by a candidate 
gene approach and illustrates that defects in many different cellular 
processes may be sufficient to cause a mental retardation phenotype.
PL06. Mutations in LRP2 , coding for the multi-ligand receptor 
megalin, cause Donnai-Barrow and Faciooculoacousticorenal 
(FOAR) syndromes
S. Kantarci1, L. Al-Gazali2, R. Hill3, D. Donnai4, G. C. M. Black4, E. Bieth5, N. 
Chassaing5,6, D. Lacombe6, K. Devriendt7, A. Teebi8, M. Loscertales1, C. Rob -
son9, T. Liu10, D. T. MacLaughlin1, K. M. Noonan1, M. K. Russell1, C. A. Walsh3,9, 
P. K. Donahoe1, B. R. Pober1,9;  
1Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 2UAE Univer -
sity, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates, 3Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Boston, MA, United States, 4University of Manchester and St Mary’s Hospital, 
Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Hopital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 6Hôpital Pel -
ligrin, Bordeaux, France, 7University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 8Weill Cornell 
Medical College in Qatar and Hamad Medical City, Doha, Qatar, 9Children’s 
Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 10Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, 
MA, United States.
Donnai-Barrow syndrome (DBS) is an autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by hypertelorism, myopia, corpus callosum agenesis, 
deafness, omphalocele, and congenital diaphragmatic hernia. There is 
phenotypic overlap with Faciooculoacousticorenal syndrome (FOAR). 
Genetic mapping using Affymetrix 10K SNP arrays on four DBS chil -
dren from one large consanguineous kindred identified a 17 cM region 
of homozygosity-by-descent on chromosome 2q23.3-q31.1. This was 
refined and confirmed by microsatellite marker analysis in three ad -
ditional multiplex DBS families.
Sequencing of candidate genes in six DBS and one FOAR kindreds 
revealed homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the 79 
exon LRP2  gene in all cases. LRP2 encodes  megalin, a ~600 kDa Plenary Lectures 
transmembrane protein that mediates receptor-mediated endocytosis 
for re-uptake of numerous ligands including lipoproteins, sterols, vita -
min-binding proteins, and hormones in the renal proximal tubules and 
other sites, and may also play a role in Sonic hedgehog signaling.
The DBS/FOAR phenotypes mirror those of megalin knock out mice 
which have perinatal lethality due to respiratory insufficiency, and mal -
formations of the forebrain and eye (agenesis of the corpus callosum, 
holoprosencephaly, microphthalmia). Among surviving mice, low-mo -
lecular weight proteinuria with spillage of retinol binding and vitamin 
D-binding proteins has been demonstrated. We confirmed comparable 
urinary abnormalities in our patients, which may serve as a valuable 
diagnostic marker.
We suggest that malformations of DBS/FOAR result from mutations in 
LRP2 and absence of functional megalin leading to embryonic failure 
to uptake and deliver key lipophilic compounds required for normal de -
velopment. This identifies pathways important in neural and diaphrag -
matic development and suggests potential targets for therapy.
PL07. RAB23 mutations in Carpenter syndrome imply an 
unexpected role for Hedgehog signaling in cranial suture 
development and obesity
D. Jenkins1, D. Seelow2, F. S. Jeehee3, C. A. Perlyn4, L. G. Alonso5, D. F. 
Bueno6, D. Donnai7, D. Josifiova8, I. M. J. Mathijssen9, J. E. V. Morton10, K. 
Orstavik11, E. Sweeney12, S. A. Wall13, J. L. Marsh14, P. Nurnberg2, M. Passos-
Bueno15, A. O. M. Wilkie1;  
1Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Cologne 
Center for Genomics and Institute for Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 3Centro 
de Estudos de Genomca Humano, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 4Washington University 
School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, United States, 5Universidade Federal de Sao 
Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 6Universidade de Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 7Uni-
versity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 8Guy’s Hospital, London, 
United Kingdom, 9Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 10Bir-
mingham Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 11Rikshospitalet-
Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway, 12Liverpool Women’s Hospital, 
Liverpool, United Kingdom, 13John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 
14St John’s Mercy Medical Center, St Louis, MO, United States, 15Universidade 
de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Carpenter syndrome is a pleiotropic disorder with autosomal reces -
sive inheritance, the cardinal features of which include craniosynos -
tosis, polysyndactyly, obesity and cardiac defects. Using homozygos -
ity mapping, we found linkage to chromosome 6p12.1-q12 and, in 15 
independent families, identified five different mutations (4 truncating, 1 
missense) in RAB23, which encodes a member of the RAB GTPase 
family of vesicle transport proteins and acts as a negative regulator 
of Hedgehog (HH) signaling. In 10 patients the disease was caused 
by homozygosity for the same nonsense mutation, L145X, which re -
sides on a common haplotype, indicative of a founder effect in patients 
of northern European descent. Surprisingly, nonsense mutations of 
Rab23 in open brain mice cause recessive embryonic lethality with 
neural tube defects, suggesting a species difference in the require -
ment for RAB23 during early development. The discovery of RAB23 
mutations in Carpenter syndrome implicates HH signaling in cranial 
suture biogenesis, an unexpected finding given that craniosynostosis 
is not usually associated with mutation of other HH pathway compo -
nents, and provides a new molecular target for studies of obesity.
PL08. Y chromosome detection by Real Time PCR and 
pyrophosphorolysis-activated polymerization using free fetal 
DNA isolated from maternal plasma.
H. B. Schlecht1, E. M. J. Boon2, P. Martin3, G. Daniels3, R. H. A. M. Vossen4, J. 
T. den Dunnen4, B. Bakker2, R. Elles1;  
1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, 
2Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands, 3International 
Blood Group Reference Centre, Bristol, United Kingdom, 4Leiden Genome 
Technology Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands.
The discovery of cell-free fetal DNA in the maternal blood plasma has 
potential for the development of non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of fe -
tal sex and genetic traits. Current fetal genetic testing relies mainly on 
invasive testing by chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis, which 
carry a significant risk of fetal loss (1-2%). Detection of Y chromo -
somal sequence of fetal origin is highly advantageous for early fetal 
sex determination where there is a risk of X-linked genetic disorders 
or conditions such as congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Highly sensitive and specific techniques are required to accurately detect the very low 
levels of cell free fetal DNA in the maternal plasma. This study is to 
validate the use of Real Time PCR, a widely used technique that can 
detect very low levels of Y chromosomal sequence, and to assess the 
use of a highly sensitive PCR technique, pyrophosphorolysis-activated 
polymerisation (PAP), for fetal sex determination. Both techniques de -
tected Y chromosome sequence at very low levels with high specificity 
and sensitivity. Furthermore, the PAP technique was shown to be more 
robust than the Real Time PCR as none of the samples tested failed to 
meet the acceptance criteria. Combining the two techniques for male 
fetal sex detection from maternal blood plasma increases the sensitiv -
ity and specificity in this series. This study shows that the PAP assay 
can be used for Y chromosome detection using ffDNA. Furthermore, 
by using PAP in combination with Real Time PCR more reliable early 
non invasive prenatal sexing can be performed.
PL09. Neurodegenerative dementias
C. Van Broeckhoven ;  
Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, 
VIB; Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Institute Born-Bunge; and University of Ant -
werp, Antwerpen, Antwerpen, Belgium.
The neurodegenerative dementias are characterized by different clini -
cal and pathological phenotypes and are diagnosed according to spec -
ified criteria. In brain the pathology shows different neurodegenerative 
profiles due to the deposition of defined proteins in defined areas that 
are characteristic for the disease e.g. tau within neurons in tauopa -
thies. Neurodegenerative dementias are known to have a genetic ae -
tiology though multifactorial in nature meaning that both genetic and 
environmental factors contribute to the expression of the disease. 
Since almost 20 years molecular and epidemiological geneticists are 
aiming at identifying the genetic variations that underlie the disease 
process. Initial results were obtained in families in which the disease 
was apparently only genetically since the disease was transmitted as 
an autosomal dominant trait. As in most multifactorial diseases, also in 
all dementia subtypes rare families with a monogenic trait have been 
identified. In these families causal genes were identified that when 
mutated produced a 100% risk for the carrier of the mutated gene. 
The proteins involved are being studied in detail and have resulted in 
important biological hypothesis that are currently being pursued for the 
development of suitable and more effective treatments e.g. the amyloid 
cascade in Alzheimer’s dementia. For the majority of patients where 
the disease is multifactorial, not many susceptibility genes have been 
identified i.e. genes that carry a genetic variation that predisposes to 
disease in conjunction with environmental factors. One reason is that 
each one of these genetic variants contributes a small fraction of the 
risk and that not yet the right instruments are available for finding these 
small effects contributed by several distinct genes. Nevertheless, the 
current knowledge of genetics and biology of neurodegeneration in 
dementias indicates that there is substantial crosstalk between the dif -
ferent pathways that lead to disease substantiating the complexity of 
brain and disease.
PL10. Selective reduction of cerebellar iron accumulation in 
Friedreich’s Ataxia obtained by a moderate defriprone chelation 
treatment
A. Munnich1, N. Boddaert2, Z. I. Cabantchik3;  
1Med. Genetics Clinic and Research Unit INSERM 393, Pediatric Radiology 
Unit, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades and Université Paris V 
René Descartes, Paris, France, 3Dept of Biol. Chemistry and Charles E. Smith 
Psychobiology Laboratory, A. Silberman Institute of Life Sciences, Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, Safra Campus-Givat Ram, Jerusalem, Israel.
Background.  Friedreich’s ataxia (FA) is caused by a deficiency in 
frataxin needed for mitochondrial Fe-S cluster (ISC) formation and 
heme protein synthesis. The resulting dysfunctional respiratory chain 
activity and ensuing oxidative damage are accompanied and possibly 
associated with mitochondrial iron accumulation. Previous attempts to 
overcome the above deficiencies have led to the successful applica -
tion of the CoQ10 analog Idebenone for reducing cardiac complications. 
Failure of Idebenone to slow-down neurodegeneration has led to us to 
consider the removal of regionally accumulated iron as a possible ad -
junct therapy in FA. The rationale used in this work rested on the con -
cept that oxidative damage is generally caused by iron accumulated 
in chemically labile (redox-active and chelatable) forms, but also that Plenary Lectures 
labile iron can be safely relocated from areas of accumulation to areas 
of deprivation. We therefore considered the possibility of: a. selective -
ly dissipating clusters of labile-iron with chelators that demonstrably 
reach the CNS and that can remove labile iron from cell organelles 
such as mitochondria and relocate it to cellular and extracellular tar -
gets b. applying chelation regimens that minimally affect the iron status 
of individuals known to have no systemic iron overload by using chela -
tors that can safely transfer labile tissue iron to plasma apotransferrin.
Methods . An efficacy-toxicity phase I-II open trial was conducted for 
6 months on 11 FA adolescents (13-23 years) with deferiprone (20-30 
mg/kg/day) administered together with antioxidants (Idebenone). The 
patients were monitored: monthly or every other month by MRI, so as 
to gain information about regional iron levels from R2*=1/T2* values; 
bimonthly by biochemical and haematological tests and at entrance 
and at exit for ataxia by ICARS and Purdue pegboard test. Nine of the 
eleven FA patients completed the study.
Results. Brain iron content monitored by MRI, indicated that at en -
trance FA patients had smaller and irregularly shaped dentate nuclei 
and proton relaxation rates R2* significantly higher (p<0.027) than 
age-matched controls. Deferiprone (DFP) intake led to a progressive 
and significant decrease in R2* (p<0.002) in the dentate nuclei of 8/9 
DFP-treated patients and none in untreated patients. After 6 months 
treatment the relative decrease in R2* was proportional to the value 
at the onset of treatment, indicating the labile nature of iron in FA den -
tate nuclei but not in other brain areas and the possible attainment of 
an objective clinical endpoint. Clinical benefits were manifested espe -
cially in the youngest patients as: disappearance of constipation and 
incontinence, improvement of manipulative dexterity and of ataxic gait, 
fluency of speech, subjective signs of neuropathy but no changes in 
hematological indices.
Conclusion . Deferiprone evoked removal of labile iron accumulating 
in spinocerebellar tracts of FA patients. The ensuing clinical improve -
ments indicate for the first time that local iron chelation might reduce 
and possibly reverse oxidation-induced brain injury, particularly at ear -
ly stages of the disease. The results of the clinical pilot study warrant 
controlled prospective studies aimed at assessing iron chelation alone 
and in combination with antioxidants for treating FA and other diseases 
of regional ion accumulation, NBIA (neurodegeneration with brain iron 
accumulation).Acknowledgments : The clinical aspects of the study were supported 
by APHP, GE (France) and Association Francaise contre les Myopa -
thies (AFM) and the basic studies by the Israel Science Foundation 
ISF (Israel) and AFIRN. Deferiprone was a kind gift from Apopharma 
(Canada).
PL11. Huntington’s disease : Intracellular dynamics and 
neuronal apoptosis
F. Saudou , S. Humbert;  
Institut Curie, UMR146 CNRS, Bat. 110, Orsay, France.
Huntington’s disease (HD) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder that 
affects 1 in 10000 individuals of European origin. The neuropathology 
of HD involves neuronal dysfunction and the selective death of striatal 
neurons in the brain. The mutation that causes disease is an abnormal 
expansion of a polyglutamine (polyQ) stretch in the N-terminus of the 
350 kD protein huntingtin. The mechanisms by which huntingtin in -
duces dysfunction and death of neurons in the brain are not clearly un -
derstood. These could involve the gain of a new toxic function as well 
as the loss of the beneficial activities intrinsic to wild type huntingtin. 
Indeed, huntingtin possesses anti-apoptotic properties as observed in 
cell culture and animal models.
We have used 3D fast video microscopy techniques to study the in -
tracellular dynamics in normal and pathological situations. Using this 
approach we have unravelled a function of huntingtin in the micro -
tubule-based transport of neurotrophic factors such as BDNF. In the 
pathological situation, huntingtin-stimulated BDNF transport is altered. 
Reduced BDNF transport leads to a decrease in neurotrophic support 
and to neurotoxicity that are both rescued by wild-type huntingtin. Our 
results demonstrate that the anti-apoptotic properties of huntingtin are 
linked to the ability of huntingtin to promote transport of BDNF in the 
brain.
The development and the use of relevant neuronal models of HD al -
lowed us to identify molecular mechanisms and signal transduction 
pathways that control neuronal death in HD. We will report recent find -
ings that explain how these signaling pathways inhibit the toxicity of 
mutant polyQ-huntingtin in disease.Concurrent Symposia 
Concurrent Symposia
S01. The increasing impact of internet on genetic services
S. Aymé , A. Rath, V. Thibaudeau, V. Fonteny, B. Urbero, K. Marazova, M. 
Levi-Strauss;  
INSERM sc11, Paris, France.
With the widespread dissemination of the internet and the multiplica -
tion of web-based information services, the question of to what extent 
this affects the behaviour of the stakeholders needs to be addressed. 
For the patients, potential benefits are a better understanding of their 
disease and its mode of inheritance, improved dialogue with health 
care professionals, the ability to more easily locate the expert service 
that they can be referred to, and occasionally to be able to participate 
in clinical research. For the patients support groups, the benefits are 
improved visibility, which leads to an expansion of their membership 
and allows them to help more people. For the non-specialised health -
care professional, the benefits are similar to those for the patients with 
the ultimate benefit being to deliver better care. At the beginning of 
the internet era, experts feared they would no longer be consulted, 
due to the wide availability of what they considered as their specific 
added-value. Experience shows that this fear was unfounded. Taking 
Orphanet (www.orpha.net) as an example of a website, and looking at 
the behaviour of the site visitors during the past ten years and at the 
impact in terms of referral to listed services, it seems like the positive 
effects outweigh the negative ones. Additional services are expected 
from the community. The physicians and biologists would like to ac -
cess mutation databases by population, the physicians are expecting 
more practical information and the patients would like to be partners 
in the development of an encyclopaedia concerning their own experi -
ence.
S02. Is there a role for the Human Geneticist in the genomic 
revolution
C. J. Epstein ;  
University of California, San Francisco, Department of Pediatrics and Institute 
for Human Genetics, San Francisco, CA, United States.
With the completion of the human genome project, the belief that vir -
tually all human diseases and responses to therapy are the products 
of both genetic and environmental factors has firmly taken hold, and 
an extensive search for mutations/variants that influence susceptibil -
ity to disease and the efficacy and toxicity of drugs is well underway. 
The anticipated outcomes of this research are a better understand -
ing of disease pathogenesis and the development of genetic tests to 
predict who will be at risk for what. It is believed by many that genetic 
risk assessment or profiling will lead to a genomic or “personalized” 
medicine in which individualized strategies will be used to prevent the 
onset of disease and to improve the efficacy of therapeutic agents. Al -
though human geneticists will certainly be involved in the research, the 
role of the medical (clinical) geneticist in the delivery of this genomic 
medicine, if it actually comes to pass, is less certain. Given their small 
numbers, medical geneticists would certainly not be in a position to be -
come the principal providers of genetic testing and risk assessment for 
the greater population, and this responsibility would fall to others. Nev -
ertheless, geneticists do have a special knowledge of genetics and hu -
man disease that should be brought to bear on the provision of these 
services. This can be accomplished by playing a role in the education 
in genetics of other physicians and health providers and by serving as 
designated referral sources for problems that may be too complex for 
those without substantial knowledge of genetics to handle alone. At 
the same time, medical geneticists need to continue to provide and, 
indeed, to expand the services that are uniquely theirs to give: the 
diagnosis, management (including treatment), and counseling of pa -
tients and families with Mendelian, chromosomal, and mitochondrial 
disorders, malformations, and syndromes.
S03. What use the 1000 euro genome?
M. E. Pembrey ;  
Institute of Child Health, University College London, United Kingdom.
Whatever this use of the word ‘genome’ includes in terms of coverage 
and DNA sequence information, the 1000 euro genome will detect a 
vast amount of personal genetic variation including rare mutations. It 
will become commercially available in less than 20 years was the con -
clusion of a 2005 UK report on genetic profiling by a group chaired by John Sulston (www.hgc.gov.uk/Client/news_item.asp?NewsId=38) and 
probably used by individuals, although not as state-funded screening. 
However being used is not the same as being useful! Software claim -
ing to interpret your genome will become the new palmistry. There is 
a pressing need to develop research programmes within existing and 
in new cohort studies that include intermediate as well as disease 
phenotypes and environmental exposures to discover what it means 
prospectively to carry a particular genotype. The cheap genotyping 
techniques behind the drive for the 1000 euro genome will help in this 
research although more useful in epidemiology may be selected gene 
by gene sequencing of many thousands of samples in parallel. The 
first fruits of such cohort research could be the introduction of clinically 
useful newborn genetic screens sequencing 100 genes or so. Detec -
tion of filaggrin null mutations might be an example where simple strat -
egies might prevent eczema related allergies. One of the problems 
with the idea of genetic profiling at birth, or at any other time for that 
matter, is that most genetic effects are likely to be conditional  on the 
person’s developmental experience and/or the prevailing environment. 
Thus the value of knowing just one’s genotype is also conditional. By 
the time the 1000 euro genome arrives we may have more useful tests 
based on epigenetic/methylation profiling to detect prenatal develop -
mental programming or based on gene expression patterns in periph -
eral blood cells under challenge from specific stressors.
S04. Better education for medical geneticists and non-
geneticists in the new genomics era
R. M. Harden ;  
Tay Park House, Dundee, United Kingdom.
No abstract available as per date of printing. Please check www.eshg.
org for updates in the online database.
S05. MicroRNAs as oncogenes and tumor suppressors
S. M. Hammond ;  
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short, non-coding RNAs that post-transcrip -
tionally regulate gene expression. Over 450 miRNA genes have been 
identified in the human genome. We have undertaken the study of 
miRNA function in mammals. Using a custom microarray platform, we 
investigated miRNA expression patterns in mammalian development 
and in cancer. We found that many miRNAs are down-regulated in 
tumor cell lines. This downregulation is not due to decreased transcrip -
tion, but is due to reduced maturation during miRNA biogenesis. On 
the other hand, several miRNA genes are over-expressed in tumor 
cell lines and primary tumors. Seven of these cancer-associated miR -
NAs are clustered in a single primary transcript termed chr13orf 25 or 
OncomiR-1. This cluster is located in a region amplified in lymphoma 
and several solid malignancies. Ectopic expression of these miRNAs 
in a mouse model of lymphoma accelerated disease progression. In 
addition, the lymphomas had reduced apoptosis and were more dis -
seminated into secondary regions. This work establishes non-coding 
RNAs, and specifically miRNAs, as oncogenes in human cancers.
S06. Small RNAs in gametogenesis
A. Girard , A. Aravin, R. Sachidanandam, M. Carmell, G. Hannon;  
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Watson School of Biological Sciences, Cold 
Spring Harbor, NY, United States.
Argonaute proteins and associated small RNAs have critical role in 
development by regulating messenger RNA stability, protein synthesis, 
chromatin organization and genome structure. In animals, Argonaute 
proteins segregate into two subfamilies. Ubiquitously expressed mem -
bers of Argonaute subfamily bind 21-23 nt RNA and act in RNA inter -
ference and in microRNA-mediated gene regulation. The Piwi subfam -
ily is involved in germline-specific events such as germline stem cell 
maintenance and meiosis. Particularly, three members of the Piwi sub -
family in mouse are critical for successful spermatogenesis. Recently 
we identified a new class of 25-30 nt RNAs (piRNAs) as a binding 
partner of Piwi proteins in the mammalian male germ cells. piRNAs are 
highly abundant in germ cells and accumulate at the onset of meiosis. 
Thousands of identified piRNAs show distinctive localization patterns 
in the genome, being predominantly grouped into 20-90-kilobase clus -
ters scattered throughout genome. We explore biogenesis of piRNAs 
and function of Piwi-piRNA complexes in the mammalian germline.Concurrent Symposia 
S07. Vertebrate miRNA diversity
E. Cuppen ;  
Hubrecht Laboratory, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
MicroRNAs are 20- to 23-nucleotide RNA molecules that can regulate 
gene expression. Currently over 400 microRNAs have been experi -
mentally identified in mammalian genomes, whereas estimates go up 
to 1000 and beyond. We have used bioinformatic and experimental 
(microarray-based detection and massively parallel sequencing) ap -
proaches to get insight in the vertebrate microRNA repertoire and evo -
lutionary dynamics.
Analysis of the microRNA content of human and chimpanzee brain 
regions resulted in the identification of hundreds of novel microRNAs 
genes, many of which are not conserved beyond primates, indicating 
their recent origin. Others are expanded in one species through du -
plication events, suggesting that evolution of microRNAs is an ongo -
ing process and that along with ancient, highly conserved microRNAs, 
there are a number of emerging microRNAs that could contribute to 
evolutionary processes and differences in human and chimpanzee 
brain function.
S08. SLE susceptibility genes
T. J. Vyse ;  
Imperial College, Molecular Genetics and Rheumatology Section, London, 
United Kingdom.
SLE is a generalised autoimmune disease affecting a wide range of 
tissues including skin, joints, bone marrow and kidneys, which afflicts 
~10,000 individuals in the UK. The disease is characterised by the 
production of autoantibodies to nuclear and cell-surface antigens. The 
cause of the disease is poorly understood although genetic factors 
contribute. The strategy adopted is to use both family-based and case-
control methods to ascertain genetic association with SLE. To achieve 
this we have established large collections of SLE cases (n=500) and 
families (n=850). We have analysed approximately 100 different genes 
(based on functional and positional candidacy) and found convincing 
evidence to support the role of genetic variation in five of these in SLE 
susceptibility.
How nuclear autoantigens are targeted in SLE has been a subject of 
controversy. Nucleic acids can bind Toll-like receptors on antigen pre -
senting dendritic cells, which stimulates an interferon response and 
thereby augments dendritic cell function. Interferon regulatory genes 
(IRFs) are key molecules within this amplification loop and we have 
shown that patients with lupus are almost twice as likely to carry ge -
netic variants in IRF5 that generate more transcripts, in part due to 
differential polyadenylation. Autoantibodies in SLE are of the IgG iso -
type and bind with high affinity to their targets, implicating the adaptive 
immune system in pathogenesis. We examined a number of candidate 
genes acting at the T-B lymphocyte interface and identified associa -
tions with SLE at the CTLA4 locus and a stronger signal arising from 
the tumour necrosis factor family member, OX40L. Finally, the IgG Fc 
receptor locus on human chromosome 1q23 has been extensively 
studied in autoimmunity genetics. We have provided strong evidence 
that the locus does contribute to the risk of SLE as a result of copy 
number variation. Reduction in neutrophil FCGR3B expression predis -
poses to end organ damage in the kidney, probably through defective 
removal of immune complexes.
In conclusion, we have identified lupus susceptibility genes operating 
in both the adaptive and innate immune systems. Gene effects pro -
mote initial autoantigen targeting, aberrant regulation of the immune 
response and finally accentuate end organ damage.
S09. New pathways in pathogenesis of allergic asthma: ADAM  
and end organ susceptibility genes
J. Holloway ;  
Human Genetics and Infection, Inflammation & Repair Divisions, School of 
Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.
While asthma is an inflammatory disorder of the airways usually as -
sociated with atopy, an important additional component is involvement 
of the epithelium and underlying mesenchyme acting as a trophic unit 
(EMTU). In addition to allergens, a wide range of environmental fac -
tors interact with the EMTU, such as virus infections, environmental 
tobacco smoke and pollutants, to initiate tissue damage and aberrant 
repair responses that are translated into remodelling of the airways. 
While candidate gene association studies have revealed polymorphic variants that influence asthmatic inflammation, positional cloning of 
previously unknown genes is identifying a high proportion of novel 
genes in the EMTU and revealing mechanistic pathways behind the 
remodelling response. A disintegrin and metalloproteinase (ADAM)33 
is one such susceptibility gene strongly associated with asthma that 
is preferentially expressed in the airway mesenchyme. Furthermore, 
recent results suggest that variation in the gene may play a significant 
role in other diseases that involve tissue remodelling in response to 
chronic inflammation, and that this variation may act early in life, alter -
ing developmental processes, rendering tissue innately susceptible to 
remodelling.
S10. Genetic and environmental factors in celiac disease
L. M. Sollid ;  
Institute of Immunology, Rikshospitalet, University of Oslo, Norway.
Coeliac disease (CD) is an intestinal disorder which develops as a 
result of interplay between genetic and enviromental factors. Particu -
lar HLA genes together with non-HLA genes predispose to the dis -
ease. The concordance rate among monozygotic twins is about 75% 
whereas the concordance rate among HLA identical siblings is about 
30%. This suggests the involvement of non-HLA genes, but the many 
attempts to identify non-HLA genes has been met with limited success. 
There is evidence for susceptibility genes located on chromosomes 
5q32, 2q33 and 19p13. By contrast, the HLA susceptibility genes in 
CD are well characterised. The primary HLA association in the ma -
jority of CD patients is with DQ2 and in the minority of patients with 
DQ8. DQ2 (DQA1*05/DQB1*02 can be encoded in cis in DR3DQ2 
individuals and in trans in individual being DR5DQ7/DR7DQ2 hetero -
zygous). Among the multifactorial disorders with involvement of HLA 
genes CD is unique, as a critical environmental factor has been identi -
fied, namely dietary gluten. Evidence suggests that CD4+ T cells are 
central in controlling a multifaceted immune response to gluten that 
causes the characteristic disease pathology. Gluten reactive T cells 
can be isolated from small intestinal biopsies of coeliac patients but not 
from non-coeliac controls. DQ2 or DQ8, but not other HLA molecules 
carried by patients, are the predominant restriction elements for these 
T cells. Lesion derived T cells mainly recognise deamidated gluten 
peptides, and this the deamidation is mediated in vivo  by transgluta -
minase 2 (TG2). A number of distinct T cell epitopes exist within gluten. 
DQ2 and DQ8 bind the epitopes so that the glutamate residues intro -
duced by TG2 are accommodated in pockets of the binding site which 
have preference for negatively charged side chains. Notably, TG2 can 
also generate complexes between gluten and TG2. These complexes 
may permit gluten reactive T cells to provide help to TG2 specific B 
cells thereby explaining the occurrence of gluten TG2 auto-antibodies 
which is a characteristic feature of CD patients exposed to gluten.
S11. The genetic architecture of Skin pigmentation
M. D. Shriver ;  
The Pennsylvania State University, Department of Anthropology, University 
Park, PA, United States.
No abstract available as per date of printing. Please check www.eshg.
org for updates in the online database.
S12. Novel Insights into melanoma genetics
B. C. Bastian1, J. C. Curtin1, J. Bauer1, A. Viros1, J. Fridlyand1, P. Kanetsky2, T. 
Landi3, D. Pinkel1;  
1University of California, San Francisco, Comprehensive Cancer Center, San 
Francisco, CA, United States, 2University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
United States, 3National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, DC, United States.
Melanocytic neoplasms display significant phenotypic variation.We 
used a genetic approach to compare primary melanomas from muco -
sal membranes, the non-hair bearing skin of the palms and soles (acral 
melanomas), and sun-exposed skin with and without signs of chronic 
sun-induced damage (CSD and non-CSD). We found differences in 
the degrees of genomic instability, the specific genomic regions that 
are gained and lost, frequencies of mutations in specific genes, and 
effects of genetic variants in the germline on melanoma risks. Melano -
mas on acral skin and mucosa had distinct patterns of frequent ampli -
fications and deletions involving very small segments of the genome, 
indicating a unique type of genomic instability. By contrast amplifica -
tions were rare in melanomas arising on some-exposed skin. Among 
these, BRAF mutations occurred in~ 60% of non-CSD melanomas but Concurrent Symposia 
were significantly less frequent in CSD melanomas. We showed that 
germline variants of MC1R are a major susceptibility factor for BRAF 
mutations among non-CSD melanomas. Further analysis our array 
CGH data suggested a genomic region harboring KIT to be important 
in melanomas on mucosa, acral skin and skin with CSD. Oncogenic 
mutations or focused copy number increases in the gene were found in 
40% of acral and mucosal melanomas, and 30% of CSD melanomas. 
These results suggest that the existing drugs such as imatanib and 
new are inhibitors against KIT could be useful for certain melanoma 
types. More recent studies correlating phenotypic alterations with the 
underlying genotype have shown that mutations in BRAF are associ -
ated with distinct histopathological features of the primary tumor that 
can be combined to simple algorithms that can predict the mutation 
status of BRAF with high accuracy. Our data show that melanoma is 
comprised of genetically and phenotypically distinct subtypes with dif -
ferent requirements for treatment stratification.
S13. Comprehensive analysis of the SRY-box 10 locus (SOX10): 
Implications for diseases of neural crest derivatives
B. J. Pavan ;  
Genetic Disease Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Insti -
tute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
The transcription factor SOX10 is a key regulator of genes involved 
in neural-crest derived melanocytes, enteric neurons, and myelinating 
Schwann cells. Mutations in the SOX10 gene are associated with hu -
man diseases that affect these cell populations, including impaired pig -
mentation, enteric aganglionosis (e.g., Waardenburg-Shah syndrome), 
and demyelinating peripheral neuropathy. While SOX10 targets have 
been identified, the mechanisms involved in the transcriptional regu -
lation of SOX10 remain elusive. Recently, we used comparative se -
quence analysis to identify highly-conserved, non-coding segments 
upstream of SOX10. We demonstrated that three of these segments 
are encompassed by a 15-kb deletion residing ~ 50 kb upstream of 
Sox10 in a mouse model of Waardenburg-Shah syndrome. Important -
ly, this deletion does not completely compromise Sox10 expression 
in all tissues. Thus, other sequences at the Sox10 locus are likely in -
volved in transcriptional regulation, and mutations in these sequences 
may contribute to neural crest disorders in humans. 
One goal of our lab is to fully characterize SOX10 regulatory sequences 
and to establish if mutations in these sequences contribute to human 
disease. Our studies involve four distinct research areas: (1) Testing 
conserved segments for enhancer activity in cell lines; (2) Determin -
ing if these conserved segments drive reporter gene expression in a 
tissue-specific manner in zebrafish and mouse; (3) Deleting these con -
served segments in BACs and testing for altered reporter gene expres -
sion in transgenic mice; and (4) Screening these conserved segments 
for sequence variations in a panel of >600 DNA samples isolated from 
patients with enteric aganglionosis (Hirschsprung disease). These 
studies will provide important clues about the transcriptional regulation 
of SOX10 and the full role of the transcription factor in human develop -
ment and disease.
S14. Cilia in Skeletal Development: identification of Evc as a 
mediator of Ihh signalling
V. L. Ruiz-Perez1, H. J. Blair2, M. Rodriguez-Andres1, M. Blanco3, Y. Liu2, H. 
Peters2, C. Miles2, J. A. Goodship2;  
1Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas, Madrid, Spain, 2Institute of Human Genetics, International Centre 
for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Department of Human Anato -
my and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 
Madrid, Spain.
Cilia are projections from the cell made of a core of microtubules and 
associated proteins. Cilia are classified according to their microtubule 
components: 9+2 motile cilia and 9+0 primary cilia, which are usu -
ally immotile. The importance of primary cilia in development, e.g. left-
right development, and postnatally, e.g. in the kidney, is increasingly 
recognised. Intraflagellar transport (IFT) is required to generate cilia. 
IFT mutants are embryonic lethal but generation of conditional alleles 
enables studies regarding requirement for cilia in later processes and 
have shown that they play a critical role in endochondral bone forma -
tion. A limitation of this approach is that removal of cilia disrupts all of 
their many functions. We identified two causative genes for the human 
chondrodysplasia Ellis-van Creveld syndrome (EvC, OMIM: 225500 ) by positional cloning. We have inactivated Evc in the mouse and show 
that Evc-/- mice develop an EvC-like syndrome, including short ribs, 
short limbs, and dental abnormalities. LacZ  driven by the Evc promoter 
revealed that Evc is expressed in the developing bones and the oro -
facial region. We developed antibodies that localized the Evc protein 
to the base of the primary cilium. Recent studies of IFT mutants have 
revealed that primary cilia are integral to Hedgehog signalling. Analy -
sis of the growth plate of Evc-/- mice shows delayed bone collar forma -
tion and advanced maturation of chondrocytes. By in situ hybridization 
we detected that Indian hedgehog (Ihh)  is expressed normally in the 
growth plates of Evc-/- mutants but expression of the Ihh downstream 
genes Ptch1  and Gli1 were markedly decreased. Cilia formation is not 
affected in Evc mutants and western blot analysis indicates that Gli3 
processing is normal. We conclude that Evc is required for Ihh signal -
ling in endochondral bone formation.
S15. Molecular basis of primary ciliary dyskinesia
S. Amselem ;  
INSERM U.654, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France.
Defects in structure and function of cilia have recently been associ -
ated with a growing number of rare diseases. The phenotypic features 
of these so-called ciliopathies reflect the diverse biological properties 
of these evolutionarily conserved structures that protrude from the 
apical surface of most eukaryotic cells. Cilia, which contain a micro -
tubule cytoskeleton (axoneme) structurally related to the flagella of 
spermatozoa, can be classified according to their axonemal compo -
nents: primary cilia, with sensory function, are involved in a wide range 
of disorders, whereas motile cilia are involved in the most prominent 
ciliopathy called primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD). PCD is a rare res -
piratory disease, affecting approximately 1/16,000 individuals, due to 
impaired mucociliary clearance. This disorder, usually transmitted as 
an autosomal recessive trait, is characterized by chronic airway in -
flammation, male infertility, and, in approximately half of the patients, 
abnormal left-right asymmetry, defining the Kartagener syndrome. The 
disease phenotype results from various axonemal defects involving 
the motile respiratory and embryonic nodal cilia, as well as the flag -
ella of spermatozoa. Its molecular basis is just beginning to be elu -
cidated, with, to date, 5 genes known to be involved in that condition 
(i.e. DNAI1 , DNAH5 , DNAH11 , RPGR , and TXNDC3 ). These results 
were obtained by various means, including original candidate-gene 
approaches based on data from a one-billion-year-old unicellular flag -
ellar algae ( Chalmydomonas  reinhardtii ) and from see urchin. The cur -
rent challenges are to identify new PCD genes and to characterize 
the molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in ciliary dyskinesia. 
Flagellated protists like trypanosomes represents promising models to 
achieve these goals. These lower eukaryotes possess genes for flag -
ellar motility whose inactivation reproduces the motility and ultra-struc -
tural defects seen in patients with PCD. In addition, in spite of the evo -
lutionary distance between these unicellular organisms and humans, 
the complementation of genetically modified strains of trypanosomes 
with human orthologous sequences seems conceivable.
S16. Making sense of cilia: Bardet Biedl syndrome and other 
ciliopathies
P. L. Beales ;  
The Institute of Child Health,, University College London, London, United King -
dom.
Despite knowledge of primary (non-motile) cilia for over a century, re -
cently ascribed functions have rekindled interest in these sessile cel -
lular appendages. Less than a decade ago, cilia were associated with 
renal cyst formation (through observations in mouse models of poly -
cystic kidney disease) although the mechanism is still hotly debated. 
More recently, developmental biologists have discovered the origins 
of left-right asymmetry common to vertebrates and demonstrated the 
involvement of specialised “spinning” primary cilia. Our own area of 
study, the Bardet-Biedl syndrome along with nephronophthisis, both 
causes of renal cyst formation have revealed the importance of pri -
mary cilia in human disease.
In this lecture, I will describe the evidence for ciliary dysfunction in Bar -
det-Biedl syndrome and how this is leading us to define extended roles 
for cilia in developmental pathways. I will also describe an approach 
we have taken to discover the causes of other diseases of cilia function 
thus widening the scope of this emerging class of ciliopathies.Concurrent Symposia 
S17. Towards a gene expression map of human brain 
development
S. Lindsay1, L. Puelles2, D. Vouyiouklis1, M. Muiras1, S. Woods3, M. Atkinson4, 
D. Davidson5, T. Strachan1, R. A. Baldock5;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
United Kingdom, 2University of Murcia, Murcia, Spain, 3PEALS Institute, New -
castle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 4National e-Science 
Centre, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 5MRC Human 
Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Discoveries of human-specific gene expression or gene regulation 
or gene content are being made at an accelerating pace and have 
sparked interest in molecular answers to the question of “what makes 
us human”. Studies of the human brain and its development are ex -
pected to provide at least some of these answers.
Characterising gene expression patterns is a crucial step towards un -
derstanding the molecular determinants of development and the roles 
of genes in disease. However, human brain development involves 
transformations from a simple tube to a highly organised and complex 
3-dimensional (3-D) structure. We have used a recently developed 
method, optical projection tomography (OPT), to generate digital 3-D 
models of early human brain development. These models can be used 
both as frameworks, on to which normal or experimental gene expres -
sion data can be mapped, and as objects, which provide a valuable 
means for visual interpretation and overview of complex morphological 
data and within which morphological relationships can be investigated 
in silico. Together these models, mapped gene expression patterns 
and the sophisticated software to manipulate and analyse them are 
being expanded towards the generation of an electronic atlas of hu -
man brain development (www.ncl.ac.uk/EADHB). This should be a 
mechanism for systematically correlating human gene expression re -
sults with corresponding data in mouse and provide a scientific basis 
for extrapolation from mouse model to human disease which is crucial 
if we are to safely use the mouse (or other animal models) to inves -
tigate the mechanisms underlying human disorders and for testing 
therapeutic agents or interventions.
More generally, human developmental studies bring with them ethical 
and technical challenges and will need a large-scale, trans-national 
effort in order to make the maximum effective use of the limited human 
tissue (suitable for gene expression studies) that is being collected. 
DGEMap (Developmental Gene Expression Map) is an EU-funded 
Design Study with a multidisciplinary team which aims to define the 
molecular genetic & informatics technologies and the organisational & 
collaborative structures necessary for a new research infrastructure to 
meet these challenges within an appropriate ethical framework (www.
dgemap.org)
S18. Genetic and genomic studies of patterning in the human 
cerebral cortex
X. Piao, T. Sun, B. Chang, C. A. Walsh ;  
Division of Genetics, Children’s Hospital Boston, Howard Hughes Medical In -
stitute, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, and Departments of Neurology 
and Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
The human cerebral cortex is distinguished from that of other species 
by its remarkable size, its subdivision into lobes and regions with dis -
tinct functions, and the relative specialization of the left and right hemi -
spheres for complementary functions, with the left usually dominant 
for language and mathematical ability. Remarkably, genetic malfor -
mations of human cerebral cortex can affect different cortical regions 
preferentially, potentially identifying genes involved in generating area-
specific patterns in human cortex. Mutations in GPR56, which encodes 
an unusual G-protein coupled receptor, cause a recessively inherited 
disorder that preferentially affects the frontal lobe (bilateral frontopa -
rietal polymicrogyria), and specific GPR56  alleles cause remarkably 
localized frontal defects. Understanding the regulation of GPR56 ex -
pression may reveal additional factors that pattern the cortex. In order 
to identify genes with potential differences in expression between left 
and right hemisphere, we used SAGE to compare right and left peri -
sylvian cortex at 12-14 weeks gestation, and found substantial num -
bers of genes with differential levels of expression, notably LMO4 . We 
are presently extending these studies to earlier developmental ages. 
Finally, a recently described human brain malformation preferentially 
disrupts the right perisylvian region but not the left, suggesting a gene 
that may be involved in hemisphere-specific development. Supported by the NINDS, HHMI, the NLM Family Foundation and the Simons 
Foundation. C.A.W. is an Investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute.
S19. Signalling Pathways Deduced from a Global Analysis of 
Spatial Gene Expression Patterns
A. Visel1, J. Carson2, J. Oldekamp1, M. Warnecke1, V. Jakubcakova1, X. Zhou1, 
C. Shaw3, G. Alvarez-Bolado1, G. Eichele1;  
1Genes and Behavior Department, MPI Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Ger -
many, 2Biological Monitoring and Modeling Department, Pacific Northwest Na -
tional Laboratory, Richland, WA, United States, 3Department of Molecular and 
Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States.
Automated in situ  hybridization (ISH) permits construction of com -
prehensive atlases of gene expression patterns in mammals. When 
web-accessible, such atlases become searchable digital expression 
maps of individual genes and offer an entryway to elucidate genetic 
interactions and signaling pathways. An atlas housing ~1,000 spatial 
gene expression patterns of the mid-gestation mouse embryo was 
generated. Patterns were textually annotated using a controlled vo -
cabulary comprising 90 anatomical features. Hierarchical clustering 
of annotations was carried out using distance scores calculated from 
the similarity between pairs of patterns across all anatomical struc -
tures. This ordered hundreds of complex expression patterns into a 
matrix that reflected the embryonic architecture and the relatedness 
of patterns of expression. Clustering yielded twelve distinct groups of 
expression pattern. Because of similarity of expression patterns within 
a group, members of this group may be components of regulatory cas -
cades. We focused on group 7 which is composed of 80 genes, many 
of which encoded regulatory proteins such as Pax6, an evolutionary 
conserved transcriptional master mediator of the development. By 
combining ISH on Pax6 -deficient embryos, bioinformatics-driven Pax6 
binding site selection, and Pax6 binding site validation by means of 
electromobility shift assays, we identify numerous new genes that are 
transcriptionally regulated by Pax6 in the developing neocortex. Hence 
cluster analysis of annotated gene expression patterns derived from 
ISH is a novel approach to unravel components of signaling cascades 
regulating critical aspects of mammalian development, physiology and 
pathophysiology.
S20. New mechanisms of human genetic disease
M. De Gobbi1, V. Viprakasit2, J. Hughes1, C. Fisher1, V. J. Buckle1, H. Ayyub1, 
R. J. Gibbons1, D. Vernimmen1, Y. Yoshinaga3, P. de Jong3, J. F. Chen4, E. M. 
Rubin4, W. G. Wood1, D. Bowden5, D. R. Higgs1;  
1MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, 
Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Department of Pediatrics, Mahidol University, Bang -
kok, Thailand, 3BACPAC Resources, Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, 
CA, United States, 4Genome Science, Genomic Division, Lawrence Berkeley 
National Laboratory, CA, United States, 5Clinical Genetics Laboratory, Monash 
Medical Centre, Clayton, Australia.
We describe a new mechanism underlying human genetic disease by 
identifying a gain of function regulatory SNP (rSNP) that causes a form 
of alpha thalassaemia which occurs at polymorphic frequencies in 
Melanesia. Association studies localised the mutation to a 168kb seg -
ment of the genome including the alpha globin locus but conventional 
analyses failed to detect any molecular defect. After re-sequencing 
this region and using a combination of chromatin immunoprecipitation 
and expression analysis on a tiled oligonucleotide array, a regulatory 
SNP (rSNP) was identified in a nondescript region of the genome lying 
between the alpha globin genes and their highly conserved, remote, 
upstream regulatory elements. The rSNP creates a new promoter-like 
element which interferes with normal activation of all downstream al -
pha-like genes. This not only demonstrates a new mechanism of hu -
man genetic disease but also illustrates an important general strategy 
for distinguishing between neutral and functionally important rSNPs.
S21. Chromosome dynamics in cytokine gene expression
C. Spilianakis, T. Town, R. A. Flavell ;  
Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
CT, United States.
In the last few years, we have found that regulatory elements on one 
chromosome associate with genes on another chromosome. The sys -
tem that we study is the differentiation of naïve, precursor CD4 T cells 
into different kinds of effector helper T cells. We first observed inter -Concurrent Symposia 10
chromosomal association of the TH1 ifnγ locus and TH2 loci, which 
are mutually exclusively expressed by two subtypes of differentiated T 
helper cells, precedes differentiation and may act as a checkpoint for T 
cell fate determination. Since this primary observation, we have found 
several other cases of interchromosomal associations between differ -
ent cytokine loci in the naïve T cell precursors. Interestingly, upon TH 
cell differentiation, these associations are terminated and replaced by 
interactions between expressed loci. Regulatory elements in one locus 
appear to play an active role in orchestrating processes across these 
chromosomes. The interchromosomal interactions we describe appear 
to direct either activatory or silencing roles in gene transcription.
S22. Molecular mechanisms of congenital hyperinsulinism
P. De Lonlay1,2, C. Bellanné-Chantelot3, I. Giurgea1, M. Ribeiro4, V. Valayan -
nopoulos1, Y. Aigrain5, J. Robert6, F. Brunelle7, J. Rahier8, C. Fékété5, Y. de 
Keyzer9, F. Jaubert10;  
1Service de neuropédiatrie et de maladies métaboliques, Hôpital Necker 
Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 2INSERM-U781, Paris, France, 3Service de 
biologie moléculaire, Hôpital Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 41Service 
Hospitalier Frédéric Joliot, Département de Recherche Médicale, Direction des 
Sciences du Vivant,, Orsay, France, 5Service de chirurgie viscérale, Hôpital 
Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 6Service de diabétologie, Hôpital 
Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 7Service de radiologie pédiatrique, 
Hôpital Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 8Service d’anatomopathologie, 
Université de Louvain, Louvain, Belgium, 9INSERM-U781, Hôpital Necker En -
fants-Malades, Paris, France, 10Service d’anatomopathologie, Hôpital Necker 
Enfants-Malades, Paris, France.
Persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (HI) is the most 
important cause of hypoglycemia. HI is a heterogeneous disorder 
which may be divided into two forms on the basis of the histopathologi -
cal lesion, but which are clinically indistinguishable: diffuse (DiHI) and 
focal (FoHI).
FoHI is characterized by somatic islet-cell hyperplasia, which is as -
sociated with hemi- or homozygosity of a paternally inherited mutation 
of the sulfonylurea-receptor ( ABCC8  or SUR1 ) or the inward rectifying 
potassium channel genes ( KCNJ11  or Kir6.2 ) on chromosome 11p15, 
and loss of the maternal allele in the hyperplastic islets. The focal le -
sion is a sporadic event, as indicated by the somatic molecular abnor -
mality in the pancreas, the observation of discordant identical twins 
and our experience. However, FoHI occurring in consanguineous fam -
ily can repeat with a diffuse form.
DiHI is a heterogeneous disorder which can be caused by various de -
fects in the regulation of insulin secretion by the pancreatic beta-cell. 
The same genes can be implicated in neonatal diabetes or MODY. 
These include:
i) channelopathies affecting either the SUR1  or the KIR6.2  channel; 
Recessive ABCC8  mutations and, more rarely, recessive KCNJ11  mu-
tations, are responsible for the majority of diffuse and severe neonatal 
HI resistant to medical treatment. Dominant ABCC8  mutations are re -
sponsible for less severe HI sensitive to diazoxide;
ii) metabolic HI since anaplerosis appears to play an important role 
in the secretion of insulin, including GCK , GDH  and probably SCHAD  
deficiencies; the two first causes are dominantly inherited or caused 
by a de novo  mutation;
iii) defects of insulin transcription factors ( HNF4A  mutations described 
in MODY and HI) or insulin receptor, with de novo or dominantly-inher -
ited mutations, or defect in proinsulin processing.
Syndromic HI (CDG, HI/HA by overactivity of GDH with hyperammo -
nemia, Sotos, Beckwith-Wiedemann and Kabuki syndromes) is rare in 
our recruitment. Symptoms associated to diazoxide-sensitive hypogly -
caemia are mental retardation, diarrhea, liver abnormalities, gigantism, 
or malformations. The differential diagnosis is facticious hypoglycemia 
secondary to Munchausen by proxy syndrome.
S23. Title not available as per date of printing
J. M. Houghton ;  
Department of Medicine, GI Division (JH), Department of Cancer Biology, 
Worcester, MA, United States.
No abstract available as per date of printing. Please check www.eshg.
org for updates in the online database.S24. Stem cell renewal and the Nanog gene
A. Smith ;  
Wellcome Trust Centre for Stem Cell Research, Department of Biochemistry, 
School of the Biological Sciences, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
No abstract available as per date of printing. Please check www.eshg.
org for updates in the online database.
S25. The role of Pax5 in B-cell commitment and 
lymphomagenesis
C. Cobaleda1, W. Jochum2, M. Busslinger1;  
1Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria, 
2Department of Pathology, University Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.
Lineage commitment and differentiation to a mature cell type are con -
sidered to be unidirectional and irreversible processes under physi -
ological conditions. Mature B lymphocytes critically depend on the 
transcription factor Pax5 for their differentiation and function. Here we 
show that conditional Pax5  deletion allowed mature B cells from pe -
ripheral lymphoid organs to dedifferentiate in vivo back to early uncom -
mitted progenitors in the bone marrow, which rescued T-lymphopoiesis 
in the thymus of T cell-deficient mice. These B cell-derived T-lympho -
cytes carried not only immunoglobulin heavy- and light-chain gene 
rearrangements, but also participated as functional T cells in immune 
reactions. Notably, mice lacking Pax5  in mature B cells also developed 
aggressive lymphomas, which were identified by their gene expression 
profile as progenitor cell tumours. Hence, the complete loss of Pax5 
in late B cells could initiate lymphoma development and uncovered 
an extraordinary plasticity of mature peripheral B cells despite their 
advanced differentiation stage.
S26. Copy number variation in the human genome
S. W. Scherer ;  
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
The advent of genome-scanning technology and comparative DNA 
analysis has uncovered a significant extent of structural variation in the 
human genome. Structural variants can include microscopic and more 
commonly submicroscopic deletions, duplications, insertions, and 
large-scale copy number variants - collectively termed copy number 
variants (CNVs) or polymorphisms - as well as, inversions and translo -
cations. CNVs are the most prevalent form of structural variation and 
they can comprise millions of nucleotides of heterogeneity within every 
genome, having an important contribution to human diversity and dis -
ease susceptibility. We have been applying numerous experimental 
and data mining approaches to catalogue the complete complement of 
CNVs in worldwide populations, as well as to characterize the genomic 
features and affects of CNVs. Our collective data, integrated with all 
other available information, is released in the ‘Database of Genomic 
Variants’ (http://projects.tcag.ca/variation/), which we are continually 
curating and upgrading. The database serves as a resource to assist 
numerous clinical research studies. Our latest data assessing CNV 
content for involvement in disease will also be presented.
S27. Destabilization of the NFAT Signaling Pathway in Down 
Syndrome
I. A. Graef1, G. R. Crabtree2, A. Polleri1, U. Francke3;  
1Dept.of Pathology, Stanford, CA, United States, 2Dept.of Developmental Biol -
ogy & Pathology, HHMI, Stanford, CA, United States, 3Dept.of Genetics, Stan -
ford, CA, United States.
Trisomy 21 results in Down Syndrome (DS), but little is known about 
how a 1.5-fold increase in gene dosage produces the pleiotropic phe -
notypes of DS. Studies of patients with partial trisomy 21 have defined 
a DS critical region (DSCR) on chromosome 21q. We have recently 
shown that increased dosage of two genes, found within the DSCR,  
cooperatively reduces the activity of the calcineurin/NFAT signaling 
pathway, which is a critical regulator of vertebrate development (1,2). 
At the centromeric border of the DSCR is DSCR1 , a member of a 
family of closely related inhibitors of the protein phosphatase calcineu -
rin. DSCR1 is blocks the calcineurin dependent nuclear localization of 
the NFATc proteins in response to Ca2+ influx. DYRK1a  is telomeric to 
DSCR1  and encodes a nuclear kinase that blocks NFAT signaling by 
rapid nuclear export of NFATc proteins. We found that mice harbour -
ing mutations of the four genes encoding NFATc transcription factors, 
individually and in combinations, exhibit many of the characteristics of 
DS. Transgenic expression of DYRK1a and DSCR1 produces features Concurrent Symposia 11
at E13.5 similar to those seen in DS and NFATc mutant mice. Math -
ematical modelling of the NFAT pathway, which includes positive and 
negative feedback loops, predicts that a 1.5-fold increase in DSCR1 
and DYRK1a levels will reduce NFAT activity and alter the expression 
of target genes. These studies raise the question that perturbation of 
the NFAT genetic circuit by increased dosage of these genes may ex -
plain many of the developmental phenotypes in DS. More generally 
this suggests that developmental defects may arise from the specific 
susceptibilities of genetic regulatory circuits.
1. Arron, J. R. et al. NFAT dysregulation by increased dosage of 
DSCR1 and DYRK1A on chromosome 21. Nature (2006).
2. Graef, I. A., Chen, F. & Crabtree, G. R. NFAT signaling in vertebrate 
development. Curr Opin Genet Dev 11, 505-12. (2001).
S28. The Tc1 mouse, an aneuploid mouse with a human 
chromosome that models aspects of Down syndrome
A. O’Doherty1,2, S. Ruf1,2, C. Mulligan3, V. Hildreth4, M. L. Errington2, S. Cooke2, 
S. Sesay2, S. Modino5, L. Vanes2, D. Hernandez1,2, J. M. Linehan1, P. Sharpe5, 
S. Brandner1, T. V. P. Bliss2, D. J. Henderson4, D. Nizetic3, V. L. J Tybulewicz2, 
E. M. C. Fisher1;  
1Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, Institute of Neurology, London, 
United Kingdom, 2National Institute for Medical Research, Mill Hill, London, 
United Kingdom, 3Centre for Haematology, Institute of Cell and Molecular Sci -
ence, Barts and The London - Queen Mary’s School of Medicine, London, 
United Kingdom, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University of Newcastle upon 
Tyne, International Centre for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, London, United King -
dom, 5Department of Craniofacial Development, Kings College London, Guy’s 
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
Down syndrome (DS) arises from trisomy human chromosome 21 
(Hsa21) and is the most common known genetic cause of mental retar -
dation, and also results in increased susceptibility for other disorders, 
such as heart defects. DS is a complex genetic disorder likely involv -
ing several ‘major effect’ dosage sensitive genes on Hsa21 and their 
interaction with the rest of genome/environment. To help towards our 
understanding of DS we generated a mouse model in which an almost 
complete Hsa21 segregates through the germline. This trans-species 
aneuploid mouse strain, ‘Tc1’, has widespread novel phenotypes in -
cluding in behaviour, synaptic plasticity, cerebellar neuronal number, 
heart development and mandible size, that relate to human DS. Tran -
schromosomic mouse lines such as Tc1 could be useful genetic tools 
for dissecting other human aneuploidies and syndromes arising from 
dosage sensitivity of multiple genes.
S29. Polymorphic miRNA-mediated gene regulation: 
contribution to phenotypic variation and disease
M. Georges ;  
Unit of Animal Genomics, Department of Animal Production, Liège, Belgium.
The expression level of at least one third of mammalian genes is post-
transcriptionally fine-tuned by ∼ 1,000 microRNAs assisted by the RNA 
silencing machinery comprising tens of components.  Polymorphisms 
and mutations in the corresponding sequence space (machinery, miR -
NA precursors and target sites) are likely to make a significant con -
tribution to phenotypic variation including disease susceptibility.  We 
herein review basic miRNA biology in animals, survey the available 
evidence for DNA sequence polymorphisms affecting miRNA-medi -
ated gene regulation and hence phenotype, and discuss their possible 
importance in the determinism of complex traits.
S30. Epigenetics and X-inactivation
P. Navarro, C. Chureau, L. Duret, P. Avner, C. Rougeulle ;  
Unité de Génétique Moléculaire Murine, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
Some 150 years after the emergence of genetics, epigenetic mecha -
nisms are increasingly understood to be fundamental players in phe -
notype transmission and development. In addition, epigenetic altera -
tions are now linked to several human diseases, including cancers. A 
common feature of many epigenetic phenomena, for which X-chromo -
some inactivation (XCI) is the paradigm, is the implication of non-cod -
ing RNAs. The X-inactivation centre, which controls the initiation of 
X-inactivation, hosts several such non-coding RNAs, of which at least 
two play essential roles in the process in the mouse. The Xist gene pro -
duces a nuclear RNA that, when expressed in sufficient amount, coats 
the chromosome in cis and induce its silencing. Tsix, a transcript anti -
sense to Xist, is a negative regulator of its sense counterpart, whose chromatin-remodelling activities have been shown by us and others to 
be important for the epigenetic programming of Xist expression. 
Although X-chromosome inactivation has been adopted as a dos -
age compensation mechanism in all therian mammals, phenotypic 
divergences are known to exist between species and to correlate with 
genotypic differences, in which non-coding RNAs are particularly con -
cerned. As essential as it is in placental mammals, Xist was recently 
found to have no homolog in marsupials and to be derived from a pro -
tein-coding gene with ancestral functions unrelated to X-inactivation. 
Likewise Tsix, which is clearly involved in some aspect of X-inactiva -
tion in the mouse, has seen its existence in human actively debated. 
The observation that X chromosome inactivation can be achieved in 
different species through distinct pathways, most of which remaining to 
be deciphered, underlies the mechanistic plasticity of epigenetic proc -
esses during evolution.
S31. DNA methylation signatures in colorectal cancer
J. Rodriguez1, J. Frigola1, R. Mayor1, L. Vives2, M. Jordà1, M. A. Peinado2;  
1Institut d’Investigacio Biomèdica de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L’Hospitalet, Bar -
celona, Spain, 2Institut de Medicina Predictiva i Personalitzada del Càncer 
(IMPPC), Badalona, Barcelona, Spain.
Cancer cells are characterized by a generalized disruption of the DNA 
methylation pattern involving an overall decrease in the level of 5-
methylcytosine together with regional hypermethylation of particular 
CpG islands. The extent of both DNA hypomethylation and hypermeth -
ylation in the tumor cell is likely to reflect distinctive biological and clini -
cal features. We have analyzed DNA methylation profiles in sporadic 
colorectal carcinomas, synchronous adenoma-carcinoma pairs and 
their matching normal mucosa using different techniques. All tumors 
displayed altered patterns of DNA methylation in reference to normal 
tissue. Genome-wide hypomethylation and hypermethylation associ -
ate with different features in colorectal tumorigenesis suggesting that 
DNA hypermethylation and hypomethylation are independent pro -
cesses and play different roles in colorectal tumor progression. While 
hypermethylation is associated with patient’s sex, tumor staging, and 
specific gene hypermethylation, hypomethylation is an early event, as -
sociated with chromosomal instability and poor prognosis.
S32. Testing and estimation of genotype and haplotype effects in 
case/control and family-based association studies
H. Cordell ;  
Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
United Kingdom.
A variety of methods are used for the analysis of data generated in 
genetic association studies. Most methods focus on the detection of 
genetic effects using case/control or family (pedigree) data, although 
arguably a more interesting question, once a region of disease as -
sociation has been identified, is to estimate the relevant genotypic or 
haplotypic effects and to perform tests of complex null hypotheses 
such as the hypothesis that some loci, but not others, are associated 
with disease. We previously developed a regression-based approach 
(Cordell and Clayton 2002; Cordell et al. 2004) that provides a unified 
framework for detection or estimation of effects using case/control or 
family data. This approach allows genotype and haplotype analysis 
at an arbitrary number of linked and unlinked multiallelic loci, as well 
as modelling of more complex effects such as gene-gene interactions 
(epistasis), gene-environment interactions, parent-of-origin and mater -
nal genotype effects. In practice, many genetic studies contain mod -
erate to large amounts of missing genotype data, either arising from 
individuals who have not been fully genotyped, or from the inability to 
infer phase (alleles received in coupling from a single parent), given 
unphased genotype data. We have recently been exploring different 
approaches to deal with this missing data problem in the context of 
case/control (Cordell 2006) or family (Croiseau et al. 2007) data. In 
particular, multiple imputation approaches, in which the missing data 
is repeatedly filled in using the correct posterior probability distribution 
(given the observed data), appear to represent a promising approach 
that has some advantages over missing data likelihood methods with 
regards to model flexibility and ease of use.Concurrent Symposia 12
S33. Genomics of bipolar affective: from multiply affected 
families to the general population
M. Nöthen ;  
Department of Genomics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
Bipolar affective disorder (BPAD) is characterized by severe episodes 
of mania and depression and represents a common disorder affect -
ing approximately 1% of the world’s population. Therefore, BPAD is 
considered to be one of the top public health problems associated with 
a significant morbidity. Although formal genetic studies consistently 
provide strong evidence for a major genetic contribution to BPAD, the 
underlying genetic architecture is poorly understood.
Using family samples from different European populations we impli -
cated several chromosomal regions in the development of BPAD, in -
cluding regions on chromosomes 1, 4, 6, 8, and 10 (e.g. Cichon et 
al. Hum Mol Genet 2001, Schumacher et al. Am J Hum Genet 2005). 
A genome-wide interaction linkage scan provided strong interaction 
evidence between BPAD genes on chromosomes 2q22-q24 and 6q23-
q24, and 2q22-q24 and 15q26. Focusing on specific candidate genes, 
the best evidence was obtained for G72/G30 and tryptophan hydox -
ylase 2 (e.g. Schulze et al Am J Psychiatry 2006). The recent first 
genome-wide association study was a further progress in the genetic 
study of BPAD showing that several genes, each of modest effect, re -
producibly influence disease risk (Baumer et al. Mol Psychiatry 2007). 
Specifically, the gene DGKH showed significant association even after 
conservative experiment-wise correction.
The causative mutations in the implicated genes for BPAD, however, 
remain to be identified. As soon as these will be known, samples of 
patients collected from the general population will allow estimation of 
parameters such as relative risks and etiological fraction.
S34. Large population studies
W. E. R. Ollier ;  
Centre for Integrated Genomic Medical Research, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, United Kingdom.
Approaches in Genetic Epidemiology have now advanced technically 
to such as extent that it is increasingly possible to capture longitudi -
nal real-time clinical phenotype and exposure data relating to massive 
population samples. When this is combined with relentless advances 
in high-throughput and low-cost technologies to define either labora -
tory-based phenotypes/biomarkers or genetic/transcriptomic profiles, 
vast meta-databases are being generated. Analysis and mining of 
such multi-level datasets will reveal important insights into the health 
and disease at both a population and individual level. This will par -
ticularly relate to disease progression, and gene-environment interac -
tions relating to drugs (pharmacogenetics) and nutrients (nutrigenom -
ics). Such longitudinal population-based cohort studies are now being 
developed in a range of countries, taking advantage of advances in 
health service infrastructure for electronic clinical record capture. UK 
Biobank (www.ukbiobank.ac.uk) is such a study, designed to investi -
gate both health and disease in the UK.
At the same time, large national and international collections of sam -
ples and data are being assembled for case-control studies of specific 
diseases (www.dna-network.ac.uk), www.genomeutwin.org). These 
are being used in whole genome association studies using high den -
sity genotyping (>500,000 SNP loci). Examples of such projects in -
clude the WTCCC (www.wtccc.org.uk) and GAIN (www.fnih.org/GAIN/
GAIN_home.shtml).
Such massive initiatives are required to generate the levels of power 
and replication studies to detect small genotype relative risks (<1.2). 
However, initiatives of this complexity and size are only possible 
through increasing international collaboration and data/sample shar -
ing.
New International and European initiatives are directed at such needs 
and these will specifically address what framework has to be put in 
place for greater standardisation and harmonisation of data/sample 
collection, management and exchange, and what measures of quality 
assurance/control are required. Further important considerations are 
the ethical, legal and sociological frameworks that these studies need. 
The context and advances being made in the field of large population 
studies will be discussed.S35. Cell division and modelling cancer in Drosophila
E. Castellanos, E. Rebollo, P. Dominguez, C. Gonzalez ;  
Cell Division Laboratory, Institut de Recerca Biomedica (IRB Barcelona), Bar -
celona, Spain.
Asymmetric stem cell division is crucial to ensure cellular diversity, tis -
sue repair and organ homeostasis during embryo development and 
adult life. The key issue during stem cell asymmetric division is the 
unequal segregation of cell fate determinants into each of the two re -
sulting cells, thus priming one of the daughter cells to differentiate and 
contribute tissue mass, while the other retains stem-cell identity, and 
can go into another round of asymmetric mitosis. Loss-of-function of 
any of several genes that control the fate of the daughters of Dro -
sophila larval neuroblasts -the stem cells that originate the fly´s CNS- 
results in the growth of malignant neuroblastomas. One of the most 
conspicuous asymmetric clues displayed by larval neuroblasts is the 
mechanism of spindle assembly and spindle dynamics, which indeed 
governs the marked size asymmetry of the neuroblast’s daughters. I 
will present and discuss recent results obtained in our laboratory re -
garding the connexion between spindle dynamics, segregation of fate 
determinants and tumor suppression in these model stem cells.
S36. How is time controlled during embryonic development? 
Lessons from the chick embryo.
I. Palmeirim , F. Bajanca;  
Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences, 
Braga, Portugal.
Throughout the Animal Kingdom, the time of embryonic development 
is maintained and strictly controlled. Each step of the process is suc -
cessful only when it occurs at the right time and place. The impor -
tance of time control during embryo development is particularly evident 
during somitogenesis, the process by which the vertebrate presom -
itic mesoderm is segmented along its anterior-posterior axis to form 
somites. These are formed in a highly controlled way, both temporally 
and spatially, and later give rise to definitive segmented structures, in -
cluding vertebrae and ribs. In 1997, chick presomitic cells were shown 
to undergo several cycles of hairy1  gene expression, providing the 
first molecular evidence for the existence of a molecular clock underly -
ing the rhythm of somitogenesis (Palmeirim et al., Cell 1997). We cur -
rently know that this molecular clock operates in all vertebrate groups 
studied, in more than one embryonic tissue, with different time-periods 
(Pascoal et al., 2007; Pascoal and Palmeirim, 2007) and an increas -
ing number of genes belonging to the Notch, FgF and Wnt signalling 
pathways are being implicated in this clocked mechanism (reviewed 
by Andrade et al., 2007, in press ).
References  
- Andrade RP, Palmeirim I, Bajanca F. Molecular Clocks Underlying 
Vertebrate Embryo Segmentation: a Ten-Year-Old hairy-Go-Round. 
Birth Defects Research - Part C “Embryo Today”, in press.
- Pascoal S and Palmeirim I. Portuguese contributions to the embry -
onic molecular clock discovery and characterization. International 
Journal of Developmental Biology, in press.
- Pascoal S, Carvalho CR, Rodriguez-León J, Delphini MC, Duprez3 
D, Thorsteinsdóttir S and Palmeirim I (2007) A molecular clock oper -
ates during chick autopod proximal-distal outgrowth. Journal of Mo -
lecular Biology, Apr 27;368(2):303-9.
- Palmeirim I, Henrique D, Ish-Horowicz D and Pourquié O. (1997) 
- Avian hairy  gene expression identifies a molecular clock linked to 
vertebrate segmentation and somitogenesis - Cell 91, 639-648.
S37. Conditional gene targeting to model human diseases in 
mice
K. Rajewsky ;  
CBR Institute for Biochemical Research, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
United States.
Conditional gene targeting using the Cre/loxP recombination system 
allows one to introduce mutations into the mouse genome in a cell 
type-specific or inducible manner, and thus to model acquired human 
diseases in mice. In addition to the generation of loss-of-function mu -
tations, Cre-mediated recombination can also be used to conditionally 
turn on gene expression. This latter approach is particularly useful for 
the analysis of the role of oncogenes in the pathogenesis of cancer. 
I will exemplify this approach by recent experiments addressing the 
role of the NF κB signaling pathway and of Epstein-Barr-Virus in lym -Concurrent Symposia 1
phomagenesis. I will also draw attention to pitfalls of the conditional 
gene targeting approach, which can lead to serious misinterpretations 
of experiments.
S38. On principal & modifying genes in Hirschsprung disease
A. Chakravarti ;  
Center for Complex Disease Genomics, McKusick - Nathans Institute of Ge -
netic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 
United States.
Hirschsprung disease (HSCR), or congenital aganglionosis, is a clas -
sical multifactorial disorder that has continued to teach us important 
lessons in non-Mendelian inheritance and the genomics of complex 
disorders.  To date, we know of 9 genes that harbor rare mutations, all incompletely penetrant but with greater effects in males than females.  
One of these genes, the RET tyrosine kinase, also harbors a polymor -
phism in an enhancer leading to reduced RET transcription and high 
association with short segment HSCR (S-HSCR). Interestingly, the en -
hancer polymorphism modifies the genetic effects of rare mutations 
not only for RET in HSCR but many other HSCR-related traits such 
as Down syndrome, Congenital Central Hypoventilation syndrome and Bardet-Biedel syndrome.  Thus, a single gene can have a diversity of 
mutations with differential effects but the same mutation can also have 
differential effects depending on its interactions with other (mutant) genes.  In HSCR, the genetic modifiers can be both allelic and non-allelic.  I will describe the genetic tests needed to distinguish between 
these scenarios.
S39. Why use the candidate gene approach to find CF 
modifiers?
M. Drumm1, M. Knowles2;  
1Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States, 2University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
Genes that do not cause, but modify, a clinical phenotype are of medi -
cal interest as these genes provide information about the biology caus -
ing the phenotype and will potentially suggest therapeutic strategies to 
treat the disease phenotype. There are various strategies to identify 
these modifying genes and one of the key design features is the choice 
of variants selected. Technologic advances are making genome scans 
more feasible and affordable, and these approaches allow one to test 
hypotheses about candidate genes, as well as identify genes not pre -
viously considered to contribute to the phenotype. However, these 
scans are still costly and therefore candidate gene approaches are 
still useful. The candidate gene approach relies on knowledge of the 
pathophysiology of the disease to be effective, as genes whose prod -
ucts lie in relevant pathways will be assessed. Consequently, when 
a candidate gene is found to associate with the phenotype, some in -
formation is already known about the gene’s role in the phenotype. 
Therefore, this approach is most likely to verify a pathway’s involve -
ment in the disease phenotype, rather than to identify new pathways. 
We have taken the candidate gene approach to identifying modifiers 
of cystic fibrosis. In doing so, we have incorporated several strategies 
to identify candidates. One approach has been to examine genes in 
pathways thought to contribute to the pathophysiology of the disease, 
such as epithelial ion transport mediators, inflammatory cascade com -
ponents, endocrine pathways and innate defense, to name a few. A 
second approach has been to examine genes that have been reported 
to modify or cause related disorders, such as asthma and chronic ob -
structive pulmonary disease (COPD), as CF, asthma and COPD are 
likely to have overlapping biology. Using this candidate approach, we 
have tested apparent associating genes in at least two populations of 
CF patients to verify associations. These approaches have identified 
transforming growth factor beta1, and genes in inflammatory pathways 
and airway function as genes contributing to disease severity.
S40. Genes that modify iron loading in mice
N. Andrews1,2;  
1Childrens Hospital, Karp Family Research Laboratories, RM 8-125, Boston, 
MA, United States, 2Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
Adult onset hemochromatosis, an iron overload disorder affecting the 
liver, heart and pancreas, is usually caused by mutations in HFE. How -
ever, only a fraction of patients homozygous for disease-associated 
mutations develop clinical hemochromatosis. A wide range in the se -
verity of iron loading and its complications can be explained by both ge -netic factors (modifier genes) and environmental factors (e.g., alcohol 
intake, dietary iron consumption, and menstruation). Iron physiology in 
mice closely resembles that in humans, making the mouse a valuable 
genetic model. We undertook a quantitative trait locus (QTL) analysis 
in mice to identify modifier genes that might influence the severity of 
hemochromatosis. We identified a strong QTL on mouse chromosome 
9 that differentially affected macrophage iron burden in C57BL/10J and 
SWR/J mice. A C57BL/10J missense allele of an evolutionarily con -
served gene, Mon1a, co-segregated with the QTL in congenic mouse 
lines. We present evidence that Mon1a is a cytoplasmic protein in -
volved in trafficking of ferroportin, the major mammalian iron exporter, 
to the surface of iron-recycling macrophages. Differences in amounts 
of surface ferroportin correlate with differences in cellular iron content. 
Mon1a is also important for trafficking of cell surface and secreted mol -
ecules unrelated to iron metabolism, suggesting that it plays a funda -
mental role in the mammalian secretory apparatus.
S41. Genetic Modulation of Sickle Cell Anemia
M. H. Steinberg ;  
Center of Excellence in Sickle Cell Disease, Boston Medical Center; Dept. of 
Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States.
Sickle cell anemia, a Mendelian disease caused by homozygosity for 
a beta-globin gene mutation ( HBB, glu6val)), has notorious phenotypic 
variability. We are conducting candidate gene and genome-wide asso -
ciation studies (GWA) to understand the relationships between genetic 
heterogeneity and the phenotype of disease.
Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) is the most powerful modulator of sickle cell 
anemia. HbF levels are regulated by at least three quantitative trait 
loci (QTL) on 8q, Xp and 6q and by elements linked to HBB. When 
panels of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were used to study 
the association of variability in these QTLs in two independent sickle 
cell anemia patient groups, SNPs in TOX ( 8q12.1) were associated 
with HbF. TOX belongs to a high mobility group box protein family that 
binds DNA with high sequence specificity. Many potential TOX binding 
sites, including one in the HBG2  promoter are found near the HBB 
gene cluster. GWA using pooled DNA confirmed the association on 
SNPs in 6q and 8q associated with HbF and identified promising new 
areas for further study.
Stroke is a common complication of childhood sickle cell anemia. Us -
ing Bayesian network modeling to evaluate the interactions between 
many candidate gene SNPs and the risk of a stroke, we developed a 
prognostic model for stroke. SNPs in 11 genes and four clinical vari -
ables, interacted in a complex network of dependency to modulate the 
risk of stroke. Case-control association studies examining candidate 
genes in other subphenotypes of sickle cell anemia showed associa -
tions with several genes of the TGF-beta/BMP pathway.
To study the genetic association with a global estimate of disease se -
verity, we developed a model predicting which patients with sickle cell 
disease are at risk for near-term death and validated this model in two 
independent patient groups. Using this severity score as a phenotype 
of disease, SNPs in EDN1, ECE1, KDR, EGF and NOX3 were associ -
ated with overall disease severity .
Understanding the genetic modulation of the hemolytic, vascular and 
inflammatory components of this disease could provide important 
prognostic information and suggest novel approaches to treatment.
S42. Inborn errors of mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation: 
From newborn screening to diagnosis and treatment
R. J. A. Wanders ;  
University of Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center, Lab Genetic Metabolic 
Diseases, F0-224, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
The mitochondrial fatty acid (FA) beta-oxidation deficiencies consti -
tute an expanding group of clinically and genetically heterogeneous 
disorders. Originally, diagnosis of patients suffering from a fatty acid 
oxidation (FAO) disorder was difficult, but the introduction of (tandem) 
mass-spectrometry and in particular its use for the analysis of acyl -
carnitines in plasma from patients, has revolutionized the diagnosis of 
FAO deficiencies. In fact, since tandem mass spectrometry has turned 
out to be so robust and reliable, existing neonatal screening programs 
have been extended in many countries around the world and now in -
clude different FAO disorders, using tandem mass spectrometric anal -
ysis of acylcarnitines in blood spots. The best known FAO disorder 
is medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency with an Concurrent Symposia 14
incidence of 1:5-10.000, at least in most Western countries. Inclusion 
of MCADD in new neonatal screening programs is obvious since it is 
known that 25% of MCADD patients die upon the first hypoglycemic 
attack. Follow-up diagnostic studies in patients with a positive acyl -
carnitine screening result are usually based on the analysis of me -
tabolites, including acylcarnitines in plasma. Since metabolites may be 
erroneously normal in affected patients, we have investigated whether 
it would be possible to measure the candidate enzymes directly, i.e. in 
blood cells. Our results show that all enzymes of mitochondrial fatty 
acid oxidation are expressed in lymphocytes and that lymphocyte 
analysis is a reliable and quick method to discriminate between false 
and true positives.
The second part of our research program is focused on the generation 
of new therapeutic options, especially for defects in the oxidation of 
long-chain fatty acids, using selective knockout mice.
S43. Glycosylation defects
G. Matthijs ;  
University of Leuven, Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium.
Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation (CDG) are an expanding group 
of inherited metabolic diseases caused by defects in the synthesis and 
processing of glycoproteins. The genetic defect in CDG-Ia, the most 
common type of the disease, was reported 10 years ago. Since then, 
more than 20 novel defects have been described, mainly in the endo -
plasmic reticulum (type I) but also in the Golgi (type II) (Freeze, Nat 
Rev Genet.7:537-51, 2006).
The systematic search towards other defects in the endoplasmic 
reticulum is based on the analysis of intermediate structures of the 
dolichol-linked oligosaccharides and takes advantage of the strong ho -
mology with yeast. The corresponding human genes have now been 
identified, and for nearly also steps in the synthesis of dol-PP-GlcNAc -
2Man9Glc3, at least one or a few patients with a defect have been 
identified. On the contrary, the number of type II cases with a known 
defect in the Golgi compartment, is limited. Up till now, only a few de -
fects in the processing of the glycans were identified.
Whereas these CDG cases have defects in genes that encode en -
zymes or transporters that are directly involved in the glycosylation 
process, recent work has shown that the abnormalities may also be 
due to abnormal intracellular trafficking of resident Golgi enzymes or 
transporters involved in glycosylation. Even though the mechanisms 
which allow the selective retention of glycosyltransferases in certain 
cisternae are still poorly understood, it is clear that multiprotein com -
plexes, like the Conserved Oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex, are key 
determinants in their localization. Wu et al. (Nat Med.10:518-23, 2004) 
described a form of CDG caused by a defect in COG7. We have now 
also identified mutations in 2 different COG subunits (Foulquier et al. 
PNAS 103:3764-9, 2006; Hum Mol Genet. 16, 717-730, 2007). These 
observations open a new era of research into CDG.
S44. Pyridoxine metabolism
P. T. Clayton , P. B. Mills;  
Biochemistry Research Group, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United 
Kingdom.
Some infants have epilepsy that is poorly controlled by antiepileptic 
drugs (AED’s) but responds dramatically to treatment with pyridox -
ine or pyridoxal phosphate (pal-P). Mutations in the gene encoding 
pyridox(am)ine phosphate oxidase (PNPO) lead to defective conver -
sion of pyridoxine to pyridoxal phosphate. These infants do not re -
spond to treatment with pyridoxine but their fits cease when they are 
given pal-P. The first patients identified as having PNPO deficiency 
had biochemical changes in their cerebrospinal fluid that suggested 
reduced amounts of pal-P in the brain. These included raised levels 
of 3-methoxytyrosine, threonine and glycine. However, more recently 
mutations have been found in the PNPO  gene in patients ascertained 
on the basis of their response to pal-P treatment and in some of these, 
no abnormality of CSF biochemistry was found.
Seizures responsive to pyridoxine treatment can occur when an in -
born error of metabolism leads to accumulation of an intermediate 
that complexes with pyridoxal phosphate, thus increasing the body’s 
requirement for vitamin B6. The first described example of this was 
hyperprolinaemia type 2 which leads to accumulation of Δ1-pyrroline-
5-carboxylate. The latter forms a condensation product with pal-P. We 
were able to show that the majority of patients with pyridoxine-depen -dent epilepsy (PDE) have mutations in the ALDH7A1  gene encoding 
antiquitin. Antiquitin catalyses the conversion of an equilibrium mixture 
of α-aminoadipic semialdehyde / Δ1-piperideine-6-carboxylate (P6C) to 
α-aminoadipic acid. In the absence of this enzyme, P6C accumulates 
and forms a condensation product with pal-P, thus inactivating it. We 
can now diagnose PDE by measuring α-aminoadipic semialdehyde 
in the urine and confirm the diagnosis by sequencing the ALDH7A1  
gene; a few mutations are found quite frequently. It is becoming clear 
that the phenotypic spectrum of PDE due to antiquitin deficiency in -
cludes patients with late onset seizures, cortical malformations, endo -
crine dysfunction and a partial response to AED’s.
S45. The adenomatous polyposis coli protein as a regulator of 
the cytoskeleton
I. Näthke ;  
Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.
Mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli protein (APC) are com -
mon to most colorectal cancers and occur extremely early during tu -
mourigenesis. The most prominent function of APC is its ability to sup -
port the assembly of a protein complex that regulates the degradation 
of beta-catenin in a Wnt-regulated manner. Accumulating beta-catenin 
causes changes in the activity of TCF/Lef transcription factors. This has 
been implicated in the transformation produced by truncations muta -
tions in APC that disrupt the ability of APC to support a functional beta-
catenin degradation complex. However, APC is also an important reg -
ulator of the cytoskeleton. Inactivating APC in cells causes a decrease 
in cell migration in cultured cells and enterocytes in the intestine. In 
cells, this change is accompanied by changes in post-translationally 
modified microtubules and cell shape. Loss of APC also disrupts mi -
totic spindles and compromises the spindle checkpoint. This leads to 
defects in cell division and produces tetra- and polyloidy in cells and 
tissues lacking APC. Another immediate consequence of APC loss is 
a reduction in apoptosis. Importantly, the mitotic and apoptotic defects 
induced by loss of APC do not require transcriptional changes induced 
by the accumulation of beta-catenin.
In summary, loss of APC leads to the inappropriate accumulation of 
cells with altered differentiation and increased genetic instability to 
provide an efficient means of increasing the number and survival of 
potential tumour cells.
I will describe our work in a number of experimental systems to il -
lustrate the effect of APC on the cytoskeleton and discuss possible 
implication of these findings for tumour initiation and progression.
S46. Wt1 acts at multiple stages during kidney development
K. Wagner1,2, N. Wagner1,2, D. Badro1,3, M. Clarkson1,3, M. Afanetti1,3, E. Berard4, 
A. Schedl1;  
1INSERM U636, Centre de Biochimie, Nice, France, 2present address : IN -
SERM U145, Nice, France, 3Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, Nice, France, 
4Hôpital de l’Archet 2, Nice, France.
Wilms’ tumour or nephroblastoma is a paediatric kidney cancer that is 
believed to arise from nephrogenic rests, embryonic cells of the kidney 
that have failed to differentiate into nephrons. WT1 encodes a zinc-
finger transcription factor that has been shown to be mutated in up to 
15% of Wilms’ tumours. However, mutations in WT1  are also found 
in other congenital diseases affecting urogenital development, most 
notably Denys-Drash (DDS) and Frasier Syndrome. Using in vitro  and 
in vivo  models we are studying the cellular and developmental func -
tion of Wt1. Here we will discuss the role Wt1 plays at various stages 
of kidney development, its direct target genes and the mode of action 
of its various spliced isoforms. We have shown earlier that nephrin 
represents one of the direct downstream targets of Wt1. Analyzing 
nephrin knockout mice we now demonstrate a novel function of this 
gene in heart development. Finally, we will report on an unusual muta -
tion in WT1  that is associated with a rare form of congenital nephrotic 
syndrome with an almost complete absence of glomeruli and severe 
hypertension.
S47. HSP90 modulates developmental and cancer phenotypes
V. van Heyningen , P. Yeyati
MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
HSP90 is a highly-expressed molecular chaperone with roles in main -
taining normal developmental regulators, as well as in the folding of 
mutant proteins. Partial inhibition of HSP90, previously reported to un -15
cover cryptic mutations in Drosophila and Arabidopsis, has now also 
been shown to modulate phenotype in zebrafish.  Using carefully ti -
trated inhibition of HSP90, we identified novel structural eye anomalies 
reminiscent of human microphthalmia and anophthalmia in one strain, 
showing frequent unilaterality, and illustrating the variable penetrance 
that is so often observed with some developmental malformations.  
Some phenotypes with Mendelian inheritance patterns were also mod -ulated in response to inhibitors.  Interestingly, responsive phenotypes 
were associated with missense mutations.  Some showed increased 
severity, others were ameliorated.  The proposed molecular mecha -
nism for this HSP90 function also provides insight into the promising 
cancer therapeutic role of HSP90 inhibitors.1
Concurrent Sessions
C01. A novel ciliary gene is mutated in cerebello-oculo-renal 
syndrome (Joubert syndrome type B) and Meckel syndrome
D. Marion1, L. Baala2, R. Salomon1, C. Laclef3, K. Tory1, F. Silbermann1, S. Au -
dollent2, T. Lacoste1, C. Ozilou4, M. Gubler1, J. Martinovic4, F. Encha-Razavi2,4, 
M. Vekemans5,4, C. Antignac1,4, U. Rüther6, S. Schneider-Maunoury3, T. Attié-
Bitach2,4, S. Saunier1;  
1Inserm U574, Hôpital Necker, Université René Descartes, Paris, France, 2In-
serm U781, Hôpital Necker, Université René Descartes, Paris, France, 3CNRS 
UMR7622, Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement, Université Pierre et 
Marie Curie, Paris, France, 4Department of Genetics, Hôpital Necker, AP-HP, 
Paris, France, 5Inserm U871, Hôpital Necker, Université René Descartes, Paris, 
France, 6Institute for Animal Developmental and Molecular Biology, University 
of Düsseldorf,, Düsseldorf, Germany.
Cerebello-oculo-renal syndrome (CORS), also called Joubert syn -
drome (JS) type B, and Meckel (MKS) syndrome belong to the ciliopa -
thy group of developmental autosomal recessive disorders associated 
with primary cilium dysfunction. Nephronophthisis (NPHP), the most 
frequent genetic cause of renal failure in children and young adults, is 
associated with retinal degeneration and cerebellar vermis aplasia in 
CORS. MKS is characterized by renal cystic dysplasia, central nervous 
system malformations and hepatic developmental defects. Using SNP 
mapping, we identified missense and truncating mutations in a novel 
gene, NPHP8, in both CORS and MKS, and we show that inactivation 
of its mouse orthologue recapitulates the cerebral, renal, craniofacial 
and limb defects of MKS. We further demonstrate that NPHP8 pro -
tein co-localizes at the basal body/centrosomes with nephrocystin-6 
and nephrocystin-4, the protein products of both NPHP6 and NPHP4, 
known disease genes for NPHP. In addition, missense mutations of 
NPHP8 protein found in CORS patients diminishes its interaction with 
nephrocystin-4. Mutations of this novel ciliary in both CORS or MKS 
syndromes identify novel JS (JBTS7) and MKS loci (MKS5) and fur -
ther demonstrate that these phenotypes are a continuum of the same 
underlying disorder.
C02. Pleiotropic effects of CEP20 (NPHP)  mutations extends 
to Meckel-Gruber syndrome
T. Attié-Bitach1,2, L. Baala3, S. Audollent2,1, C. Ozilou2,1, J. Martinovic2, S. 
Sivanandamoorthy1, E. Rattenberry4, S. Saunier5, R. Salomon5, C. Esculpavit1, 
F. McDonald4, A. Munnich1,2, S. Lyonnet1,2, M. C. Gubler5, C. A. Johnson6, F. 
Encha-Razavi1,2, M. Vekemans1,2;  
1Unité INSERM U-781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Université Paris V, 
Paris, France, 2Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 
AP-HP, Paris, France, 3Unité INSERM U-781, Université Paris V, Hôpital 
Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 4West Midlands Regional Genetics, 
Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 5Unité INSERM 
U-574, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Université Paris V, Paris, France, 
6Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, St. James’s University Hospital, Leeds, 
United Kingdom.
Meckel syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive lethal condition char -
acterized by the association of central nervous system malformations, 
postaxial polydactyly, multicystic kidney dysplasia and ductal prolifera -
tion in the portal area of the liver. MKS is genetically heterogeneous 
and 2 genes have been identified: MKS1/FLJ20345  in Finnish kindreds 
and MKS3/TMEM67 in families from Pakistan and Oman. The gene at 
the MKS2  locus remains unknown.
A genome wide linkage scan was performed by Affymetrix 10K SNP 
chips or 10cM-resolution microsatellite markers in consanguineous 
MKS families. Homozygozity on chromosome 12q was observed in 
four families, in an interval containing CEP290 , a gene recently identi -
fied as causative for Joubert syndrome and isolated Leber congenital 
amaurosis. In view of the clinical overlap between MKS and JS, and 
our recent findings of allelism at the MKS3  locus between these two 
disorders, CEP290  was considered as a good candidate. Homozy -
gous truncating mutations were identified in 3/4 families, confirming 
that CEP290  is the gene for MKS on chromosome 12. Sequencing 
of additional cases identified compound heterozygote CEP290  muta -
tions in 2 additional MKS cases and in 3 families presenting a “cere -
bro-reno-digital” syndrome, with a phenotype in between MKS and JS, 
further demonstrating that Meckel and Joubert are the variable expres -
sion of the same disorder. These data identify a fourth locus for MKS 
(MKS4 ) and CEP290  as a gene responsible for MKS, and extend the phenotypic spectrum of CEP290  mutations to severe and lethal cystic 
kidney dysplasia with bile duct proliferation of liver.
C03. A novel vertebrate specific chaperonine related protein 
(BBS12) is involved in Bardet-Biedl syndrome
H. J. Dollfus1, C. Stoetzel1, J. Muller2, V. Laurier1, E. E. Davies3, N. Katsanis4, 
O. Poch2, J. Mandel2;  
1Laboratoire EA 3949, Faculté de Médecine de Strasbourg, Hôpitaux Uni -
versitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Institut de Génétique et de 
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Inserm U596, CNRS, UMR7104, Illkirch, 
France, 3McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine and Departments of 
Ophthalmology and Molecular Biology and Genetics, John Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, United States, 4McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine 
and Departments of Ophthalmology and Molecular Biology and Genetics, John 
Hopkins University,, Baltimore, MD, United States.
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is primarily an autosomal recessive 
ciliopathy defined by progressive retinal degeneration, obesity, cogni -
tive impairment, polydactyly and kidney anomalies. BBS is genetically 
heterogeneous with 11 BBS genes identified to date, which account 
for about 70% of affected families. We have combined SNP array 
homozygosity mapping with in silico  analysis to identify a new BBS 
gene, BBS12 . Patients from two gypsy families were homozygous 
and haploidentical in a 6 Mb region of chromosome 4q27. FLJ35630  
was selected as a candidate as it was predicted to encode a protein 
sharing similarity to members of the type II chaperonin superfamily, 
which includes BBS6 and the recently identified BBS10. Pathogenic 
mutations in both gypsy families, as well as in 14 other families from 
various ethnic backgrounds were found. BBS12  accounts for about 5% 
of all BBS. BBS12 is vertebrate specific and together with BBS6  and 
BBS10  define a novel branch of the type II chaperonin superfamily. 
These three genes are characterized by unusually rapid evolution and 
are likely to perform ciliary functions specific to vertebrates that are 
important in the pathophysiology of the syndrome, and together they 
account for about one third of the total BBS mutational load.
C04. Mutations in SCNA  cause a congenital inability to 
experience pain
C. G. Woods1, J. Cox2, A. Nicholas1;  
1Cambridge Institute of Medical Genetics, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Cam -
bridge Institute of Medical Genetics, Ccambridge, United Kingdom.
The complete inability to sense pain in an otherwise healthy individual 
is a very rare phenotype. In three consanguineous families from north -
ern Pakistan, we mapped the condition as an autosomal-recessive trait 
to chromosome 2q24.3. This region contains the gene SCN9A, encod -
ing the alpha-subunit of the voltage-gated sodium channel, Na(v)1.7, 
which is strongly expressed in nociceptive neurons. Sequence analy -
sis of SCN9A in affected individuals revealed three distinct homozy -
gous nonsense mutations (S459X, I767X and W897X). We show that 
these mutations cause loss of function of Na(v)1.7 by co-expression of 
wild-type or mutant human Na(v)1.7 with sodium channel beta(1) and 
beta(2) subunits in HEK293 cells. Our data suggest that SCN9A is an 
essential and non-redundant requirement for nociception in humans.
C05. Identification of mutations in Cytokine Receptor-Like Factor 
1 (CRLF1) in Crisponi syndrome.
N. Dagoneau1, P. Blanchet2, P. Sarda2, L. I. Al-Gazali3, M. Di Rocco4, C. Huber1, 
F. Djouadi5, C. Le Goff1, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics and INSERM U781, Hopital Necker, Paris, 
France, 2Department of Genetics, Hopital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, 
France, 3Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates, 4Second Unit of 
Pediatrics, Istituto G.Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, 5CNRS UPR9078, Faculté Necker, 
Paris, France.
Crisponi syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized 
by congenital contractions of facial muscles with trismus, dysmorphic 
features, camptodactyly, feeding and respiratory difficulties with ac -
cess of hyperthermia leading to death in the first months of life. Up 
till now, the disease has been reported in a total of 19 newborns from 
sardinian, italian and portuguese families. The overlap of Crisponi syn -
drome with Stüve-Wiedemann syndrome (SWS) is striking. However, 
congenital bowing of the lower limbs, which is a cardinal feature of 
SWS, has never been reported in Crisponi syndrome. Studying four 
children (from three unrelated families) with Crisponi syndrome, we Concurrent Sessions 11
first excluded the Leukemia Inhibitory Factor Receptor gene (respon -
sible for SWS) in Crisponi syndrome. We then considered the Cytokine 
Receptor-Like Factor 1 (CRLF1) gene as a candidate gene based on 
the identification of CRLF1 mutations in cold-induced sweating syn -
drome. By direct sequencing, we identified CRLF1 mutations in the 
four children. The mutations were located in the Ig-like and type III 
fibronectin domains and three of them predicted premature termina -
tion of translation. Using real time quantitative PCR, we found a de -
crease of CRLF1 mRNA expression in patient fibroblasts, suggestive 
of a mutation-mediated decay of the abnormal transcript. CRLF1 forms 
a heterodimer complex with Cardiotrophin Like Cytokine Factor 1 and 
this heterodimer competes with Ciliary Neurotrophic Factor for binding 
to the ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor complex (CNFTR). The iden -
tification of CRLF1 mutations in Crisponi syndrome supports the key 
role of the CNTFR pathway in the function of the autonomic nervous 
system.
C06. Crisponi Syndrome is Caused by Mutations in the CRLF1 
Gene and Shows Allelism to Cold-Induced Sweating Syndrome 
Type 1
F. Rutsch1, L. Crisponi2, A. Meloni2, M. R. Toliat3,4, G. Nürnberg3,5, G. Usala2, M. 
Uda6, M. Masala2, W. Höhne7, C. Becker5, M. Marongiu2, F. Chiappe2, R. Kleta8, 
A. Rauch9, B. Wollnik10, F. Strasser11, T. Reese12, C. Jakobs13, G. Kurlemann14, 
A. Cao2, P. Nürnberg3,4, G. Crisponi15;  
1Department of General Pediatrics, University Children’s Hospital, Muenster, 
Germany, 2Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazio -
nale delle Ricerche, c/o Cittadella Universitaria di Monserrato, Cagliari, Italy, 
3Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 
4Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Deutsches 
Ressourcenzentrum für Genomforschung GmbH, Berlin, Germany, 6Istituto di 
Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, c/o 
Cittadella Universitaria di Monserrrato, Cagliari, Italy, 7Institute of Biochemistry, 
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 8Centre for Nephrology, 
University College London, London, United Kingdom, 9Institute of Human Ge -
netics, Friedrich Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 
10Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 11Pe-
diatric Practitioner, Nabburg, Germany, 12Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, 
Mathias-Spital, Rheine, Germany, 13Department of Clinical Chemistry and 
Pediatrics, VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 14Department of 
Pediatric Neurology, University Children’s Hospital, Muenster, Germany, 15Casa 
di cura Sant’ Anna, Cagliari, Italy.
Crisponi syndrome (CS) is a severe autosomal recessive condition, 
characterized by abnormal, paroxysmal muscular contractions re -
sembling neonatal tetanus, large face, broad nose, anteverted nares, 
camptodactyly, hyperthermia and sudden death in most cases. We 
performed homozygosity mapping in five Sardinian and three Turkish 
families with CS using high-density SNP arrays and identified a criti -
cal region on chromosome 19p12-13.1. The most prominent candidate 
gene was CRLF1 , recently found to be involved in the pathogenesis 
of cold induced sweating syndrome type 1 (CISS1). CISS1 belongs 
to a group of conditions with overlapping phenotypes, also including 
cold induced sweating syndrome type 2 (CISS2) and Stüve-Wiede -
mann syndrome (SWS). All these syndromes are caused by mutations 
of genes of the ciliary neurotrophic factor receptor (CNTFR) pathway, 
which is known to be involved in motor neuron survival. Here we de -
scribe the identification of four different CRLF1  mutations in eight dif -
ferent Crisponi families, including a missense mutation, a single nucle -
otide insertion, a nonsense and an insertion/deletion (indel) mutation, 
all segregating with the disease trait in the families. Comparison of the 
mutation spectra of CS and CISS1 suggests that neither the type nor 
the location of the CRLF1  mutations point to a phenotype/genotype 
correlation that would account for the most severe phenotype in CS. 
Our findings provide further evidence for the importance of the CNTFR 
pathway in the development of autonomic and motorial functions of the 
nervous system.
C07. The novel neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis gene CLN  
encodes a putative lysosomal transporter protein
E. Siintola1,2, M. Topcu3, N. Aula1,2, H. Lohi1,4, B. A. Minassian4, A. D. Pater -
son4,5, M. Liu4, C. Wilson6, U. Lahtinen1,2, A. K. Anttonen1,2, A. E. Lehesjoki1,2;  
1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Neuroscience Center, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe 
University Faculty of Medicine, Section of Child Neurology, Ankara, Turkey, 4Genetics and Genome Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Cana -
da, 5Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada, 6Starship Children’s Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are a group of autosomal re -
cessive neurodegenerative disorders with a variable age of onset. 
Within the NCLs, the late-infantile onset group (LINCLs) is genetically 
the most heterogeneous with mutations identified in CLN1, CLN2, 
CLN5, CLN6,  and CLN8 . A variant form of LINCL (vLINCL) present 
in Turkish patients is clinically characterized by onset at 2-7 years of 
age, epileptic seizures, myoclonus, psychomotor deterioration, loss of 
vision, and premature death. Initially, Turkish vLINCL was considered 
a distinct genetic entity (CLN7). However, we recently reported muta -
tions in the CLN6 and CLN8  genes accounting for the disease in a 
subset of Turkish vLINCL patients, whereas in the majority of families, 
Turkish vLINCL is not linked to any of the known NCL loci. By perform -
ing a genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism scan and homo -
zygosity mapping in nine Turkish and one Indian family, we mapped 
a novel vLINCL locus, CLN7 , in five of these families. Subsequently, 
by positional candidate gene sequencing, we identified the causative 
gene with six different homozygous mutations found in patients in six 
families. The gene encodes a novel polytopic membrane protein that 
belongs to the major facilitator superfamily, members of which have 
various transporter activities. The CLN7  transcript is expressed ubiq -
uitously with several alternatively spliced variants. Like most of the 
known NCL proteins, CLN7 localizes mainly to the lysosomal compart -
ment. The cellular function of the protein encoded by this novel NCL 
gene remains to be elucidated.
C08. Identification of a new gene mutated in autosomal 
recessive centronuclear myopathies, and functional links with 
the dominant form
A. Nicot1, A. Toussaint1, V. Tosch1, C. Kretz1, C. Wallgren-Pettersson2, E. Iwars -
son3, H. Kingston4, J. Garnier1, V. Biancalana5, J. Mandel1, J. Laporte1;  
1IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 2The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Fin -
land, 3Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Academic Unit of 
Medical Genetics and Regional Genetic Service, Manchester, United Kingdom, 
5Faculté de Médecine et laboratoire de Génétique Médicale EA3949, Stras -
bourg, France.
Centronuclear (myotubular) myopathies (CNM) are characterized by 
muscle weakness and abnormal centralisation of nuclei in muscle fi -
bres which is not secondary to regeneration. The severe neonatal X-
linked form (myotubular myopathy, XLMTM) is due to mutations in the 
phosphoinositide phosphatase myotubularin (MTM1), while mutations 
in dynamin 2 (DNM2) have been found in some autosomal dominant 
cases. By direct sequencing of functional candidate genes, we identi -
fied homozygous mutations of the amphiphysin 2 gene (also called 
BIN1) in three families with autosomal recessive inheritance. Two dif -
ferent missense mutations in the BAR (Bin1/Amphiphysin/RVS167) 
domain disrupt its membrane tubulation properties in transfected cells, 
while a partial truncation of the C-terminal SH3 domain abrogates 
the interaction with dynamin 2 and its recruitment to the membrane 
tubules. Our results suggest that mutations in amphiphysin 2 cause 
centronuclear myopathy by interfering with membrane remodeling at 
T-tubules, and that the functional interaction between amphiphysin 2 
and dynamin 2 is necessary for normal muscle function and position -
ing of nuclei.
C09. A protein sharing similarity with an ancestral prokaryotic ki -
nase is mutant in a new form of recessive ataxia
C. Lagier-Tourenne1, M. Tazir2, C. Quinzii3, L. Lopez3, S. Makri2, L. Pacha2, T. 
Benhassine2, N. Drouot1, M. Assoum1, L. Reutenauer1, D. Lynch4, C. Thibault1, 
F. Plewniak1, L. Bianchetti1, M. Anheim1, H. Puccio1, O. Poch1, J. Mandel1, M. 
Hirano3, M. Koenig1;  
1IGBMC; Inserm, U596; CNRS, UMR7104; Université louis Pasteur, Illkirch, CU 
de Strasbourg, France, 2Service de Neurologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 
Mustapha, Alger, Algeria, 3Department of Neurology, Columbia University Col -
lege of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, United States, 4Children’s 
Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
A SNP-based genome-wide scan in a large consanguineous family al -
lowed us to identify a new locus for autosomal recessive ataxia at 1q41 
(LOD score : 3.9). We searched for nucleotide change in genes of this 
region coding for mitochondrial proteins and found deleterious muta -
tions in CABC1 in 6 patients from 3 families. All patients have child -Concurrent Sessions1
hood-onset cerebellar ataxia with slow progression and little additional 
signs. The CABC1 yeast homologue is mutated in the ubiquinone (or 
coenzyme Q) deficient S. cerevisiae strain COQ8. Likewise, we found 
that ubiquinone synthesis was partially impaired in muscle biopsy and 
fibroblasts of one of the patients (additional patients are under study). 
Albeit COQ8 seems to be involved in one of the monooxygenation 
steps of the hydroxy benzoic ring of the coenzyme Q precursor, its role 
is likely indirect, since COQ8/CABC1 belongs to a small family of an -
cestral prokaryotic kinases. Coenzyme Q10 deficiency was previously 
identified in severe encephalopathy-nephrotic syndromes with direct 
blocks in the biosynthetic pathway and, surprisingly, in ataxia-oculo -
motor apraxia 1 (AOA1) which is caused by a defective nuclear DNA 
repair protein. The identification of CABC1 mutations emphasizes the 
role of coenzyme Q10 in the physiopathology of degenerative ataxias 
and leads to direct supplementation therapeutic possibilities.
C10. Prenyldiphosphate synthase ( PDSS1 ) and OH-benzoate 
prenyltransferase ( COQ2 ) mutations in ubiquinone deficiency 
and oxidative phosphorylation disorders
J. Mollet1, I. Giurgea1, D. Schlemmer1, G. Dallner2, D. Chretien1, A. Dela -
hodde3, D. Bacq4, P. de Lonlay1, A. Munnich1, A. Rötig1;  
1INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2Department of Molecular Medicine and Sur -
gery, Stockholm, Sweden, 3UMR 8621 CNRS, Orsay, France, 4Centre National 
de Génotypage, Evry, France.
Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) plays a pivotal role in oxidative phosphorylation 
(OXPHOS), as it distributes electrons between the various dehydroge -
nases and the cytochrome segments of the respiratory chain. We have 
identified two novel inborn errors of CoQ10 biosynthesis in two distinct 
families. In both cases, enzymologic studies showed that quinone-de -
pendent OXPHOS activities were in the range of lowest control values, 
while OXPHOS enzyme activities were normal. CoQ10 deficiency was 
confirmed by restoration of normal OXPHOS activities after addition of 
quinone. A genome-wide search for homozygosity in family 1 identi -
fied a region of chromosome 10 encompassing the prenyldiphosphate 
synthase gene ( PDSS1 ) which encodes the human ortholog of the 
yeast COQ1  gene, a key enzyme of CoQ10 synthesis. Sequencing 
PDSS1  identified a homozygous nucleotide substitution modifying a 
conserved amino acid of the protein (D308E). In the second family, 
direct sequencing of the OH-benzoate prenyltransferase gene, the hu -
man ortholog of the yeast COQ2  gene, identified a single base pair 
frameshift deletion resulting in a premature stop codon (c.1198delT, 
N401fsX415). Transformation of yeast Δ coq1  and Δ coq2  strains by 
mutant yeast COQ1  and mutant human COQ2  genes, respectively, 
resulted in defective growth on respiratory medium showing that these 
mutations are indeed the cause of OXPHOS deficiency
C11. Mitochondrial DNA depletion is a major cause of multiple 
respiratory chain defects
A. Rötig1, E. Sarzi1, A. Bourdon1, D. Chretien1, M. Zahrate1, J. Corcos1, A. 
Slama2, V. Cormier-Daire1, P. De Lonlay1, A. Munnich1;  
1INSERM U781, PARIS, France, 2Hôpital du Kremlin Bicêtre, PARIS, France.
Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome (MDS) is a clinically and 
genetically heterogeneous condition characterized by reduction in 
mtDNA copy number responsible for multiple oxidative phosphoryla -
tion (OXPHOS) enzyme deficiency. In order to determine the actual 
incidence of mtDNA depletion in multiple respiratory chain deficiency, 
we have carried out the real-time PCR quantification of mtDNA in 
liver or muscle tissue of 100 of 270 children with unexplained mul -
tiple OXPHOS deficiency. Half of the patients presented a reduction 
in mtDNA copy number below 50% of control values in liver and/or 
muscle (50/100). Most patients (16%) presented a neonatal form with 
severe liver involvement, a second group was represented by Alpers 
syndrome (4%) and 20% of the patients presented encephalomyopa -
thy. DGUOK or POLG mutations could be identified in 22% of patients 
with liver disease, POLG mutations were consistently found in all but 
one patient with Alpers syndrome. Two patients carried a homozygous 
TK2 or MPV17 mutation respectively. Our findings show that mtDNA 
depletion is a very frequent cause of multiple respiratory chain defi -
ciency with a incidence of at least 18% of children with unexplained 
OXPHOS deficiencyC12. Identification of a new gene of mitochondrial DNA depletion
A. Bourdon1, L. Minai1, V. Serre1, J. Jaïs2, E. Sarzi1, S. Aubert1, D. Chrétien1, P. 
de Lonlay1, V. Paquis3, H. Arakawa4, Y. Nakamura4, A. Munnich1, A. Rötig1;  
1INSERM U781, PARIS, France, 2Service de biostatistiques Université Pa -
ris-Descartes, PARIS, France, 3Département de génétique médicale, NICE, 
France, 4Human Genome Center, TOKYO, Japan.
The mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) depletion syndrome (MDS) is char -
acterized by a severe and tissue-specific reduction of mtDNA copy 
number. Until now, mutations of five nuclear genes are known to result 
in MDS (TK2, POLG, DGUOK, SUCLA2 and MPV17). They are ei -
ther involved in mitochondrial dNTP salvage pathway (TK2, DGUOK, 
SUCLA2) or in mtDNA replication (POLG) whereas MPV17 has a yet 
unknown function. However, only part of patients (36%) presents mu -
tations in these genes suggesting the occurrence of mutations in other 
yet unknown genes. A genome-wide linkage analysis in a large inbred 
Moroccan family with a severe MDS in muscle revealed a region of 
autozygosity on chromosome 8q21.3-q22.3 with a maximal lod score 
at 3,331. We identified a homozygous non-sense mutation in a gene 
mapping in this region and involved in nucleotide metabolism as well 
as in three additional families of French origin.
C13. Gender-specific association of a novel polymorphism in the 
TNFSF  gene with allele-specific promoter activity and risk of 
myocardial infarction.
M. Ria , J. Lagercrantz, A. Samnegård, S. Boquist, A. Hamsten, P. Eriksson;  
Atherosclerosis Research Unit, King Gustaf V Research Institute, Department 
of Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
The OX40L/OX40 system, along with other receptor-ligand pairs, has 
been shown to be involved in T-cell activation and might be there -
fore proatherogenic. We previously showed that genetic variants in 
TNFSF4 , the gene encoding for OX40 ligand, are associated with the 
risk of developing precocious coronary artery disease (CAD) and myo -
cardial infarction (MI) in women from two independent cohorts. Our 
approach was to use data from a mouse atherosclerosis model to po -
sitionally identify candidate genes in a human context.
Based on a combined strategy including a systematic screening by 
sequencing of the TNFSF4  genomic region and a bionformatic evalu -
ation of genetic variants affecting potential regulatory regions, we here 
report a novel promoter polymorphism (-921C>T) and a new haplo -
type, conceivably involved in gene regulation. The -921T-allele was 
shown to be associated with increased risk of MI in women. Haplotype-
specific chromatin immunoprecipitation (haploChIP) of activated poly -
merase II, as a measure of transcriptional activity in vivo , suggested 
that the -921C>T polymorphism is functionally important, the -921T-al -
lele being associated with lower transcriptional activity. Electromobility 
shift assay (EMSA) showed that the -921C>T polymorphism affects 
the binding of nuclear factors in allele-specific manner, thus suggest -
ing that the lower transcriptional activity associated with the -921T-al -
lele is due to binding of one or more transcriptional repressor(s) to the 
T-allele.
In conclusion, our results strongly reinforce the contention that the 
haplotype carrying the -921T-allele may be causally related to MI and/
or CAD.
C14. Genome-wide copy number variation in schizophrenia
T. Lencz1,2,3, C. Lambert4, T. Vance Morgan5, J. M. Kane1,2,3, R. Kucherlapati5,6, 
A. K. Malhotra1,2,3;  
1The Zucker Hillside Hospital, Glen Oaks, NY, United States, 2Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, United States, 3The Feinstein Institute for 
Medical Research, Manhasset, NY, United States, 4Golden Helix, Inc., Boze -
man, MT, United States, 5Harvard Partners Center for Genetics and Genomics, 
Cambridge, MA, United States, 6Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United 
States.
Background: Recently, considerable attention has focused on the sur -
prisingly common degree of structural variation in the human genome. 
While excess rates of psychiatric illness have been reported in cytoge -
netically-defined chromosomal alterations, whole-genome microarray 
technology has not yet been utilized to identify sub-microscopic struc -
tural variation underlying psychiatric phenotypes. We report results of 
a novel approach to examining genome-wide structural variation in a 
case-control schizophrenia (SZ) cohort.
Methods: SZ cases (65F/113M) and controls (63F/81M) were exam -
ined. All subjects self-identified as Caucasian non-Hispanic; testing Concurrent Sessions1
of 210 ancestry informative markers revealed no population stratifi -
cation. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were assayed using 
the Affymetrix 500K array. Quality control procedures yielded mean 
call rates of 97%, reliability (concordance across repeated samples) 
> 99%, and 439,511 high-quality SNPs available for analysis. A novel 
algorithm was implemented to identify and quantify extended runs of 
homozygosity (ROHs), which can signify chromosomal microdeletions 
and/or ancestral autozygosity.
Results: A total of 339 “common” ROHs (observed in >3% of subjects) 
were identified across the 22 autosomes. In genome-wide analysis, SZ 
patients had significantly more ROHs than controls (32±12 vs.28±13, 
p=0.009). Frequency of nine specific ROHs significantly differed be -
tween patients and controls at a nominal p<.01; all demonstrate great -
er frequency in cases. Two prominent ROHs overlapped genes for 
DTNBP1  and DISC1  binding partners.
Conclusions: To our knowledge, this is the first study of structural vari -
ation in schizophrenia using genome-wide SNP data. Results suggest 
that extended homozygosity, and possibly microdeletions are both 
more frequent in schizophrenia and specific to critical risk loci.
C15. A genome-wide assessment of the genetic basis of type 1 
diabetes
V. Plagnol1, D. Clayton1, K. Downes1, D. Dunger2, H. Leung1, S. Nutland1, D. 
Smyth1, H. Stevens1, N. Walker1, Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium, J. 
Todd1;  
1Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Uni-
versity of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
The strong familial clustering of autoimmune type 1 diabetes (T1D) 
in families remains only partially explained. The six confirmed genes 
or chromosome regions with convincing statistical support in large, 
and multiple, populations, namely the major histocompatibility com -
plex (MHC), the insulin gene (INS), CTLA4, PTPN22, IL2RA/CD25, 
and IFIH1/MDA5 can explain only about 50% of familial aggregation. 
Nonetheless, their identification has provided many insights into the 
biology and pathways of T1D. Recent expansions in sample collec -
tions, including the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome 
Trust Diabetes and Inflammation Laboratory (JDRF/WT DIL) British 
T1D case sample (n = 8,000), and advances in affordable, genome-
wide, high throughput single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) geno -
typing technologies (Affymetrix), has allowed an association analysis 
of 500,000 SNPs across the genome in 2,000 T1D cases and 3,000 
controls as part of the Wellcome Trust Case-Control Consortium 
(WTCCC). Attesting to the quality of the SNP map, positive results 
were obtained for all six susceptibility loci reported previously. How -
ever, follow-up genotyping studies of 14 other chromosome regions 
showing P < 10-5 in the WTCCC scan in over 6,000 cases and 6,000 
controls, and in approximately 2,000 families, supported in a convinc -
ing way (P < 10-15 and odds ratios approximately 1.2) four regions 
associated with T1D in both the family and case-control samples, on 
chromosomes 16p13, 18p11, 12q13 and 12q24. These results illus -
trate the power of genome-wide association approach to characterise 
the genetic basis of T1D.
C16. Identification of TGFB1  as the first gene associated with 
otosclerosis
M. Thys1, I. Schrauwen1, K. Vanderstraeten1, K. Janssens1, N. Dieltjens1, K. 
Van Den Bogaert1, E. Fransen1, W. Chen2, M. Ealy2, M. Claustres3, C. R. W. J. 
Cremers4, I. Dhooge5, F. Declau6, J. Claes6, P. Van de Heyning6, R. Vincent7, T. 
Somers8, E. Offeciers8, R. J. H. Smith2, G. Van Camp1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Wilrijk, Belgium, 2Molecular Otolaryngology 
Research Laboratories, Iowa City, IA, United States, 3Laboratoire de Genetique 
Moleculaire et chromosomique CHU, Montpellier, France, 4Department of Oto -
rhinolaryngology, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 5Department of Otorhinolaryngol -
ogy, Gent, Belgium, 6Department of ORL, Edegem, Belgium, 7Jean Causse Ear 
Clinic, Colombiers, France, 8University Department of Otolaryngology, Wilrijk, 
Belgium.
Otosclerosis is a progressive hearing loss characterized by an abnor -
mal bone homeostasis leading to stapes fixation. Although its etiology 
remains unknown, otosclerosis can be considered a complex disease. 
TGFB1  was chosen for a case-control association study, because of 
several non-genetic indications of involvement in otosclerosis. SNP 
analysis in a large Belgian-Dutch case-control group gave significant 
results (p = 0,0044) for an amino acid changing SNP in TGFB1 , T263I, remaining significant after multiple testing correction. Analysis of an 
independent large French case-control group replicated this significant 
association for the same SNP T263I (p = 0,00019), again surviving 
multiple testing correction. Haplotype analysis and the independent 
effect test using WHAP in both populations were both compatible with 
SNP T263I being the only causal variant. The variant I263 is underrep -
resented in otosclerosis patients and hence protective against the dis -
ease. Combining the data of both case-control groups for SNP T263I 
with a Mantel-Haenszel estimate of common odds ratios gave a very 
significant result (p = 9.2 x 10-6). Functional analysis of this SNP T263I 
with a luciferase reporter assay showed that the protective variant I263 
of TGFB1  is more active than the WT variant T263 (p = 1,6 x 10-6). On 
the basis of our results, including very low p-values for association, 
replication in two independent populations and a demonstrated func -
tional effect of the causative variant, we conclude that TGFB1  is the 
first gene that influences the susceptibility for otosclerosis, and that the 
I263 variant is protective against the disease.
C17. Origin of the Etruscans: novel clues from the Y 
chromosome lineages
A. Piazza1, N. Cerutti1, C. Di Gaetano1, F. Crobu1, A. Kouvatsi2, C. Triantaphylli -
dis2, D. Palli3, A. Achilli4, S. Fornarino4, V. Battaglia4, S. Santachiara Benerecet -
ti4, P. A. Underhill5, G. Matullo1, L. L. Cavalli-Sforza5, A. Torroni4, O. Semino4;  
1Dipartimento di Genetica, Biologia, Biochimica, Torino, Italy, 2Department of 
Genetics, Development and Molecular Biology, School of Biology, Aristotle 
University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece, 3Molecular and Nutritional 
Epidemiology Unit, CSPO-Scientific Institute of Tuscany Region,, Florence, 
Italy, 4Dipartimento di Genetica e Microbiologia, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 
5Genetics Department, Stanford University, Stanford, California, CA, United 
States.
Three hypotheses have been proposed on the origin of the distinc -
tive Etruscan civilization and language that flourished ca. 3,000 years 
before present (BP) in Central Italy: 1) an external Anatolian source 
(Lydia and Lemnos) as claimed by Herodotus, 2) an autochthonous 
process of formation from the preceding Villanovan society as firstly 
proposed by Dionysius of Halicarnassus and 3) an influence from 
Northern Europe. A synthetic geographical map summarizing 34 clas -
sical genetic markers in Italy differentiates a genetically homogeneous 
Central Italian region between the Arno and Tiber rivers (ancient Etru -
ria) from the rest of Italy. While this fact was tentatively interpreted as a 
genetic footprint of the Etruscans, its verification remained a challenge 
due to lack of data on differentiation of such markers and its calibration 
with time.
Here we show the genetic relationships of modern Etrurians, who 
mostly settled in Tuscany, with other Italian, Near Eastern and Aegean 
peoples by comparing the Y-chromosome DNA variation in 1,264 un -
related healthy males from: Tuscany-Italy (n=263), North Italy (n=306), 
South Balkans (n=359), Lemnos island (n=60), Sicily and Sardinia 
(n=276). The Tuscany samples were collected in Volterra (n=116), 
Murlo (n=86) and Casentino Valley (n=61).
We found traces of recent Near Eastern gene flow still present in Tus -
cany, especially in the archaeologically important village of Murlo. The 
samples from Tuscany show eastern haplogroups E3b1-M78, G2*-
P15, J2a1b*-M67 and K2-M70 with frequencies very similar to those 
observed in Turkey and surrounding areas, but significantly different 
from those of neighbouring Italian regions. The microsatellite haplo -
types associated to these haplogroups allow inference of ancestor 
lineages for Etruria and Near East whose time to the most recent com -
mon ancestors is relatively recent (about 3,500 years BP) and sup -
ports a possible non autochthonous post-Neolithic signal associated 
with the Etruscans.
C18. Epidemics of viral haemorrhagic fever in Medieval times 
as a possible selection pressure for CCR5del32 in Europe: new 
insights from Croatian island isolates
Z. Biloglav1, M. Smoljanovic2, C. Hayward3, A. Vorko-Jovic1, I. Kolcic1, O. Po -
lasek1, L. Zgaga1, N. Hastie3, H. Campbell4, A. Wright3, I. Rudan4;  
1Faculty of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Split, Croatia, 
3MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 4Faculty of Medicine, 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Aim. The CCR5del32 mutation is protective against HIV infection. The 
possible historic selection pressure that gave rise to its increased fre -
quency in Europe remains a matter of conjecture. The hypotheses in -Concurrent Sessions20
clude plague epidemics, childhood infections or random genetic drift.
Materials and methods. We sampled 1001 examinees from 9 isolated 
Dalmatian villages which had differing history of epidemics during the 
period between 11th-20th centuries. The demographic history of these 
isolates during the past 1,000 years was reconstructed in great detail 
from historic records. The frequency of CCR5del32 mutation was de -
termined in each population.
Results: CCR5del32 mutation frequency in the Croatian general 
population is 7.1%. The villages with no history of epidemics had a 
CCR5del32 mutation frequency between 1.5% and 3.9% (p<0.01 in all 
cases in comparison to general population). The villages with a history 
of a major 15th-century epidemic (with lethality rates of about 70%) 
had CCR5del32 frequencies between 6.5% and 11.0% (p<0.01 in all 
cases in comparison to epidemic-free villages). Further research on 
the historic records suggested that epidemics of viral haemorrhagic 
fever (possibly originating in Russia) and with an exceptionally long in -
cubation period may have spread to Baltic states and then through the 
‘route of Amber’ to southern Europe and the Republic of Venice, from 
where it affected some village populations on the Croatian islands.
Conclusion. The extensive available historical and genetic data from 
these Croatian island isolates supports the hypothesis that an unknown 
viral haemorrhagic fever was reponsible for the selection pressure on 
the CCR5del32 mutation in Europe.
C19. Reconstructing functional gene loci using PCR
S. Kraner , S. Christan, M. Zoller, C. Jung, D. Schindelhauer;  
Human Artificial Chromosome Group, Livestock Biotechnology, Life Sciences 
Center Weihenstephan, Technical University Munich, Freising, Germany.
A very long PCR method has been established for 30-65 kb sized hu -
man genomic products from PAC/BAC clones for human artificial chro -
mosome development. Within PAC libraries, gene loci rarely are rep -
resented in an applicable form. The available segments often contain 
more than one gene, or parts of adjacent genes, or are incomplete. 
Long PCR can introduce adequate restriction sites via primers, how -
ever, up to now it was unknown if long PCR within this size range can 
produce functional genomic molecules.
Using a novel DNA quality termed grade 1, quantitative amplification is 
robustly achieved within 7-9 PCR cycles, resulting in a very low error 
rate. For locus reconstruction via subcloning of PCR products, a large 
fraction of resulting molecules needs to be free of errors.
Here we have subcloned single 32 kb molecules of the human genom -
ic HPRT gene locus in a telomerized PAC vector. The constructs were 
transfected into HT1080 (HPRT-) cells and checked in a HAT assay. 
Out of five bacterial clones obtained, 2 showed large deletions. Out 
of the 3 showing the correct PFGE size, 2 turned out to be functional. 
FISH analysis of HAT resistant cell lines from each construct showed 
presence of the transgene locus randomly integrated in a host chromo -
some. Cotransfection of a centromere resulted in the incorporation of 
the synthetic locus in a human artificial chromosome (HAC). This tech -
nology represents a breakthrough for the assembly of HAC constructs 
based on conventional cloning and for the development of therapeutic 
HACs containing entire gene loci.
C20. Single cell microRNA and mRNA profiling reveals unique 
gene expression signatures and heterogeneities in mouse ES 
cells
C. Chen1, R. Tan1, D. Ridzon1, L. Bahreinifar1, K. Guegler1, W. M. Strauss2;  
1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2University of Colorado-
Boulder, Boulder, CO, United States.
We describe a new method for simultaneously quantifying 237 mouse 
microRNAs (miRNAs) and 21 messenger RNAs (mRNAs) from single 
cells including embryonic stem (ES) cells, embryoid bodies (EBs), 3T3 
cells, or splenocytes. The method is based on multiplex RT, multiplex 
preamplification, and singleplex real-time TaqMan® PCR assays. 
Assays are quantitative for a dynamic range of at least three logs. 
Single cell expression signatures could classify individual ES, EBs, 
or somatic cells. Significant inter-cell variations of both miRNA and 
mRNA expression within ES cell lines indicated the heterogeneity of 
ES cells. The highest variability was observed among EB cells (CV 
= 139%), demonstrating that EBs undergo differentiation at different 
stages. Interestingly, ES marker gene Oct4 and signaling gene Tdgf1 
were highly co-expressed. Both were absent in 3T3 and splenocyte 
cells, highly expressed in ES cells, and significantly reduced in EB cells. Results indicated that Oct4 and Tdgf1 might be co-regulated dur -
ing ES differentiation. The total number of expressed miRNA genes in 
ES, EB, and somatic cells remained constant. However, their expres -
sion levels were significantly elevated during differentiation, further 
suggesting the involvement of miRNAs in cellular development and 
specification. Furthermore, there was no correlation in the expression 
levels between miRNAs and their predicted target mRNAs, thereby 
supporting a translational repression model. Our results provide new 
insight into both miRNA and mRNA expression patterns at the single 
cell level.
C21. A High Resolution Oligonucleotide CpG Island Microarray
C. Foo , D. B. Gordon, S. Shchegrova, S. B. Giles, E. M. LeProust, S. B. Mil -
ligan, C. Hopkins, A. Bhattacharjee, R. Mukherjee Saxena, D. N. Roberts;  
Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States.
CpG islands are areas of DNA containing multiple CpG dinucleotides. 
When CpG dinucleotides within these islands are methylated, espe -
cially in promoter regions, expression of the corresponding down -
stream genes is often repressed. Aberrant CpG island methylation is 
implicated in cancer.
We developed an oligonucleotide microarray that represents the CpG 
islands in the human genome. This microarray contains ~230,000 
oligo probes tiling the 21 megabases of 27,800 CpG islands, with an 
average spacing between probes of 95 base pairs. The microarray is 
compatible with several published methods for the genome-wide de -
tection of methylated CpG islands. To demonstrate the ability of this 
microarray to detect methylated DNA, we performed analysis of hu -
man genomic DNA samples after methylated DNA immunoprecipita -
tion (mDIP). We also developed “spike-in” control DNA that was  in vitro  
methylated to varying degrees.
The mDIP method combined with CpG island microarray analysis ac -
curately differentiated between partially and fully methylated spike-in 
DNAs. We then applied the whole-genome assay to the prostate can -
cer cell line PC3 and detected methylated CpG islands upstream of 
cancer genes including CDKN2A/p16. We studied other cancer cell 
lines and determined relative methylation at multiple cancer-related 
genes. Finally, using male and female embryonic fibroblast cells, we 
demonstrate that many CpG islands on the female X chromosome are 
more methylated than the corresponding islands on the male X chro -
mosome. Comparitively, methylation of CpG islands on autosomes is 
essentially the same for the male and female samples. This supports 
a role for CpG methylation in silencing the inactive X chromosome in 
females.
C22. Cost-effective screening of deletions and duplications of up 
to 1500 loci in one assay: a bead-based approach
E. Aten1, S. White1, M. Kriek1, M. Bibikova2, L. Zhou2, E. Wickham-Garcia2, J. 
Fan2, M. H. Breuning1, J. T. den Dunnen1;  
1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Illumina Inc, San 
Diego, CA, United States.
Copy Number Variation (CNV), deletions and duplications, is frequent -
ly involved in genetic disease. Historically, methodologies detecting 
quantitative changes were laborious, costly and consequently neglect -
ed. Now genome-wide analyses can be used to study CNV, revealing 
extensive variation in the human genome, both pathogenic and non-
pathogenic. However, in diagnostic setting cost prohibits application 
of these methods to screen all incoming patients. Focused on clinical 
application, we developed a flexible targeted method using Illumina’s 
GoldenGate® assay, facilitating cost-effective screening of 1420 loci in 
parallel in hundreds of samples. The assay should detect all trisomies, 
telomere-end rearrangements and known micro-deletion syndromes 
and perform a rough whole genome scan. Analysis of 48 control cases 
succefully identified all known rearrangements, from trisomy-21 to a 
single DMD-exon deletion. Analysis of 320 patient samples (mental 
retardation of unknown etiology) revealed many new rearrangements, 
including non-pathogenic CNV (present in >20% of cases). MLPA, 
FISH or whole genome SNP-array analysis thus far confirmed other 
changes as pathogenic in 29 cases. The assay designed is reliable, 
cost-effective, can be easily modified to include new regions of interest 
and used to screen up to 1500 loci in parallel.Concurrent Sessions21
C23. Literature-aided interpretation of microarray data: a 
compendium study on muscle development and disease
P. A. C. ‚t Hoen1, R. Jelier2, E. Sterrenburg1, J. T. den Dunnen1, G. B. van Om -
men1, J. A. Kors2, B. Mons1,2;  
1Leiden University Medical Center, Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, 
Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Erasmus MC - University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
Biosemantics Group, Department of Medical Informatics, Rotterdam, The Neth -
erlands.
Lists of differentially expressed genes from microarray studies are dif -
ficult to interpret. Comparative analysis of related microarray studies 
may help to improve the understanding of the molecular and cellular 
processes involved. We analyzed 102 microarray studies published in 
the field of muscle development and disease. The overlap in the lists 
of differentially expressed genes was generally small. Analysis at the 
level of biological processes should be more rewarding, since different 
genes may hint at the same process. Currently available methods rare -
ly performed well due to low sensitivity and their dependence on the 
limited annotation of gene function and pathways in curated databases. 
As an alternative, we developed a literature-based annotation system. 
For all genes, species-independent concept profiles were derived, link -
ing all biological concepts mentioned together with the gene in Medline 
abstracts in a weighted fashion. The concept profiles for all possible 
gene pairs from two microarray studies were matched and evaluated 
for significance of overlap. Our algorithm discovered biologically mean -
ingful associations between studies that had no genes in common. The 
biological processes shared between studies were easily recognized. 
For example, mouse and human studies on limb-girdle muscular dys -
trophy 2B were brought together by non-overlapping macrophage-ex -
pressed genes. In vitro and in vivo studies into muscular atrophy were 
connected by decreased mitochondrial activity, and found closely re -
lated to mitochondrion-related myopathies. In conclusion, our approach 
facilitates finding common biological denominators in microarray stud -
ies in an unsupervised way, and without the need for raw data analysis 
or annotations of biological functions in curated databases.
C24. Producing a reference human gene set
J. Loveland,  J. A. Rajan, A. Frankish, E. A. Hart, J. G. R. Gilbert, L. Gordon, 
E. Griffiths, R. Storey, S. Dyer, V. Curwen, S. Searle, L. Wilming, J. Harrow, T. 
Hubbard;  
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
The Havana group (www.sanger.ac.uk/HGP/havana/) produces man -
ual annotation of finished sequence from vertebrate genomes, con -
centrating on finished human, mouse and zebrafish genomes. Manual 
annotation is needed for the accurate determination of duplicated gene 
clusters, pseudogenes and non-coding genes, polyA features, splice 
variation and accurate nomenclature. Currently, annotation of genes 
on the human genome is provided by multiple public resources. To 
provide a standard uniform human gene set Havana is collaborating 
with NCBI, UCSC and Ensembl to produce a consensus CDS (CCDS) 
database containing a core set of mouse and human protein-coding 
regions that are consistently annotated. The next release of the human 
CCDS set will contain around 19000 coding transcripts compared to 
13372 currently in mouse.
Havana also collaborates with Ensembl to improve the genebuild on 
the finished genome and produce a merged gene set that is visible in 
Ensembl. This merged set contains only full-length coding transcripts 
predicted identically and independently by both groups and is coloured 
gold in Ensembl. This enables Ensembl users to highlight errors within 
the automated genebuild allowing Havana to correct the genes manu -
ally. The resulting corrections get re-incorporated into the new gene -
build. The merged set consists of approximately 12,000 Ensembl and 
Havana transcripts with identical exon coordinates and splice sites. It 
differs to the CCDS approach in that UTR, as well as protein-coding 
regions, must be the same. A new graphical interface called Zmap has 
recently been implemented which enables multiple genomes to be an -
notated simultaneously and thus should improve the consistency of 
annotation.
C25. How healthy are children born after preimplantation genetic 
diagnosis?
I. Liebaers , W. Verpoest, S. Desmyttere, M. De Rycke, C. Staessen, K. Ser -
mon, A. Michiels, K. Boelaert, J. Van der Elst, P. Devroey, M. Bonduelle;  
Research centre for reproductive genetics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel – uzbrus -sel, Brussels, Belgium.
Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) was introduced in the clinic 
in 1990 as a very early form of prenatal diagnosis (PND) for couples at 
high risk to transmit a genetic disease. Preimplantation genetic screen -
ing (PGS), a variant of PGD was introduced later in order to improve 
the selection of embryos for transfer in in vitro fertilisation (IVF).
The requests for PGD or PGS of infertile as well as of fertile couples 
were evaluated and accepted for treatment whenever possible. As 
soon as the PCR-based or FISH-based single cell assays were ready, 
the IVF treatment was planned .A prospective data collection on preg -
nancies and children was organised by giving questionnaires to the 
couples on the day of transfer. Additional questionnaires were send to 
the patients and their physicians (gyneco- logists, pediatricians) dur -
ing pregnancy, at delivery and later on. Children were examined at 2 
months and 2 years of age whenever possible. Between 1993 and 
2005, 2756 PGD and PGS cycles were performed for many different 
indications including HLA-typing. After transfer of ‘fresh’ embryos, 567 
children were born .Of these, 548 were liveborn, 19 were stillborn. And 
9 children died neonatally. The perinatal death rate (5 from single -
ton pregnancies and 23 from multiple pregnancies) of 4.9 %.should 
be further investigated.. The mean term and birth weight in live born 
singletons is respectively 38.8 weeks and 3268 grams. The major mal -
formation rate is 3.6%. Embryo biopsy does not increase the major 
malformation rate when compared to children born after IVF/ICSI with -
out PGD.
C26. The use of proteomic methods to search for biomarkers in 
maternal plasma from trisomy 21 pregnancies.
W. E. Heywood1, T. E. Madgett2, A. Wallington2, J. Hogg1, K. Mills1, N. D. 
Avent2, L. S. Chitty1;  
1Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2University of the West of 
England, Bristol, United Kingdom.
Objective: To use proteomic methods to search for biomarkers for tri -
somy 21 (T21) in maternal plasma.
Methods: Surface Enhanced Laser Desorption Ionisation Mass Spec -
trometry (SELDI) detects small mass proteins (<30kDa) that are differ -
entially expressed. Using protein array chips specific to proteins with 
different properties maternal plasma samples matched for gestational 
age were analysed. Plasma from pregnancies with normal male and 
female fetuses, and 8 T21 fetuses were analysed. Higher molecular 
weight analyses on albumin and IgG depleted plasma samples were 
performed using 2D Differential Gel Electrophoresis (2D-DiGE) in the 
pH 4-7 range. Further analysis of interesting areas was performed in 
a narrower pH range.
Results: Initial SELDI analysis showed differences between normal 
and T21 pregnancies and subsequent studies were controlled for 
gestational age. IMAC30 arrays in T21 samples showed potential bio -
markers with masses of ~24kDa (p=0.0087) and 24.3kDa (p=0.046). A 
Q10 Chip array showed a potential biomarker of higher mass, 123kDa 
(p=0.027). These proteins were expressed in samples analysed at 
11-13 weeks’ and 18-19 weeks’ gestation. 2D DiGE results showed 
three possible biomarker proteins in T21 pregnancies, one of 54kDa 
(p=0.021) with a 2.3 fold increase in spot intensity and two smaller pro -
teins with 1.8 (p= 0.01) and 2.1 (p= 0.024) fold increases. Initial work 
in a narrower pH range shows better resolution of proteins of interest. 
Studies are underway to confirm and identify these proteins.
Conclusions: Proteomic methods may be useful to identify biomark -
ers of T21 that could be used clinically for non-invasive diagnosis of 
Down’s syndrome
C27. Investigation of New Markers for Improved Isolation of Fetal 
Trophoblast Cells in Maternal Peripheral Circulation
E. Guetta1, L. Gutstein-Abo1,2, A. Sacher3, G. Desoye4, G. Barkai1;  
1Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-
Hashomer, Israel, 2Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 
Israel, 3The Maiman Institute for Proteome Research, George S. Wise Faculty 
of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 4Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
Trophoblasts present an attractive target cell type for non-invasive pre -
natal diagnosis in that they can be isolated from maternal blood early 
in the first trimester.
The aim of this study is to identify specific Trophoblast cells markers for 
application in retrieval of rare fetal cells from maternal peripheral blood.Concurrent Sessions22
Trophoblast and peripheral blood cell samples were obtained from 
women, undergoing pregnancy termination in the first trimester. Tro -
phoblast isolation was efficient and the cell populations showed high 
purity for trophoblasts (85-94% positive cells), with low fibroblast con -
tamination (0-12%- positive cells).
Isolation and identification of proteins was performed by proteomics 
technology. The results of 2-D gel analysis revealed many differences 
in protein expression between the maternal blood cells and placenta-
derived trophoblasts. The most obvious protein spots that appeared 
in the placenta samples but were absent in the blood samples were 
isolated, purified and identified.
The proteins identified were: cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 8, keratin 19, 
Zeta globin, A-gamma globin, G-gamma globin, and annexin IV.
Antibodies against cytokeratin 7 (an intracellular antigen) and annexin 
(a cell-surface antigen) were tested in trophoblast cell lines (JAR and 
BeWo) and Chorionic Villus (CVS) cultures. Annexin staining was posi -
tive in the JAR cell line only whereas both lines as well as CVS cultures 
were positive for cytokeratin 7. The remainder of the proteins detected 
by proteomics are currently being screened and the most promising 
markers will be applied in trophoblast isolation from maternal blood 
samples, the ultimate goal being culture expansion and karyotype 
analysis of the isolated cells.
C28. APEX microarrays for the non-invasive prenatal diagnosis 
of beta-thalassaemia
T. E. Papasavva1, I. Kallikas2, S. Papacharalambous2, A. Kyrri3, L. Kythreotis3, 
H. Roomere4, M. Kleantous1;  
1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Archibishop 
Makarios III Hospital,, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Cyprus Thalassaemia Center, Nicosia, 
Cyprus, 4Asper Biotech Ltd, Tartu, Estonia.
The recent discovery of relatively abundant quantities of cell free fetal 
DNA in maternal plasma and serum has opened up new possibilities 
for the non-invasive prenatal diagnosis. In Cyprus, seven different 
beta-thalassaemia mutations account for over 98% of all cases with 
IVSI-110 representing the 81% of the total. Therefore, the develop -
ment of a non-invasive method for the Cyprus population is based on 
the detection of paternally inherited Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms 
(SNPs) as well as the direct detection of paternal beta-thal mutations.
One of the approaches that are being developed is the Arrayed Primer 
Extension (APEX) method on the Genorama® QuattroImager™ . We 
developed a DNA chip called “thalassochip” that contains 29 beta-thal 
mutations and 10 SNPs linked to the beta-globin locus. More informa -
tive SNPs are being added constantly.
The specificity and the sensitivity of the approach were tested using 
genomic DNA. We were able to detect as low as 30pg/μl of genomic 
DNA. Fetal DNA in maternal plasma is about 90pg/μl. Moreover, the 
specificity of the approach was determined using genomic DNA. Fol -
lowing that, the procedure was applied on maternal plasma DNA for 
2 SNPs and we were able to detect the paternal allele of the fetus for 
those SNPs.
Although the results are preliminary, the approach is very promising. 
All the SNPs and mutations that are currently on the thalassochip need 
to be standardized. Moreover, more informative SNPs need to be add -
ed validated and standardized.
C29. Prenatal diagbosis in Denmark after the introduction of 
nuchal translucency screening
S. Kjaergaard1, J. M. Hahnemann1, L. Skibsted2, L. Neerup3, L. Sperling4, H. 
Zingenberg5, A. Kristiansen6, K. Brondum-Nielsen1;  
1Kennedy Institute, Glostrup, Denmark, 2Roskilde Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark, 
3Gentofte Hospital, Gentofte, Denmark, 4Herlev Hospital, Herlev, Denmark, 
5Glostrup Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark, 6Naestved Hospital, Naestved, Den -
mark.
In 2004, the National board of Health in Denmark recommended new 
guidelines for prenatal diagnosis. Instead of restricting the offer of pre -
natal diagnosis mainly to pregnant women over the age of 35 years, 
all pregnant women shall have the possibility to opt for 1. trimester 
screening including nuchal translucency measurement in the fetus and 
a maternal blood sample (doubletest), allowing a combined risk cal -
culation that the fetus has Down syndrome (or other trisomies). If the 
risk is over 1:300, an invasive procedure is offered with chromosome 
analysis of fetal cells from chorionic villus sample or amniocentesis.
We have surveyed the outcome of prenatal diagnosis in 3 counties in Denmark after gradual implementation of the new guidelines during 
2004, 2005 and 2006. The area covers approx 1.1 mill inhabitants, 
1/5 of the total population. A comparison was also made with national 
figures obtained from the Central Cytogenetic Registry. Main findings 
were: An overall reduction in invasive procedures (from approx. 11% 
of all pregnancies to approx. 5%), a doubled number of trisomy 21 
fetuses diagnosed prenatally, and a reduction in the number of chil -
dren born with Down syndrome by approx 50%. The maternal history 
of the children born with Down syndrome revealed: decline of offer of 
screening, risk calculation above cut-off limit, too late appearance in 
pregnancy. Sex chromosome abnormalities were apparently not de -
tected more frequently prenatally, but triplodi and possibly trisomy 18 
were diagnosed more often than previously.
Selected cases with mosaicim and pseudomosaicim will be present -
ed.
C30. Prenatal detection of partial chromosome imbalance by 
Quantitative Fluorescent PCR (QF-PCR)
V. Cirigliano1,2, G. Voglino3, E. Ordoñez1,2, A. Plaja1, C. Fuster2;  
1General Lab, Barcelona, Spain, 2Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Bellater -
ra, Barcelona, Spain, 3Promea Day Surgery, Torino, Italy.
The QF-PCR assay allows prenatal diagnoses of chromosome aneu -
ploidies in a few hours after sampling.
Several markers are needed on chromosomes X, Y, 21, 18 and 13 
to minimize homozygous or uninformative samples. However, if mic -
rosatellites are selected along the examined chromosomes, QF-PCR 
may also allow detecting partial trisomies.
We developed a QF-PCR assay including up to 10 markers on the 
sex chromosomes, 8 on chromosomes 21 and 18 and 6 markers on 
chromosome 13.
In the course of its application on over 30.000 clinical cases the test 
allowed detecting 100% aneuploidies without false positive results. On 
the other end, it was also possible to detect 11 different partial aneu -
ploidies resulted from unbalanced translocations, duplications, inser -
tions and other structural rearrangements. Chromosome 18 was in -
volved in 4 cases, 6 fetuses had either X or Y derived extra sequences 
and in two more samples partial trisomies 21 or 13 were also readily 
detected as trisomic patterns for two or more STRs. In 6 cases QF-
PCR result was crucial to achieve the correct diagnosis.
Rapid prenatal diagnosis by QF-PCR has proven to be efficient and 
reliable in detecting major numerical abnormalities. In this study we 
demonstrate that an appropriate marker selection can also allow iden -
tification of partial chromosome imbalance.
The main advantages of the assay are its low cost, speed and au -
tomation allowing high throughput of samples. QF-PCR reaches the 
purposes of relieving anxiety of most parents within 24 hours from 
sampling or to accelerate therapeutical interventions in case of ab -
normal result.
C31. Screening and maternal transmission instability of 
intermediate-size and premutation FMR1 alleles in 24,446 
mother-newborn pairs from the general population
F. Rousseau1,2, S. Lévesque1, C. Dombrowski1, M. Morel1, R. Réhel1, J. S. 
Côté1, J. Bussières1, K. Morgan3;  
1URGHM, Centre de recherche du Centre hospitalier universitaire de Québec, 
Quebec, PQ, Canada, 2CanGeneTest consortium & Université Laval, Québec, 
PQ, Canada, 3McGill University Hospital Centre, Montreal General Hospital 
Research Center, Montréal, PQ, Canada.
Background: To study the instability of FMR1 gene triplet repeats in the 
general population, we screened a large prospective sample of 24,446 
anonymized mother-offspring pairs to determine transmission insta -
bility of intermediate-size (40-58 triplets) and premutation-size FMR1 
alleles (59-230 triplets) in the general population.
Methods: We used a mini-Southern blotting method to screen all moth -
ers for FMR1 alleles of 40 to 58 triplets (n=676) or premutation-size 
(59+ triplets, n=22). We studied transmission of these alleles to their 
offspring using triplet repeat PCR with validation of the mother-child 
link using six highly polymorphic microsatellite markers.
Results: Out of a subsample of 343 transmissions of normal-size alleles 
(<40 triplets) we observed three(1%) unstable transmissions. There 
were 11 unstable alleles out of 191 transmission (6%) of intermediate-
size alleles (40 to 58 repeats) and 6 unstable premutation-size alleles 
out of 11 transmissions (55%). One mother with a 100 triplet allele had Concurrent Sessions2
a boy with a typical full mutation. The incidence of fragile-X syndrome 
in this population was thus 1:24446 (upper limit of 95% C.I. 1/7065). 
Intermediate-size alleles were significantly more unstable than normal-
size alleles (Fisher exact p : p=0.0012) but much more stable (about 
ten-fold) than premutation-size alleles (Fisher exact p = <0.0001). The 
major fragile-X haplotype (T50-T42-T62) was present in all unstable 
premutation-size alleles.
Conslusion: Empirical measures of incidence and instability are of in -
terest to determine the feasibility and cost-effectiveness of putative 
FMR1 screening programs and to counsel carriers of large FMR1 al -
leles with no family history of the disease.
C32. Familial inherited microtia caused by a benign CNV 
amplification at chromosome 4pter
I. G. Balikova1, K. Martens1, C. Melotte1, S. Van Vooren2, Y. Moreau3, H. 
Starke4, D. Vetrie5, H. Fiegler5, N. Carter6, T. Liehr4, G. Matthijs1, J. Fryns1, I. 
Casteels7, K. Devriendt1, J. R. Vermeesch1;  
1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2ESAT-SISTA KU - Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium, 3ESAT-SISTA, KU-Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Institute of 
Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany, 5Wellcome Trust Sanger 
Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 6Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute,, Hinxton, 
United Kingdom, 7Department of Ophthalmology, KU - Leuven, Leuven, Bel -
gium.
Recently, large scale benign copy number variations (CNVs) were un -
covered, encompassing over 12% of our genome. Deletions and du -
plications of these regions present in normal individuals contain genes 
considered to be dosage tolerant for human development.
Here we present a 4 generation family with autosomal dominant inheri -
tance of microtia, eye coloboma and lacrimal duct obstruction, a novel 
syndrome. This phenotype is linked (lod >3) with a cytogenetically vis -
ible alteration at 4pter but was never described in patients with 4pter 
deletions nor duplications. We demonstrate by array CGH, qPCR, 
FISH and Southern blot that the disorder is caused by the amplification 
of a 780kb region on 4pter, encompassing the olfactory receptor gene 
cluster. This is the first example in which the amplification of a well-
known copy number variable region causes a phenotype and hence is 
a novel genetic disease mechanism causing a dominant disorder.
In addition, we investigated the organization of the amplified fragment 
in order to understand the mechanism by which this amplification oc -
curred. We show that perfect copies of the 780kb fragment are ampli -
fied in tandem.
C33. Gene dosage, craniofacial and neurological development 
and Williams-Beuren syndrome.
M. Tassabehji1, P. Hammond2, S. Gribble3, W. Beckett1, A. Karmiloff-Smith4, M. 
Peippo5, L. Brueton6, P. Lunt7, K. Metcalfe8, D. Donnai9, N. Carter10;  
1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2UCL, London, United 
Kingdom, 3The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 
4Birkbeck College, University of London, United Kingdom, 5Helsinki University 
Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 6Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Birming -
ham, United Kingdom, 7Bristol Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Bristol, United 
Kingdom, 8St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 9University of Man -
chester and St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 10The Wellcome 
Trust Sanger Institute, Canbridge, United Kingdom.
Segmental duplications play an important role in disease by creating 
instability that leads to genomic rearrangements in important regions. 
The consequences can be dosage imbalance of gene(s) critical for 
normal human development. Abnormal gene dosage is involved in the 
aetiology of the microdeletion disorder Williams-Beuren Syndrome 
(WBS) which displays characteristic cardiovascular, craniofacial and 
neurological phenotypes. 28 or more genes are heterozygously delet -
ed and upsetting the balance of specific gene(s) affects human speech 
and language as well as cognitive capabilities. Genotype-phenotype 
correlations have been difficult to assign and position effects involv -
ing genes outside the critical region cannot be excluded. We have in -
vestigated rare individuals with atypical deletions in the WBS region, 
displaying partial or more severe features of the classic cases, supple -
mented by the study of mouse models. The combination of clinical, 
psychological and 3D-face morphometric analyses alongside detailed 
molecular profiling on a genome-wide scale has narrowed down the 
critical region harbouring genes important for the WBS phenotypes 
as well as highlighting new regions associated with craniofacial and 
neurological development. Reciprocal WBS duplications also exist and the clinical and molecular profile is still being defined. Using aCGH 
analyses on the Sanger Institute 30K WGTP arrays we have gener -
ated a genomic footprint for patients with different sized deletions 
and duplications and compared their genome architecture on a global 
scale. Our patients with atypical deletions and duplications involving 
the WBS locus present with a spectrum of phenotypes for which we 
will attempt to link genotype to pathological phenotype.
C34. Long-range conserved non-coding SHOX sequences 
regulate expression in developing chicken limb and are 
associated with short stature phenotypes in human patients.
N. Sabherwal1, F. Bangs2, R. Röth1, B. Weiss1, K. Jantz1, E. Tiecke2, G. K. 
Hinkel3, C. Spaich4, B. P. Hauffa5, H. van der Kamp6, J. Kapeller1, C. Tickle2, G. 
Rappold1;  
1Department of Molecular Human Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, Uni -
versity of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Division of Cell and Developmen -
tal Biology, School of Life Sciences, MSI/WTB Complex, University of Dundee, 
Dundee, United Kingdom, 3Gemeinschaftspraxis, Dresden, Germany, 4Institute 
of Clinical Genetics, Klinikum Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany, 5Zentrum für Kin -
derheilkunde, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 6Department of 
Paediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Defects in long-range regulatory elements have recently emerged as 
previously underestimated factors in the genesis of human congenital 
disorders. Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis is a dominant skeletal malfor -
mation syndrome caused by mutations in the short stature homeo -
box gene SHOX.  We have analyzed four families with Léri-Weill dys -
chondrosteosis with deletions in the pseudoautosomal region but still 
with an intact SHOX  coding region. Using FISH and SNP studies, we 
identified an interval of ~200 kb that was deleted in all tested affected 
family members but retained in the unaffected members and in 100 
control individuals. Comparative genomic analysis of this interval re -
vealed eight highly conserved non-genic elements between 48 kb and 
215 kb downstream of the SHOX  gene. As mice do not have a Shox  
gene, we analyzed their enhancer potential in chicken embryos using 
a GFP reporter construct driven by the ß-globin promoter, by in ovo  
electroporation of the limb bud. We observed cis-regulatory activity in 
3 of the 8 non-genic elements in the developing limbs argueing for an 
extensive control region of this gene. These findings are consistent 
with the idea that the deleted region in the affected families contains 
several distinct elements that regulate Shox  expression in the devel -
oping limb. Furthermore, the deletion of these elements in humans 
generates a phenotype apparently undistinguishable to those patients 
identified with mutations in the SHOX  coding region and, for the first 
time, demonstrates the potential of an in vivo  assay in chicken to moni -
tor putative enhancer activity in relation to human disease.
C35. Chromosomal imbalances detected in patients with 
cerebral cortex malformations and epilepsy through array−CGH 
technique
F. Novara1, T. Pramparo1, R. Guerrini2, B. Dalla Bernardina3, O. Zuffardi1;  
1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Pavia, Italy, 2Unità di Neurologia Infanti -
le, Ospedale Pediatrico A Meyer - Università di Firenze, Firenze, Italy, 3Servizio 
Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Policlinico GB Rossi, Università di Verona, Verona, 
Italy.
A cohort of 72 patients (37 males and 35 females) with cerebral cortex 
malformations and/or epilepsy, and with a normal karyotype was anal -
ysed trough array-CGH at a resolution of about 75Kb (Agilent platform 
44B). Most of the patients had also mental retardation and a few pre -
sented congenital anomalies. All have been analyzed for brain MRI, 
behavioural tests and types of epilepsy. Array-CGH resulted diagnostic 
in 10 out of 72 patients analysed (14%). The size of the imbalance 
ranged from 350Kb to 10Mb. The following chromosomal anomalies 
were found: duplication of regions 7q11.23, 22q12.3-13.2 and Xp22.2; 
deletion of regions 2q22.1-q23.3, 5q14-21, 7q11.23, 15q13.2-q13.3 
and 20q13.33. All chromosomal aberrations have been confirmed by 
microsatellite analysis and the parental origin determined. Three cases 
with 7q11.23 duplication, reciprocal to the Williams-Beuren deletion, 
have been detected in a girl, a male child and his mother. All suffered 
from severe speech impairment; the girl and the boy had cerebral cor -
tex malformations of different type whereas the mother had not been 
tested for brain MRI. The 15q13.2-q13.3 deletion was mediated by the 
same type of segmental duplications (BP1, BP2 and BP3) responsible 
for instability of the PWS/AS region but located at BP4 and BP5. These Concurrent Sessions2
preliminary results represent the first step to identify novel genes in -
volved in biological mechanisms important for human cerebral cortex 
development and for processes causative of epilepsy.
C36. Activating SOS1 mutations cause Noonan syndrome
M. Tartaglia1, L. Pennacchio2,3, C. Zhao4, K. K. Yadav4, V. Fodale1, A. Sar -
kozy5,6, B. Pandit7, K. Oishi7, S. Martinelli1, W. Schackwitz2,3, A. Ustaszewska2,3, 
J. Martin2,3, J. Bristow2,3, C. Carta1, F. Lepri5,6, C. Neri5,6, I. Vasta8, K. Gibson9, C. 
J. Curry10, J. P. Lopez Siguero11, M. C. Digilio12, G. Zampino8, B. Dallapiccola5,6, 
D. Bar-Sagi4, B. D. Gelb7;  
1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Lawrence Berkeley National Labora -
tory, Berkeley, CA, United States, 3Joint Genome Institute, Walnut Creek, CA, 
United States, 4New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, United 
States, 5IRCCS-CSS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 6Istituto CSS-Mendel, 
Rome, Italy, 7Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 
8Università Cattolica, Rome, Italy, 9Royal Children’s Hospital, Herston, Austra -
lia, 10Genetic Medicine Central California, Fresno, CA, United States, 11Hospital 
Materno-Infantil, Malaga, Spain, 12Ospedale “Bambino Gesù”, Rome, Italy.
Noonan syndrome (NS) is a relatively common, genetically heteroge -
neous Mendelian trait characterized by short stature, facial dysmor -
phisms, congenital heart defects and skeletal anomalies. Accumulat -
ing evidence supports the idea that NS is caused by enhanced RAS-
MAPK signaling. Indeed, gain-of-function mutations in PTPN11, the 
gene encoding SHP-2, a protein tyrosine phosphatase that positively 
controls RAS signaling, and KRAS have been documented in 50% 
of NS cases. Here, we demonstrate that approximately 20% of NS 
patients without PTPN11 or KRAS mutation have missense mutations 
in SOS1, which encodes a RAS-specific guanine nucleotide exchange 
factor (GEF). SOS1 mutations cluster at residues implicated in the 
maintenance of SOS1 in its autoinhibited form and expression of two 
NS-associated mutants induced enhanced RAS and ERK activation. 
The phenotype associated with SOS1 defects is distinctive, although 
within NS spectrum, with a high prevalence of ectodermal abnormali -
ties but generally normal development and linear growth. Our findings 
implicate for the first time gain-of-function mutations in a RAS GEF in 
inherited disease and define a new mechanism by which upregulation 
of the RAS pathway can profoundly change human development.
C37. Mutations in the SPG11 gene, encoding spatacsin, are a 
major cause of spastic paraplegia with thin corpus callosum
G. Stevanin1,2, F. M. Santorelli3, H. Azzedine1, P. Coutinho4, P. Denora1,3, E. 
Martin1, A. Lossos5, B. Fontaine6, A. Filla7, E. Bertini3, A. Durr1,2, A. Brice1,2;  
1INSERM UMR679 - NEB, Paris, France, 2APHP- Pitie-Salpetriere Hosptital, 
Dpt Genetics Cytogenetics, Paris, France, 3IRCCS-Bambino Gesù Children’s 
Hospital, Rome, Italy, 4Hospital S. Sebastiao and UnIGENe, Porto, Portugal, 
5Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 6INSERM 
U546, Paris, France, 7Federico II University, Naples, Italy.
Autosomal recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia (ARHSP) with thin 
corpus callosum (TCC) is a common and clinically distinct form of fa -
milial spastic paraplegia, linked to the SPG11 locus on chromosome 
15 in most families. It clinically manifests as spastic paraplegia usually 
beginning during infancy or puberty, preceded by learning difficulties. 
Some patients develop a pseudobulbar involvement, with dysarthria, 
dysphagia and upper limbs spasticity, associated with bladder dys -
function and signs of peripheral neuropathy. MRI shows thin corpus 
callosum (TCC), with hyperintensities in periventricular white matter, 
and cerebral cortical atrophy predominating in the frontal region.
We collected 12 ARHSP-TCC families. All available members were 
genotyped using 34 microsatellite markers covering the candidate in -
terval for SPG11. Linkage analysis and haplotype reconstruction in 10 
informative families restricted the SPG11 region to a 3.2-cM homozy -
gous region. Eighteen genes were analyzed in SPG11 index patients 
by direct sequencing, but no disease-causing mutations were found in 
17 of them. Ten mutations in 11 of the 12 families were found, how -
ever, in a novel gene (KIAA1840/FLJ21439) expressed ubiquitously 
in the nervous system but most prominently in the cerebellum, cere -
bral cortex, hippocampus and pineal gland. The mutations were either 
nonsense or insertions and deletions leading to frameshifts, suggest -
ing a loss-of-function mechanism.We have identified the SPG11 gene 
that accounts for the majority of the ARHSP-TCC families studied here 
(11/12). The identification of the function of the gene will provide insight 
into the mechanisms leading to the degeneration of the corticospinal 
tract and other brain structures in this frequent form of ARHSP.C38. OST3 mutation in non-syndromic mental retardation: 
expanding the spectrum of congenital disorders of 
glycosylation?
F. Molinari1, S. Romano1, W. Morelle2, P. de Lonlay1, A. Munnich1, L. Colleaux1;  
1INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2UMR CNRS/USTL 8570, Lille, France.
Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) is a group of inherited 
disorders that affect glycoprotein biosynthesis. The Eighteen different 
CDG types are characterized by a central nervous system dysfunction 
and multi-organ involvement. Group I CDG results in the failure of as -
sembly or transfer of the N-glycan chain while group II is defined as 
defects in the processing of the protein-bound glycan.
Here, we report on a non-syndromic mental retardation (MR) in two sibs 
born to first cousin French family. Homozygosity mapping in the two af -
fected and two healthy children led to the identification of a unique ho -
mozygous region of 8 Mb on 8p23.1-p22. This interval encompassed 
the gene TUSC3/OST3 (Ost3 S.cerevisae homologue) encoding a 
protein involved in the oligosaccharyltransferase complex which catal -
yses the transfer of an oligosaccharide chain on nascent proteins, the 
key step of the N-Glycosylation process. Sequencing the OST3 gene 
identified a one base-pair insertion in exon 6, 787_788insC. The muta -
tion co-segregated with the disease and resulted in a premature stop 
codon 37 codons downstream of the coding sequence, N263fsX300. 
Extensive work-up (Caryotype analysis, liver function, clotting factors, 
brain MRI, EEG) was unremarkable with normal isoelectric focusing 
and Western blotting assay of serum N-glycoproteins.
Recent studies of glycoprotein fucosylation and polysialic acid modifi -
cation of neuronal cell adhesion molecules have shown the critical role 
of glycoproteins in synaptic plasticity. However, our results provide the 
first demonstration that a defect in N-Glycosylation can result in non-
syndromic MR providing therefore new insights in the understanding of 
the pathophysiological bases of MR.
C39. A defect in the ionotropic glutamate receptor 6 gene 
(GLUR6) causes autosomal recessive mental retardation
M. M. Motazacker1, B. Rost2, T. Hucho1, M. Garshasbi1, K. Kahrizi3, R. Ull -
mann1, F. Behjati3, R. Vazifehmand3, A. Tzschach1, L. R. Jensen1, D. Schmitz4, 
H. Najmabadi3, H. H. Ropers1, A. W. Kuss1;  
1Max-Planck-Institute for molecular genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Neuroscience 
research center (NWFZ), Charité, Berlin, Germany, 3University of social welfare 
and rehabilitation sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Neuroscience 
research center (NWFZ), Charité, Berlin, Germany.
Mental retardation (MR) is among the most common forms of genetic 
handicaps. So far, however very little is known about the gene defects 
underlying this disorder. Especially the contribution of autosomal re -
cessive hereditary defects is largely unresolved and to date, only three 
genes have been found to be directly associated with non-syndromic 
autosomal recessive MR (NS-ARMR).
We have previously identified 8 new genomic loci for NS-ARMR 
(MRT6-11) and report here a complex deletion-inversion mutation in 
the glutamate receptor 6 gene (GLUR6, GRIK2), a member of the kai -
nate receptor family. GLUR6 maps to the MRT6 locus, a 10Mb linkage 
interval on Chr6q16.3, which we have recently identified in a large con -
sanguineous Iranian family with moderate to severe non-syndromic 
ARMR. As shown by Southern blotting, inverse PCR, array-CGH and 
cloning experiments, the sequence changes include a deletion of ap -
proximately 120Kb including exons 7 and 8, as well as an inversion of 
about 80Kb that encompasses exons 9 to 11. This mutation was not 
found in 172 controls, and the integrity of the coding sequence of 7 
other potential candidate genes in the interval was verified by direct 
sequencing.
Glutamate receptor signalling has previously been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of the fragile-X-syndrome and may also play a role in 
autism. However, our studies provide the first direct evidence for the 
importance of glutamate receptors in human cognition. Moreover, they 
have implications for the diagnosis and prevention of NS-ARMR and 
may shed new light on the role of ion channels in the human brain.Concurrent Sessions2
C40. Mutation of a potassium channel-related gene in 
progressive myoclonic epilepsy
R. Azizieh , P. Van Bogaert, J. Désir, A. Aeby, L. De Meirleir, J. Laes, F. Christi -
aens, M. J. Abramowicz;  
IRIBHM, Brussels, Belgium.
Objective: We investigated a large consanguineous Moroccan family 
with progressive myoclonic epilepsy (PME) consistent with autosomal 
recessive inheritance, in order to describe the phenotype and identify 
the causal gene.
Methods: We recorded the clinical course of the disease and the re -
sponse to drug therapy, while carefully excluding known causes of 
PME. We then linked the disease by homozygosity mapping using 
microsatellite markers and SNP microarrays (11K GeneChip®) and 
studied candidate genes in the critical linkage region.
Results: Epilepsy started between 16 and 24 months of age after 
normal initial development. Seizures were multifocal myoclonus ag -
gravated by movements, and generalized tonic-clonic seizures in two 
patients. EEG showed slow dysrythmia, multifocal and occasionally 
generalized epileptiform discharges, and photosensitivity. Brain MRIs 
were normal. All patients were demented. Two had refractory epilepsy 
and a severe course. Seizures were controlled in the third patient, 
whose disease course was less severe. Linkage analyses identified 
a new locus on 7q11.2, with a maximum multipoint LOD of 4.0 at 
D7S663. In the critical linkage region, we found a C to T mutation in 
exon 2 of the Potassium Channel Tetramerization Domain-containing 
7 gene (KCTD7). The mutation affected a highly conserved segment 
of the predicted protein, changing an arginine codon into a stop codon 
(R99X).
Interpretation: Neurodegeneration in PME presented by our patients 
paralleled therefractoriness of epilepsy. The disease was transmit -
ted as an autosomal recessive trait linked to a novel locus at 7q11.2, 
where we identified a mutation in KCTD7.
C41. Mutations in TCF- , encoding a class I basic helix-loop-
helix transcription factor, are responsible for Pitt-Hopkins 
syndrome, a severe epileptic encephalopathy associated with 
autonomic dysfunction.
J. Amiel1, M. Rio1, L. de Pontual1, R. Redon2, V. Malan1, N. Boddaert3, P. Pl -
ouin4, N. Carter2, S. Lyonnet1, A. Munnich1, L. Colleaux1;  
1INSERM U-781, Université Paris-Descartes, Faculté de Médecine; AP-HP, 
Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2The Wellcome Trust Sanger 
Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Pe-
diatric Radiology and INSERM U-797, Paris, France, 4Clinical Neurophysiology 
Unit and INSERM U-663, Paris, France.
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PHS) is a rare syndromic encephalopathy 
characterised by severe psychomotor delay, epilepsy and daily bouts 
of diurnal hyperventilation starting in infancy, mild postnatal growth re -
tardation, postnatal microcephaly and distinctive facial features. We 
have ascertained 4 cases of PHS and carried out a systematic 1Mb 
resolution genome wide BAC array screening for microdeletions or 
duplications in all cases. Using this approach, we have identified a 
1.8 Mb  de novo  microdeletion on chromosome 18q21.1 in 1/4 case. 
We subsequently identified two de novo  heterozygous missense muta -
tions of a conserved amino acid in the basic region of the TCF4  gene 
in three additional PHS cases. These findings demonstrate that TCF4 
anomalies are responsible for PHS and provide the first evidence of a 
human disorder related to class I basic helix-loop-helix transcription 
factor defects (also known as E-proteins).
Differential diagnoses include Rett, Angelman, Mowat-Wilson and 
Goldberg-Shprintzen syndromes.  The facial gestalt of patients with 
PHS is extremely valuable for clinicians to consider the diagnosis be -
fore the onset of distinctive features such as bouts of hyperventilation 
and epilepsy. EEG and brain MRI may also give valuable clues that will 
be discussed. Patients diagnosed with PHS dysplay a broad spectrum 
of dysautonomic features (hyperpneic episodes,  dilated pupils with 
sluggish responses to light, short-segment Hirschsprung disease or 
severe gastrointestinal dysfunction). These data may shed new light 
on the normal processes underlying autonomic nervous system de -
velopment and maintenance of an appropriate ventilatory neuronal 
circuitry.C42. Haploinsufficiency of TCF4 causes syndromal mental 
retardation with intermittent hyperventilation (Pitt-Hopkins 
syndrome)
A. Reis1, C. Zweier1, M. M. Peippo2, J. Hoyer1, S. Sousa3, A. Bottani4, J. Clay -
ton-Smith5, W. Reardon6, J. Saraiva3, A. Cabral3, I. Göhring1, K. Devriendt7, T. 
de Ravel7, E. K. Bijlsma8, R. C. M. Hennekam9,10, A. Orrico11, M. Cohen12, A. 
Dreweke13, P. Nürnberg14, A. Rauch1;  
1Inst. of Human Genetics, Univ. Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 
2The Family Federation of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 3Pediatrics Hospital, Co -
imbra, Portugal, 4Division of Medical Genetics, Geneva, Switzerland, 5St Mary’s 
Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6Our Lady’s Hospital for Sick Children, 
Dublin, Ireland, 7Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 8Centre for Hu -
man and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands, 9Institute of Child Health, 
London, United Kingdom, 10Dept. of Pediatrics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 
11Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 12Kinderzentrum 
München, Munich, Germany, 13Computer Science Dept. 2, Erlangen, Germany, 
14Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), Cologne, Germany.
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is a rarely reported syndrome of so far unknown 
etiology characterized by mental retardation, wide mouth and inter -
mittent hyperventilation. By molecular karyotyping using GeneChip 
Human Mapping 100K SNP arrays we detected a 1.2 Mb deletion in 
18q21.2 in one patient. Sequencing of the TCF4 transcription factor 
gene, which is contained in the deletion region, in 30 patients with 
significant phenotypic overlap revealed heterozygous stop, splice and 
missense mutations in 5 further patients with severe mental retarda -
tion and remarkable facial resemblance. Thus we establish the Pitt-
Hopkins syndrome as a distinct, but probably heterogeneous entity 
caused by autosomal dominant de novo mutations in TCF4. Due to its 
phenotypical overlap Pitt-Hopkins syndrome evolves as an important 
differential diagnosis to Angelman and Rett syndromes. As both, null 
and missense mutations impaired the interaction of TCF4 with ASCL1 
from the PHOX-RET-pathway in transactivating an E-box containing 
reporter construct, hyperventilation and Hirschsprung disease in pa -
tients with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome might be explained by altered devel -
opment of noradrenergic derivatives.
Our study shows, that molecular karyotyping is not only able to dis -
close novel microdeletion syndromes and the underlying gene defect 
in well known disorders like CHARGE and Peters-Plus syndromes, 
but also to resolve the etiology in very rarely reported phenotypes. 
However, Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is probably widely under-diagnosed 
like the now clinically recognizable Mowat-Wilson syndrome was un -
til the identification of the underlying gene defect. To our knowledge, 
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome is the first constitutive phenotype in which the 
etiology was identified by molecular karyotyping using genome wide 
SNP arrays.
C43. Powerful methods for whole genome association analysis 
of quantitative traits in samples of related individuals
Y. S. Aulchenko1, N. Amin1, N. Belonogova2, D. de Koning3, C. Haley3, C. M. 
van Duijn1;  
1Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Institute of Cytology & 
Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Roslin Institute, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
Genome-wide association (GWA) analysis is a tool of choice for iden -
tification of genes responsible for complex human disorders. GWA 
analysis using closely or remotely related individuals from genetically 
isolated populations (e.g. EUROSPAN consortium) or families from 
general population (e.g. Framingham study) may have certain advan -
tages over designs using apparently unrelated individuals from the 
general population.
Most of the methods suitable for GWA analysis of pedigree data are 
based on variants of the Transmission-Disequilibrium test (TDT). 
These methods utilise within-family variation and are therefore robust 
to false positives potentially induced by population stratification. How -
ever, these methods lose power because they ignore between-family 
variation and also require precise knowledge of pedigree and sampling 
of closely related individuals, which may be not always possible and 
cost-effective.
Here, we suggest a set of powerful methods suited for analysis of sam -
ples of (potentially) related individuals. We show that when pedigree 
relationships between the study subjects are not known or are only 
partly known, genomic control (GC) may be used to correct for related -
ness and stratification. As expected, for a wide range of scenarios the Concurrent Sessions2
power of this method is much higher compared to TDT-based meth -
ods. When pedigree structure is at least partly known, utilisation of this 
information allows even more powerful analysis. The baseline method 
is extended to include covariates, interactions and more complex ge -
netic effects, such as parent-of-origin and epistasis. We demonstrate 
the utility of the newly developed methods using real data from a young 
genetically isolated population.
C44. Optimizing information for linkage genomescreen in a large 
and inbred pedigree with a high density SNP map
C. Bellenguez1,2, C. Ober3, C. Bourgain2,1;  
1Univ Paris-Sud, UMR-S535, Villejuif F-94817, France, 2INSERM, Villejuif F-
94817, France, 3Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, 
Chicago, IL, United States.
Large genealogies available in isolated populations are potentially 
very informative for linkage analyses, in particular when considering 
high density SNP maps.
Here, we investigate different methodological aspects of linkage analy -
sis in a large and inbred 1840-member Hutterite pedigree, phenotyped 
for asthma and asthma-related traits. Starting with a 5cM microsatellite 
map, we first identify genome-wide significant regions (1p13, 1p31, 
5q33, 6q21-23, 12q14, 13q13 and 14p11-q11), after a carefully op -
timized breaking of the pedigree. Our approach is interesting since 
these regions had not been significantly detected in previous analyses 
of the same dataset but have been described by others.
We further analyse these linked regions using a 500K SNP map. Be -
cause SNPs are much closer than microsatellite markers, they present 
important linkage disequilibrium (LD), which bias classical nonpara -
metric multipoint analyses. This problem is even stronger in population 
isolates where LD extends over larger regions with a more stochastic 
pattern. The only method that models LD in the NPL analysis is limited 
in both the pedigree size and the number of markers (Abecasis and 
Wigginton, 2005) and therefore could not be used. Instead, we pro -
pose methods that identify sets of SNPs with maximum linkage infor -
mation content in our pedigree and no LD-driven bias. Both algorithms 
that directly remove pairs of SNPs in high LD and clustering meth -
ods are evaluated. Preliminary results suggest that in such population 
isolates, a careful marker selection is necessary to obtain information 
content for linkage higher with SNPs than that already available with 
microsatellites.
C45. Epistasis for physiological variables in admixed 
populations
M. Fenger1, A. Linneberg2, O. Pedersen3, T. Hansen4, T. Jøregensen2;  
1University of Copenhagen, Hvidovre, Denmark, 2Research Centre for Preven -
tion and Health, Glostrup, Denmark, 3Steno Diabetes Center, Gentofte, Den -
mark, 4Steno Diabetes Centre, Gentofte, Denmark.
The metabolic syndrome and diabetes mellitus are highly influenced 
by genetic factors. These conditions are heterogenous and polygenic 
in nature for the vast majority of cases, each gene supposed to have 
only a minor impact of the phenotypic variance in the general popula -
tion.
Therefor large populations are required to identify and elucidate the 
genetic structure of these conditions. A major obstacle is the het -
erogeneity of most study populations, i.e. the populations consist of 
a mixture of yet unidentified physiological and genetic homogenous 
subpopulations. To define these subpopulations a latent class analysis 
is performed. This was done in a structural equation modelling frame -
work. Basic physiological variables previously shown to be related to 
the metabolic syndrome were included in analysis as indicators and 
covariates. No genetic model is assumed. This model defined 19 sub -
populations with an entropy measure of approximately 0.9. Less than 
0.1%. of all possible single-gene heritabilities were present. In con -
trast, including two-gene interactions revealed that 28 of the 30 genetic 
markers are involved in one and usually several epistatic interactions. 
On average approximately 1/3 of all possible two-gene interactions 
were significant for all the traits included in the model. Most notably, 
stratifying the basic study population revealed approximately 30% 
more interactions masked in the physiological mixed study population. 
These results supports the notion that genome wide single-gene asso -
ciation studies generally will be futile. For a genome wide screening to 
be successful the populations should be physiologically stratified and 
at least two-gene interactions should be included.C46. A powerful approach to detect parent-of-origin effects in 
whole-genome association scans of quantitative traits
N. M. Belonogova1,2, Y. S. Aulchenko1,3;  
1Institute of Cytology & Genetics SD RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 
2Department of Cytology & Genetics, Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, 
Russian Federation, 3Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Erasmus 
MC, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Parent-of-origin effect (POE) is a widespread genetic phenomenon ex -
tensively studied in model animals. For the genes exhibiting POE, the 
trait value in a heterozygous offspring depends on the parental origin 
of the alleles. There exist evidences that POE is important for such hu -
man traits as weight, type 2 diabetes, and others. For these traits the 
power of genome-wide association (GWA) analysis may be increased 
by incorporating POE into the analysis model.
To study POE in GWA scans of human quantitative traits, different vari -
ants of TDT-based methods may be applied. These, however, exploit 
only within-family variation in order to avoid population stratification 
bias. In homogeneous populations methods utilizing both within- and 
between-family variation, such as the measured genotype (MG) ap -
proach, are shown to have greater power. In MG analysis, genetic 
polymorphism is included as a fixed effect or covariate in a mixed 
linear model along with a polygenic component. To utilize POE infor -
mation, we suggest using probabilities indicating parental origin as a 
covariate in the MG analysis. We suggest a fast approximation to the 
full MG analysis, which is suitable for the analysis of GWA scans and 
a method to estimate probabilities of parental origin in arbitrary com -
plex pedigrees. Using simulated data, we compare our approach to the 
TDT-based methods. We show that our approach is more powerful. 
For many scenarios the sample size can be reduced two times when 
using our approach and the same significance level as by using the 
TDT-based methods is still achieved.
C47. Quantifying the increase in human individual genome-wide 
heterozygosity through isolate break-up and admixture
I. Rudan1, Z. Biloglav2, A. Vorko-Jovic2, I. Kolcic2, O. Polasek2, L. Zgaga2, T. 
Zemunik3, R. Mulic3, D. Ropac3, D. Stojanovic4, D. Puntaric5, R. Stevanovic6, H. 
Campbell1;  
1Faculty of Medicine, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Faculty of Medicine, Zagreb, 
Croatia, 3Faculty of Medicine, Split, Croatia, 4Faculty of Medicine, Rijeka, Croa -
tia, 5Faculty of Medicine, Osijek, Croatia, 6Institute for Public Health, Zagreb, 
Croatia.
Aim. The human population is undergoing a major transition from a 
metapopulation structure (subdivision in many relatively isolated com -
munities) to a more admixed structure such as that which occurs in 
large cities. We attempted to quantify the magnitude of increase in 
average individual genome-wide heterozygosity (IGWH) that has oc -
curred through isolate break-up and admixture.
Materials and methods. We sampled 100 examinees from 9 isolat -
ed villages on 5 Croatian islands, and an additional 101 immigrants 
into those villages. Out of the larger sample of 1001 examinees, we 
carefully selected 6 samples each of 23 individuals with a predicted 
increasing level of genome-wide heterozygosity, which was then mea -
sured studied using 1,200 STR markers. The first sample was from 
the most isolated island, the second from less isolated island, the third 
from the least isolated island, the fourth included individuals admixed 
between villages, the fifth immigrants from mainland cities and the 
sixth extremely outbred individuals.
Results: Relative to the mean IGWH estimate in the first sample, the 
increase in the percentage of the genome that is heterozygous in the 
remaining 5 samples was found to be: 2.3%, 3.8%, 5.8%, 6.7% and 
7.9%. These differences are statistically highly significant (p<0.0001), 
and their gradual increase follows the predictions based on a priori 
hypothesis.
Conclusion. The human population is undergoing substantial outbreed -
ing through breakup of isolate communities and rural-urban migration, 
with the potential to increase average genome-wide heterozygosity by 
up to 10%. The health consequences of this major change in genetic 
structure merit further study.Concurrent Sessions2
C48. CHROMSCAN: Genome-wide association mapping
A. R. Collins ;  
University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.
Many genome-wide association mapping studies using high density 
arrays of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are underway. Typi -
cally these involve 100s to 1000s of DNA samples collected as case-
control studies screened for several hundred thousand SNPs across 
the genome. Efficient analysis and interpretation of these vast data 
sets raises considerable difficulties. If significance is tested at individu -
al SNPs, large numbers of false positives make interpretation difficult. 
Models which utilise information from multiple SNPs simultaneously 
offer advantages by reducing the number of tests and providing in -
creased power. However, the reliable computation of significance lev -
els remains an issue, given the high density of non-independent SNPs 
and consequent auto-correlation. Other concerns include the difficulty 
of incorporating information on the underlying linkage disequilibrium 
(LD) structure when testing association with disease. Including such 
information has been shown to substantially increase power and preci -
sion of mapping.
CHROMSCAN  models association with disease in non-overlapping 
sliding windows and rapidly and robustly determines candidate regions 
and maximum likelihood locations and standard errors for putatively 
causal polymorphisms. The program employs a composite-likelihood 
based model, estimating a small number of parameters in each re -
gion, thereby reducing the number of tests made. A permutation test 
ensures the P-value distribution is not distorted due to autocorrelation 
caused by extensive LD. Association with disease is modelled on an 
underlying map in linkage disequilibrium units (LDUs). CHROMSCAN , 
which runs on UNIX and Linux platforms, is also implemented for par -
allel computing on either a Linux-based cluster.
C49. Screening for splice defects: application to BRCA 1 and 
BRCA 2 unknown variants (UV)
V. Caux-Moncoutier1, S. Pagès-Berhouet1, D. Michaux1, A. De Pauw1, M. Gau -
thier-Villars1, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet1,2, C. Houdayer1,3;  
1Institut Curie, Paris, France, 2INSERM U509, Paris, France, 3UMR INSERM 
745, Paris, France.
Nearly half of BRCA1 and BRCA2  sequence variations remain of un -
certain clinical significance (UV) and are candidates for splice altera -
tions e.g. by creating cryptic splice sites. Since an out-of-frame splicing 
defect leads to severe reduction in the level of the mutant mRNA, we 
developped a cDNA-based test to evidence such allelic imbalance.
Seventy patients without BRCA1/2 mutation and bearing consecutive -
ly identified UVs were included in the study. Following RNA extraction, 
DNAse treatment and RT-PCR, 3 exonic SNPs on both BRCA 1 and 
BRCA 2 were asked using a semiquantitative single-nucleotide primer 
extension approach.
Data were collected with an ABI3130XL then analysed using Gene -
Mapper (Applied Biosystems). cDNA allelic ratios were corrected us -
ing genomic DNA ratios from the same sample. This approach was 
combined with in silico  predictions using Splice Site Finder, Splice Site 
Prediction, MaxEntScan, ESE Finder and Rescue ESE.
Allelic imbalances were found in 4/21 and 11/49 cases for BRCA 1 and 
BRCA 2, respectively. However, the corresponding UVs did not show 
in silico pathogenic effects.
In order to determine UVs’ impact on mRNA instability, sequencing of 
their cDNA flanking regions has started, using cDNA from cells treated 
with puromycin.
Analysis of the first 5 patients excluded UVs’ involvement therefore 
complete cDNA sequencing was performed, evidencing in one case an 
out-of-frame deletion of BRCA 2 exons 12 and 13. These preliminary 
results showed that allelic imbalance screening is a simple way to de -
tect splicing defects but they also demonstrated that changes in allelic 
expression may be due to other cis- or trans-acting factors.
C50. HNPCC-associated missense mutations in MSH2 may lead 
to failure of the protein to bind mismatched DNA
S. E. Ollila1, D. Dermadi1, J. Jiricny2, M. Nyström1;  
1Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Division of Genetics, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Institute of Molecular Cancer Re -
search, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
Inherited mutations in mismatch repair (MMR) genes, MLH1 MSH2, 
MSH6 and PMS2 predispose to hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). A significant proportion of all identified MMR gene 
mutations are non-truncating, which complicates the interpretation of 
their clinical relevance.
We have previously conducted functional studies on non-truncating 
MSH2 mutations to clarify their role in the pathogenesis of HNPCC. In 
this study we characterized the biochemical defects of mutated MSH2 
proteins in more detail, by assessing the ability of the mutated proteins 
to bind base-base mismatches, and to dissociate from mismatched 
DNA in vitro.
Wild-type and fifteen mutated MSH2 proteins, twelve of which had 
showed functional defects in our previous studies, were expressed 
in the baculovirus system together with his-tagged wild-type MSH6. 
The recombinant heterodimeric MSH2/MSH6 complexes were purified 
by fast protein liquid chromatography or partially purified on Ni-NTA 
columns. The heterodimers were then used in bandshift assays to ex -
amine their affinity for homo- and heteroduplex DNA. In addition, their 
ATP-mediated dissociation from the mismatches was assessed.
None of the proteins showed detectable binding to homoduplex DNA. 
Preliminary data showed that some of the mutants, also those defec -
tive in other functional assays, displayed mismatch binding comparable 
to the wild-type protein complex. Some failed to bind mismatches, and 
some weak binders could also be identified. The ATP-mediated dis -
sociation from DNA was not impaired in any of the proteins analysed 
thus far. This study will provide additional information for interpreting 
the pathogenicity of HNPCC-associated missense mutations.
C51. MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP): spectrum and 
frequency of extracolonic lesions
D. Christian , V. Steinke, S. Uhlhaas, P. Propping, W. Friedl, S. Aretz;  
Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP) is a recently discovered auto -
somal-recessive precancerous condition of the colorectum which is 
caused by germline mutations in the base excision repair (BER) gene 
MUTYH. MAP is associated with a colorectal cancer lifetime risk of 
up to 100%, comparable to familial adenomatous polyposis. However, 
there are only sporadic descriptions of extraintestinal manifestations. 
Here we report on a systematic evaluation of the tumour spectrum in 
German MAP patients, based on medical records and anamnestic in -
formation. The study is part of a collaborative European trial performed 
together with two centres in the Netherlands and UK. To date, 83 bi -
allelic German MUTYH mutation carriers were included. The median 
age at evaluation was 54 years (range 28-85). In 17% of the patients 
duodenal polyps are reported; 49% had extraintestinal lesions (10 pa -
tients had two, 6 had three different tumours), 23% had at least one 
extracolonic malignancy. The following tumours were observed more 
than once:
Tumour Frequency Age of diagnosis
Breast cancer 10% (4/42 females) 49-60
Endometrial cancer 5% (2/42 females) 32-54
Ovarian cancer 5% (2/42 females) 45-56
Skin cancer 5% (4/83) 32-68
Bladder carcinoma 2,4% (2/83) 45-62
Teratoma 2,4% (2/83) 28-33
Lipomas 8% (7/83) 30-50
Benign skin tumours 15% (12/83) 15-62
Compared to the age-related population-based tumour risk these preliminary data 
indicate an increased incidence of gynaecological cancer (endometrium, ovary) and 
cutaneous tumours in MAP patients. The risk of breast cancer is close to the age-
related female population risk. The results may influence future surveillance recom -
mendations and contribute to the understanding of the underlying pathophysiological 
mechanisms in MAP.
The study was supported by the Deutsche Krebshilfe  (German Cancer Aid), 
project no. 106244
C52. A genome-wide SNP screen for bowel cancer susceptibility 
alleles
I. Tomlinson1, R. Houlston2, CORGI consortium, NSCCG;  
1London Research Institute, London, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Cancer Re -
search, Sutton, United Kingdom.
We present the results of a genome-wide screen using the Illumina 
Hap550 SNP arrays to search for susceptibility alleles for colorectal 
carcinoma. 1,000 familial cases and 1,000 controls from the UK Cau -
casian population were screened in stage 1 of this survey and we re -Concurrent Sessions2
port the findings of this screen, including SNPs that are significantly 
associated with increased risk of bowel cancer. These SNPs are now 
being tested in a phase 2 study involving 3,000 unselected cases and 
3,000 controls. Further collaborative studies involving large sample 
sets will be needed to confirm that SNPs from our phase 1 and 2 data 
are truly associated with disease.
C53. Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer (HDGC) patients and 
CDH1 mutations: a systematic review of the literature
C. Oliveira1, R. Karam1, C. Graziadio2, H. Pinheiro1, S. Sousa1, R. Seruca1,3;  
1Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto, 
Porto, Portugal, 2Department of Genetics, Fundação Faculdade Federal de 
Ciências Médicas de Porto Alegre (FFFCMPA), Porto Alegre, Brasil, Porto 
Alegre, Brazil, 3Medical Faculty of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 
Porto, Portugal.
Worldwide, gastric cancer is the second cause of cancer-related 
death. Despite an overall trend for decrease, incidence of gastric 
cancer in young patients and cases with familial clustering remains 
stable. Despite being an uncommon disease, HDGC is a major health 
problem and extremely difficult to address in clinical and therapeu -
tic grounds, due to its severity and unavailability of early diagnosis. A 
single gene was identified with a causative role in HDGC, E-cadherin. 
We performed a systematic review of CDH1  mutation carriers clini -
cal presentation and its association with frequency, localization and 
type of CDH1  germline mutations. We collected information on 99 
CDH1  mutation carriers, described to date in the literature. The age 
of onset of CDH1  mutation carriers varied between 16 and 73 years 
old (mean=41.8±14.4), and 75% of cases were diagnosed before 
50. Male:female ratio was near 1.0. Although CDH1  mutations were 
distributed along all gene sequence, exons 2,3,7 and 11 were pref -
erentially affected. Most mutation carriers (87.9%-87/99) harboured 
CDH1  truncating mutations. The type of mutations (truncating and mis -
sense) was significantly different between families with complete and 
incomplete criteria for HDGC, previously established by the IGCLC 
(p=0.0001). Carriers from families with complete criteria harboured 
preferentially truncating mutations (92%), while carriers from families 
with incomplete criteria harboured truncating and missense mutations 
in similar frequencies (50%). Moreover, truncating mutations carriers 
were significantly younger (40.5±14.3) than missense mutation carri -
ers (50.7±12.4) (p=0.02). This systematic analysis is of crucial impor -
tance to help genetic counselling and to direct molecular analysis in 
suspected HDGC mutation carriers.
C54. The identification of (ETV6/)RUNX1-regulated genes in 
lymphopoiesis using histone deacetylase inhibitors in ETV6/
RUNX1-positive lymphoid leukaemic cells
J. Starkova1, J. Madzo1, G. Cario2, T. Kalina1, A. Ford3, M. Zaliova1, O. Hrusak1, 
J. Trka1;  
1CLIP – Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, Department of Paediatric 
Haematology and Oncology, Charles University, 2nd Medical School, Prague, 
Czech Republic, 2Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Hol -
stein, Kiel, Germany, 3Leukaemia Research Fund Centre, Institute of Cancer 
Research, Chester Beatty Laboratories, London, United Kingdom.
Chimeric transcription factor ETV6/RUNX1 (TEL/AML1) is believed to 
cause pathological block in lymphoid cells development via interac -
tion with corepressor complex and histone deacetylase. We wanted 
to demonstrate regulatory effect of ETV6/RUNX1 and its reversibil -
ity by histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) and to identify potential 
ETV6/RUNX1-regulated genes. We used luciferase assay to demon -
strate the interaction of ETV6/RUNX1protein, ETV6/RUNX1-regulated 
gene and HDACi. In order to identify ETV6/RUNX1-regulated genes 
we employed expression profiling and HDACi in the lymphoid cells. 
Next using the flow cytometry and qRT-PCR we measured changes in 
gene and proteins expression after HDACi treatment. Luciferase as -
say showed repression of granzyme B expression by ETV6/RUNX1 
protein and reversibility of this effect by HDACi. Proving this regula -
tory role of ETV6/RUNX1, we used complex statistical analysis to 
identify 25 genes that are potentially regulated by ETV6/RUNX1 pro -
tein. In 4 selected genes with known role in the cell cycle regulation 
(JunD, ACK1, PDGFRB and TCF4) we confirmed expression changes 
after HDACi by quantitative analysis. After HDACi treatment, ETV6/
RUNX1-positive cells showed immunophenotype changes resembling 
differentiation process compared to other leukaemic cells (BCR/ABL, ETV6/PDGFRB-positive). Moreover, ETV6/RUNX1-positive leukaemic 
cells accumulated in G1/G0 phase after HDACi while other B-lineage 
leukaemic cell lines showed rather unspecific changes including induc -
tion of apoptosis and decreased proliferation. Presented data support 
the hypothesis that HDACi affect ETV6/RUNX1-positive cells via direct 
interaction with ETV6/RUNX1 protein, and that treatment with HDACi 
may release aberrant transcription activity caused by ETV6/RUNX1 
chimeric transcription factor.
Supported by grants IGA MZ 8316 and MSM0021620813.
C55. Analysis of the genomic insertion sites of viral gene 
therapy vectors using next generation sequencing technologies.
C. Bauser1, M. Schmidt2, C. von Kalle2;  
1GATC Biotech, Konstanz, Germany, 2National Center for Tumor Diseases 
(NCT), Heidelberg, Germany.
Viral vectors commonly used for somatic gene therapy can cause in -
sertional mutagenesis, activating oncogenes in the patient, potentially 
leading to oncogenic transformation. After transduction, the viruses in -
tegrate into the genome, preferentially upstream of actively expressed 
genes. The potential therefore exists to alter the expression of onco -
genic or tumor suppressor genes which occasionally leads to changes 
in stem cell self-renewal and oncogenic transformation. Clonal expan -
sion of a cell with an integration event that promotes cell division, and 
possibly oncogenic transformation, leads to the dominance of a few (or 
single) integration events in hematopoietic progenitor cells.
By using LAM-PCR, DNA-sequencing and bioinformatic analysis, we 
can identify the viral integration sites in the genome. Because the inte -
gration site can differ in each cell, it can be difficult to identify all genes 
potentially influenced by the integration events. Whereas cloning and 
Sanger sequencing only allow identification of several hundred inte -
gration events, next generation sequencing methods allow the iden -
tification of ten thousands of individual integration events in parallel. 
The ability to identify more integration events early in the gene therapy 
treatment procedure, and follow changes in the distribution of cells 
having different integration sites, will allow to better assess the safety 
of somatic gene therapy, and develop new and safer viral vectors and 
transduction methods.
We present the results of a systematic insertion site analysis for a 
retroviral vector and show that the broad range of insertion sites found 
using next generation sequencing technology is a vast improvement 
over the traditional Sanger method.
C56. Correction of VLCAD deficiency and prediction of mutation 
severity with bezafibrate: how to kill two birds with one stone.
S. Gobin-Limballe1, F. Djouadi1, F. Aubey1, S. Olpin2, S. Yamaguchi3, R. Wan -
ders4, T. Fukao5, J. Kim6, J. Bastin1;  
1CNRS UPR 9078, Paris, France, 2Sheffield Children’s Hospital, Sheffield, 
United Kingdom, 3Shimane School of medicine, Shimane, Japan, 4Academic 
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 5Gifu University, Gifu, Japan, 
6Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States.
We recently showed that fibrates could restore FAO in patient cells har -
boring inborn defects in Very-Long-Chain-AcylCoA-Dehydrogenase (VL -
CAD; mitochondrial β-oxidation), by stimulating residual enzyme activity. 
Given the variety of reported VLCAD gene point mutations, we investigat -
ed the response to drug as a function of genotype. 34 VLCAD-deficient fi -
broblast with distinct genotypes representing 50 different mutations were 
treated with 400µM bezafibrate for 72h and FAO was measured using 
tritiated palmitate. Untreated cells exhibited FAO rates much lower (-30 
to -90%) than control. Bezafibrate induced a marked increase in FAO in 
60% of the genotypes tested, and a complete correction in 15 cell lines. 
These data allowed to identify three groups: - severely deficient cells 
with nonsense mutations, or missense mutations affecting residues es -
sential for catalysis (G222, G441, R469), that were drug-resistant -a 2nd 
group with missense mutations compatible with a moderate response to 
bezafibrate - a 3rd group which harbored genotypes compatible with a 
full restoration of FAO by bezafibrate, pointing to mild mutations (V283A, 
G441D, R615Q). We also characterized changes in VLCAD mRNA and 
residual enzyme activity levels induced by bezafibrate, as a function of 
genotype. The mutations were reported in a predictive VLCAD 3-D mod -
el allowing to confirm the mild or severe mutations that were character -
ized in the “bezafibrate test”. The response to bezafibrate can therefore 
predict the severity of VLCAD point mutations that was not documented 
yet and might help to identify patients for a future clinical trial.Concurrent Sessions2
C57. RNAi-based allele specific silencing of the ataxin-7 gene in 
South African patients with SCA7
J. Scholefield1, M. Weinberg2, P. Arbuthnot2, M. Wood3, J. Greenberg1;  
1Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, UCT, Cape Town, 
South Africa, 2Department of Molecular Medicine and Haematology, Wits, Jo -
hannesburg, South Africa, 3Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, 
Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
RNA interference (RNAi) is a mechanism that occurs naturally in eu -
karyotes and mediates post-transcriptional gene silencing and has 
been shown to have application to treatment of many debilitating ge -
netic disorders. One such disease is the polyglutamine disorder, spi -
nocerebellar ataxia 7 (SCA7). SCA7 has a higher frequency in South 
Africa and has only been diagnosed here in black African patients to 
date. A recent study demonstrated that an exonic single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) is tightly linked to the disease-causing (CAG)n 
expansion within ataxin 7 . The aim of this project is to exploit the RNAi 
pathway to achieve specific knockdown of the mutant mRNA transcript 
of ataxin 7 . A panel of 14 different Pol III U6 promoter-encoded short 
hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) that target the ataxin 7  SNP were designed. 
Knockdown effects against mutant and wild-type targets linked to a 
luciferase reporter gene were measured in triplicate. Knockdown of the 
targets was measured in triplicate. Luciferase emissions were reduced 
in cell cultures containing the mutant target compared with those of 
the wild-type, although the differences were for the most part, small. 
However, one shRNA showed nearly 30% discrimination between the 
wild-type and the mutant target cell cultures. Unexpectedly, shRNAs 
with secondary mismatches abrogated discrimination and knockdown 
with one exception. These preliminary results indicate that discrimina -
tory knockdown of ataxin 7  can be achieved using a weak mismatch. 
Further shRNAs have been designed to maximise this initial discrimi -
nation. This investigation shows promise for development of a gene 
therapy-based approach to treating a disease of South African impor -
tance as well as other similar conditions.
C58. Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay regulates response of 
cystic fibrosis patients to gentamicin
L. Linde1, S. Boelz2,3, M. Nissim-Rafinia1, Y. S. Oren1, M. Wilschanski4, Y. Yaa -
kov4, G. Neu-Yilik2,3, A. E. Kulozik2,3, E. Kerem4, B. Kerem1;  
1Department of Genetics, Life Sciences Institute, The Hebrew University, Jeru -
salem, Israel, 2Molecular Medicine Partnership Unit, University of Heidelberg 
and European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Depart -
ment for Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Immunology, University Hospital 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4CF Center, Hadassah University Hospital, 
Mount Scopus, Jerusalem, Israel.
Aminoglycosides can readthrough premature termination codons 
(PTCs), permitting translation of full-length proteins. Previously we 
have found variable efficiency of readthrough in response to the ami -
noglycoside gentamicin among cystic fibrosis (CF) patients all carrying 
the W1282X nonsense mutation. Here we demonstrate that there are 
patients in whom the level of CFTR nonsense transcripts is markedly 
reduced while in others it is significantly higher. Response to gentami -
cin was found only in patients with the higher level. We further investi -
gated the possibility that the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) 
might vary among cells and hence governs the level of nonsense tran -
scripts available for readthrough. Our results demonstrate differences 
in NMD efficiency of CFTR transcripts carrying the W1282X mutation 
among different epithelial cell lines, even derived from the same tissue. 
Variability was also found for β-globin transcripts carrying a disease-
causing PTC as well as for five physiologic NMD substrates, RPL3, 
SC35 1.6 kb, SC35 1.7 kb, ASNS and CARS. Importantly, our results 
demonstrate existence of cells in which NMD of all transcripts was ef -
ficient, while others in which the NMD was less efficient. Downregula -
tion of NMD in cells carrying the W1282X mutation increased the level 
of CFTR nonsense transcripts and enhanced the CFTR chloride-chan -
nel activity in response to gentamicin. Together our results show that 
the efficiency of NMD might vary and hence regulate the response to 
treatments aiming to promote readthrough of PTCs in many human 
genetic diseases.C59. Harmless selection of genetically manipulated human stem 
keratinocytes
T. Magnaldo , V. Bergoglio, E. Warrick, F. Larcher, O. Chevallier-Lagente, M. 
Del Rio;  
CNRS, Villejuif, France.
Ex-vivo gene therapy of monogenic and recessively inherited genoder -
matoses prone to cancer require the selection of transduced epidermal 
keratinocytes in a manner compatible with skin graft perspectives. We 
have set up a selection system which aims at : i-preserving growth 
and differentiation potentials of transduced keratinocytes, ii-reduce the 
risk of immune response in grafted patients, iii-maintain sustained ex -
pression of the corrective gene. In this system, selection is based on 
ectopic expression of the small cell surface marker CD24 in prolifera -
tive keratinocytes. In human epidermis, CD24 is normally expressed 
in post mitotic, differentiated keratinocytes. Several primary strains of 
normal keratinocytes could be successfully transduced using a CD24-
IRES-GFP MoMLV retroviral viral vector. CD24-selected cells could 
be passaged serially over more than one year, attesting the conserva -
tion of stem cell growth potential. Reconstruction of organotypic skin 
cultures using transduced cells, indicated normal differentiation and 
proliferation capacity. Transduced cells were grafted onto the nu/nu 
athymic mouse and regenerated a full thickness, normally differenti -
ated epidermis, over a period of 20 weeks. Expression of the GFP 
reporter gene was maintained without attenuation. The encourag -
ing results strongly stimulate our prospects of genetic correction of 
epidermal keratinocytes from patients suffering from the DNA repair 
deficient / cancer prone disease, xeroderma pigmentosum or for any 
other genodermatose candidate for ex vivo cutaneous gene therapy. 
In addition, our system now allows any application of long term and 
harmless gene transfer such as gene extinction or mutation expres -
sion in human primary cells.
C60. Development of liver disease despite mannose treatment in 
two patients with CDG-Ib
K. Mention, F. Lacaille, V. Valayannopoulos, S. Romano, F. Jaubert, Y. De Key -
ser, N. Seta, P. De Lonlay ;  
Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) result from a defect in 
N-glycosylation. Phosphomannose isomerase (PMI) deficiency is the 
only treatable CDG (CDG-Ib). The first clinical description of CDG-Ib 
was made by Pelletier et al. in 1986, as a lethal disease in 4 patients 
from the “Saguenay-Lac St-Jean” area in Quebec. Since this descrip -
tion, mannose therapy improved the general condition and the diges -
tive symptoms in all reported patients as well as in ours.
We report here the 6 year follow-up of two patients with CDG-Ib treat -
ed with oral mannose, who were diagnosed at 2 months of age with 
digestive symptoms, liver involvement and hyperinsulinemic hypogly -
cemia. Both developed portal hypertension while general condition 
improved and other symptoms disappeared. #The development of the 
characteristic histological lesions of congenital hepatic fibrosis was 
observed despite an early onset of treatment and several years on 
mannose. In both patients, improvement of the transferrin profile was 
noted, although complete normalization was never observed. We can 
speculate that persistently abnormally glycosylated proteins interfere 
with the normal development of the liver, either by accumulation of an 
abnormal product, or more probably by a loss of function.
In conclusion, the efficacy of mannose might transform this lethal dis -
ease into a treatable one. However, in some patients this treatment 
does not seem to protect against the liver disease.
C61. Acetylcholinesterase deficiency with neuromuscular 
junction remodeling in a mouse model of Schwartz-Jampel 
syndrome
M. Stum1, E. Girard2, V. Bernard3, M. Bangratz1, C. Davoine1, N. Tabti1, J. 
Willer4, B. Fontaine1,5, J. Molgó6, E. Krejci3, S. Nicole1,5;  
1U546, INSERM; UMRS546 UPMC-Paris6, Paris, France, 2UPR9040, CNRS, 
laboratoire de Neurobiologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Institut de Neurobiologie 
Alfred Fessard, Gif-sur-Yvette, France, 3U686, INSERM, Paris, France, 4As-
sitance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Fédération de neurophysiologie clinique, 
Groupe Hospitalier de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5Assistance Publique-
Hôpitaux de Paris, Fédération des maladies du système nerveux & centre de 
référence “canalopathies musculaires”, Groupe Hospitalier de la Pitié-Salpê -
trière, Paris, France, 6UPR9040, CNRS, laboratoire de Neurobiologie Cellulaire Concurrent Sessions0
et Moléculaire, Institut de Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard, Gif sur Yvette, France.
Schwartz-Jampel syndrome (SJS) is a rare autosomal recessive dis -
order characterized by permanent and generalized muscle stiffness 
(myotonia), and chondrodystrophy. First symptoms appear during 
early childhood, and the disease is slowly progressive until adulthood. 
SJS is due to hypomorphic mutations in the gene encoding perlecan, 
a ubiquitous heparan sulfate proteoglycan secreted within basement 
membranes. We have developed a mouse model of SJS by a knock-in 
approach, introducing one missense mutation into the perlecan mouse 
gene by homologous recombination, to explore the pathophysiological 
mechanism of this human disorder.
Homozygous mutant mice were viable with unaffected life span, but 
showed a reduced growth and a distinct neuromuscular phenotype 
with delayed opening of the eyelids, and flexion of the hind paw when 
suspended by the tail. EMG recordings revealed a sustained bursting 
activity at rest. Histological analyses of skeletal muscles were sugges -
tive of denervation-reinnervation events. Major modifications of NMJs 
with lack of pretzel-like shape and acetylcholinesterase deficiency 
were observed. However, ex-vivo  electrophysiological analyses did 
not reveal abnormal synaptic transmission. Our results argue for the 
accuracy of our mutant mouse line as a model of the disease, dem -
onstrate that the incomplete perlecan deficiency which characterized 
SJS is responsible for major modifications of NMJs, and suggest that 
acetylcholinesterase deficiency alone is not responsible for the muscle 
hyperexcitability observed in SJS.
C62. Trinucleotide repeat “big jumps” in DM1 transgenic mice: 
large CTG expansions, splicing abnormalities and growth 
retardation
M. Gomes-Pereira , L. Foiry, A. Nicole, A. Huguet, C. Junien, A. Munnich, G. 
Gourdon;  
Inserm, U781, Paris, France.
Trinucleotide repeat expansions are the genetic cause of numerous 
human diseases, including fragile X mental retardation, Huntington 
disease and myotonic dystrophy type 1. Disease severity and age-of-
onset are critically linked to expansion size. Previous mouse models 
of repeat instability have not recreated large intergenerational expan -
sions (“big jumps”), observed when the repeat is transmitted from one 
generation to the next, and have never attained the very large tract 
lengths possible in humans/patients. We now describe dramatic inter -
generational CTG•CAG repeat expansions of several hundred repeats 
in a transgenic mouse model of myotonic dystrophy type 1, resulting 
in increasingly severe phenotypic and molecular abnormalities. Ho -
mozygous mice carrying over 700 trinucleotide repeats on both alleles 
display severely reduced body size and splicing abnormalities, nota -
bly in the central nervous system. Our findings demonstrate that large 
intergenerational trinucleotide repeat expansions can be recreated in 
mice, and endorse the use of transgenic mouse models to refine our 
understanding of triplet repeat expansion and the resulting pathogen -
esis.
C63. Recessive severe/lethal osteogenesis imperfecta is caused 
by deficiency of proteins comprising the 3-hydroxylation 
complex
J. C. Marini1, W. Chang1, W. A. Cabral1, A. M. Barnes1, D. R. Eyre2, M. Weis2, 
R. Morello3, B. Lee3, S. Leikin4, K. Rosenbaum5, C. Tifft5, D. I. Bulas5, C. Koz -
ma6, P. Smith7, J. J. Mulvihill8, U. Sundaram9;  
1BEMB, NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, United States, 3Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United 
States, 4SPB, NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Children’s National 
Medical Center, Washington, DC, United States, 6Georgetown University Medi -
cal Center, Washington, DC, United States, 7Shriner’s Hospital for Children, 
Chicago, IL, United States, 8University of Oklahoma HSC, Oklahoma City, OK, 
United States, 9VCU/MCV, Richmond, VA, United States.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is well-known to be caused by domi -
nant mutations in the genes that code for type I collagen, COL1A1  and 
COL1A2 . Collagen defects cause about 85% of OI cases. Mutations 
that alter the type I collagen primary structure delay helix folding and 
allow overmodification of the collagen helix by prolyl 4-hydroxylase, 
lysyl hydroxylase and glycosylating enzymes. We have discovered 
that essentially all cases of lethal/severe OI without a primary collagen 
defect, but with overmodification of the collagen helix, are caused by 
null mutations in LEPRE1 , encoding prolyl 3-hydroxylase 1 (P3H1), or CRTAP  (cartilage-associated protein), two members of a complex in 
the endoplasmic reticulum that 3-hydroxylates only α1(I)Pro986 in type 
I collagen. We identified 3 OI probands with null CRTAP  mutations and 
7 with null LEPRE1  mutations. Five patients with P3H1 defects have a 
common LEPRE1  mutant allele, which apparently originated in West 
Africa and is also present in African-Americans. All probands have de -
fects in both alleles and heterozygous carrier parents. Proband mRNA 
and protein from the mutant gene is absent or severely reduced. 
Mass spectrometry demonstrated absent or residual hydroxylation of 
α1(I)Pro986. Interestingly, excess lysyl hydroxylation of proband col -
lagen helices is comparable to that caused by defects in the primary 
structure of the collagen helix, suggesting that helix folding is delayed. 
Proband collagen secretion is moderately delayed but total collagen 
secretion is increased. These recessive null mutations of CRTAP  and 
LEPRE1  delineate a novel skeletal paradigm and demonstrate that the 
3-hydroxylation complex is crucial for normal bone development.
C64. Left-sided embryonic expression of the BCL-6 corepressor, 
BCOR, is required for vertebrate laterality determination
E. N. Hilton1,2, F. D. C. Manson1,3, J. E. Urquhart1, J. J. Johnston4, A. M. 
Slavotinek5, P. Hedera6, E. L. Stattin7, A. Nordgren8, L. G. Biesecker4, G. C. M. 
Black2,3;  
1Centre for Molecular Medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester, United 
Kingdom, 2Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetic Service, 
St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Manchester Royal Eye 
Hospital, Central Manchester and Manchester Children’s University Hospitals 
NHS Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Genetic Disease Research Branch, 
National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, United States, 5Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genet -
ics, University of California, San Francisco, CA, United States, 6Department of 
Neurology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, United States, 7Department of 
Clinical Genetics, Umeå University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden, 8Department of 
Molecular Medicine, Clinical Genetics Unit, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
Oculofaciocardiodental (OFCD) syndrome is an X-linked male lethal 
condition encompassing cardiac septal defects, as well as ocular and 
dental anomalies. The gene mutated in OFCD syndrome, the BCL-6 
corepressor  (BCOR ), is part of a transcriptional repression complex 
whose transcriptional targets remain largely unknown. We reviewed 
cases of OFCD syndrome and identified patients exhibiting defective 
lateralization including dextrocardia, asplenia and intestinal malrota -
tion, suggesting that BCOR is required in normal lateral determination 
and that the frequent heart problems occurring OFCD syndrome may 
be due to defects in this process. To study the function of BCOR we 
used morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs) to knockdown expression of 
xtBcor in Xenopus tropicalis , thus creating an animal model for OFCD 
syndrome. The resulting tadpoles had cardiac and ocular features 
characteristic of OFCD syndrome. Reversed cardiac orientation and 
disorganized gut patterning was seen when MOs were injected into 
the left side of embryos, demonstrating a left-sided requirement for 
xtBcor in lateral determination in the frog. Ocular defects displayed no 
left-right bias and included anterior and posterior segment disorders 
such as microphthalmia and coloboma. Expression of xtPitx2c  was 
shown to be down regulated when xtBcor was depleted, providing a 
mechanism by which xtBcor is required for lateral specification and an 
explanation of how BCOR mutation may disrupt cardiac septal devel -
opment via the left-right laterality pathway.
C65. USF1 and Dyslipidemias; Insulin dependent expression 
of a transcription factor in muscle and fat results in adverse 
regulation of target genes
J. Naukkarinen1, E. Nilsson2, H. A. Koistinen3, V. Lyssenko4, L. Groop4, M. R. 
Taskinen3, L. Peltonen1,5;  
1National Public Health Institute of Finland and University of Helsinki, Depart -
ment of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Steno Diabetes center, Gentofte, 
Denmark, 3Department of Medicine, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Hel -
sinki, Finland, 4Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, 
Clinical Research Center, Malmo University Hospital, Lund University, Malmo, 
Sweden, 5The Broad Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cam -
bridge, MA, United States.
We recently reported association in Finnish families of allelic variants 
of USF1 with FCHL, a common dyslipidemia predisposing to cardio -
vascular disease (CVD). This association with dyslipidemia has since Concurrent Sessions1
been replicated in numerous studies in different populations. However, 
evidence for the underlying mechanism how USF1 variants relate to 
dyslipidemia remains limited.
We here show for the first time, allele-specific differences in USF1 
transcript levels in two relevant tissues. In muscle biopsies from 142 
twins, following insulin challenge only subjects homozygous for the 
non-risk allele responded with significantly increased USF1 transcript 
levels, as measured by RT-PCR. Essentially the same phenomenon 
was observed in fat-biopsies of FCHL family members as insulin levels 
correlated with allelic imbalance. Quantitative sequencing of genomic- 
and transcribed RNA from subjects heterozygous for the best associ -
ating SNP, located in the 3’-UTR of USF1 revealed an average ~20% 
lower expression of the risk-allele in fat.
In a set of 47 expression arrays of fat-biopsies, differential expres -
sion of numerous USF1 target genes was evident -among them many 
genes of lipid metabolism and inflammatory-response. Interestingly, 
the neighboring F11R gene recently implicated in development of ath -
erosclerotic plaques also showed allele-dependent expression, sug -
gesting the presence of multiple, potentially co-regulated CVD associ -
ated genes in this chromosomal region.
In summary, common allelic variants, defined by non-coding SNPs of 
the USF1 transcription factor gene and associated with dyslipidemia 
risk, seemingly eradicate the insulin response of transcript levels. Sub -
sequently, they result in differential expression of numerous relevant 
target genes predisposing carriers of risk alleles to dyslipidemia and 
CVD.
C66. The cohesion protein NIPBL recruits histone deacetylases 
to mediate chromatin remodeling
W. Xu1, P. Jahnke1, M. Wülling2, M. Albrecht1, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, F. J. 
Kaiser1;  
1Universitätklinikum S-H,, Lübeck, Germany, 2Universität Duisburg-Essen, Es -
sen, Germany.
Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is a rare malformation disorder 
with multiple congenital anomalies, a characteristic face, growth and 
mental retardation as well as gastrointestinal and
limb abnormalities. About 50 % of the patients with CdLS carry muta -
tions in the NIPBL gene.
NIPBL  encodes a homologue of the fungal Scc2-type and Drosoph -
ila Nipped-B protein and is part of the chromatid cohesion complex. 
Recent studies show an association of chromatid cohesion with chro -
matin-remodeling complexes, either in the recruitment of cohesion to 
particular sequences along chromosome arms or in the establishment 
of cohesion.
In yeast-two hybrid assays we could identify the chromatin remodeling 
factors histone deacetylases 1 and 3 (HDAC1 and 3) as potential NIP -
BL-interacting proteins. Using different fragments of NIPBL in liquid β-
galactosidase assays, we could narrow down the interacting region for 
HDAC1 and 3 to a stretch of 162 amino acids (aa) within a highly con -
served region of NIPBL which was predicted to be a HDAC-interacting 
domain  by in silico  studies. In luciferase reporter gene assays we could 
show that this HDAC-interacting domain of NIPBL fused to the GAL4-
DNA-binding domain (GAL4-DBD) is able to repress reporter gene 
transcription. Moreover, cotransfections of HDAC1 and 3 enhance this 
effect significantly. To confirm whether this effect is based on histone 
deacetylation we used an antibody recognizing the acetylated histone 
3 in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays and could identify specific 
deacetylation of histone 3 adjacent to the NIPBL-GAL4-DBD binding 
sites. Our data show that NIPBL is able to recruit chromatin remodeling 
enzymes mediating histone deacetylation.
C67. The Human Epigenome Project (HEP)
S. Beck ;  
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Epigenetic processes play an essential role in biology with wide-rang -
ing implications for human health and disease. To understand and har -
ness these processes we need to read and interpret the epigenetic 
code with the same rigour and vigour that made reading the genetic 
code one of the greatest scientific achievements. To this end, a num -
ber of efforts have already been initiated of which the EU-funded HEP 
was among the first to be set up in 2000 with the aim to map one of the 
epigenetic marks, DNA methylation. On behalf of the HEP Consortium, 
I will present our findings to date, discuss some of the lessons learnt and give an outlook on how the data and technology may be used in 
an integrated (epi)genetic approach to common disease.
www.epigenome.org
C68. Mechanism of Alu integration into the human genome
J. Chen1,2, C. Férec2,3, D. N. Cooper4;  
1Etablissement Français du Sang–Bretagne, Brest, France, 2INSERM, U613, 
Brest, France, 3Université de Bretagne Occidentale, Faculté de Médecine de 
Brest et des Sciences de la Santé, Brest, France, 4Institute of Medical Gene -
tics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
LINE-1 or L1 has driven the generation of at least 10% of the human 
genome by mobilising Alu sequences. Although there is no doubt that 
Alu insertion is initiated by L1-dependent target site-primed reverse 
transcription, the mechanism by which the newly synthesised 3’ end 
of a given Alu cDNA attaches to the target genomic DNA is less well 
understood. Intrigued by observations made on 28 pathological simple 
Alu insertions, we have sought to ascertain whether microhomologies 
could have played a role in the integration of shorter Alu sequences 
into the human genome. A meta-analysis of the 1624 Alu insertion 
polymorphisms deposited in the Database of Retrotransposon Inser -
tion Polymorphisms in Humans (dbRIP), when considered together 
with a re-evaluation of the mechanism underlying how the three pre -
viously annotated large deletion-associated short pathological Alu in -
serts were generated, enabled us to present a unifying model for Alu 
insertion into the human genome. Since Alu elements are compara -
tively short, L1 RT is usually able to complete nascent Alu cDNA strand 
synthesis leading to the generation of full-length Alu inserts. However, 
the synthesis of the nascent Alu cDNA strand may be terminated pre -
maturely if its 3’ end anneals to the 3’ terminal of the top strand’s 5’ 
overhang by means of microhomology-mediated mispairing, an event 
which would often lead to the formation of significantly truncated Alu 
inserts. Furthermore, the nascent Alu cDNA strand may be ‘hijacked’ 
to patch existing double strand breaks located in the top-strand’s up -
stream regions, leading to the generation of large genomic deletions.
C69. Evolution of mammalian gene expression promoted by 
retroposons
N. V. Tomilin ;  
Russian Academy of Sciences, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Expression of eukaryotic protein-coding genes is strongly affected by 
specific sequence motifs which concentrate near transcription start 
sites (TSS) and bind transcription factors. These transcription factor 
binding motifs (TFBM) may arise in promoters by slow accumulation 
of base changes in a random sequence but recent data indicate that 
promoter TFBMs can also arise rapidly through insertion of mobile el -
ements already having functional motifs or having sequences which 
may be converted to TFBMs by a small number of mutations. For ex -
ample, single C to T transition at specific position can create functional 
estrogene-response element in human Alu retroposons. We studied 
abundance of retroposon-derived sequences in human and mouse 
promoters (-1000 to +200 bp segments relative to TSS) and found that 
>15000 of human promoters and >11000 of mouse promoters have 
Alu-derived or B1/B2-derived elements, resp. Global distribution of 
these retroposons in human and mouse chromosomes strongly corre -
lates with clusters of CpG islands present in promoters of ~75% genes. 
In active genes CpG islands are not methylated but major fraction of 
retroposons, especially LINEs and LTRs, are heavily methylated. 
It is unknown how promoter CpG islands are protected from spread 
of methylation initiated at adjacent LINEs and LTRs. Human Alu and 
mouse B1 elements can be transcribed by RNA polymerase III be -
cause their internal promoters bind transcription complex TFIIIC. This 
complex can limit spread of repressive histone methylation in S.pombe  
and we suggest that Alu- and B1-associated TFIIIC sites have similar 
function in mammals.
C70. Prominent use of distal 5’ transcription start sites and 
discovery of a large number of additional exons in ENCODE 
regions
A. Reymond1, F. Denoeud2, J. Harrow3, C. Ucla4, A. Frankish3, C. Henrichsen1, 
C. Wyss4, T. Alioto2, J. Drenkow5, J. Lagarde2, T. Hubbard3, S. E. Antonarakis4, 
R. Guigo2, P. Kapranov5, T. R. Gingeras5;  
1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Swit -
zerland, 2IMIM, Barcelona, Spain, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Concurrent Sessions2
United Kingdom, 4University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 5Affymetrix Inc., 
Santa Clara, CA, United States.
The aim of the ENCODE project (http://genome.gov/10005107) is to 
identify all the functional elements of the human genome. The pilot 
phase focuses on a specified 1% of its sequence. As part of this proj -
ect, the GENCODE consortium by combining manual annotation with 
experimental validation, produced a high quality annotation to be used 
as the “reference set” by the ENCODE consortium.
To uncover further the complex architecture of the human transcrip -
tome and potentially identify new gene elements (exons), we combined 
5’Rapid Amplification of cDNA Ends in twelve adult human tissues and 
three cell lines with high-density 22 nucleotides-resolution tiling arrays. 
We identified previously unannotated and often tissue/cell line specific 
transcribed fragments (RACEfrags), both 5’ distal to the annotated 5’ 
terminus and internal to the annotated gene bounds for the vast ma -
jority (81.5%) of the tested genes. Half of the distal RACEfrags span 
large segments of genomic sequences away from the main portion 
of the coding transcript and often overlap with the upstream-annotat -
ed gene(s). Several lines of evidence suggest that these sequences 
correspond to bona fide exons. First, the 5’ distal RACEfrags exhibit 
a statistically-significant trend to map in the vicinity of Transcription 
Start Sites identified using independent methods such as CAGE tags, 
5’PETs, promoter mapping and/or hypersensitivity to DNAse. Second, 
the splice site strength of the novel exons appears as high as that of 
GENCODE UTRs and CDSs. Third, the transcripts that contain novel 
exons could be independently isolated. Fourth, these novel exons 
show some conservation in the mammalian lineage.
C71. Mapping of small RNAS (smRfrags) in the human encode 
regions
C. Borel1, M. Gagnebin1, C. Gehrig1, A. Hatzigeorgiou2, E. Kriventseva1, E. 
Zdobnov1, S. Antonarakis1;  
1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva 
Medical School, CH, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of Genetics, School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
The elucidation of the largely unknown transcriptome of small RNAs 
is of considerable interest. We report here the results of an analysis 
of the small RNAs (<50nt) in the ENCODE regions of the human ge -
nome.
Size fractionated RNAs (between 19 and 50 nts) from 4 different cell 
lines (HepG2, HelaS3, GM06990, SK-N-SH) were mapped using 
the forward and reverse ENCODE tiling arrays of 22 bp resolution. 
The small RNA probe was prepared by labelling a newly synthesized 
poly(A)tail.
Our smRfrags (small RNA fragments; ~7500 positive signals; top 1% 
signal) overlap only 8% of the exons of known genes (Gencode an -
notation), whereas the majority map to intergenic (34%) and intronic 
(53%) regions. As much as 18% of the 3’ or 5’ UTRs contain smRfrags. 
In addition, 9.6% and 16.8% of smRfrags in the 5’UTR regions overlap 
significantly with His.PolII.TAF250 and DNase I Hypersensitive sites 
respectively (compared to 5.3% and 9% expected). Interestingly, 19-
26% of smRfrags show evidence of overlapping transcription on both 
strands. Approximately 4.8% and 1.7% of smRfrags in non-annotated 
regions overlap transfrags in HeLa and GM06990 cell lines respec -
tively. We hypothesized that a fraction of the identified smRfrags cor -
responded to microRNAs. We tested by northern-blot a set of 30 high-
likelihood predictions of potential microRNAs candidates that overlap 
with smRfrags. We validated 3 novel microRNAs (~20nt length); how -
ever most of the remaining candidates showed a larger band (~100nt) 
likely to be a microRNA precursor.
C72. Human miR-155 on chromosome 21 differentially interacts 
with its polymorphic target in the AGTR1  3’UTR - a mechanism 
for functional SNPs related to phenotypes
C. Borel1, P. Sethupathy2, M. Gagnebin1, C. Gehrig1, G. Grant2, S. Deutsch1, A. 
Hatzigeorgiou2, S. E. Antonarakis1;  
1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Med -
ical School, CH, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Penn Center for Bioinformatics, School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, PA, United States.
Animal microRNAs (miRNAs) regulate gene expression through base 
pairing to their targets within the 3’ UTR of protein coding genes. Sin -
gle Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) located within such target sites 
can affect miRNA regulation.We mapped the human and mouse SNPs from dbSNP (http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/SNP/) onto the 138 annotated entries for the 
human and/or mouse experimentally supported miRNA target sites 
from TarBase database (http://www.diana.pcbi.upenn.edu/tarbase.
html). This mapping revealed only five human miR-target sites that 
harbor SNPs.
We further experimentally investigated one of these target sites, an 
hsa-miR-155 target site within the 3’ UTR of the human AGTR1  gene 
that contains SNP rs5186. Using reporter silencing assays, we show 
that hsa-miR-155 downregulates the expression of only the 1166A, 
and not the 1166C allele, of rs5186. Remarkably, the 1166C allele has 
been associated with hypertension in many studies. Thus the 1166C 
allele may be functionally associated with hypertension by abrogating 
regulation by hsa-miR-155, thereby elevating AGTR1  levels.
We have also shown that miR-155that maps to chromosome 21. This 
could explain the observation that individuals with Down syndrome 
have reduced blood pressure compared to controls.
C73. Unravelling the diploid genome - The synaptonemal 
complex as a molecular machine.
E. Bolcun-Filas1, Y. Costa2, R. Speed1, M. Taggart1, H. J. Cooke1;  
1MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2National Institute for 
Medical Research, London, United Kingdom.
Generating haploid gametes from diploid germ cells is central to both 
genetics and reproduction. Around 10-15% of couples are classed as 
infertile at some point in time and the genetic contribution to this is 
thought to be about half. To expand our understanding of the basic 
biology and to provide new candidate fertility/infertility genes we have 
used transcriptional profiling to identify new genes involved in meio -
sis.
Two of these genes encode proteins of the Synaptonemal Complex 
(SC). In mammals including humans this structure, which holds the 
aligned sister chromatids together prior to recombination, is essential 
for the completion of repair of meiotic double strand breaks and for 
meiosis. Failure of this process in some individuals results in infertil -
ity.
We have modelled the effects of mutation of both of these genes 
(SYCE1 and SYCE2) by targeted mutagenesis in mouse. Heterozy -
gous animals are fertile but homozygous null mutants are sterile with 
females producing occasional abnormal follicles and males show -
ing a Stage IV arrest of spermatogenesis. At the chromosomal level 
homologues align but complete SC’s are not formed, double strand 
break repair is incomplete and crossover is does not occur. Based on 
a detailed examination of the biochemical interactions between these 
proteins and other SC proteins coupled with immunocytochemistry in 
the mutant mice we propose a molecular basis for the zipping up of the 
Synaptonemal Complex.
C74. Low copy repeats: few make the most noise
R. Ciccone1, R. Giorda2, M. Bonaglia3, P. Magini1, M. De Gregori1, T. Pram -
paro1, M. Seri4, M. Prieur5, C. Turleau5, L. Rodríguez6, M. L. Martínez-Frías6, M. 
Silveira6, C. Contesotto6, M. Rocchi7, O. Zuffardi1;  
1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica - Universty of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2IRCCS 
E. Medea, Bosisio Parini - Lecco, Italy, 3IRCCS E. Medea, Bosisio Parini - 
Lecco, Italy, 4UO genetica medica - Sant’Orsola-Malpighi Hospital - University 
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5Service de Cytogenetique, Hopital Necker Enfants 
Malades, Paris, France, 6Cytogenetic lab CIAC (ECEMC), Madrid, Spain, 7Dip. 
di Genetica e Microbiologia, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
We demonstrated that some recurrent rearrangements of chromo -
some 8p such as the inv dup del(8p), the supernumerary analphoid 
der(8p) and the interstitial deletion of 8p23.1 are mediated by the two 
homologous segmental duplications (proximal and distal repeats: 8p-
REPP and 8p-REPD) constituted by olfactory receptor gene clusters 
(ORGC). We also demonstrated that the t(4;8)(p16;p23) usually de -
tected in Wolf-Hirschhorn individuals carrying the der(4) is a recurrent 
translocation mediated by two pairs of REPs, highly homologous to 
those at 8p23, that are located at 4p16. We demonstrate by in silico  
analysis that a 200 Kb portion of the 8p-REPs share over 95% iden -
tity with several other chromosomal locations, including 4p16, 11p15, 
11q13, 3p12, 3q21, 16p13. We report a new series of constitutional re -
arrangements mediated by some of these segmental duplications and 
we confirm the mechanism leading to the t(4;8)(p16;p23) translocation 
in two new cases. We also demonstrate that the same mechanism is Concurrent Sessions
involved in an apparently non-recurrent t(8;11)(p23.2;p15.5) transloca -
tion and we describe a cryptic 11q13 deletion mediated the same class 
of repeats. We also analyze the evolutionary origin of these segmental 
duplications and demonstrate that they originate from a sequence re -
lated to human chromosome 16p13. The genome of M. mulatta  has 
only one copy of the region, but its sequence contains a 2.3 Kb invert -
ed repeat localized to one end of the region generating the different 
duplications. This repeat is not found in non-primate species and may 
be the first step in the genesis of ORGC segmental duplications.
C75. Diagnostic DNA copy number screening in patients with 
unexplained mental retardation using whole genome tiling-
resolution array CGH
D. A. Koolen , R. Pfundt, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa, N. de Leeuw, L. E. L. M. Vissers, W. 
M. Nillesen, E. Sistermans, A. Geurts van Kessel, H. G. Brunner, J. A. Veltman, 
D. Smeets, B. B. A. de Vries;  
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Genome-wide array based Comparative Genomic Hybridization (ar -
ray CGH) using tiling path DNA microarrays was diagnostically imple -
mented at our department in 2005. Since then we have tested 350 
individuals with unexplained mental retardation. This is the largest 
clinically well-defined cohort analyzed by array CGH so far. We de -
tected 51 DNA copy number alterations in genomic regions that are 
not known to harbor copy number variation and were able to proof 
de novo occurrence in the majority of these. In total 26 copy number 
losses and 25 copy number gains, varying in size from 0.1 to 12.4 
Mb, were identified. Interestingly, the average size of the losses in our 
series was larger compared to the gains (2.5 Mb versus 1.7 Mb) and 
20 cases showed alterations smaller than 1 Mb. Although the vast ma -
jority of all aberrations is non-recurrent, several recurrent aberrations 
have now been identified. The first and most frequent novel microdele -
tion identified by array CGH is characterized by a 600 kb deletion at 
17q21.31 and is associated with a clearly recognizable phenotype1. 
The 17q21.31 region contains several low copy repeats that might act 
as recombination substrates for nonallelic homologous recombination 
and a common inversion polymorphism. Other loci at which recurrent 
genomic aberrations and a recognizable clinical phenotype were iden -
tified are 2q23.1 and 15q24.
In conclusion, array CGH technology considerably increases the di -
agnostic yield in patients with mental retardation and reveals novel 
recurrent microdeletion syndromes for which the frequency remains 
to be established.
1) Koolen, et al. Nat Genet 2006;38:999-1001.
C76. The chromosomal constitution of an embryo changes 
during preimplantation development
T. Frumkin , Y. Yaron, M. Malcov, A. Amit, D. Ben-Yosef;  
Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Introduction: Preimplantation  genetic screening (PGS) using single-
cell FISH analysis is proposed for selecting euploid embryos in recur -
rent IVF failures. An additive value for this procedure is the ability to 
analyze early embryonic development at different stages, allowing to 
characterize post zygotic chromosomal changes.
Aim: To track post zygotic chromosomal changes during preimplanta -
tion development.
Materials & Methods: FISH analysis was performed on day 3 of de -
velopment. For each embryo, 1-2 blastomeres were analyzed, using 
probes for 3 to 9 chromosomes (13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21, 22, X, Y). 
Chromosomally normal embryos were transferred to the uterus on day 
4 or 5. Aneuploid embryos were re-analyzed on day 5, using the same 
probe panels.
Results: A total of 52 aneuploid embryos (as determined on day 3), 
were reanalyzed on day 5. In 25 embryos (48%), the day 5 reanalysis 
confirmed the results observed on day 3. In 14 embryos (27%), „self 
correction“ of the chromosomal aberration was observed, in some or 
in all of the blastomeres. In 13 embryos (25%) different chromosomal 
aberrations were noted than those observed on day 3.
Discussion: PGS provides the opportunity to study the chromosomal 
constitution of preimplantation embryos. Our results demonstrate that 
embryos, designated as “aneuploid” on day 3, may demonstrate a 
high rate of mosaicism for chromosomal aberration. Some of these 
mosaic embryos are capable of developing into normal embryos by 
„self correction“. However, some embryos accumulate further chromo -somal anomalies. These findings suggest that PGS results must be 
interpreted with caution.
C77. Multiple cryptic deletions are a common finding in 
“balanced” complex chromosome rearrangements: a study of 
seventeen cases.
M. De Gregori1, R. Ciccone1, F. Cifuentes2, T. Pramparo1, P. Magini1, S. Gimel -
li1, J. Vermeesch3, J. Messa1, F. Novara1, P. Maraschio1, M. Bonaglia4, G. Ferre -
ro5, M. Silengo6, A. Zatterale7, S. Belli8, A. Ferlini9, G. Calabrese10, T. Mattina11, 
F. Bernardi12, M. Riege13, M. Rocchi14, A. Schinzel15, O. Zuffardi1,16;  
1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2Agilent 
Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 3Center for Human Genetics, 
University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 4IRCCS E. Medea, Bosisio 
Parini, Lecco, Italy, 5Dip. di Scienze Pediatriche, Universita’ di Torino, Torino, 
Italy, 6Dip. di Scienze Pediatriche Universita’ di Torino, Torino, Italy, 7Servizio 
di Citogenetica ASL-NA1, Napoli, Italy, 8Consultorio Genetico, Trento, Italy, 
9Genetica Medica, Università di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 10Genetica Medica, Uni -
versità di Chieti, Chieti, Italy, 11Genetica Medica, Università di Catania, Catania, 
Italy, 12Patologia Genetica e Prenatale, Policlinico G.B. Rossi, Verona, Italy, 
13Institute of Medical Genetics University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 14Dip. 
di Genetica e Microbiologia, Università di Bari, Bari, Italy, 15Institute of Medical 
Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 16IRCSS Policlinico San 
Matteo, Pavia, Italy.
We report array-CGH findings in seventeen carriers of de novo  com -
plex chromosome rearrangements, involving from 3 to 8 chromosomes, 
all but one interpreted as balanced through conventional cytogenetic 
examinations. Thirteen of them were detected in individuals with ab -
normal phenotypes and mental retardation, two in normal females with 
repeated abortions, the remaining two in fetuses with normal ultraso -
nographic findings investigated for advanced maternal age.Two rear -
rangements, one present in one of the females with repeated abortions 
and the other in a male with mental retardation, were balanced. The 
remaining 15 cases had up to four deletions both at the breakpoints 
and elsewhere. All the deletions had occurred de novo  as confirmed 
in all cases by the array-CGH performed in the parents and by the 
paternity tests performed in eight of the cases. Ten of these deletions 
could be tested for the parental origin and all turned out to be paternal. 
Using a customized array for seven patients we have narrowed the 
deletion breakpoints at few hundreds of bp; no peculiar motif of DNA 
sequences associated to the imbalance was detected. Our findings 
demonstrate that 1) phenotypic abnormalities, reported in half of the 
cases of apparently balanced de novo complex rearrangements are 
mainly due to cryptic deletions mostly but not exclusively at the break -
points, 2) in order to exclude cryptic imbalance with impact on the phe -
notype, detection of a CCR in prenatal diagnosis requires array-CGH 
analysis and 3) male gametogenesis is more prone to create multiple 
chromosomal imbalances than female one.
C78. External Quality Assessment (EQA) in Europe
B. Quellhorst-Pawley1, R. T. Howell1, K. Held2, C. Ramos3, M. Rodriguez de 
Alba3, B. H. Faas4, G. Floridia5, O. Bartsch6, K. Simola7, M. Doco-Fenzy8, N. 
Dastugue9, F. Sole10, Z. Zemanova11, R. Hastings1;  
1John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Fertility Centre, Hamburg, 
Germany, 3Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 4University Medical Centre 
Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 5Instituto Superiore de Sanita, Rome, 
Italy, 6Universitaet Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 7Tampere University Hospital, 
Tampere, Finland, 8CHU Reims, Reims, France, 9Hopital PURPAN, Toulouse, 
France, 10Hospital del mar, Barcelona, Spain, 11General Faculty Hospital, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
The Forum of Cytogenetic EQA providers, assembled under the um -
brella of the EuroGentest Network two years ago, agreed it would be 
desirable to establish a European EQA scheme independent of Na -
tional schemes. It is not intended that this European scheme would 
replace existing schemes but rather provide opportunities for labora -
tories that have no access to a National scheme. Currently there are 
about 700 cytogenetic laboratories in Europe of which less than 50% 
participate in or have access to EQA.
CEQA (Cytogenetics European Quality Assessment) consists of a 
web-based EQA providing images for analysis which can be evaluated 
on line or downloaded to an image analysis system. This EQA has 
been developed to closely mimic the diagnostic situation and over -
comes some of the limitations of other forms of EQA. It allows the 
participant to choose appropriate follow-up tests (for example, FISH) Concurrent Sessions
to elucidate the chromosome abnormality. This is a major improvement 
on conventional distribution of slides or images where the inclusion of 
additional test material inevitably reveals the answer. Participants can 
submit reports in Czech, English, French, Finnish, German, Italian or 
Spanish. A prenatal and postnatal pilot EQA was completed by 19 lab -
oratories from 18 countries. Seven laboratories had never participated 
in EQA before. The reports reflected the variation in interpreting and 
reporting cytogenetic results within Europe. Some poor performance 
was identified.
The pilot will be expanded to allow more laboratories to participate 
next year. Participation in EQA will improve the provision of genetic 
services for the benefit of the patient.
C79. Regulations and practices of genetic counselling in 38 
European countries
E. Rantanen1, M. Hietala1, U. Kristoffersson2, I. Nippert3, J. Schmidtke4, J. Se -
queiros5, H. Kääriäinen1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Depart -
ment of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital of Lund, Lund, Sweden, 3Institute 
of Human Genetics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany, 4Institute of Hu -
man Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 5Department of 
Human Genetics, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Background: As genetic tests are increasingly offered across the bor -
ders of the European countries, EuroGentest, a NoE aiming at im -
proving the quality of testing, also aims at harmonizing the quality of 
genetic counselling.
Objective: To review what kinds of regulations and practices related to 
genetic counselling there are in different European countries.
Methods: An electronic survey was performed among the National So -
cieties of Human Genetics in 29 countries and contact persons in the 
9 countries where a Society could not be traced. The president or the 
board of the society, or a selected expert provided the answers to the 
questions about existing legislation, guidelines and generally applied 
practices of genetic counselling. The respondents also estimated how 
well genetic counselling is organized in their country and what future 
changes can be predicted.
Results: There is legislation related to counselling in 13 and guide -
lines in 21 countries. It was hoped that the amount of regulations 
would increase. The topics that were most often covered in legislation 
and guidelines, and also considered as generally applied practices, 
were counselling in the context of prenatal testing, informed consent, 
confidentiality, training of the person who performs counselling, and 
non-directiveness. The seldom-covered topics were counselling in the 
context of predisposition testing for multifactorial diseases, duty to re -
contact the patient afterwards, and counselling persons from ethnic 
minorities. Of the respondents, 70 % considered that national regula -
tions are necessary, and 90 % thought that some improvements are 
needed in the organization of genetic counselling in their country.
C80. Attitudes regarding genetic testing in minors. A survey of 
European clinical geneticists
P. Borry , T. Goffin, H. Nys, K. Dierickx;  
Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, KULEUVEN, Leuven, Belgium.
Background Various professional guidelines have discussed genetic 
testing in minors and provided recommendations on the topic. As we 
have described earlier (Borry et al. 2005, 2006) professional guide -
lines have shown to disagree on a various issues. Regarding carrier 
testing guidelines varied regarding (a) the role of genetic services in 
ensuring that children are informed about their carrier status and as -
sociated risks when they are older; (b) exceptions to the general rule 
of withholding or deferring carrier testing; (c) the communication of 
incidentally discovered carrier status. In the case of predictive and pre -
symptomatic genetic testing ambiguity exists for childhood-onset dis -
orders for which preventive or therapeutic measures are not available 
and for the timing of testing for childhood-onset disorders.
Objective The aim of our study was to gather information from clinical 
geneticists about their practices and attitudes with regard to carrier 
testing in minors.
Method 316 medically qualified specialists in genetics who have of -
fered genetic counseling to patients in the last year were asked to 
complete a survey of items assessing their attitudes and practices 
regarding genetic testing in minors. The data collection took place be -
tween October 2006 and March 2007. All respondents completed a 28-item questionnaire. The measures were based on ethical issues 
related to genetic testing in minors identified in the literature and from 
previous research.
Results At this moment we have a response rate of 60%. We just start -
ed a preliminary statistical analysis of the data using non-parametric 
statistics. (22 February 2007) Results are planned in March and April.
C81. An operational checklist for evaluation of molecular genetic 
tests destined to clinical use: development and description.
F. Rousseau1,2, C. Lindsay3, M. Charland4, J. Bergeron5, I. Blanqueart6, R. 
Delage7, B. M. Gilfix8, M. Miron9, G. A. Mitchell10, L. Oligny11;  
1CanGeneTest consortium & Université Laval, Quebec, PQ, Canada, 2Centre 
de recherche du Centre hospitalier universitaire de Québec, Québec, PQ, Ca -
nada, 3CanGeneTest consortium & CRCHUQ, Quebec, PQ, Canada, 4CanGe -
neTest consortium, Quebec, PQ, Canada, 5Réseau de médecine génétique ap -
pliquée et CRCHUQ, Québec, PQ, Canada, 6CanGeneTest consortium & Agen -
ce d’Évaluation des technologies et modes d’intervention en santé du Québec, 
Montréal, PQ, Canada, 7Centre de recherche du Centre hospitalier universitaire 
affilié de Québec & Université Laval, Québec, PQ, Canada, 8McGill University 
Hospital Centre, Montréal, Montréal, PQ, Canada, 9Centre Hospitalier de la 
Sagamie, Saguenay, PQ, Canada, 10Réseau de médecine génétique appliquée 
& Centre de recherche de l’Hopital Ste-Justine, Montréal, PQ, Canada, 11Centre 
de recherche de l’Hôpital Ste-Justine, Montréal, PQ, Canada.
Background: The completion of the Human Genome Project has in -
creased the pace of genetic markers of disease. Despite tremendous 
fundamental research efforts, clinical applications are still lagging be -
hind expectations, partly due to the lack of effective tools to summarize 
published data relative to the clinical assessment of new diagnostic 
molecular tests.
Methods: We used a collaborative process using published tools and 
an expert panel to develop a detailed checklist of the evidence that 
needs be collected or produced to evaluate the potential usefulness of 
a new molecular diagnostic test in medicine.
Results: We present a checklist that allows 1)stakeholders to collect 
data related to a given molecular test and improve their decision making 
process and 2)researchers to summarize known evidence and direct 
research efforts towards studies to fill knowledge gaps. This checklist 
comprises 29 clearly defined items, grouped into 10 categories, includ -
ing an overview of disease epidemiology and genetics, available diag -
nostic tools and their analytical and clinical performances, availability 
of quality control programs, methodological and clinical best practice 
guidelines, clinical utility, impacts on health care, psycho-social, ethical 
and legal aspects of the analysis. It also comprises a summary of the 
evidence available and the identification of research priorities to fill the 
knowledge gaps relative to the test.
Interpretation: This systematic checklist is intended to streamline col -
lection of the available evidence to appraise the potential for clinical 
application of new molecualr diagnostic tests and help prioritize re -
search to complete the evidence base relative to the clinical implemen -
tation of molecular tests.
C82. Public Perception of Genetic Medicine - A survey of 
attitudes in the United Kingdom
P. Finegold1, J. Ayres1, M. Boon2, M. J. Leech1, K. Mathieson1, H. R. Middleton-
Price1, S. Nicholls1, D. Donnai1;  
1North West Genetics Knowledge Park, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2ICM, 
London, United Kingdom.
The UK’s North West Genetics Knowledge Park (Nowgen) sets out 
as one of its aims to act as a forum for education, engagement and 
dialogue around human genetics that will empower people to make de -
cisions about health management . In August 2006, Nowgen commis -
sioned a telephone interview based survey amongst a sample of 1006 
subjects from around the United Kingdom. The survey questions were 
designed to establish public perception of the role genetics plays in 
health, how genetic medicine is seen in relation to genetic modification 
of food, the level of acceptability amongst the population to undergo 
a genetic test for health reasons and to gauge public expectations in 
relation to future genetics and healthcare.
The research carried out by polling organisation ICM is broken down 
into standard demographic categories of age, gender, social class and 
region, with the intention of providing an evidence base for Nowgen’s 
continuing public engagement work.
The survey results indicated that just over 70 per cent of the popula -Concurrent Sessions
tion considers that their genes significantly influence their health sta -
tus whereas over 40 per cent feel that an individual’s genetic makeup 
guides their behaviour. Just under half of the sample felt that heart 
disease and cancer are significantly caused by genes, with a third con -
sidering mental illness to have a high heritable dimension. The figure 
of 40 per cent who said that they would not consider having a pharma -
cogenetic test to see whether a medicine would work for them, poses 
some interesting questions for future public engagement work.
C83. Teaching genetics to medical trainees: grounding genetics 
in clinical practice at each level of training
M. Martyn1, S. Burke2, A. Stone3, C. Bennett1, P. Farndon1;  
1NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, 
United Kingdom, 2Centre for Research in Medical and Dental Education, Uni -
versity of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 3Partner Thornley Street 
Practice, Wolverhampton, United Kingdom.
To highlight the relevance of genetics to the clinical practice of medical 
practitioners outside specialist genetics services, it is important to work 
with them to define where and how genetics impacts on their practice. 
This knowledge can then be used to define educational outcomes for 
trainees.
Genetics knowledge, skills and attitudes needed by medical students, 
general practice trainees and specialty trainees for their clinical roles 
have been defined by the UK NHS National Genetics Education and 
Development Centre in partnership with a number of groups. These 
have been used to develop genetics learning outcomes.
Learning outcomes for medical students were developed in consulta -
tion with UK medical school genetics leads based on topics previously 
agreed as important for medical students. These lay the foundation of 
core genetic concepts which can be built upon in later training. Learn -
ing outcomes for general practice trainees are outlined in ‘Genetics in 
Primary Care’, curriculum statement 6 of the Royal College of Gen -
eral Practitioner’s new Training Curriculum. These learning outcomes 
are based on genetics items identified by GP trainees and trainers, 
programme directors and geneticists as important for general practice 
(N=60). Learning outcomes for specialty trainees are based on the 
findings of a similar needs assessment involving geneticists and spe -cialty consultants (N=66).
The Centre has defined genetics learning outcomes relevant to clinical 
practice for different stages of medical training in the UK. These out -
comes, available from www.geneticseducation.nhs.uk, may be a use -
ful tool for those involved in genetics education across Europe.
C84. Implementation of a medical genetics distance education 
programme for registered nurses
M. Glass1, S. L. Walters1, A. Christianson1, B. Henderson2;  
1National Health Laboratory Services and University of Witwatersrand, Johan -
nesburg, South Africa, 2University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa.
The South African National Department of Health Policy Guidelines for 
the Management and Prevention of Genetic Disorders, Birth Defects 
and Disability, recommended the development and implementation of 
a postgraduate distance-learning programme for primary health care 
nursing staff in South Africa. With reference to this, the aim of this study 
was to produce a Medical Genetics Education Programme (MGEP) 
incorporating a birth defects manual (BDM) to assess the knowledge 
and skills of Primary Health Care Registered Nurses, and to evaluate 
the results after offering a distance education course. The sample for 
the study was selected from registered nurses working in rural and 
semi-rural areas in South Africa. The instrument used was a pre-test/
post-test questionnaire. Combined with distance learning, four contact 
days with lectures and “hands-on” workshops with “Recognising Birth 
Defects” as a consistent theme were held. Pre-course  knowledge of 
the six groups was poor with an average of 48%. Pre-course skills, 
including the drawing and interpretation of a three-generation family 
tree scored an average of 4,5%. Post-course knowledge  increased 
to an average of 75%, and post-course  skills improved to an average 
of 86%. The long-term goal of this study is to produce at least one 
certificated “genetic specialist” nurse at each primary care facility, with 
the aim to improve management and care of children and families with 
genetic conditions. It is planned that after successful completion of the 
BDM, a two-week “hands-on” course in basic genetic counselling be 
offered and implemented.Concurrent Sessions
Posters
Po01. Clinical genetics
P0001. A 17q21.31 microduplication (including MAPT ) and a 
2q22.3q23.1 microdeletion (including ACVR2A ) detected by 
routine array-CGH analysis using 244k Agilent oligoarrays in two 
patients with mental retardation and dysmorphic features
M. Kirchhoff1, A. M. Bisgaard1, M. Duno1, F. J. Hansen2, H. Rose1, M. 
Schwartz1;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2De-
partment of Pediatric Neurology, Rigshospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Two cases with de novo  chromosomal imbalances detected by rou -
tine screening using 244k Agilent oligoarrays are presented. In case 
1, a microduplication of 17q21.31 was found (approximately 0.5 Mb). 
The duplication is reciprocal to the recently described 17q21.31 micro -
deletion and includes the MAPT  gene. The patient is a nine-year-old 
girl with severe psychomotor developmental delay. Her facial dysmor -
phism includes a low anterior and posterior hairline, a small nose with 
a flat root, a long philtrum, and small widely spaced teeth. In addition, 
she has microcephaly, abnormal fingers and toes, and hirsutism with 
very long hairs on her back. In case 2, a microdeletion of 2q22.3q23.1 
was found (approximately 0.4 Mb). The deletion includes the ACVR2A  
gene, which has been associated with cranio-facial development in 
mice. The patient is a three-year-old girl. Her psychomotor develop -
ment is approximately 12 months delayed. Her facial dysmorphism 
includes lateral extension of eyebrows, a low anterior hairline, long 
palpebral fissures, a high nasal bridge giving the impression of deep-
set eyes, a bulbous nasal tip, a thin upper lip, and micrognathia/retrog -
nathia. In addition, she is microcephalic, hypermobile and hypotonic. 
Beside the two patients an outline will be presented from seven months 
of routine CGH-analysis using 244k Agilent oligoarrays of patients with 
mental retardation and dysmorphic features.
P0002. Clinical and cytogenetic aspects in two children with 
trisomy 18
M. Budisteanu1, A. Arghir1, I. Minciu2, S. Magureanu2, G. Chelu1, A. Lungeanu1;  
1”Victor Babes” National Institute of Research and Development, Bucharest, 
Romania, 2Clinical Hospital of Psychiatry “Prof. Dr. Al. Obregia”, Bucharest, 
Romania.
Objective: The authors present two cases of trisomy 18 with different 
clinical and cytogenetic characteristics.
Material and methods: The children were admitted to the Department 
of Pediatric Neurology of the Clinical Hospital Al. Obregia, Bucharest 
for evaluation of a delayed psychomotor development. They were in -
cluded in a large study, part of a national research program, which 
investigate the cytogenetic causes of MR in children. First case, an 
eight years old girl, showed: dysmorphic features, severe MR, hyper -
kinesia with self-injurious behavior. Second case, a four months old 
girl, displayed the clinical phenotype characteristic of Edwards syn -
drome (including dysmorphic features, failure to thrive, arthrogryposis, 
epileptic seizures, brain malformation). The children were investigated 
cytogenetically by karyotype with GTG-banding.
Results: In the first case, the cytogenetic investigation revealed a par -
tial trisomy 18pter-18q21. In the second case, the diploid karyotype 
showed a duplication of the long arm of chromosome 18.
Conclusions: The phenotype of the patients with trisomy 18 can be dif -
ferent depending on the specific triplicated chromosomal region. For 
a better description of the sequences involved in the breakpoints in 
this two cases, we intend to extend the study by applying molecular 
genetic methods.
P0003. CYP21A2 genotyping in an Italian population with 21-
hydroxylase deficiency: molecular characterization of 1050 
alleles
L. Baldazzi1, S. Menabò1, A. Balsamo1, M. Barbaro1,2, A. Nicoletti1, G. Cange -
mi1, A. Cicognani1;  
1Pediatric Department S.Orsola-Malpighi University Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 
2Center for Molecular Medicine Karolinska University Hospital, Stockolm, Swe -
den.
Steroid 21-hydroxylase deficiency (21OHD), an autosomal recessive 
disorder caused by mutations in the CYP21A2 gene and responsible for 
>90% of cases of congenital adrenal hyperplasia, presents a wide phe -notypic spectrum ranging from a severe classical form (CL, 1/15000) 
with or without salt wasting, through to a mild nonclassical form (NC, 
1/100), to a hyperandrogenic adult form. The active gene and the inac -
tive pseudogene CYP21P are organized in a complex locus on chro -
mosome 6p21.3. Most of the genetic lesions that cause 21OHD are 
deletions/conversions (often giving rise to chimeric CYP21P/CYP21 
genes) or various gene conversion-type mutations resulting in CYP21 
genes carrying one/multiple pseudogenic mutations. Mutations arising 
independently of the pseudogene are rare.
A molecular strategy analysis that combines specific PCR (designated 
to avoid allele dropout phenomena caused by pseudogene sequences 
and to discover a chimeric gene), sequencing of the entire CYP21A2 
gene region (from nt-420 to nt+2907), as well as intragenic polymor -
phism segregation analysis, enabled us to characterize a total of 1050 
alleles of: 383 21OHD patients (162 CL, 231 NC) and 136 hyperan -
drogenic subjects with 98.8% of mutation detection. Mutations were 
confirmed in the parents in 85% of the cases. Single/multiple pseu -
dogene-derived mutations account for 93.2% of the alleles, whereas 
5.6% carry a rare/new mutation, mostly missense mutations affecting 
a conserved residue. Functional studies of 3 new mutations confirmed 
their implication in the phenotype observed. The genotype/phenotype 
relationship was generally good. Further studies will focus on rare vari -
ants in the non coding regions associated with mild forms.
P0004. A boy with 3q29 microdeletion and congenital mitral 
valve stenosis
A. Stray-Pedersen1, K. L. Eiklid2, K. Ramstad1, O. K. Rødningen2;  
1Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 2Ulleval University Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway.
We present an 8 year old boy with congenital mitral valve stenosis 
and mental retardation. Clinical findings: progressive microcephaly, 
epicanthus, antimongoloid eye shape, oedematous eyelids, prominent 
nasal tip, irregularly and widely spaced teeth. He has hypotonic mus -
culature with pronounced joint laxity both elbows. He has overriding 2nd 
toes, fetal pads toes and fingers. He is developmentally retarded. He 
started to walk at 23 months of age. His language is severely delayed, 
and he has autistic-like features.
Array CGH using CytoChip™ (BlueGnome Ltd.) revealed an intersti -
tial microdeletion of chromosome 3q29. This microdeletion is reported 
in only 7 patients worldwide. The clinical phenotype in the reported 
cases is variable despite an almost identical deletion size. It includes 
mild/moderate mental retardation and progressive microcephaly with 
mildly dysmorphic facial features (long and narrow face, short philtrum 
and high nasal bridge).
The phenotype in our patient is very similar to the other cases, but 
mitral valve stenosis is not reported in the 7 other patients. However, 
early death (at 3mo-5y) caused by cardiac events has been reported 
in some of the other patients with 3q29 microdeletion, and terminal 
deletions of chromosome 3q are associated with congenital heart de -
fect. The microdeletion encompasses several genes including PAK2. 
This gene is the autosomal homologue of a known X-linked mental 
retardation gene (PAK3), and might be the cause of mental retardation 
in the patients. The specific gene causing the heart defect reported in 
our patient is unknown. Our patient’s phenotype broadens the clinical 
spectrum of the 3q29 microdeletion syndrome.
P0005. Subtelomeric 6p deletion: clinical and array-CGH findings 
in two patients
I. Filges1, D. Martinet2, F. Bena1, N. Besuchet2, I. Bouchardy1, A. C. Gaide2, S. 
E. Antonarakis1, J. Beckmann2, M. A. Morris1, A. Bottani1, M. C. Addor2;  
1Medical Genetics Service, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland, 
2Medical Genetics Service, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
Approximately 30 patients with subtelomeric 6p deletion have been 
reported. A recognizable phenotype, including hypertelorism, down-
slanting palpebral fissures, flat nasal bridge and dysplastic ears, has 
been delineated. In addition to variable mental retardation and poten -
tial hearing deficit, there is a distinctive malformation pattern, which 
comprises anterior eye chamber malformations, posterior fossa/cer -
ebellar anomalies, and heart defects.
Patient 1 is an 8-month-old female born with normal growth param -
eters, typical facial features of 6pter deletion, bilateral corectopia, and 
protruding tongue. She has severe developmental delay, profound bi -Clinical genetics
lateral neurosensory deafness, poor visual contact and hypsarrhythmia 
from 6 months. Patient 2 is a 5-year-old moderately mentally-retarded 
boy born with normal growth parameters and unilateral hip dysplasia; 
he has a characteristic facial phenotype and bilateral embryotoxon.
Routine karyotypes were reported as normal. Subtelomeric MLPA or 
multi-FISH and parental testing revealed de novo 6pter deletions. Mi -
croarray testing (Agilent Human Genome kit 244K) showed that pa -
tient 1 has a 7.8 Mb 6pter-6p24.3 deletion and a contiguous 5.5 Mb 
6p24.3-6p24.1 duplication. Investigations to explain the origin of the 
duplicated segment are ongoing. Patient 2 has a 5.7 Mb 6pter-6p25.1 
deletion, partially overlapping that of patient 1.
Few 6p subtelomeric deletions have been characterized by microarray 
analysis and at present it is not possible to make accurate conclusions 
concerning genotype-phenotype correlations. The identification of the 
contiguous duplication in patient 1 may provide a clue to the mecha -
nism of the deletion.
P0006. Molecular analysis of ABCA4 and CRB1 genes in one 
mixed Spanish family segregating Stargardt disease (STGD) and 
Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA)
R. Riveiro-Alvarez1, E. Vallespin2, C. Diego2, A. Jana1, A. Almudena1, G. As -
censión1, T. Mª Jose1, A. Carmen1;  
1Fundacion Jimenez Diaz-Capio-CIBER-ER (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain, 2Fundacion 
Jimenez Diaz- Capio- CIBER-ER (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain.
Stargardt disease (STGD) is the most common juvenile macular dys -
trophy, characterised by central visual impairment. All recessively in -
herited cases are thought to be due to mutations in the ABCA4 gene. 
Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) is the most severe inherited reti -
nopathy with the earliest age of onset. LCA has been associated with 
mutations in ten genes, being CRB1 the most mutated gene in Span -
ish population. The aim of this study is to describe one mixed pedigree 
segregating two different retinal dystrophies, STGD and LCA.
This family was identified through the course of a conventional muta -
tional screening performed on 223 Spanish families. Mutational analy -
ses were performed by screening on genotyping microarray, dHPLC 
and direct sequencing.
The patient with STGD was homozygous for the p.Asn1805Asp muta -
tion in the ABCA4 gene. Therefore, the involvement of ABCA4 in the 
etiopathogenesis of the STGD patient was clear but not for the case 
of LCA. Further analyses showed that the LCA patient was double 
heterozygous for the p.Cys948Tyr and p.Trp822ter mutations in the 
CRB1 gene, the second mutation was found in our laboratory. These 
mutations are consistent with her retinal phenotype.
A correct ophthalmologic examination is necessary for providing ac -
curate clinical diagnoses to the patient and therefore an appropriate 
molecular analysis can be concluded. Therefore, identifying the muta -
tion responsible of the disease is helpful for confirming diagnosis and 
counselling. Note that in one family different phenotypes and genetic 
causes can coexist, so it is very important to study all affected mem -
bers.
P0007. A case of achondrogenesis in Kaunas Medical University 
Hospital
L. Kucinskas1, D. Serapinas2, R. Sereikiene2, V. Sarauskas3;  
1Kaunas Medical University Hospital, Kaunas, Lithuania, 2Kaunas Medical 
University Hospital Genetic Consultation, Kaunas, Lithuania, 3Kaunas Medical 
University Hospital Department of Pathology, Kaunas, Lithuania.
Achondrogenesis is a rare disorder subtyped according to radiologic 
and histopathologic characteristics. The are three subtypes of achon -
drogenesis: achondrogenesis type 1A , achondrogenesis type 1B and 
achondrogenesis type 2 .Within the achondrogenesis group, clinical 
and radiologic distinction between subtypes of achondrogenesis is not 
always possible.
We are presenting a case of achondrogenesis type 2/hypochondro -
genesis in Clinics of Kaunas University of Medicine. The diagnosis 
was confirmed by clinical, radiological and histological data. The pa -
tient was born from the first unaffected pregnancy, 36 weeks gestation 
age. The prenatally preformed ultrasound detected polyhydramnion, 
regression of normal genesis of sacrococcygea. Newborn was born 
hypotrophic, with dysplastic signs: large head, flattened face, small 
narrow eyes openings, short neck and displastic ears. Some skin ar -
eas had blisters. After a few day patient dead of pulmonary insuffici -
entia. The radiological data was a marked delay in bone maturation with severe vertebral dysplasia, some metaphyseal involvement, and 
severe epiphyseal delay. There was no ossification of the pubis or is -
chiadic bones. The histology shows a conspicuous lack of cartilage 
matrix with ballooning and vacuolization of chondrocytes.
All data indicate that the fetus had achondrogenesis type 2/hypochon -
drogenesis. The monitoring with ultrasound was decided to perform in 
case of another pregnancy in this family.
P0008. Acro-oto-ocular syndrome: a malformation disorder with 
psychiatric features
C. du Souich1, J. Austin2, R. Friedlander2, C. F. Boerkoel1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada, 2Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Van -
couver, BC, Canada.
Acro-oto-ocular syndrome (OMIM #264475) is an autosomal reces -
sive disorder characterized by mixed hearing loss, pseudopapillede -
ma, malformation of the face, ears, hands, and feet. We extend the 
phenotype to include psychiatric symptoms. The propositus was born 
to consanguineous parents and had minor facial and limb anomalies. 
His facial features were remarkable for a high prominent forehead 
with bitemporal narrowing, broad nasal base, malar hypoplasia, and 
blepharophimosis. His ears, which had thick over-folded helices, were 
small, posteriorly rotated, and low set. His mouth had a high arched 
palate with crowded dentition, shallow eruption of the teeth from the 
gingiva, and abnormally shaped molars. His hands and feet were dis -
tinctive. He had unusual palmar creases, marked fifth finger clinodac -
tyly, broad fingertips, mild soft tissue syndactyly of fingers 3 and 4, and 
mild hypoplasia of the thenar, hypothenar, and inter-digital areas. He 
had brachydactyly of his toes, increased space between the first and 
second toes, mild soft tissue syndactyly and camptodactyly of toes 
2-5, valgus deviation of the halluces, and bilateral pes planus. Addi -
tionally he displayed bilateral gynecomastia, diffuse café-au-lait spots, 
and ataxia as well as moderate global developmental delay. However, 
in contrast to previously described individuals, he presented with audi -
tory hallucinations and behavioral problems. Our observations confirm 
the previous hypothesis that psychiatric features are a component of 
Acro-oto-ocular syndrome. To better understand the underlying patho -
physiology and phenotypic spectrum, we seek other patients with this 
disorder.
P0009. Wide clinical spectrum of Adams Oliver syndrome in a 
new family
S. Sifakis , E. Papadopoulou, P. Vorgia, I. Germanakis, M. Kalmanti;  
University Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion, Greece.
Introduction: Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is a rare congenital disor -
der, characterized by scalp defects and distal transverse limb reduc -
tion anomalies.
Case presentation: a 14 month-old boy, the 2nd child of phenotypically 
normal parents, who was born at 36 weeks’ gestation, SGA. Current 
clinical examination shows growth retardation and central hypotonia. 
The patient presents an area 2x4cm of hairless atrophic skin, large 
anterior fontanel, nail dystrophy of hands and feet, camptodactyly of 
the right thumb and 3rd finger, and left inguinal hernia. X-rays show a 
variety of hypoplasia or aplasia in different phalanges in thumbs and 
in fingers of the hands and feet. Cardiac sonogram reveals a wide 
atrial septal defect. Brain MRI shows bilateral asymmetrical dilatation 
of lateral ventricles, periventricular leukomalacia, and hypoplasia of 
corpus callosum. The karyotype is normal. The father has a hairless 
scar over his posterior scalp. Father’s father presented cutis aplasia 
and nail dystrophy.
Discussion: Variable clinical expression of the AOS syndrome has been 
reported in the literature. In our patient the combination of aplasia cutis 
congenita, distal limb anomalies and transverse dystrophy of the nails 
indicated the diagnosis of AOS. A vertical transmission is recognized 
in this new AOS family, which is consistent with autosomal dominant 
inheritance. Our patient presents cardiac defects, which are present in 
approximately 20% of cases. Some affected children have intracranial 
anomalies including hypoplasia of corpus callosum, or periventicullar 
leucomalacia, such as in our patient. This may be the result of abnor -
mal small vessel structures manifesting in embryogenesis.Clinical genetics
P0010. Adrenal hypolasia congenita (AHC) in monozygotic 
twins-a contiguous gene syndrome
E. J. Steichen-Gersdorf1, K. Kapelari1, W. Hoegler1, T. M. Strom2;  
1Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Institute of Humangenet -
ics, TU, Munich, Germany.
Mutations in the DAX1 (NR0B1), which is encoded in the Xp21 chro -
mosomal region, can lead to adrenal insufficiency with glucocorticoid 
and mineralocorticoid deficiency. These mutations also cause hypogo -
nadotropic hypogonadism, which is consistent with the expression of 
DAX1 in the hypothalamus and pituitary.
DAX1 belongs to the nuclear receptor family and acts with a number 
of transcription factors in a transcription regulatory network under its 
control.
In some patients the deficiency is part of an Xp21 contiguous gene 
deletion The deletion extends proximal and distal to the DAX1 gene. 
(Gene order Xper...IL1RAPL1- DAX1-GK_DMD... Xcen.)
Usually there is considerable phenotypic variability associated with 
DAX1 mutations even within the same family. This is due to genetic 
and environmental influences.
We report on monozygotic twins with a contiguous gene syndrome, 
who presented with an identical clinical course. The male twins were 
born to a 23 years old mother with low normal IQ. Caesarean sec -
tion was performed at 36/6 weeks (BW 1st twin 2580g, BW 2nd. twin 
2090g)
Both twins developed a moderate respiratory distress syndrome and 
were on CPAP for 4 days. Within the second week of life they pre -
sented with feeding problems, lethargy and weakness - adrenal insuf -
ficiency was diagnosed. The adrenals were severeley hypoplastic on 
ultrasound.
Genetic investigation revealed a large deletion of at least 3Mb com -
prising the IL1RAPL1, DAX1, GK (Glycerol kinase), and the distal part 
of the DMD gene. The deletion is one of the largest ever reported.
P0011. Molecular analysis in two siblings African patients 
with severe form of Hunter syndrome: Identification of a novel 
(p.Y54X) nonsense mutation
L. Mutesa1, N. Muganga2, W. Lissens3, F. Boemer1, R. Schoos1, G. Pierquin1, 
V. Bours1;  
1University of Liège, Liège, Belgium, 2National University of Rwanda, Kigali, 
Rwanda, 3Dutch-speaking Free University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium.
Hunter syndrome (or Mucopolysaccharidosis type II, MPS II) is an 
X-linked recessive disorder due to the deficiency of the iduronate-
2-sulfatase (IDS) enzyme, resulting in the accumulation of heparan 
and dermatan sulfates in the lysosomes. The heterogeneity of clinical 
phenotypes, ranging from mild to severe forms, is a result of different 
mutations in the IDS gene. We report here a novel nonsense mutation 
(p.Y54X) in two siblings MPS II African patients affected with a severe 
form of the disease. We postulated that the p.Y54X mutation which 
causes a loss of the IDS region highly conserved among sulfatase 
enzymes, could be predicted as a severe disease-causing mutation 
for Hunter syndrome.
P0012. Alpha-Thalassemia prevalence and hematological 
findings in Iranian population
V. Lotfi1,2, H. Hanaee1, P. Fouladi1,2, A. Fahim1, M. Feizpour1, S. Foroghi1, F. 
Molazadeh1, S. Zeinali1,3;  
1Medical Genetics Lab of Dr Zeinali, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Young 
Researchrs Club of research and science branch of Islamic Azad University, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Biotechnology Pasteur Institu -
tion of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Thalassemia is the most prevalent monogenic disorder in the world. 
This paper reports our experience of molecular screening of α-thalas -
semia as a part of thalassemia prevention program in Iran. To deter -
mine statues type (α or β thalassemia) we performed a total of 750 
couples at risk for thalassemia. Those couple with low MCV (<80), low 
MCH (<27) and normal A2 are most probably α-thal carriers. To investi -
gate α-globin genes mutations we can either test for deletions or point 
mutations. Deletions can be detected by Multiplex gap PCR and point 
mutation by ARMS PCR or DNA sequencing.
DNA samples are usually tested for deletions like 3.7, 4.2, 20.5kb and 
Med deletions by multiplex PCR. The samples subjected to point mu -
tation tests such as point mutation in polyA (2 types), Codon19, 5Nt 
Del, Constant Spring, if no deletion detected in previous tests.In 20% of the cases tested the CBC values were normal after iron 
treatment .Deletions and point mutations were found in reaming 70% 
and in 10% of the cases no known point mutations or deletions were 
found our. Further investigation should be performed to determine the 
type of mutations in these samples. In cases where MCV were >75 and 
MCH>25 .only could see a single gene deletion or point mutations(e.
g. 3.7 del,4.2 del , 5Nt del or Codon19).For two gene deletions or point 
mutations (i.e. 20.5 and Med deletion) MCV and MCH were always 
less than 75, 25 respectively.
P0013. Late diagnosis of alpha-mannosidosis in four adult 
patients.
L. Pinson1,2, P. Blanchet1, C. Abadie1, C. Coubes1, P. Sarda1, A. Guichet2, C. 
Verny3, D. Bonneau2;  
1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU, Montpellier, France, 2Service de Géné -
tique Médicale, CHU, Angers, France, 3Service de Neurologie, CHU, Angers, 
France.
Alpha-mannosidosis is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage 
disease characterised by accumulation of oligosaccharides in various 
tissues. A continuum of phenotypes has been described ranging from 
severe infantile forms through milder forms with survival into adult -
hood.
We report four individuals (18- to 38-year-old) from two unrelated and 
non consanguineous Caucasian families. 
In the first family a brother and sister share common features: mild 
mental retardation, late deafness, malar hypoplasia and minor radio -
graphic skeletal abnormalities.
Although the brother and sister have similar IQs, the girl’s clinical his -
tory reveals earlier and more severe onset of neurodevelopmental 
retardation. At the time of examination the patients do not have char -
acteristic coarse features.
The girl of the second family has skeletal symptoms including focal 
lytic vertebral lesions on X-Rays, mild mental retardation and malar 
hypoplasia. She had early hearing loss. Her brother has severe devel -
opmental delay in addition to progressive cerebellar dysfunction. He is 
living in an institute and was unavailable for examination.
In all individuals the diagnosis of alpha-mannosidosis was based on 
reduced leucocyte alpha-mannosidase activity and confirmed by mo -
lecular study of the LAMAN (MAN2B1) gene in the first family.
This report brings out the wide variability in age of onset, rate of pro -
gression and severity of this storage disease. Owing to unusual clinical 
course or absence of striking symptom pattern, alpha-mannosidosis 
may be under diagnosed. Consequently, one should consider the pos -
sibility of alpha-mannosidosis, especially when confronted with pro -
gressive deafness in adults with mental deficiency.
P0014. Further evidence that D90A mutation is recessively 
inherited in ALS patients in Southern Italy
T. Sprovieri1, R. Mazzei1, C. Ungaro1, A. Tessitore2, G. Tedeschi2, A. Patitucci1, 
A. Magariello1, A. L. Gabriele1, V. Labella3, I. L. Simone4, G. Maiorana5, P. Val -
entino6, M. Muglia1, F. L. Conforti1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone (CS), 
Italy, 2Second Divison of Neurology, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy, 
3Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy, 
4Department of Neurological and Psychiatric Sciences, University of Bari, Bari, 
Italy, 5Department of Neurosciences Psychiatric and Anaesthesiological Sci -
ences, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 6Institute of Neurology, University 
Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), a fatal adult-onset motor neu -
ron degeneration is caused by mutations in the Cu/Zn superoxide dis -
mutase (SOD1) gene. All the SOD1 mutations are autosomal domi -
nantly inherited with the exception of D90A, very frequent in Scandi -
navian population, that can act as recessive. Only few cases of D90A 
heterozygous ALS in non-Scandinavian patients have been reported, 
all of them inherited as dominant trait. In Italy, only two sporadic ALS 
cases carrying the D90A mutation have been reported in homozygous 
state. The aim of this study is to investigate the presence of D90A mu -
tation in ALS patients in Southern Italy. One hundred and fifty-four ALS 
patients (8 familial and 146 sporadic cases) from Southern Italy were 
screened for SOD1 mutations in exon 4 by standard procedures. In our 
study, of 154 cases investigated three ALS patients with mild pheno -
type showed the homozygous D90A mutation in SOD1 gene. Two out 
of three patients were familial cases and the remaining patient was an Clinical genetics
apparently sporadic case. We also screened the available members of 
one of the FALS cases. In this family we identified an affected and an 
unaffected individual carrying the D90A mutation in homozygous and 
heterozygous state respectively. According to previous data that re -
ported for all D90A homozygous ALS patients a phenotype character -
ized by slow progression of the disease, also our patients show a mild 
phenotype with a prolonged survival. In conclusion, our study provides 
further evidence that D90A is an autosomal recessively inherited muta -
tion in ALS patients in Southern Italy.
P0015. High level of hypermetabolism in patients with familial 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
B. Funalot1,2, J. C. Desport3, M. Lacoste1, F. Sturtz2,4, P. Couratier1;  
1Dept of neurology, Limoges, France, 2EA4021 Faculté de médecine, Limoges, 
France, 3Nutrition unit, Limoges, France, 4Dept of biochemistry and molecular 
genetics, Limoges, France.
An abnormally elevated level of resting energy expenditure (REE, 
measured by indirect calorimetry) has been reported in a subset of 
patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Hypermetabolism 
(measured REE/calculated REE ≥ 1.1 or 110%) was found in 42/62 
ALS patients in a previous study. Interestingly, hypermetabolism has 
also been observed in transgenic mice harbouring ALS-causing mu -
tations in the SOD1 gene. We tested whether patients with familial 
ALS (FALS) had a REE level differing from patients with sporadic ALS 
(SALS). Eleven patients with FALS (from ten different families, all neg -
ative for the screening of SOD1  mutations by direct sequencing) who 
had performed an indirect calorimetry in our centre during the last sev -
en years were compared with 33 SALS patients matched for age and 
sex. 11/11 (100%) patients with FALS were hypermetabolic, compared 
with 17/33 (52%) patients with SALS (p=0.009). The mean level of 
hypermetabolism was significantly higher in FALS patients (124±8%) 
than in SALS patients (113±12%, p=0.01). Subjects with FALS are 
supposed to carry mutations or strong genetic risk factors predispos -
ing to the disease, which may also be responsible for the higher REE 
observed in these patients. In the absence of infection, inflammation or 
hyperthyroidism, the observed hypermetabolism is likely to result from 
mitochondrial uncoupling. Several other lines of evidence support the 
occurrence of a mitochondrial dysfunction in the course of ALS. Our 
results suggest that this mitochondrial dysfunction may be genetically 
driven in patients with FALS and could therefore be directly involved in 
the pathogenesis of FALS.
P0016. Phenotypic diversity in androgen insensitivity syndrome: 
About two families
F. Kallebi1, M. Fourati2, D. Sallemi2, R. Frikha1, T. Rebai1, N. B. Abdelmoula1;  
1Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Private sector, Sfax, Tunisia.
The androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS), a rare X-linked disorder 
caused by defects in Androgen Receptor (AR). Variable phenotypic ex-
pression has allowed the classification of AIS into complete and partial 
forms. Mutational screening of the AR gene have revealed over 300 
mutations.
Here, we describe pedigrees of two families with three affected sub -
jects. Pedigrees patterns were consistent with X-linked recessive in -
heritance. Index cases were referred to our consultation at adult age 
for genetic counselling.
At the first family, a 28 year old female consults because primary 
amenorrhea and hirsutism. She had a blind vaginal pouch without 
uterus. Abdominal surgery with bilateral gonadectomy was done at 
age 18 years but histology report was not available. Two nieces have 
an inguinal hernia with an apparently female phenotype. Karyotype 
of 3 patients reveal a 46,XY formula and diagnosis of Complete AIS 
was done.
At the second family, a 31 and 32 year old cousins had under mas -
culinised external genitalia, pseudofemale hairless and breast devel -
opment. Gonads were absent even after chirurgical exploration. The 
nephew of the first patient has ambiguous genitalia. A male karyotype 
was revealed for the three cases and diagnosis of incomplete AIS was 
done.
AR molecular investigation are conducted. Correlation between the 
phenotypic features and the abnormalities identified on mutational 
analysis of the AR gene will be discussed.
We emphasize through this report the need for accurate and early di -
agnosis of AIS which govern bearing on the sex of rearing, genetic counselling, and subsequent management.
P0017. Androgen receptor gene mutations in 46, XY females
M. D. Omrani , S. Saleh-Gargari;  
Uromieh Medical Science University, Uromieh, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The androgen insensitivity syndrome is a heterogeneous disorder with 
a wide spectrum of phenotypic abnormalities, ranging from complete 
female to ambiguous forms that more closely resemble males. The 
primary abnormality is a defective androgen receptor protein due to a 
mutation of the androgen receptor gene. This prevents normal andro -
gen action and thus leads to impaired virilization. A point mutation of 
the androgen receptor gene affecting two siblings with complete an -
drogen insensitivity syndrome is described. On examination they both 
had normal external female genitalia.
Genomic DNA was extracted from EDTA-preserved blood samples 
and isolated according to standard procedures. The androgen recep -
tor gene was screened for mutations using an automated sequence 
analyzer (ABI Prism 310). Both girls possess one substitutions (G>A 
at position 2086 in exon 4), leading to D695N mutation. Mother was 
found to be a heterozygous carrier for this mutation. GTG banded 
karyotype of the girls showed they both have male karyotype (46, XY). 
In addition, the SRY gene screening showed they both have intact 
SRY gene. The labioscrotal folds contained palpable gonads measur -
ing 1.5 cm in largest diameter. Ultrasound examination of the pelvis 
revealed absence of the uterus.
Serum follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), 
and testosterone values were higher than normal range.
To our knowledge this is the first confirmed instance of AIS due to an 
AR mutation occurring in familial cases in this country. Furthermore, 
the phenotype has complete association with this mutation.
P0018. Aniridia in a three-generation family
C. C. Albu , E. Severin, D. Albu;  
Carol Davila Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania.
Background: Aniridia is a rare development eye anomaly.As an isolated 
ocular abnormality, aniridia is an autosomal dominant disorder. Clinical 
phenotypes of aniridia are associated with PAX6 mutations. We report 
a case of aniridia in a three-generation family in which the proband 
has a severe ocular phenotype similar to her maternal grandmother. 
Objectives: to describe and compare clinical manifestations of aniridia 
in younger and older generations; to study the intrafamilial variability of 
aniridia and management implications. Patients and Methods: A three-
generation Caucasian family with aniridia was investigated. Four of 
the family members (a one-year-old girl, her mother, her maternal aunt 
and her maternal grandmother) were affected and expressed variable 
ocular phenotypes. Evaluation included physical examination and a 
detailed medical history and family history. Genomic DNA was isolated 
from affected individuals (clinically diagnosed aniridia) and analyzed 
by PCR. Results: The clinical expression of aniridia was variable in this 
family: bilateral complete or partial aniridia, unilateral complete aniridia 
and iris coloboma. Aniridia was associated with other ocular defects: 
cataract, glaucoma, nystagmus, amblyopia and strabismus. The fam -
ily pedigree showed an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance with 
complete penetrance and variable expressivity. The patient and her 
grandmother shared similar phenotype (more severe than their rela -
tives). All cases were defined by clinical signs. All cases had the same 
PAX6 mutations.Conclusions: aniridia appears as a hereditary condi -
tion with clinical variation; molecular-genetic data should be integrated 
with the corresponding clinical findings; all patients with aniridia should 
be evaluated by an ophthalmologist and a geneticist.
P0019. SOX2 anophthalmia syndrome: point mutations, large 
deletions and a broader phenotype.
N. K. Ragge1, P. Bakrania1, D. J. Bunyan2, A. Salt3, A. Martin1, J. A. Crolla2, A. 
Wyatt1, A. Fielder4, J. Ainsworth5, A. Moore3, D. Laws6, D. Pascuel-Salcedo7, C. 
Ayuso8, L. Allen9, J. Collin3, D. O. Robinson2;  
1University of Oxford,Dept of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, Oxford, 
United Kingdom, 2Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District 
Hospital, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 3Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United 
Kingdom, 4Western Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 5Dept. of Ophthal -
mology, Birmingham Children’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 6Single -
ton Hospital, Swansea, United Kingdom, 7Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 
8Fudacion Jiminez Diaz, Madrid, Spain, 9Addenbrookes Hospital, Cambridge, Clinical genetics0
United Kingdom.
Developmental eye anomalies including anophthalmia or microphthal -
mia (AM) occur in around 2-3 per 10, 000 children and are responsible 
for approximately 25% of childhood severe visual impairment. Hetero -
zygous mutations in the SOX2 gene, a SOX1B-HMG box transcription 
factor, have been identified in around 10% of individuals with severe 
microphthalmia or anophthalmia associated with a range of non-ocu -
lar abnormalities, principally motor, speech and developmental delay, 
seizures, and hypothalamo-pituitary abnormalities. SOX2 is therefore 
the most common causative gene for AM identified to date. We have 
screened a new cohort of 95 patients with congenital eye abnormali -
ties, mainly anophthalmia, microphthalmia and coloboma, for SOX2 
mutations. Ten cases with mutations were identified, 5 with intragenic 
mutations creating premature translational stop codons and 5 with 
deletion of all or part of the SOX2 gene. The 5 deletion cases were 
identified by MLPA analysis of a subgroup of 47 patients with severe 
AM. Four were deleted for the whole SOX2 gene and one had a partial 
gene deletion. In two of these FISH analysis identified sub-microscop -
ic deletions involving a minimum of 328Kb and 550Kb of DNA. The 
SOX2 phenotypes include a patient with anophthalmia, oesophageal 
abnormalities and horseshoe kidney, and a patient with a retinal dys -
trophy implicating SOX2 in retinal development. Our results provide 
further evidence that SOX2 haploinsufficiency is a common cause of 
severe developmental ocular malformations. Given the high incidence 
of whole gene deletion we recommend that all patients with severe 
microphthalmia or anophthalmia are screened by MLPA and FISH for 
SOX2 deletions.
P0020. Additional defects in congenital anorectal malformations
M. Roth , Y. Alembik, B. Dott, C. Stoll;  
Genetique Medicale, Strasbourg, France.
Patients with congenital anorectal malformations (CAM) often have 
other associated congenital defects. The reported incidence and the 
types of associated malformations vary between different studies. The 
purpose of this investigation was to assess the prevalences at birth 
of associated malformations in patients of a geographically defined 
population with CAM which were collected between 1979 and 2003 in 
334,262 consecutive births. Of the 169 patients with CAM during the 
study period, 45.0% had associated malformations.Patients with asso -
ciated malformations were further classified into groups with chromo -
somal abnormalities,and malformation syndromes,including Townes-
Brocks syndrome,Klippel Feil syndrome,Di George syndrome;sequ
ences,including OEIS,Pierre Robin and Prune belly sequences;and 
associations including VATER(13 patients) and MURCS associations, 
Malformations of the urogenital system and of the skeletal system 
were the most common other anomalies in multiply malformed pa -
tients without recognized syndromes, followed by malformations of the 
cardiovascular system,the digestive system,and the central nervous 
system. Weight, length, and head circumference of children with CAM 
and multiple associated malformations were lower than in controls, 
as was the weight of the placenta. Prenatal diagnosis by fetal ultra -
sonographic examination was rarely done in isolated CAM. However, 
even in multiple associated malformations, prenatal diagnosis by fetal 
ultrasonographic examination had a low sensitivity, 33.9%.In conclu -
sion the overall prevalence of malformations, which was close to one 
in two infants, emphasizes the need for a thorough investigation of 
patients with CAMs. A routine screening for other malformations may 
be considered in patients with CAM, and genetic counseling seems 
warranted in most of these complicated cases.
P0021. SBDS  gene mutations predispose to acquired aplastic 
anemia by causing telomere shortening of leukocytes
S. A. Graf1,2, R. T. Calado1, S. Kajigaya1, P. M. Lansdorp3, N. S. Young1;  
1National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2How-
ard Hughes Medical Institute, Research Scholars Program, Bethesda, MD, 
United States, 3University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Aplastic anemia (AA), defined as low blood cell counts and a hypo -
cellular bone marrow, can be either acquired or constitutional. Com -
mon to both types are short-for-age telomeres, and mutations to the 
telomerase complex underlie dyskeratosis congenita and some cases 
of acquired AA. Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS), a recessive 
marrow failure syndrome resulting from mutation to SBDS , also fea -tures telomere shortening. SBDS is thought to function in fundamental, 
nucleolar-localized cellular processes. We therefore hypothesized that 
SBDS may participate in telomere repair and that its mutation predis -
poses to acquired AA. We report heterozygosity for the 258+2 T→C 
SBDS  mutation (commonly found in SDS patients) in 4 of 91 patients 
with acquired AA but not in 276 ethnically-matched controls ( P=0.0037, 
Fisher’s exact test). Affected patients had reduced SBDS expression 
but no evidence of the pancreatic failure or skeletal abnormalities 
typical of SDS. Telomeres in AA SBDS+/- patients’ granulocytes were 
significantly short in comparison to age-matched controls and even 
shorter in SDS ( SBDS-/-), inversely correlating in length with SBDS 
expression. Increased telomere length heterogeneity was found cor -
related with SBDS mutations in both acquired AA and SDS. This char -
acteristic has previously been observed in activation of the pathway 
of alternative telomere lengthening. However, telomerase activity of 
patients’ lymphocytes was comparable to controls and no physical in -
teraction between SBDS and telomerase complex components (TERT 
and TERC) was indentified. These data indicate that heterozygosity for 
the 258+2 T→C SBDS  mutation is a risk factor for apparently acquired 
AA by causing hastened telomere shortening via a telomerase-inde -
pendent mechanism.
P0022. Application of HR-CGH and Chromosomal Microarray 
Analysis (CMA) in the Cohort of 112 Patients with Mental 
Retardation.
B. Nowakowska1,2, E. Bocian1, P. Stankiewicz1,2, M. Smyk1, E. Obersztyn1, Z. 
Ou2, J. Li2, K. Borg1, S. Cheung2, T. Mazurczak1;  
1Dept. of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 
2Baylor College of Medicine, Dept. of Molecular & Human Genetics, Houston, 
TX, United States.
Advances in molecular cytogenetics enable detection of small chromo -
somal aberrations in 5-20% of patients with mental retardation (MR). 
The aim of this study was to compare two genome-wide screening 
techniques, high-resolution CGH (HR-CGH) and targeted array CGH, 
termed also Chromosomal Microarray Analysis (CMA). In contrast to 
conventional CGH, HR-CGH enables genome-wide screening for DNA 
copy-number changes with 3-5 Mb resolution. Array CGH is a new 
powerful technology capable of identifying chromosomal imbalances 
with the resolution depending only on the size and distance between 
the arrayed interrogating probes. CMA version 5.0 (853 BAC/PAC 
clones) enables detection of DNA copy-number changes in more than 
60 chromosomal regions of known diagnostic significance and in all 
subtelomeric regions in a single test. In this study, we analyzed 112 
patients with unexplained MR and other features suggestive of chro -
mosomal abnormality, with apparently normal or balanced karyotypes 
using HR-CGH (35 patients) and/or CMA (92 patients). HR-CGH de -
tected seven interstitial deletions in 35 (20%) patients. CMA revealed 
34,8% (32/92) abnormalities, among which 11 (11,8%) were clinically 
relevant, 19 (20,5%) cases were interpreted as polymorphic variants 
and two (2,1%) were of uncertain significance. HR-CGH and CMA 
findings varied in size between 0.5-12.9 Mb and were all validated 
by FISH. Our results show that HR-CGH and array CGH techniques 
have high detection rates of genomic imbalances in the tested groups. 
Both methods have become important components in cytogenetic di -
agnostics, particularly for detecting cryptic constitutional chromosome 
imbalances in patients with MR, in whom the underlying genetic defect 
is unknown.
P0023. A boy with a small deletion of chromosome 10p with 
incomplete Scimitar syndrome and mental retardation
C. von der Lippe1, O. Rodningen1, E. Ormerod1, C. B. van der Hagen2, M. 
Fannemel1, L. Retterstol1;  
1Dept. of Medical Genetics, Ulleval University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Institute 
of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
We present a 3.5 year old boy with cardiopulmonary anomalies and 
mental retardation. Clinical findings include broad short neck, frontal 
bossing, low-set ears, skinfolds behind ear helices, high muscular to -
nus, height 2.5-10 perc., weight 50 perc., head circumference 25-50 
perc. and bilateral testis retention. He had normal hearing, but no lan -
guage. There was no history of heart disease or mental retardation in 
the family. Pregnancy and birth was normal.
His cardiopulmonary anomalies were consistent with incomplete Scim -Clinical genetics1
itar syndrome, which is a rare anomaly of pulmonary venous return to 
the vena cave inferior.
Chromosome analysis on routine G-banded chromosomes was nor -
mal.
However, CGH showed a deletion on chromosome 10(p11.2p12.1). 
Extended G-banding (900 band-level) and array CGH confirmed the 
deletion, and breakpoints were suggested to be (p11.23p12.1).
Several deletions in the short arm of chromosome 10 have been pub -
lished in literature and in the ECARUCA chromosome database, but 
to our knowledge these deletions are all larger than the deletion our 
patient has. In addition, all patients described have a more severe phe -
notype than our patient. Deletions in the short arm of chromosome 
10, at or near 10p13, are associated with a DiGeorge syndrome-like 
phenotype, DiGeorge 2 syndrome (DGS2). Yatsenko et.al (2004) re -
viewed 19 patients with deletion in 10p and congenital heart defects 
(CHD) and found that atrial septum defect (ASD) is a common cardiac 
anomaly associated with DGS2. Thus, the short arm of chromosome 
10 may comprise one ore more critical regions for normal development 
of the cardiopulmonary system.
P0024. Arterial tortuosity syndrome: clinical and molecular 
findings in 12 newly identified families
B. L. Callewaert1, A. Willaert1, W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse2,3, J. De Backer1, 
K. Devriendt4, B. Albrecht5, M. A. Ramos-Arroyo6, M. Doco-Fenzy7, R. C. M. 
Hennekam8,9, R. E. Pyeritz10, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach11, E. L. Wakeling12, S. Nik-
Zainal13, C. Francannet14, P. Mauran15, C. Booth16, M. Barrow17, P. J. Coucke1, 
B. L. Loeys1, A. M. De Paepe1;  
1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 
2University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 3Univer -
sity of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 4Center for Human Genetics, 
University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Institut für Humangenetik, Univer -
sitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 6S. Genética Médica, Hospital Virgen 
del Camino, Pamplona, Spain, 7Service de Génétique, CHRU Reims, UFR de 
médecine, Reims, France, 8Institute for Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 
9Academisch Medisch Centrum, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 10Division of 
Medical Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, 
PA, United States, 11Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-
Holstein, Lübeck, Germany, 12NW Thames Regional Genetics Service, Ken -
nedy Galton Centre, Northwick Park and St Mark’s Hospitals, Harrow, United 
Kingdom, 13Department of Medical Genetics, Addenbrooke’s Hospital NHS 
Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 14Service de Génétique Médicale, CHRU 
Clermont-ferrand, Clermont-ferrand, France, 15Cardiologie Pédiatrique, Ameri -
can Memorial Hospital, CHU Reims, Reims, France, 16Genetics department, 
Lutheran General Children’s Hospital, Park Ridge, IL, United States, 17Depart -
ment of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital of Leicester, NHS Trust, Leices -
ter, United Kingdom.
Background: Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is a rare autosomal 
recessive connective tissue disease, mainly characterized by wide -
spread arterial involvement with elongation, tortuosity and aneurysms 
of the large and middle-sized arteries. Recently, mutations were identi -
fied in the SLC2A10  gene. This gene encodes the facilitative glucose 
transporter GLUT10 and was previously suggested as a candidate 
gene for diabetes mellitus type 2.
Methods: Twelve newly identified ATS families with 16 affected indi -
viduals were clinically and molecularly characterized. In addition, ex -
tensive cardiovascular imaging and glucose tolerance tests were per -
formed in both patients and heterozygous carriers.
Results and conclusions: All 16 patients harbor bi-allelic mutations in 
SLC2A10 and haplotype analysis suggests founder effects for all 5 
recurrent mutations.
In this series, patients are significantly older than those previously re -
ported in literature (p=0.04) and only one affected relative died, most 
likely of an unrelated cause. Although the natural history of ATS seems 
less severe, it does indicate a risk for ischemic events. Two patients 
initially presented with a stroke, respectively at age 8 months and 23 
years, due to a carotid artery dissection in the former. Tortuosity of the 
aorta or large arteries is invariably present in all patients. Two adult 
probands have mild aortic root dilation and 8 patients have arterial 
stenoses. Heterozygous carriers do not show any vascular anoma -
lies. In 5 unrelated families, HbA1c levels and glucose tolerance tests 
are normal in all 6 patients and 8 heterozygous individuals tested. As 
such, overt diabetes is not related to SLC2A10  mutations associated 
with ATS.P0025. An Unusual Clinical Presentation Accompanying Cardiac, 
Renal, Neurologic abnormalities with Asplenia
S. Unlubay1, O. Cogulu2, A. Alpman2, A. Anik2, A. Aykut2, F. Ozkinay2;  
1Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, 
Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, 
Turkey.
Congenital asplenia is mostly found in association with other anom -
alies, particularly cardiac, hepatic, renal anomalies, and structural 
abnormalities of the gastrointestinal tract. It is a feature of a number 
of genetic disorders such as Stormorken syndrome, Kartagener syn -
drome and particularly asplenia [Ivemark] syndrome. Asplenia syn -
drome is the association of congenital absence of the spleen with a 
variety of visceral abnormalities, predominantly of the cardiovascular 
system. The incidence is estimated at 1 in 10.000 to 20.000 live births. 
We report a 6-month-old female presented with multiple congenital 
anomalies associated with asplenia and seizures with abnormal EEG 
findings. She had macrocephaly, frontal bossing, microphtalmia, blue 
sclera, long eyelashes, low set ears, broad base to nose, full cheeks, 
long filtrum, cleft palate, micrognathia, hypoplastic nails, sacral dimple, 
skin syndactyly of 2nd,3rd,4th toes. She had a history of an operation for 
congenital umbilical hernia after birth in newborn period and seizures. 
Neurologic evaluation revealed motor retardation and hypertonicity. 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging showed the cystic changes in germinal 
matrix and agenesis of the corpus callosum. Atrial septal defect and 
ventricular septal defect were detected in echocardiography. Abdomi -
nal ultrasound showed hidronephrosis in the left side. Her karyotype 
and subtelomeric FISH were normal. The combination of asplenia with 
the anomalies detected in this case can be the variation of one of the 
known asplenia syndromes or a new syndrome.
P0026. The MDR1 polymorphism C3435T in bronchial asthma 
(BA) and steroid-resistant idiopathic fibrosing alveolitis (IFA) 
patients
M. Simakova , Z.A.Mironova, V.I. Trofimov, E.D. Iantchina, M.V.Dubina, U.M. 
Ilkovich;  
I.P. Pavlov ׳State Medical University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
The objective of this study was to estimate the frequency of polymor -
phism C3435T of MDR1 gene occurrence and associations between 
this polymorphism and features of glucocorticosteroids therapy. Blood 
samples were taken from 55 asthmatics and 18 patients with steroid-
resistant IFA. Genotypes were detected by PCR-RLFP. Frequencies 
of MDR1 alleles C and T were not different - 0.55 and 0.45 in BA and 
0.53 and 0.47 in IFA, respectively. Distribution of MDR1 genotypes 
in BA were CC-36% (n=20), CT-40% (n=22), TT-24% (n=13); in IFA 
were CC-17% (n=3), CT-72% (n=13), TT-11% (n=2). The frequency of 
MDR1 CT genotype was higher in IFA (χ2=8.00, p=0.005). Daily doses 
of oral glucocorticosteroids (GC) according to MDR1 genotypes in IFA 
were: CC-15.0 +7,6mg prednisolone, CT-24.6 +1.7mg, TT-30 +10mg 
(no significant). Daily doses of inhalation glucocorticosteroids (iGC) in 
BA group were: CC-955 +106mcg, CT-941 +113mcg, TT-1057 +74mcg, 
without significant too. But in patients with BA, which had daily dose 
of iGC more than 800 mcg, genotype TT was found significantly of -
ten, than in patients with smaller dose: 34%(n=13) versus 7%(n=1), 
χ2=3,81, p=0,051.
Consequently, we found significant association of MDR1 CT genotype 
with steroid resistant IFA. We assumed that asthmatics with MDR1 TT 
genotype needed higher doses of iGC. It is related with possible role of 
genetic control mechanism in corticosteroids transport from the cell.
P0027. New genetic variants of complex V,ATPsynthase 6&ATP 6
B. I. Radeva , E. Naumova, M. K. Stancheva;  
University Children’s Hospital,Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Five new cases of genetic variants of mutation of ATP synthase 6 gene 
were diagnosed with clinical and laboratory methods.The mutations 
were identified by PCR method sequence of mitochondrial regions in 
peripheral intravenose blood.The clinical symptoms,which help the di -
agnosis were:microbrachicephaly,muscle hypotonia,normo to areflex -
ia, atrophy nervi optici and etc.The mental retardation was from light 
motor retardation to generalized mental retardation. The investigated 
mutation were unknown up to now and were not registrated in www.
mitomap.org yet. In the first case: base changes A91355G in ATP-syn -
thase 6 gene,C9335T in CO III gene.In second case :base changes 
T8538C MT ATP6gene ,transversion of aminoacid isoleucin / treonin.Clinical genetics2
In third case : mutation G8494 A in ATP-ase gene and C11674T in ND 
4 gene . In fourd case G 8573A mutation of ATP -ase 6 region.In ad -
dition were found two nonsense bases changes .The PCR method for 
sequence of mt DNA open new possibility for optimize the diagnosis 
and treatment of these patients in Clinical genetics.
P0028. Partial duplications of the ATRX-gene cause the ATR-X 
syndrome
B. Thienpont1, T. de Ravel1, H. Van Esch1, D. Van Schoubroeck2, P. Moerman3, 
J. R. Vermeesch1, J. Fryns1, G. Froyen4, C. Badens5, K. Devriendt1;  
1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Obstetrics, Leu -
ven, Belgium, 3Department of Pathology, Leuven, Belgium, 4Human Genome 
Laboratory, Center for Human Genetics, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for 
Biotechnology, Leuven, Belgium, 5Centre d’Enseignement et de Recherche en 
Génétique Médicale, Faculté de médecine, Marseille, France.
ATR-X syndrome is a rare X-linked disorder characterized by profound 
mental retardation, a characteristic face, skeletal abnormalities and 
alpha thalassaemia. We show that some of the patients suspected of 
having ATR-X carry do not carry small mutations at the single bp level, 
but instead carry intragenic duplications in the ATRX gene, further ex -
panding the spectrum of mutations found in ATRX. We identified such 
a duplication in two families.
In the absence of an etiological diagnosis, array CGH analysis was 
performed on two siblings. This showed they carry a complex chromo -
somal aberration: an intragenic duplication in ATRX and an additional 
duplication upstream of this gene. We show that these duplications 
lead to an absence of ATRX mRNA and of the protein.
We next extended this observation to a group of 50 patients suspected 
of having ATR-X but without a detected sequence alteration. Quantita -
tive PCR screening identified one additional patient, carrying a small 
intragenic duplication. These findings underscore the need for includ -
ing quantitative analyses to mutation analysis of the ATRX gene.
P0029. Interstitial duplication 15q11-13 in a patient with Asperger 
autism and seizures
B. Oehl-Jaschkowitz1, T. Martin1, E. Goettert1, A. Christmann1, C. Freitag2;  
1Praxis fuer Humangenetik, Homburg/Saar, Germany, 2Klinik fuer Kinder -und 
Jugendmedizin, Universitaet des Saarlandes Homburg/Saar, Germany.
We present a boy who was diagnosed to have Asperger autism at the 
age of 19 years.
Furthermore the boy suffers from seizures since the age of 16 years. 
Intelligence is in normal range.
The patient finished non-classical secondary school with good marks. 
Afterwards he tried to
graduate from expert school for social sciences which could not be 
completed because of his special defects in social competence and 
communication skills, and his deficiency of empathy which, at the end 
of the initiated diagnostic procedure, led to the diagnosis of Asperger 
autism.
Since recent studies (1) were able to show a defined interstitial dupli -
cation of chromosome15q11-13 in a few patients with autism disorder 
(1-3%) we investigated this region with respect to this abnormality .
We were able to show a duplication of the region of interest with the 
proof of three alleles for the internal markers D15S122, D15S822 and 
D15S1234.
Furthermore we could confirm this result with FISH using the probe 
GABRB3 (15q11-12),which showed three signals on meta- and inter -
phase chromosomes.
Parental investigations (FISH and molecular analysis) were inconspic -
uous. Microsatellite-analysis showed that the duplication did arise from 
the boy`s maternal chromosome 15, as described in the literature (2).
The proposed mechanism is misalignment in maternal meiotic recom -
bination.
The influence of parental imprinting on phenotype will be discussed; the 
variation of the symptoms of the yet published cases will be shown.
P0030. An autosomal dominant loose anagen hair syndrome: 
Clinical and genetic analysis
S. Ari1, U. Ratnamala1, U. C. Patel2, J. V. Solanki3, D. G. Saple4, S. K. Nath5, U. 
Radhakrishna1;  
1Green Cross Blood Bank & Genetic Research Centre, Paldi, Ahmedabad, 
India, 2Departments of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Veterinary College, 
Gujarat Agriculture University, Anand, India, 3Departments of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Veterinary College, Gujarat Agriculture, University, Anand, India, 
4Department of Dermatovenereology & AIDS Medicine, G.T. Hospital, Grant 
Medical College, University of Mumbai, Mumbai, India, 5Arthritis and Immunol -
ogy Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma 
City, OK, United States.
Loose anagen hair syndrome (LAHS: OMIM 600628) is a non-in -
flammatory hereditary hair disorder characterized by anagen hairs of 
abnormal morphology that are easily and painlessly pluckable from 
the scalp. The hair is usually sparse, thin, slow growing and naturally 
does not grow beyond the nape of the neck. The phenotype has been 
recently described and its prevalence is yet to be defined. It affects 
both the genders equally. The condition is usually isolated; however 
few cases associated with other genetic conditions are also reported. 
There are several isolated cases and families reported with LAHS. 
We have studied one large Indian LAHS pedigree, with an autoso -
mal dominant mode of inheritance, containing 63 individuals includ -
ing 22 affecteds (12 males and 10 females). The phenotype appears 
to be100% penetrance in this family since no skipping of generation 
was observed. All affected had typical characters of loose anagen hair 
syndrome. The expression of the phenotype was an early age of on -
set. A hair pull test of all affected individuals extracted multiple hairs 
easily and painless and there were no sign of scalp inflammation or 
scarring. Light microscopic examination was also consistent with LAS. 
Majority of the affected members including all females never cut their 
hair, however three males has the history of seldom cutting their hair. 
Nine patients had an additional clinical phenotype of partial woolly hair 
and five females had fair hair color. There were no other associated 
anomalies observed in this family. Cytogenetic analysis of four affected 
individuals did not show any abnormality. We are planning to perform a 
high-density genome-wide linkage analysis to identify the responsible 
LAHS susceptibility locus. Email: madam_fille@yahoo.com
P0031. Genetic abnormalities in patients with azoospermia in 
ART programs
N. V. Zotova , E. V. Markova, N. V. Kazmina, O. A. Serebrennikova, T. A. Zait -
seva, A. V. Svetlakov;  
Center for Reproductive Medicine, Krasnoyarsk, Russian Federation.
Azoospermia is the most severe form of male infertility. Thanks to 
developing of assisted reproductive techniques (ART) many patients 
come to reproductive centers for infertility  treatment. Azoospermia may 
be caused by number of genetic abnormalities. In this study we inves -
tigated molecular and cytogenetic defects in 57 azoospermia patients 
(age 31.6±0.7). Azoospermia was defined as the total absence of sper -
matozoa in ejaculate even after it centrifugation. DNA was extracted 
from peripheral blood. We analyzed 12 mutations of CFTR  gene and 
11 STS involving the AZFa , AZFb  and AZFc  regions using PCR and 
PCR/RELP. The karyotype analyses were performed by GTG-banding 
technique for at least 12 metaphases of standard lymphocyte culture. 
In all cases of mosaic forms in karyotype FISH technique was used for 
1000 cells. Y chromosome microdeletions were found in six cases of 
azoospermia men (10.5%): three with AZFc , one with AZFb , and two 
with both AZFc and AZFb . Mutations of CFTR  gene (only F508del/-
) were revealed in 4.4%. Chromosome abnormalities were observed 
in 21.6% cases, including 47,XXY karyotype in six cases (three of 
them were mosaic variants). One patient had an XX male syndrome, 
with presence of SRY gene. Two patients had combined defects: one 
with cytogenetically detected deletion of Y chromosome and AZFb/
c microdeletion, and one with both AZFb  microdeletion and mosaic 
Klinefelter`s syndrome. Thus, genetic abnormalities were determined 
in 32% of azoospermia cases. Genetic testing is necessary to deter -
mine aetiology of azoospermia and to choose ART strategies between 
ICSI with testicular spermatozoa, PGD, or sperm donation.
P0032. Barth syndrome associated with compound hemizygosity 
and heterozygosity of the TAZ and LDB  genes
A. Brega1,2, N. Marziliano3, S. Mannarino4, L. Nespoli5, M. Diegoli6, M. Pasotti6, 
C. Malattia5, M. Grasso6, A. Pilotto6, E. Porcu6, A. Raisaro7, C. Raineri8, R. 
Dore9, P. P. Maggio10, E. Arbustini6;  
1University, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sci -
ences, Milan, Italy, 3Centre for inherited cardiovasculat diseases, Foundation 
IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 4Pediatric Cardiology, Foundation 
IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 5Pediatric cardiology, Foundation 
IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 6Centre for inherited cardiovascular Clinical genetics
diseases, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 7Cardiology, 
Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 8Cardiology, Foundation 
IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 9Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Ra -
diology, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 10Cytogenetic 
Unit, Sacro Cuore di Gesù Hospital, Gallipoli, Italy.
The X-linked recessive Barth syndrome is caused by the Tafazzin 
(TAZ) gene mutations and is characterized by dilated cardiomyopa -
thy (DCM) with left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC), neutropenia, 
skeletal myopathy, abnormal mitochondria and 3-methylglutaconic ac -
iduria. Autosomal dominant DCM with LVNC has also been associated 
with LIM-Domain-Binding-3  (LDB3)  gene defects.
We describe a family in which the 12-year-old-proband had a past his -
tory of LVNC and DCM. His mother had five miscarriages and two 
postnatal deaths. The proband showed LVNC-DCM, skeletal myopa -
thy, recurrent oral aphthae and cyclic neutropenia. The DCM progres -
sively improved with age; medical therapy was discontinued at five 
years of age. At present, LV function is normal and arrhythmias are 
absent. Cardiac Magnetic Resonance documented LVNC. Oral aph -
thae recur, as does cyclic neutropenia.
In the proband we identified two novel mutations, one of maternal ori -
gin in the TAZ gene (p.[Glu202ValfsX15]) and one of paternal origin 
in the LDB3  gene (p.[Thr350Ile]). The mother, brother and father are 
healthy; the latter two show prominent LV trabeculation without dys -
function.
Expression studies of TAZ and LDB3  genes were performed in fam -
ily members and controls. In the proband, brother and father, LDB3  
expression was similar to control cases. TAZ and LDB3  expression 
progressively declined with age in control both blood and myocardial 
samples: only an endomyocardial biopsy performed in the proband at 
six months of age, showed significantly lower TAZ and LDB3  expres -
sion than in age-matched myocardial controls.
The clinical, genetic and expression data support the hypothesis that 
tafazzins are essential during fetal and early post-natal life.
P0033. Complex morphological phenotype of a child with Wolf- 
Hirshorn syndrome and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome due to 
der(4)t(4;11)(p16.1;p15.3)pat
A. Lebiedzińska1, T. Eggermann2, P. S. Iwanowski1, B. Krzykwa3, A. Kruczek3, 
A. T. Midro1;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical Academy, Bialystok, Poland, 2In-
stitute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, RWTH Aachen, Germany, 
3Department of Pediatrics, Polish-American Children’s Hospital, Jagiellonian 
University, Medical Academy, Krakow, Poland.
Partial monosomy of the short arm of chromosome 4 has a strong 
effect on phenotype resulting as a rule in the Wolf-Hirschhorn syn -
drome ( WHS #OMIM 194190) with growth delay, microcephaly, char -
acteristic facial appearance, and distinct developmental profile and 
paternal trisomy of 11p can lead to Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome 
( BWS, #OMIM 130650) associated with exomphalos, macroglossia, 
and gigantism in the neonate. We present an unusual morphological 
phenotype in a six months-old boy with 4p monosomy and 11p triso -
my resulted from paternal t(4;11)( p16.1;p15.3). Phenotype has been 
described using a catalogue of 807 well-defined traits according the 
concept of Stengel-Rutkowski. In order to evaluate the phenotypic im -
pact of either of the imbalanced segments we used have formulated a 
spectrum of phenotype traits obtained from analysis of the six children 
with simple monosomy 4p16.1→pter, and a spectrum traits from analy -
sis of 11 children with BWS performed by this same method. Among 
58 clinical / developmental and anthropological traits identified in our 
patient 6/17 (35.5%) corresponded to traits of WHS and 17/38 (44.7%) 
of BWS. Unexpectedly quantitative participation of set traits belongs 
to both syndromes were similar. In addition, methylation-sensitive 
Southern-Blot analyses were performed and hypermethylation in the 
imprinting centre region 1 (ICR1) in the telomeric imprinting domain of 
chromosome 11p was found confirming the diagnosis of BWS. To our 
knowledge the phenotype resulting from the unbalanced chromosome 
translocation der(4)t(4;11)(p16.1;p15.3) has not been hitherto reported 
.
(BMBF project POL no 03/025 and KBN Polish-German project no 
5253) P0034. A case of isolated neonatal hyperinsulinism due to an 
atypical Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome
D. R. Amrom1, J. Wayenberg2, L. Duprez3;  
1Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, Hôpital Français 
- ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Pediatrics, Hôpital Français - ULB, 
Brussels, Belgium, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Hôpital Erasme - ULB, 
Brussels, Belgium.
Background:  The Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is an over -
growth syndrome with macrosomia, visceromegaly, macroglossia and 
abdominal wall defects. Many of the affected patients have episodes of 
hypoglycemia during the first days of life. During childhood, a frighten -
ing complication of BWS is the development of specific tumors. BWS 
is caused by different types of anomalies at the 11p15.5 imprinted lo -
cus.
Case report: A female patient was born at 36 weeks by cesarian sec -
tion because of preeclampsia. She was eumorphic, her birth occipito-
frontal circumference was 33 cm (P50-P75), weight 3 140 kgs (P90), 
length 46.5 cm (P50). From day 3, repetitive episodes of severe hy -
poglycemia occurred, leading to increase the glucose intake up to 12 
mg/kg/min for stabilizing glycemia. At day 15, normoglycemia was ob -
tained by continuous enteral alimentation and diazoxide. As a diffuse 
form of hyperinsulinism was evidenced, a subtotal pancreatectomy 
was performed at 2 months of age which was followed by normogly -
cemia even with normal discontinuous alimentation. There was no or -
ganomegaly. At 6 years of age, neurological assessment was normal 
except for cognitive functions with an IQ in the lower normal range and 
attention deficit. At 8.5 years, FISH analysis was performed on lym -
phocytes using the RP11-534I22 probe, containing the IgF2 gene, and 
the CDKN1C probe. Using these probes a duplication in the 11p15.5 
region was shown in 50% of patient’s lymphocytes. At 10 years of age, 
follow up did not reveal any tumoral pathology.
Conclusions:  Neonatal hyperinsulinism could be the only manifesta -
tion of BWS.
P0035. Distribution of beta thalassemia mutations in Northern 
provinces of Iran
P. Derakhshandeh-Peykar1,2, H. Akhavan-Niaki3, A. Tamaddoni3, S. Ghawidel-
Parsa4, K. Holakouie Naieni5, M. Rahmani2, F. Babrzadeh2, M. Dilmaghani-Za -
deh1, D. D. Farhud2;  
1Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dr. 
Farhud Genetic Clinic, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetic Laboratory, 
Amirkola Children Hospital, Babol University of Medical Sciences, Babol, Is -
lamic Republic of Iran, 4Division of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, Aria 
Hospital, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Department of Epidemiology, School 
of Public Health and Institute of Public Health Research, Tehran, Islamic Re -
public of Iran.
β-thalassemia is one of the most common autosomal recessive disor -
ders in Iran. There are more than two million carriers of β-thalassemia 
and over 15,000 people affected with β-thalassemia major who live in 
Iran. Prevalent mutations were identified by examining genomic DNAs 
isolated from 392 blood samples of β-thalassemia carriers from three 
Northern provinces of Iran. Furthermore, 172 pregnant women were 
analyzed among couples with a request for PND of β-thalassemia. Al -
lele identification was carried out using a routine Reverse Dot Blot, 
ARMS, and genomic sequencing. The most common mutation, IVS 
II-I, is followed, in order of frequency by Cd-30, FSC-8-9, FSC-22-24, 
IVS-I-110, IVS-I-5, IVS-II-745, IVS-I-2, FSC-8, IVS-I,3’-end;-25bp, IVS-
I-1, FSC-36-37, IVS-I-6, FSC-5, -28, Cd-37, IVSII-2,3 (+11/-2), -30, -
88. We have also identified seven rare mutations. The results showed 
a clear drift in the distribution and frequency  of some mutations in 
Northern Iran in comparison to a significant different frequency in the 
Southern Iran. This is the first report of the β-thalassemia mutation 
presentation in three provinces of Northern Iran. These results could 
help with establishing a center for prenatal diagnosis, prevention, and 
control of thalassemia in the Northern provinces of Iran.
P0036. Dental Blaschko Lines in a boy with Triploid/Diploid 
mosaicism
K. Ludwig , M. Bordignon, R. Tenconi;  
Servizio di Genetica Clinica, Padova, Italy.
A 16 year old boy was seen in our clinical genetics unit for further eval -
uation after having been diagnosed with Triploid/Diploid mosaicism 
syndrome at the age of five years. He had a history of mental retarda -Clinical genetics
tion, cardiac malformations, cranio-facial dysmorphisms and pigmen -
tary skin anomalies following the lines of Blaschko. The chromosomal 
analysis of peripheral blood cells was normal, but 69,XXY/46,XY mo -
saicism was detected in skin fibroblast culture.A thorough examina -
tion of the patient at the age of 16 revealed the usual features typical 
for this type of chromosomal mosaicism (asymmetric face, prominent 
and wide nasal bridge, clinodactyly, mental retardation, hypotonia, 
patchy pigmentation and depigmentation of skin, cardiac malforma -
tions, and truncular obesity), but also the absence of one of the inferior 
incisors and alternating vertical bands of opaque white and translu -
cent enamel most evident on the central and lateral incisors. These 
dental abnormalities represent the anatomic equivalent of cutaneous 
Blaschko lines. Extracutaneous analogies of Blaschko lines have been 
described in various organs, such as the brain, bone, lens and teeth. 
These lines do not follow any known nervous, vascular or lymphatic 
structures but do follow and represent the developmental growth pat -
tern of the skin. The embryological basis of these lines has not up to 
now been elucidated.
P0037. Blepharophimosis, Ptosis, and Epicantus inversus 
Syndrome (BPES). Clinical study about three cases
L. I. Butnariu1, C. Rusu1, M. Covic1, V. Gorduza1, L. Trandafir2;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Gr. T. Popa”, Department of Human 
Genetics, Iassy, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Gr. T. Popa”, 
“Saint Mary” Children Hospital, Iassy, Romania.
BPES is a rare autosomal dominant disease (less than 1:5,000). It is 
a complex eyelid malformation invariably characterized by four major 
features: blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicantus inversus and telecan -
thus. There are two types of BPES: type I associate the typical fea -
tures with female infertility caused by premature ovarian failure and 
type II includes only palpebral anomalies.
We present two familial and one sporadic case of BPES. The diagno -
sis was based by clinical signs.
Case 1, sporadic, G.L, male, 1 years old. There are no other relatives 
affected. We note, normal pregnancy, newborn haemolytic disease, 
febrile seizures and spastic tetraparesis. Clinical and paraclinic evalu -
ation revealed: typical BPES features, low-set ears, narrow external 
auditory meatus, bifid uvula, internal hydrocephaly, atrial septal defect 
and developmental delay.
Case 2, I.B, male, 6 years old, present clinical features of BPES type 
I, like his own father; his mother had sensorineural hypoacusy. Other 
features are tall stature, sparse hair, normal intelect. There are no 
other relatives affected.
Case 3, A.D, female,1 years old, present on clinical evaluation typical 
ocular features, low nasal bridge, low-set ears and normal intelect. The 
father and other 7 relatives on paternal side (males and females) have 
the same features of BPES type I: only males are transmitting, affected 
females are infertile. The karyotype was normal in all three patients.
In conclusion, we emphasize the importance of the clinical features for 
diagnosis, leading further to an apropiate management.
P0038. Changes in Phenotype of Bloom´s Syndrome with New 
Manifestations in Adult Individuals
E. Passarge , H. Löser;  
Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany.
Bloom´s syndrome results from autosomal recessive mutations in the 
BLM gene located on human chromosome 15 at 15q26.1, encoding 
a DNA helicase with homology to RecQ  in E. coli  (MIM 210900). Its 
phenotype includes (i) pre- and postnatal growth retardation, (ii) fa -
cial features with dolichocephaly and a narrow face, (iii) light-sensitive 
facial telangiectasia in most patients, (iv) manifestations of genomic 
instability as revealed by a 10-fold increase of spontaneous sister 
chromatid exchanges, breaks and homologous exchanges between 
chromosomes, and an increased rate of somatic mutations. Affected 
individuals develop similar types of cancer as in the population, but 
at a much younger age (about 1 in 4). We have observed the natural 
history in 15 individuals with Bloom´s syndrome during the past 38 
years in Germany. We found that the phenotype in adult individuals 
becomes less distinctive with age than it is in children. In spite of per -
sistent feeding difficulties, such as lack of appetite or regurgitation, 
adult individuals tend to gain weight. A new finding is development of 
diabetes mellitus type 1 or type 2. This has been observed in 27 of 117 
patients (23%) of individuals in the Bloom´s Syndrome Registry (J. German, M. Sanz, E. Passarge, unpublished data). The skin manifes -
tations tend to improve with age. We conclude that the phenotype of 
Bloom´s syndrome is wider than recorded previously. It remains to be 
seen whether the molecular type of mutation present in an individual 
influences the phenotype.
We thank J. German, N.A. Ellis, and M. Sanz, New York, for coopera -
tion and mutational analysis.
P0039. Implementation of a new high throughput sequencing 
service for BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene screening to comply with 
UK Government Genetics White Paper 40 day turnaround time
Y. Wallis , N. Motton, N. Morrell, C. Morgan, E. Ormshaw, J. Bell, F. Macdonald;  
West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
In response to UK Government targets for BRCA gene screening (Ge -
netics White Paper) the West Midlands Regional Diagnostic Genet -
ics Laboratory (Birmingham, UK) devised a novel sequencing-based 
strategy to screen the large BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. The strategy is 
plate-based therefore facilitating the use of highly automated process -
es. 63 new primer sets were designed to amplify the coding regions of 
both BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes simultaneously using a 2-plate system 
for each patient panel. Between September 2005 and January 2007 
a total of 731 diagnostic BRCA reports were issued as a result of the 
high throughput sequencing strategy. More than 98% of these reports 
were issued within 40 working days (from the date of sample receipt 
to date of report authorisation) with an average turnaround time for all 
731 samples of 24.9 days. 79% of samples were reported in less than 
30 days. 128 clearly pathogenic mutations have been identified in ad -
dition to 121 missense mutations and other unclassified variants. The 
Birmingham lab has also performed a number of follow-up studies to 
investigate the pathogenicity of missense and unclassified variants as 
well as undertaking RNA studies to determine the effect on splicing of 
deep intronic variants. The high throughput service has been used by 
a number of diagnostic genetics service laboratories and to date 100 
reports have been issued to them with an average reporting time of 
23 days. This high throughput BRCA sequencing service is available 
upon request from the West Midlands Regional Genetics Service.
P0040. Familial Breast Cancer With Positive History In Father 
And Mother : A Case Report .
R. Habibi ;  
Royan Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background: A family history of breast cancer in a first-degree relative 
is reported in 13% of women with the disease. In turn, over 87% of 
women with a family history will not develop breast cancer. However, 
only 1% of women have multiple affected relatives, a history sugges -
tive of a highly penetrant germ-line mutation.
The probability of breast cancer associated with a mutation in BRCA1 
and BRCA2 genes increases if there are affected before menopause 
and /or have multiple cancers, if there is a case of male, breast cancer, 
or if family members also develop ovarian cancer. BRCA2 is associ -
ated more frequently with male breast cancer.
Case report: We report a female case of invasive carcinoma who had 
37-year-old, and positive family history with paternal and maternal in -
volvement. She had fibrosis, inflammation, and fact necrosis in right 
breast that negative for malignancy and also she had invasive carci -
noma in left breast. For left breast, lumpectomy was performed .
Conclusions: First, in such a cases probability of the BRCA1 muta -
tion increases and BRCA2 mutation is possible. Then screening for 
these genes should be performed for them and the other members 
of relatives and genetic counseling is required, and as soon as clini -
cal approach for other related cancers may be performed. Second, 
also other nongenetic causes in such a family may predispose cancer 
susceptibility .Clinical genetics
P0041. The first evidence of a pathogenic insertion in the 
NOTCH3 gene causing CADASIL
C. Ungaro1, F. L. Conforti1, D. Guidetti2, M. Muglia1, A. Patitucci1, T. Sprovieri1, 
G. Cenacchi3, A. Magariello1, A. L. Gabriele1, L. Citrigno1, R. Mazzei1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone (CS), 
Italy, 2UOC di Neurologia, Ospedale di Guglielmo di Saliceto, Piacenza, Italy, 
3Department of Radiological and Istocytopathological Sciences, Section of 
Pathology, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
CADASIL is an autosomal dominant disorder leading to cognitive de -
cline and dementia caused by mutations in NOTCH3 gene. These 
highly stereotyped mutations are located within the 22 exons, encoding 
for the extracellular domain of the Notch3 receptor, all mutation result -
ing either in a gain or loss of a cysteine residue. It has been suggested 
that the unpaired cysteine residue might cause aberrant interaction 
of the Notch3 receptor with its ligands. Here we report the case of a 
patient with clinical and radiological findings consistent with CADASIL 
having distinctive GOM deposits in her skin biopsy. We examined the 
exons of NOTCH3 gene in this patient and we found a novel NOTCH3 
gene mutation consisting in a 3 base pair insertion in the exon 3. This 
mutation was not observed in 560 control chromosomes. In the sub -
ject carrying the mutations in exon 3, no mutation was found in the 
other exons containing EGF-like repeats (exons 2-23), examined with 
both DHPLC analysis and direct sequence. This insertion resulting in 
a gain of a cysteine residue together with the neurologic and clinical 
phenotype, suggests it is the causative mutation in our patient. The 
current findings demonstrate that this insertion of a cysteine residue in 
the NOTCH3 gene can cause CADASIL. This is the first evidence of 
a pathogenic insertion found in a CADASIL patient, and it is important 
to confirm the hypothesis that the change toward an unpaired reactive 
cysteine residue within EGF repeat domains is a very critical molecular 
event in CADASIL.
P0042. Association of MTHFR gene polymorphism C677T with 
dilated cardiomyopathy and severe LV hypertrophy
R. Valiev1, A. Pushkareva2, R. Khusainova1, N. Khusnutdinova1, G. Enikeeva2, 
G. Arutunov3, E. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State 
Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Russian State Medical University, 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
Cardiomyopathies are heart-muscle diseases of unknown cause. 
There are several theories of cardiomyopathies origin, including auto -
immune hypothesis. In our study we investigated three known genetic 
polymorphisms in MTHFR, TNFa and TNFb genes in patients with dif -
ferent cardiomyopathies and controls (N=200). All patients have been 
divided into three groups - dilated cardiomyopathy (ejection fraction 20-
45%, N=83), moderate left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy (wall thickness 
less than 1,5 mm, N=79) and severe LV hypertrophy (wall thickness 
more than 1,5 mm, N=118). MTHFR, TNFa and TNFb genotypes were 
determined by polymerase chain reaction with subsequent restriction 
fragment length polymorphism technique. There were no differences 
in TNF (alpha and beta) allele frequencies between studied groups 
and controls (p>0,05). Significant differences in C677T (MTHFR) al -
lele frequencies distribution have been found between patients with 
dilated cardiomyopathy and controls (chi2 test with Yets’s correction 
=5,4; df=1, p=0,024) as well as between severe LV hypertrophy and 
controls (chi2 test with Yets’s correction =6,6; df=1, p=0,0109). Geno -
type TT of MTHFR polymorphism have been associated with severe 
LV hypertrophy development (odds ratio = 3,15; [95% CI 1,04 - 9,86]). 
There was no correlation between C677T allele frequencies and pa -
tients with moderate LV hypertrophy. Despite association with other 
heart dysfunction diseases, neither TNFa nor TNFb are related with 
cardiomyopathy. MTHFR point mutation (cytosine to thymine substitu -
tion; C677T) is a known risk factor for many cardiovascular diseases, 
including atherosclerosis, heart attack and peripheral arterial disease. 
Our data shows a possible role of C677T polymorphism in develop -
ment of dilated cardiomyopathy and severe LV hypertrophy.
P0043. The indications for CATCH22 phenotype FISH analysis 
should be widened
K. Õunap1,2, K. Kuuse1, T. Ilus1, K. Muru1, R. Zordania3, K. Joost3, T. Reimand1;  
1Medical Genetics Center, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, 
Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Tallinn Children’s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia.
The 22q11.2 microdeletion is one of the most common human micro -
deletion syndromes. It is usually diagnosed by FISH analysis using TU -
PLE1 probe at 22q11.2 and N85A3 clone control probe at 22q13.3.
This study includes 335 patients investigated for CATCH22 microdele -
tion by FISH analysis during 2000-2007. In 19 patients abnormal find -
ing was found (6%). Fifteen patients had classical 22q11.2 microde -
letion (79%), in 4 cases other abnormalities were found (21%). Two 
had 22q11.2 microduplication, one had 22q13.3 deletion and in one 
22q13.3 duplication was diagnosed.
In patients with 22q11.2 deletion the indications for FISH investigation 
were classical: heart anomaly with different additional problems; 3 had 
typical facial phenotype with cleft palate or immunological problems 
only. In the patient with 22q13.3 deletion (developmental delay and 
muscular hypotonia) the main indication for FISH analysis was the 
cleft palate in his mother. Similarly, a patient with 22q13.3 duplication 
(developmental delay and abnormal face) had heart anomaly in one 
sister. Two patients with 22q11.2 duplication in one family had minor 
facial abnormalities and failure to thrive, and were investigated only 
because referral doctor was a cardiologist. None of four patients with 
other abnormalities found had cardiac anomaly.
In summary: among the cases with abnormal CATCH22 FISH results 
we found in 21% other abnormality than classical 22q11.2 microdele -
tion. The indication for FISH analysis in these cases was rather super -
ficial. This shows that the indications should be widened for CATCH22 
FISH analysis: developmental delay only (+/- dysmorphic face, muscu -
lar hypotonia or failure to thrive).
P0044. Caudal duplication syndrome with unilateral hypoplasia 
of the pelvis and lower limb and ventriculo-septal heart defect
K. Becker1, K. Howard1, D. Klazinga2, C. Hall3;  
1North Wales Clinical Genetics Service, Glan Clwyd Hospital, Bodelwyddan, 
Rhyl, United Kingdom, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Glan Clw -
yd Hospital, Bodelwyddan, Rhyl, United Kingdom, 3Department of Radiology, 
Great Ormond Street Hospital For Sick Children, London, United Kingdom.
Dominguez et al. (1993) reported six cases with caudal duplication 
syndrome and reviewed eight reports from the literature. Kroes et al. 
(2002) reported another two cases, including discordant monozygotic 
twins. The phenotypic spectrum encompasses gastrointestinal anom -
alies (intestinal duplication including double appendix, anal duplica -
tion, small bowel atresia or webs, intestinal malrotation, imperforate 
anus, omphalocele, esophageal cysts), genitourinary tract anomalies 
(duplication of external genitalia, vagina, bladder, urethras, cervix and 
uterus, single pelvic or malrotated kidney) and abnormalities of the 
spinal cord. We report a 22 year old female with caudal duplication 
syndrome, who in addition to intestinal duplication, imperforate anus, a 
dydelphic uterus and a single kidney also had a VSD and hypoplasia of 
the left pelvis, leg, labia majora and left side of a duplicated vagina.
P0045. Forget the classic CDG phenotype; a broad spectrum of 
congenital anomalies in CDG type II
E. Morava1, R. Zeevaert2, M. Guillard1, D. Lefeber1, R. Wevers1;  
1UMC Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2UMC Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
CDG type Ia, the most common form of Congenital Disorders of Gly -
cosylation presents with characteristic symptoms of hypotonia, strabis -
mus, arachnodactyly, cerebellar hypoplasia, abnormal lipid distribution 
and gastrointestinal, endocrine and coagulation abnormalities.
Patients with CDG type II, diagnosed with a glycosylation disorder due 
to Golgi dysfunction and abnormal transferrin isoelectric focusing in 
blood, have very different clinical features. Mutations in COG7 , coding 
for one of the 8 subunits of the Conserved Oligomeric Golgi complex, 
lead to a new clinical syndrome of growth retardation, severe progres -
sive microcephaly, adducted thumbs, gastrointestinal pseudo-obstruc -
tion, cardiac anomalies, wrinkled skin and episodes of extreme hyper -
thermia. Features in COG1  deficient patients include hypotonia, de -
velopmental delay, ventricular hypertrophy/cardiac dysfunction and a 
rhizomelic short stature. The single patient described so far with COG8  
mutation showed a phenotype similar to that in mitochondrial disease. 
Other defects affecting the biosynthesis of both N- and O- linked gly -
cosylation with hyposialylation include a new subtype of autosomal 
recessive cutis laxa syndrome with neonatal cutis laxa, microcephaly 
with large fontanel, hypotonia and failure to thrive. Despite the clinical 
and biochemical diagnosis in an increasing number of patients with Clinical genetics
this form of CDG type II the gene defect has not been discovered yet.
Based on the recently defined clinical syndromes with N- and O-linked 
glycosylation defects one should consider the diagnosis of Congenital 
Disorders of Glycosylation in patients with a broad spectrum of differ -
ent features, including pachygyria, hypotonia with adducted thumbs, 
cutis laxa, cardiac and cranio-skeletal anomalies.
P0046. Neurological manifestations of the Cardio-facio-
cutaneous Syndrome (CFC)
G. Yoon1, J. Rosenberg1, S. Blaser1, K. Rauen2;  
1University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2University of California San Fran -
cisco, San Francisco, CA, United States.
The cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC) is a multiple congenital 
anomaly disorder characterized by craniofacial dysmorphia, ectoder -
mal abnormalities, congenital heart defects, developmental delay and 
growth retardation. Neurological complications associated with CFC 
remain to be clearly defined. Recent discovery of causative mutations 
in the MAPK pathway now permit accurate molecular diagnosis of 
CFC. Objective: To characterize the neurological features of patients 
with molecularly-confirmed CFC. Methods: Medical records, labora -
tory and imaging data were reviewed for 37 mutation-positive CFC 
patients. Patients with a clinical diagnosis of CFC but a negative result 
on mutation screening of the BRAF, KRAS, MEK1 and MEK2 genes 
were excluded from the study. Results: Hypotonia, motor delay, speech 
delay and learning disability were universally present in this cohort. 
Macrocephaly was present in 59%, ptosis in 50%, strabismus in 64% 
and nystagmus in 50% of patients. Corticospinal tract findings were 
present in 32% of the group. Ventriculomegaly or hydrocephalus was 
present in 66% of patients. Other findings on MRI included prominent 
Virchow-Robin spaces (19%) and abnormal myelination (13%). Sei -
zures were present in 46% of patients. No specific genotype-pheno -
type correlations were observed. Interpretation: Alteration of function 
through the Ras/MAPK cascade has traditionally been associated with 
oncogenesis. Germline mutations in this pathway have an adverse im -
pact on neurodevelopment, and appear to play an important role in 
ocular function, structural brain anatomy and electrical activity.
P0047. BRAF gene mutation in a patient with cardio-facio-
cutaneous (CFC) syndrome presenting with lipoma of corpus 
callosum, hepatic and renal cysts
E. Papadopoulou1, S. Sifakis1, K. Gripp2, S. Kirwin2, K. Sol-Church2, D. Stab -
ley2, P. Vorgia1, M. Kalmanti1;  
1University Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion, Greece, 2Department of Biomedical 
Research, Nemours’ Children Clinic, Willmington, DE, United States.
Introduction: Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC) is characterized 
by craniofacial features, cardiac defects, ectodermal abnormalities, 
and psychomotor delay. It has phenotypic similarities with Noonan and 
Costello syndromes.
Case presentation: a 20-month-old boy, the first child of phenotypically 
normal parents, who during infancy presented poor suck, and failure to 
thrive. At 20th month of life he presents dysmorphic features, postnatal 
onset growth deficiency, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, hypotonia, and 
mental retardation. Dysmorphic features include relatively large head, 
downslanting palpebral fissures, broad nasal base, protruding nostrils, 
high arched palate, papilloma-lile lesion on midline of the fontal region, 
deep palmar and plantar creases, sparse curly hair, and hyperexten -
sible fingers. Brain MRI reveals a lipoma of corpus callosum. Abdomen 
ultrasound shows hepatic and renal cysts. DNA analysis initially per -
formed excluded Noonan and Costello syndromes. Further examina -
tion revealed a 770A-G transition in exon 6 of the BRAF gene, predict -
ing a gln257-to-arg (Q257R) amino acid change.
Conclusion: CFC syndrome can be caused by gain of function muta -
tions in 1 of 4 different genes: KRAS, BRAF, MEK1, and MEK2. The 
protein products of these genes interact in a common RAS/ERK path -
way that regulates cell differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis. The 
mutation found in our patient has been earlier described in 3 unrelated 
CFC patients (BRAF, gln257arg), by Niihori et al. (Nat Genet, 2006). 
Hepatomegaly and absence or hypoplasia of corpus callosum has 
been described in CFC syndrome. To our knowledge, our patient is the 
first who presents lipoma of corpus callosum, as well as hepatic and 
renal cystic formations.P0048. Brain imaging in patients with KRAS, BRAF  and MEK  
mutations
C. Nava1, C. Michot1, N. Hanna2, S. Pereira1, B. Parfait2, J. Elion1, A. Verloes1, 
H. Cavé1;  
1department of genetics APHP hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 2Inserm 
U745, Faculté des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Université Paris 
V, Paris, France.
Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFC) is a severe developmental 
disorder clinically related to Noonan syndrome and Costello syndrome 
(CS), which has been recently linked to mutations in 4 genes of the 
RAS/MEK/ERK signaling pathway. Developmental delay is frequent in 
those diseases but abnormalities of brain imaging aren’t often report -
ed in these patients. In this study, we performed mutation analysis of 
KRAS , BRAF , MEK1 , and MEK2  in 40 patients with a CFC, 20 patients 
with a CS without HRAS  mutations, and 82 patients with NS without 
PTPN11 mutations. We found 22 BRAF mutations, 7 KRAS mutations, 
11 MEK1 mutations, and 5 MEK2 mutations. 21/45 patients with a mu -
tation had a brain imagery. It was abnormal in 11/21 of cases (table 1). 
5/14 CS with a mutation in KRAS , BRAF  or MEK  had abnormal MRI (4 
patients: normal, 5 patients : unrealized). Cerebral malformations were 
less frequent in CFC patients (abnormalities in 3/23, 5 normal, 15 un -
realized). 3 patients with NS present a ventricular dilatation associated 
with a cerebral atrophy.
Brain abnormalities are frequent in all gene mutated and clinical di -
agnosis and a brain imaging seems to be justified in medical care of 
these patients.
Brain RMI abnormalities in patients with KRAS, BRAF, MEK mutations
CFC CS NS
KRAS 
(/7)1(/1) 
ventricular dilatation and 
cerebral atrophy2 (/3)  
ventricular dilata -
tion and cerebral 
atrophy
BRAF 
(/22)0 (/3)4 (/5)  
- 
ventricular dilatation  
- periventricular grey matter 
heterotopia and thin corpus 
callosum  
- ventricular dilatation and 
gyral abnormalities
MEK1 
(/11)1 (/2)  
ventricular dilatation0 (/3)1 (/1)  
ventricular dilata -
tion and cerebral 
atrophy
MEK2 
(/5)2 (/3)  
-cerebral atrophy  
-tuberous sclerosis 
(Bourneville disease 
associated)
P0049. Contiguous gene deletions involving EFNB1, OPHN1  and 
PRAJA1  in patients with craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS) 
and mild developmental delay
I. Wieland1, C. Weidner1, R. Ciccone2, E. Lapi3, D. McDonald-McGinn4, W. 
Kress5, S. Jakubiczka1, H. Collmann6, O. Zuffardi2,7, E. Zackai4, P. F. Wieacker1;  
1Institut für Humangenetik, Otto-von-Guericke-Universität, Magdeburg, Germa -
ny, 2Institute of General Biology and Medical Genetics, University of Pavia, Italy, 
3Medical Genetics Unit, Children’s Hospital AOU Meyer, Florence, Italy, 4Clinical 
Genetics Center, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5Med-
izinische Genetik im Institut für Humangenetik, Universität Würzburg, Germany, 
6Kinderklinik und Poliklinik, Universität Würzburg, Germany, 7IRCCS San Mat -
teo Hospital, Pavia, Italy.
Craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS [MIM 3404110]) is an X-linked 
malformation syndrome characterized by craniofrontonasal dyspla -
sia, body asymmetry, midline defects and abnormalities of the fingers, 
toes and hair. Unlike classical X-linked diseases, CFNS manifests in 
females, whereas male carriers are usually mildly affected. CFNS is 
caused by mutations in the EFNB1  gene (MIM 300035) encoding the 
transmembrane ligand ephrinB1 of cognate ephrin (Eph) receptor ty -
rosine kinases. However, psychomotor delay has been observed only 
in a few patients. We identified three females with classical CFNS and 
mild developmental delay harbouring de novo  deletions of the  EFNB1  
gene. Applying haplotype analysis, Southern blot hybridisation and 
array-comparative genomic hybridisation (array-CGH), deletion of Clinical genetics
EFNB1  was found to be part of contiguous gene deletions including 
oligophrenin-1 ( OPHN1,  [MIM 300127]), and Praja 1 ( PRAJA1,  [MIM 
300420]) in two of the patients. In the third patient EFNB1  gene dele -
tion may include deletion of regulatory regions 5’ of OPHN1 . Previ -
ously, the OPHN1  gene has been shown to be responsible for X-linked 
recessive mental retardation. Although it is too early to predict the 
mental performance of the two patients with contiguous gene deletion 
of OPHN1 - EFNB1 - PRAJA1 , psychomotor development is slightly 
delayed in one. A mild learning disability has been recognized in the 
third patient. It is important for genetic counselling to be aware that 
their male offspring may be affected by mental retardation and may be 
carriers of CFNS, whereas half of their female offspring will be affected 
by CFNS and will be carriers for mental retardation.
P0050. Charcot-Marie-Tooth phenotypes are defined by 
the myelin protein zero (P0) structure. An analysis of the P0 
extracellular domain
G. J. Braathen1,2, J. C. Sand2, H. S. Vollan3, G. Bukholm1,4, M. B. Russell1,4;  
1Faculty Division Akershus University Hospital, University of Oslo, Oslo, Nor -
way, 2Department of Neurology, Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Nor -
way, 3Institute for clinical epidemiology and molecular biology (Epi-Gen), Ak -
ershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway, 4Center of Research, Akershus 
University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway.
Background. The Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) phenotype caused by 
mutation in the myelin protein zero (MPZ) gene varies considerably, 
from early onset and severe forms to late onset and milder forms. The 
mechanism is not well understood.
Methods. We performed a computational analysis of the myelin protein 
zero (P0) extracellular domain encoded by the MPZ gene. The effects 
of the amino acid change in two novel missense mutations as well as 
mutations in the same or neighboring codons were analyzed.
Results. The angle between the membrane plane and P0 extracellu -
lar domain is crucial. Major deviation caused early onset phenotypes, 
while a minor angle deviation was associated with allelic heterogene -
ity (CMT type 1 or 2, or distal hereditary motor neuropathy). Mild and 
major conformational changes resulted in late and early onset phe -
notypes, respectively. Conclusions.  The phenotypic variation can be 
explained by the structural change of the P0 extracellular domain.
P0051. CHARGE syndrome, searching for the mild end of the 
phenotype
M. C. J. Jongmans1, L. H. Hoefsloot1, K. P. van der Donk1, R. J. Admiraal1, B. 
B. de Vries1, A. Magee2, I. van de Laar3, Y. M. Hendriks4, J. B. G. M. Verheij5, I. 
Walpole6, H. G. Brunner1, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij5;  
1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 
2Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom, 3Erasmus Medical Centre, Rot -
terdam, The Netherlands, 4Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Neth -
erlands, 5University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands, 
6Princess Margaret Hospital, Subiaco, Australia.
CHARGE syndrome is an autosomal dominant condition, caused by 
mutations in CHD7 . The first reported spectrum of associated features, 
later coined by the acronym CHARGE ( coloboma, heart defects, cho -
anal atresia, retarded growth and development, genital hypoplasia, ear 
anomalies and deafness), was extended by features such as cranial 
nerve palsy, hypoplasia of the semicircular canals, defects in olfactory 
bulb development and tracheo-esophageal fistula. Following identifica -
tion of the CHD7  gene, we have studied the clinical spectrum of a co -
hort of 47 CHD7  positive patients. Evaluation of this cohort confirmed 
the broad clinical variability among CHARGE syndrome patients. 
Among these first series were two familial cases; a pair of monozygotic 
twin sisters and a sib pair consisting of two affected brothers. Pheno -
typic evaluation of these patients revealed a striking intrafamilial vari -
ability, notwithstanding their identical CHD7 mutations. These findings 
prompted us to study more  CHD7  positive familial cases in order to 
extend our genotype-phenotype studies in CHARGE syndrome. Five 
more families were identified. All families were characterized by an 
intrafamilial clinical variability, confirming our previous findings. We en -
countered two mutation positive parents of independent families with 
very mild manifestations of the syndrome, further widening our knowl -
edge of the mild end of the CHARGE syndrome phenotype. These 
mildly affected persons shared the same missense mutation in CHD7 , 
providing the first evidence for a genotype-phenotype correlation in 
CHARGE syndrome. Up till now, in two parents a somatic mosaicism in lymphocytes was identified, underscoring the importance of offering 
CHD7  analysis to parents of an affected child.
P0052. Interstitial deletion 1p in a child with mental retardation 
and multiple anomalies diagnosed by Array-CGH.
M. Doco-Fenzy1, E. Landais1, C. Leroy1, A. Schneider1, N. Bednarek2, G. 
Delebarre2, P. Souchon2, B. Santerne2, M. Viprey1, F. Lefevre3, J. Motte2, D. 
Gaillard1;  
1Service de Génétique, CHU-Reims, UFR de médecine, IFR 53, Reims, 
France, 2Service de Pédiatrie, CHU- Reims, UFR de médecine, IFR 53, Reims, 
France, 3Service de Chirurgie Pédiatrique, CHU- Reims, UFR de médecine, 
IFR 53, Reims, France.
Less than 10 patients were reported with interstitial 1p35 or 1p34 dele -
tion. We report the first observation with del(1)(p35.2p34.3).
The patient was the second child from non-consanguineous parents. 
During pregnancy ultrasound examination revealed an increased nu -
chal translucency, fetal bowel hyperechogenicity, oligoamnios and 
abnormal growth parameters. A prenatal karyotype revealed no chro -
mosomal abnormality.
The child was born at 37 WG with birth weight : 2370g (-2SD); length 
: 45cm (-3SD); and OFC: 32cm (-3SD), APGAR score was 7/8/10. 
She showed hypogenitalia and she had a peculiar facial dysmorphism 
characterized by microcephaly, flat face, microstomia, hypertelorism, 
narrow and small palpebral fissures, small nose, a Pierre Robin se -
quence with high arched palate, glossopharyngeal-laryngeal respira -
tory obstruction, early feeding difficulties, and vagal syncope. Pyloric 
stenosis and severe gastro-oesophageal reflux were cured by pylo -
rotomy realised at 30 days-of-age, and Nissen fundoplication and gas -
trostomy at 4 months. Thank enteral nutrition, at 23 months, weight 
was 13kg (+1.5SD) ; length 83 cm (-0.5SD).
A severe axial hypotonia was present at birth and persisted, seizures 
appeared at 7 month-of-age, a global developmental delay was obvi -
ous at 23 months. Cerebral ultrasound observation and RMI at 1.5 
month-of-age, showed abnormal cerebellum and thin corpus callo -
sum.
A 550 R-band resolution karyotype on blood sample was normal. We 
used the 1Mb BAC and PAC Array-CGH (VIB Leuven-J.Vermeesch) 
and diagnosed an interstitial deletion in the dark R-region 1p35-p34. 
This result was confirmed by FISH. Parental karyotypes and FISHs 
were normal.
The results will be detailed and compared to the literature.
Grant : PHRC-2005-CHU-Reims
P0053. An Interstitial Deletion del(10)(q23.32q24.1) In a Mother 
And Her Two Offspring
H. Faghfoury , C. Li;  
Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, ON, Canada.
We describe a previously unreported familial interstitial deletion in a 
woman and her two pregnancies. This 33-year-old G0P0 woman un -
derwent amniocentesis after a prenatal ultrasound showed findings of 
increased nuchal translucency and isolated left talipes equinovarus. 
The fetal karyotype was found to be 46,XX,del(10)(q23.2q24.1). The 
fetus was subsequently miscarried and a maternal karyotype revealed 
the identical interstitial deletion. A subsequent pregnancy produced a 
son with the same unbalanced karyotype and a solitary right kidney, an 
atrioventricular septal defect, and a patent ductus arteriosis. Maternal 
medical history was significant for right talipes equinovarus, uterine di -
delphys, short stature, and mild developmental delay. The mother and 
child share dysmorphic features that includes microcephaly, a long 
face, short palpebral fissures, hypotelorism, a widened nasal bridge 
with a large bulbous nose, a long philtrum, a large mouth with micro -
gnathia, and prominent ears. FISH analysis using a probe for the PTEN 
gene (10q23.31) was performed on both the patient and her son. No 
deletion was noted in either patient, and their karyotypes were subse -
quently revised to del(10)(q23.32q24.1). Interstitial deletions involving 
the long arm of chromosome 10 are rare and there are only three other 
case reports documenting specific deletions in the chromosome 10q23 
segment. These patients share some features with our cases, but a 
consistent pattern of clinical features cannot be concluded.Clinical genetics
P0054. Population investigation of alpha-1-antitypsin in some 
regions of the Azerbaijan Republic
A. B. Ismayilova ;  
Baku State University, Baku, Azerbaijan.
Alpha-1-antitrypsin (α1A) is low molecular protease inhibitor, synthe -
sized by liver cells, which destroys neutrophil elastase of lung alveo -
lar cells. So far, 90 mutant and normal alleles of the α1A gene are 
known.
In our researches we have identified α1A phenotypes in healthy per -
sons as well as in patients with lung and liver disease. Capillary blood 
(0,2 ml) with anticoagulation agent-heparin was collected in eppen -
dorf tubes. Two regions of Azerbaijan Republic (Siyazan and Kazakh) 
were involved in population studies. Siyazan area is located 110 km 
northward and Qazakh area 450 km west-northward from Baku city. 
Altogether 897 person’s blood samples were screened.
Phenotype testing was carried out by isoelectric focusing (IEF) in thin 
layer polyacrylamide- ampholine gels (PAAG), pH 4-6.
Three normal phenotypes of PiM alleles were identified in homozy -
gous as well as in compound state with frequencies of: M1M2- 32%, 
M1M3-20% and M2M3-12%. The frequency of PiM alleles was : M1-
38%,M2-38% and M3-24%.
In six families two types of mutations were defined as with PiZ (6 per -
sons) and PiS (4 persons).
IEF method in PAG with pH 4-6 is recommended for identifying pheno -
types of alpha-1-antitrypsin in population studies.
P0055. Microstomia- cleft palate: a new syndrome?
S. A. Boyadjiev1, R. Saadeh2, A. Scott2, W. Tian3, A. Mian3, E. Wulfsberg3, T. 
Beaty4, C. Vander Kolk5, R. Redett5;  
1Section of Genetics, Sacramento, CA, United States, 2McKusick-Nathans In -
stitute of Genetic Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, United States, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Mary -
land, Baltimore, MD, United States, 4Department of Epidemiology, The Johns 
Hopkins University School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, United States, 5De-
partment of Surgery, Division of Plastic Surgery, The Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.
The unusual combination of extremely small mouth with U-cleft palate 
was observed in two unrelated families. While mild micrognatia was 
described in infancy, it was not obvious in later life. In fact, prominent 
and pointed chin was present in the affected adults. In the first family, 
a mother and her daughter had these oral anomalies and downslant -
ing palpebral fisssures. No associated birth defects or delays were 
present. In the second family, the affected mother had a son and fra -
ternal twin daughters with the same combination of oral features and 
brachydactyly and 5th finger clinodactyly. In addition to the oral defects, 
the youngest boy in this family had craniosynostosis and ureteral ob -
struction resulting in chronic renal failure. Whole-genome genotyping 
with Illumina 317K SNP Beadchip did not detect chromosomal rear -
rangements. The diagnosis of Pierre Robin sequence was considered 
unlikely based on the clinical presentation and extracranial dysmor -
phisms. More than 50 syndromes featuring microstomia and cleft 
palate were reviewed and excluded. We propose that this condition 
represents a new autosomal dominant dysmorphic syndrome. Linkage 
analysis of these and additional families with similar features is likely 
to pinpoint the location of a gene essential for proper development of 
the oral region.
P0056. Novel missense mutation: R131C in the RUNX2 gene in a 
case with cleidocranial dysplasia
V. Belengeanu1, D. Steinberger2, S. Farcaş1, C. Popa1, K. Rozsnyai1, D. C. 
Bratu3;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Timişoara, Romania, 2Bioscientia Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, 
Germany, 3Department of Orthodontics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Timişoara, Romania.
Cleidocranial dysplasia is a skeletal dysplasia characterized by persis -
tently open or delayed closure of sutures, hypoplastic and/or aplastic 
clavicles, wide pubic symphysis, dental anomalies, and short stat -
ure. The disorder is caused by heterozygous mutations in the CBFA 
(core binding factor alpha1) gene, also known as RUNX2 (runt-related 
gene 2) on chromosome 6p21, that encodes an osteoblast-specific 
transcription factor. Mutations scattered throughout the entire CBFA1 
gene have been related to this disorder, however, most of them affect the highly conserved Runt domain, abolishing the DNA-binding ability 
of the transcription factor. We report a case presenting with the clas -
sic phenotype of cleidocranial dysplasia, in which mutation analysis of 
the RUNX2 gene revealed a previously unreported missense mutation 
(391C>T), that replaces an arginine residue with a cysteine at position 
131, in the Runt homology domain of the RUNX2 protein. The muta -
tion occurred the novo, neither of the parents, who were phenotypically 
normal, carried the mutation identified in the patient. We describe our 
detailed investigation of the patient, expanding the data related to the 
phenotypic expression of different mutations in the RUNX2 gene.
P0057. Further Expansion of the Behavioral and 
Neurodevelopmental Phenotypic Prensentation of Boys with 49 
XXXXY ( A variant of XXY)
C. A. Samango-Sprouse1, A. Gropman1, S. A. Rosenson2, A. Rogol3;  
1George Washington University, Washington, DC, United States, 2University 
of Texas, Austin, TX, United States, 3University of Virginia, Charlottsville, VA, 
United States.
This is a comprehensive study completed on a large cohort of boys 
with 49 XXXXY (49XY) describing intact nonverbal IQ and receptive 
comprehension skills with severe developmental dyspraxia. 15 boys 
were evaluated using standardized measures by a multi-disciplinary 
team including pediatric neurology, genetics, endocrinolgy, develop -
ment, physical therapy and speech/language.
The mean age of the cohort was 37 months with mean birth weight of 
5lbs. 7ozs. The average age at the time of diagnosis was 4 mos. Mean 
Nonverbal IQ was 92 with receptive comprehension standard scores 
of 81.7 in contrast to depressed verbal capacities with standard scores 
of 66.5. There was severe motor praxis deficits with global hypotonia in 
all children. Sensory integration dysfunction was evident.
These findings describe for the first time intact nonverbal skills and 
comprehension with severe motor planning deficits in boys with this 
rare disorder. This study expands the phenotypic presentation of 49 
XY to include better nonverbal IQ capacities than appreciated previ -
ously. Speech is severely delayed secondary to verbal and oral mo -
tor dyspraxia. The presence of limb dyspraxia affects graphomotor 
function. Behavioral issues were evident in some but not all children. 
These finding support evidence of frontal lobe dysfunction as previ -
ously demonstrated in boys with XXY.
Counseling for newly diagnosed families needs to highlight variability 
of intellectual capabilities, the need for aggressive EI services with di -
rect SPL and OT for motor planning deficits. Further studies are under -
way to further investigate phenotypic variability, MRI abnormalities and 
the presence of mosiacism in the higher functioning children.
P0058. Cockayne Syndrome Type II: a unique phenotype 
among Druze Population in Northern Israel Caused by a Highly 
Prevalent Novel Mutation in the CSB  Gene.
T. C. Falik-Zaccai1,2, M. Laskar1, N. Kfir1, W. Nasser3, H. Slor4, M. Khayt1;  
1Istitute of Medical genetics, Western Galilee Hospital, Naharia, Israel, 2Rappa -
port Faculty of Medicine, Technion- Israel Institue of Technology, Haifa, Israel, 
3Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Western Galilee Hospital, Naharia, Israel, 
4Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler School of 
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
Cockayne Syndrome (CS) (OMIM # 216400) is a rare autosomal re -
cessive disease characterized by severe growth and developmental 
retardation, progressive neurological dysfunction and symptoms of 
premature aging. The primary cause of the disease is a defect in the 
transcription-coupled DNA repair, specifically the Nucleotide Excision 
Repair (NER) pathway. To date, four genes along this pathway CS-
A, CS-B, XP-D and XP-G  have been reported to be involved in the 
pathogenesis of CS.
We have identified a large, highly consanguineous, Druze kindred 
descended from a single ancestor, with six CS patients. All patients 
presented with congenital severe phenotype that includes severe fail -
ure to thrive, severe mental retardation, congenital cataracts, loss of 
adipose tissue, joint contractures, bird-like faces with small, deep-set 
eyes and prominent nasal bridge, and kyphosis. All patients exhibited 
neither language skills nor independent sitting or walking and died by 
the age of 5 years.
Cellular studies in patients‘ fibroblasts showed significant defect in 
transcription-coupled DNA repair (TCR) and a marked correction of 
the abnormal cellular phenotype with a plasmid containing the cDNA Clinical genetics
of the CSB gene. Molecular studies that followed led to the identifica -
tion of a novel insertion mutation c.1034-1035insT in exon 5 of the 
CS-B  gene. This mutation has been found in 1:20 healthy individuals 
from the same village indicating a tremendously high carrier frequency. 
Identification of the causative mutation might enable further charac -
terization of the CSB protein function in this unique family, as well as 
prevention of this devastating disease among the population at risk 
from this village.
P0059. Hepatic involvement in Cockayne syndrome type A
D. R. Bertola1, G. Porta1, M. P. Gonçalves1, S. R. Cardoso1, L. Suzuki1, L. M. J. 
Albano1, R. A. Hegele2, C. A. Kim1;  
1Instituto da Criança, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Robarts Research Institute, London, 
ON, Canada.
Cockayne syndrome (CS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized mainly by cachectic dwarfism, premature aging, men -
tal deficiency, microcephaly, intracranial calcifications, neurological 
degeneration, retinal abnormalities and sensorineural hearing loss. 
There are two subtypes: CS-A, the less common one, whose gene 
responsible is called ERCC8  and CS-B, present in 75% of the cases 
clinically diagnosed, whose gene responsible is ERCC6 . These genes 
show a pleiotropic effect, with several different organs and systems 
involved. Gastrointestinal anomalies have been reported occasionally, 
including especially elevated plasmatic levels of liver enzymes and 
hepatoesplenomegaly. These abnormalities have been mild, unasso -
ciated with jaundice or other clinical symptoms and have not involved 
coagulation factors.
We describe the hepatic findings in a cohort of eight CS patients diag -
nosed by molecular analysis as subtype A. One of our patients, a 12 
year-old-girl, presented with recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding, due 
to esophageal varices. The other seven patients, without any hepatic 
signs/symptoms, showed elevated liver enzymes, ranging from slightly 
higher than normal to very high levels. The bilirrubin levels and coagu -
lation studies were normal.
With better management of the individuals affected by CS, the survival 
could be longer and problems, otherwise not recognized, may well be 
of importance in this syndrome. The hepatic involvement could be, 
sometimes, life threatening, as demonstrated in one of our patients. 
Therefore, we recommend that all patients affected by CS should be 
screened for hepatic involvement. It would be interesting to evaluate 
hepatic involvement in patients affected by type B, in an attempt to 
establish a genotype-phenotype correlation.
P0060. Clinical and molecular heterogeneity in Italian patients 
affected by Cohen syndrome.
E. Katzaki1, I. Longo1, C. Pescucci1, F. Papa1, F. Ariani1, I. Meloni1, M. Priolo2, 
A. Selicorni3, R. Fischetto4, M. Celle5, R. Grasso6, B. Dallapiccola7, M. Bordi -
gnon8, R. Tenconi8, F. Mari1, A. Renieri1;  
1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Hospital of 
Reggio Calabria, Reggio Calabria, Italy, 3Pediatrics Unit, University of Milan, 
Italy, 4Citogenetics Unit , Giovanni XXIII Hospital, Bari, Italy, 5G. Gaslini Istitute, 
University of Genova, Italy, 6IRCCS MEDEA, Bosisio Parini Lecco, Italy, 7Me-
dical Genetics, University of Rome, Italy, 8Clinical Genetics and Epidemiology, 
University of Padova, Italy.
Cohen syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder with variability 
in the clinical manifestations, characterized by developmental delay, 
visual disability, facial dysmorphisms and intermittent neutropenia. We 
describe a cohort of 11 patients affected by Cohen syndrome from 10 
Italian families and between 5 and 52 years of age at assessment. 
Characteristic age related facial changes are well documented. Eyes 
anomalies are found in 10/11 patients (retinopathy in 10/11 and myopia 
in 6/11). Truncal obesity is present in 9/11 patients. DNA samples from 
all patients were analyzed for mutations in COH1 by Denaturing High 
Performance Liquid Chromatography (DHPLC). We detected fifteen 
COH1  mutations; most of them are truncating mutations, only 2 being 
missense changes in functional domains. Gene deletions were found 
in two alleles. All mutations except one are private. A single base dele -
tion leading to p.T3708fs3769 was found, in heterozygous state, in 
three apparently unrelated families deriving from a restricted area of 
the Veneto’s lowland, between Padova and Tagliamento. Given the 
geographical conformation of this region, a recent origin of the muta -
tion could be hypothesized. Table 1 Summary of the clinical findings and COH1 detected mutations
Case  
Clinical findings1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10a 10b
Sex F M M M M F M M M F F
Consanguineus 
parents No No No No No No No No Yes No No
Age of assesment 10y 17y 18y 30y 5y 24y 5y 12y 6y 52y 51y
OFC at birth 5 25 <3 25 25 <<10 25
OFC at assesment <<3 <3 <3 <3 <3 75 <<3 <3 <3
Height <3 <3 <3 97 50 10 3
Truncal Obesity Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes
Neonatal Feedings No No No Yes No Yes
Laryngomalacia No Yes Yes
Age sat unsup -
ported8m 16m 1y 12m
Age first walked 14m 2y6m 3y 18m 2y10m 1y10m 2y
Age first word 15m 1yNo 
speech2y6m 4y 3y 2y6m
Age spoke 
sentences3y Not yet 4y 3y
Mental retardation Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Typical Facial 
GestaltYes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Retinopathy Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Myopia Yes Yes Yes Yes No No Yes Yes
Narrow Hands/ 
Feet and slender/ 
tapering fingersYes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Joints 
HyperextensibilityYes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes No Yes Yes
Neutropenia Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Yes Yes
MutationIVS41+1G>A  
c.11125delCc.11125delC  
p.Q3772Xc.11125delC p.R2535X p.R1143X p.A590Tc.2047delC  
p.R270Xp.S3142Gc.11564delA  
deletiondele-
tiondele-
tion 
P0061. High frequency of submicroscopic DNA copy number 
changes in patients with congenital heart disease
R. Ullmann1, L. A. Larsen2, F. Erdogan1, L. Zhang2, Z. Tümer2, W. Chen1, J. R. 
Jacobsen3, M. Schubert1, J. Jurkatis1, A. Tzschach1, N. Tommerup2, H. H. Rop -
ers1;  
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Wilhelm Jo -
hannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Copenhagen, Denmark, 
3Paediatric Cardiology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most frequent birth defect and 
affects nearly 1% of newborns. The etiology of CHD is largely unknown 
and only a small percentage can be assigned to environmental risk 
factors such as maternal diseases or exposure to mutagenic agents 
during pregnancy. Chromosomal imbalances have been identified in 
many forms of syndromic CHD, but next to nothing is known about the 
impact of DNA copy number changes in non-syndromic CHD. Here we 
present a submegabase resolution array CGH screen of 105 patients 
with CHD as the sole abnormality at the time of diagnosis. We have 
detected 18 chromosomal changes that do not coincide with frequent 
DNA copy number variants, including 2 de novo deletions, 4 de novo 
duplications, 5 familial duplications and one familial deletion. Our data 
show that sub-microscopic deletions and duplications play an impor -
tant role in the aetiology of this condition, either as direct causes or 
as genetic risk factors for CHD. These findings have immediate con -
sequences for genetic counselling and should pave the way for the 
elucidation of the pathogenetic mechanisms underlying CHD.
P0062. Severe Autosomal Recessive Congenital Neutropenia 
(Kostmann disease) in an Iranian family with two affected 
children, and homozygous mutation in HAX1 gene.
G. Vakili1, Y. Shafeghati1, H. Abolghasemi2, M. Horwitz3;  
1Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Baghyatallah 
Hosp. and Medical Science University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Medi -
cal Genetic Div., Dept. of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 
United States.
Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) or Kostmann syndrome is a rare 
type of neutropenia. It is inherited by autosomal recessive pattern. 
Consanguinous marriages mostly is a predisposing factor. Patients 
suffer from severe and recurrent bacterial infections (pneumonia, oti -Clinical genetics0
tis media, abcesses, and …..). This disease was reported by Kostman 
in a large consanguineous family from Northern part of the Sweden 
(1956).
In this report we will present an Iranian family, with two affected chil -
dren. Parents are second cousins. Both of the sibs showed neutropenia 
from early infancy. They have had recurrent severe bacterial infections. 
The older one was a boy, that showed Myelodysplastic(MDS) changes 
after the age of 15 and died from AML when he was 16-year-old. The 
younger one is a 14-year-old girl just with the similar symptoms.
The response of both of them was favorable to G-CSF.
Mutation analysis of the ELA2 gene by direct DNA sequencing of PCR-
amplified genomic DNA did not identify any abnormalities.
In searching of mutations in other candidate genes a homozygous mu -
tation found in HAX1 gene in the proband, and each of the parents was 
heterozygous carrier for the mutation.
The mutation was W44X, same as described by Klein & Welte in their 
Nature Genetics paper.
P0063. A de novo novel missense mutation in Connexin 26 in a 
sporadic dominant case of non-syndromic deafness.
L. C. Trotta1, P. Primignani1, P. Castorina1, F. Lalatta1, C. Curcio1, U. Ambroset -
ti1, A. Cesarani1, D. Cuda2, A. Murri2, M. Travi1, D. A. Coviello1;  
1Fondazione IRCCS Opedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, 
Milan, Italy, 2A.O. “Guglielmo da Saliceto”, Piacenza, Italy.
Mutations in the Connexin 26 gene (GJB2) can cause non-syndromic 
recessive or dominant hearing loss (HL) or both sensorineural hearing 
impairment and keratoderma.
We report here a novel missense dominant mutation of GJB2 gene as -
sociated with non-syndromic deafness, identified in a 3 year old Italian 
girl who has congenital profound sensorineural HL without skin dis -
ease or other clinical features.
Patient’s DNA sequencing revealed an heterozygous C→G change at 
nucleotide 172 resulting in a proline to alanine substitution at codon 
58 (P58A).
No further sequence variants were revealed in the remaining coding 
sequence and in the 5’UTR exon1.
We also excluded the reported deletions of Cx30, that is tightly linked to  
GJB2  at 13q12, the Δ(GJB6-D13S1830) and the Δ(GJB6-D13S1854) 
that are the cause of deafness in patients carrying one recessive GJB2 
mutation in trans .
Parents were shown not to carry the P58A mutation and no other fam -
ily members were reported to have a significant hearing impairment. 
Segregation analysis of 10 polymorphic microsatellite markers (from 
chromosomes 13, 18, 21 and X) confirmed the correct presence of 
bi-parental contribution.
This mutation was not observed among 100 healthy controls and 720 
unrelated affected individuals, excluding it as a common polymor -
phism.
Proline at codon 58 is conserved among all connexins, suggesting that 
this residue is critical for the function of the protein. This mutation oc -
curs in the first extracellular domain of the protein (EC1), which seems 
to be very important for connexon-connexon interaction and for the 
control of voltage gating of the channel.
P0064. Frequency of consanguinity and positive familial history 
of disability or birth defect in yazd province
A. S. H. A. Dehghani Tafti ;  
Yazd Welfar Org, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Consanguinity (family intermarriage) is commonly practiced in many 
Asian, African and Latin American communities. In some countries 
such as Iran consanguinity as in mating of first cousins is encouraged 
as part of social customs. This study was performed on 3957 couples 
that were referred to genetic counseling center of Yazd welfare orga -
nization (from 2001 to 2007). Of these, 690 couples had a child with 
disability or birth defect. The frequency of non-consanguineous mar -
riages was 31.6 % (218 couples) and the frequency of consanguine -
ous marriages was 68.4 % (472 couples). 52.9% of consanguineous 
couples were first cousins and 15.5% were other relationship .In fact 
consanguinity was so high and considerable. Furthermore, 34.5 % (238 
cases) had a positive familial history of the same disability (in parents, 
siblings and relatives). The most common kind of disability was mental 
retardation (45.8%) and the least frequent problem was skin disorder 
(0.3%). Children with chromosomal abnormality constituted 6.4% of the cases. We conclude that the offspring of family intermarriages 
have a significantly increased incidence of hereditary diseases.
P0065. Deletion of 8p23.1 with Features of Cornelia de Lange 
Syndrome and Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia and a Review 
of Deletions of 8q23.1 to 8pter. ? A Further Locus for Cornelia de 
Lange Syndrome
G. S. Baynam , I. Walpole, J. Goldblatt;  
Genetic Services of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.
Cornelia de Lange syndrome is characterised by facial dysmorphism; 
hirsutism and internal organ anomalies, including diaphragmatic her -
nia, and limb defects. Causative mutations in two genes have been 
identified: (1) NIPBL on chromosome 5q13 is dominantly inherited 
and accounts for approximately 50% of cases and (2) SMC1L1 (also 
known as SMC1) on the X chromosome, shows X-linked inheritance 
and accounts for an unknown proportion of cases. However, the aeti -
ology of a significant number of cases remains unknown. A variety of 
chromosomal anomalies have been described in a minority of cases. 
We report on a child with an 8p23.1 deletion with features of CdLS 
and congenital diaphragmatic hernia. We review cases with cytoge -
netic anomalies involving 8p23.1 and discuss potential relationships 
between 8p23.1 deletions and CdLS or impaired cohesin complex 
function.
P0066. NIPBL mutational analysis in 56 individuals with Cornelia 
de Lange Syndrome
M. Zarhrate , G. Borck, L. Colleaux, A. Munnich, V. Cormier Daire, J. Bon -
nefont;  
INSERM U781 and Department of Genetics, Hospital Necker Enfants Malades, 
Paris, France, Paris, France.
Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is characterised by facial dys -
morphism, microcephaly, growth and mental retardation, hirsutism, 
gastroesophageal reflux and congenital anomalies including limb de -
fects. Mutations in the gene NIPBL, the human homolog of Drosophila 
Nipped-B, have recently been found in approximately 50% of CdLS 
cases. The function of NIPBL in mammals is unknown. We present 
here the molecular analysis of a series of 56 children with typical fea -
tures of CdLS including two-father-to child transmissions . Multiplex 
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) screening failed to de -
tect either partial or whole-gene NIPBL deletions in 15 patients tested. 
Direct sequencing of the 47 NIPBL exons and corresponding exon-in -
tron boundaries enabled to identify 21 heterozygous NIPBL mutations 
including eight missense (38%), one nonsense (4%), four frameshift 
(19%), one 5’UTR (4%) and seven splice site mutations (33%). These 
mutations were not found in 100 control chromosomes.
Our study confirms that NIPBL mutations account for about 40% of 
CdLS cases. We detected three SMC1L1 mutations in the same pa -
tient series. Absence of NIPBL mutation in the remaining cases further 
supports genetic heterogeneity of the disorder. Finally, the observa -
tion of two familial mutations in our series suggests that parent-to-child 
transmission may have been underestimated so far.
P0067. Incidence and clinical features of X-linked Cornelia de 
Lange syndrome due to SMC1L1  mutations
G. Borck , M. Zarhrate, J. P. Bonnefont, A. Munnich, V. Cormier-Daire, L. Col -
leaux;  
Department of Medical Genetics and INSERM U781, Hôpital Necker- Enfants 
Malades, Paris, Paris, France.
Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a multisystem developmen -
tal disorder characterized by facial dysmorphism, growth and mental 
retardation, microcephaly, and various malformations. Heterozygous 
mutations in the NIPBL  gene have been detected in approximately 
45% of affected individuals. Recently, a second CdLS gene, mapping 
to the X chromosome, has been identified: SMC1L1  (structural main -
tenance of chromosomes 1-like 1 ; or SMC1A ). In order to estimate 
the incidence and refine the clinical presentation of X-linked CdLS, we 
have screened a series of 11 CdLS boys carrying no NIPBL  anomaly. 
We have identified two novel de novo  SMC1L1  missense mutations 
(c.587G>A [p.Arg196His] and c.3254A>G [p.Tyr1085Cys]). Our results 
confirm that SMC1L1  mutations cause CdLS and support the view that 
SMC1L1  accounts for a significant fraction of boys with unexplained 
CdLS. Furthermore, we suggest that SMC1L1  mutations have mild -
er effects than NIPBL  mutations with respect to pre- and postnatal Clinical genetics1
growth retardation and associated malformations. If confirmed, these 
data may have important implications for directing mutation screening 
in CdLS.
P0068. Mutation analysis of the NIPBL and the SMC1L1 gene in 
German patients with suspected Cornelia de Lange syndrome.
H. Gabriel1, D. Glaeser2, A. Dalski3, M. Gencik1, D. Lohmann4, G. Gillessen-
Kaesbach3;  
1Zentrum fuer Medizinische Genetik, Osnabrueck, Germany, 2Zentrum für 
Humangenetik, Georg Mendel Laboratorien, Neu-Ulm, Germany, 3Institut fuer 
Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Lübeck, Germany, 4Institut fuer Humange -
netik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Germany.
Cornelia-de-Lange-syndrome (CdLS) is a heterogeneous autosomal-
dominant disorder characterized by typical facial features, growth re -
tardation, developmental delay, upper-extremity malformations and a 
variety of other abnormalities.
The prevalence of CdLS is estimated to be around 1/10,000. Most 
cases are sporadic, although several familial cases are described.
Since 2004 it is known that up to 50% of CdLS cases are caused 
by mutations in the NIPBL gene on chromosome 5p13, the human 
homolog
of the Drosophila Nipped-B gene. This gene consists of 47 exons and 
mutations were found in the entire coding region.
Recently, Musio et al. described an X-linked form of mild CdLS caused 
by mutations in the gene SMC1L1 (=SMC1).
Both genes code for proteins, which are part of the cohesin complex 
involved in chromosome cohesion.
We investigated the prevalence of NIPBL gen mutations in 108 Ger -
man patients with suspected CdLS by DGGE and/or direct sequenc -
ing.
Additionally, mutation analysis of the SMC1L1 gene was performed 
in all patients tested negative for mutations in the NIPBL gene. We 
detect_
ed NIPBL gene mutations in 29 (=27%) of our patients, although pre -
vious studies reported a higher detection rate (ca. 50%). Our lower 
detection rate is probably due to patient selection.
Furthermore, the prevalence of SMC1L1 mutations in our cohort will 
be discussed.
P0069. Genotype -phenotype analysis of cerebral dysgenesis 
associated with TUBA1A  mutations
N. Bahi-Buisson1,2, K. Poirier2, N. Boddaert1, Y. Saillour2, I. Desguerre1, S. 
Joriot3, S. Manouvrier3, M. Barthez4, A. Toutain4, V. Drouin-Garaud5, A. Gol -
denberg5, S. Marret5, H. Van Esch6, L. Lagae6, D. Ville7, L. Hertz-Pannier1, M. 
Moutard8, C. Beldjord9,10, J. Chelly2;  
1Necker Enfants Malades, APHP, Université Paris V, Paris, France, 2INSERM 
U567, University Paris V, Paris, France, 3Lille University Hospital, Lille, France, 
4Tours University Hospital, Tours, France, 5Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, 
France, 6Leuven University Hospital, Leuven, Belgium, 7Lyon University Hospi -
tal, Lyon, France, 8Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 9Cochin, APHP, Université 
Paris V, Paris, France, 10INSERM U567, University Paris V, Paris, Austria.
Cortical dysgeneses are, in most cases, associated with profound 
neurodevelopmental disability, including severe mental retardation 
and epilepsy. Two major genes DCX  and LIS1 account for almost 40% 
of the cases of agyria-pachygyria, and three additional genes ( RELN , 
ARX, VLDL receptor) are exceptionally mutated. Recently, mutations 
in TUBA1A (NM_006009)  gene that encoded for an alpha tubulin that 
interacts with doublecortin, have been involved in a large spectrum of 
neuronal migration disorders. In order to better define the phenotype, 
we retrospectively studied seven unrelated patients with pathogenic 
TUBA1A  mutations.
Patient and methods : Clinical and imaging assessments were per -
formed in seven patients, aged from to 2 to 16 years with pathogenic 
de novo missense TUBA1A  mutations. 
Results : Patients exhibited congenital microcephaly (6/7), moderate 
(5/7) to severe (2/7) mental retardation, spastic diplegia (6/7). Asso -
ciated clinical features were more occasional: facial diplegia (5/7), 
oropharyngoglossal dysfunction (4/7), and strabismus (3/7). Epilepsy 
was reported in 3/7 but only 2 patients have intractable epilepsy. Brain 
MRI revealed dysmorphic basal ganglia with balloon shape (7/7), peri -
sylvian (5/7) to diffuse pachygyria with a posterior to anterior grading 
(2/7), dysmorphic (5/7) or hypotrophic (2/7) corpus callosum, mild (3/7) 
to severe (2/7) vermian hypoplasia. Conclusions : Albeit each symptom observed in TUBA1A  mutated 
patients is not specific, our data highlight a potentially specific distin -
guishable combination of developmental features that is not seen in 
neurodevelopmental disorders resulting from mutations in DCX , LIS1 
and ARX. We suggest that this specific neuro-clinical combination 
should lead the clinician to the search of TUBA1A  mutations.
P0070. Diversity, parental germline origin and phenotypic 
spectrum of de novo HRAS missense changes in Costello 
syndrome
G. Zampino1, F. Pantaleoni2, C. Carta2, G. Cobellis3,4, C. Neri5,6, A. Sarkozy5,6, 
F. Atzeri7, A. Selicorni7, K. A. Rauen8, R. Weksberg9, B. Dallapiccola5,6, A. Bal -
labio3,4, B. D. Gelb10, G. Neri1, M. Tartaglia2;  
1Università Cattolica, Rome, Italy, 2Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 
3Università “Federico II”, Naples, Italy, 4TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 5IRCCS-CSS, San 
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 6Istituto CSS-Mendel, Rome, Italy, 7Clinica Pediatrica 
De Marchi, Milano, Italy, 8University of California, San Francisco, CA, United 
States, 9Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 10Mount Sinai School 
of Medicine, New York, NY, United States.
Activating mutations in HRAS have recently been identified as the 
molecular cause underlying Costello syndrome (CS). To investigate 
further the phenotypic spectrum associated with germline HRAS muta -
tions and characterize their molecular diversity, subjects with a diagno -
sis of CS, Noonan syndrome, cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome or with 
a phenotype suggestive of these conditions but without a definitive 
diagnosis were screened for the entire coding sequence of the gene. A 
de novo heterozygous HRAS change was detected in all the subjects 
diagnosed with CS, while no lesion was observed with any of the other 
phenotypes. While eight cases shared the recurrent 34G>A change, 
a novel 436G>A transition was observed in one individual. The latter 
affected residue Ala146, which contributes to GTP/GDP binding, defin -
ing a novel class of activating HRAS lesions that perturb development. 
Clinical characterization indicated that Gly12Ser was associated with 
a homogeneous phenotype. By analyzing the genomic region flanking 
the HRAS mutations, we traced the parental origin of lesions in nine 
informative families and demonstrated that de novo mutations were 
inherited from the father in all cases. We noted an advanced age at 
conception in unaffected fathers transmitting the mutation.
P0071. Crane-Heise syndrome: a further case broadening the 
clinical spectrum
M. Holder-Espinasse1, L. Devisme2, V. Houfflin-Debarge3, C. Chafiotte4, A. 
Dieux-Coeslier1, S. Manouvrier-Hanu1;  
1Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 2Ser-
vice d’anatomopathologie, Eurasanté, Lille, France, 3Maternité, Hôpital Jeanne 
de Flandre, Lille, France, 4Service de Radiologie, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, 
Lille, France.
Crane-Heise syndrome is a rare lethal and autosomal recessive condi -
tion which has been first reported in 1981 in three siblings presenting 
with intrauterine growth retardation, a poorly mineralised calvarium, 
characteristic facial features comprising cleft lip and palate, hyper -
telorism, anteverted nares, low-set and posteriorly rotated ears, ver -
tebral anomalies and absent clavicles. Since then, to our knowledge, 
only one isolated case and two siblings were reported with similar find -
ings. In 2003, distal phalangeal hypoplasia, mild cardiac and gastroin -
testinal anomalies were suggested as additional features. We present 
a further case, diagnosed after a termination of pregnancy at 24 weeks’ 
gestation, very similar to the previously reported ones, and broaden the 
clinical spectrum of this entity. On the 20 weeks’gestation ultrasound 
scan, a laparoschisis was identified, with poor fetal movements and 
polyhydramnios. Fetal chromosomes were normal 46XX. Pathological 
examination confirmed the laparoschisis but also revealed facial dys -
morphic features, multiple joint contractures, a cleft palate, and severe 
vertebral as well as limb anomalies. Skeletal x-rays showed absent 
clavicles, undermineralisation of the skull, micrognathia, and abnormal 
phalanges. We discuss the clinical and radiological phenotype of this 
rare condition.To our knowledge, no molecular mechanism has been 
identified in Crane-Heise syndrome so far.Clinical genetics2
P0072. Cranioectodermal dysplasia (Sensenbrenner’s 
syndrome): Report of two siblings
A. Latos-Bielenska1, J. Walczak-Sztulpa2, M. Szczepańska1, M. Krawczyński1, 
J. Zachwieja1, A. W. Kuss2, H. H. Ropers2, D. Zwolińska3, A. Tzschach2;  
1University of Medical Sciences in Poznan, Poznan, Poland, 2Max Planck Insti -
tute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3University of Medical Sciences in 
Wrocław, Wrocław, Poland.
Cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED, Sensenbrenner’s syndrome, OMIM 
218330) is a rare disorder characterized by dolichocephaly, rhizomelic 
dwarfism, dental and nail dysplasia, sparse hair and renal problems. 
Among about 20 cases reported to date, most are sporadic, but few 
familial cases suggest autosomal recessive inheritance. So far, the 
underlying genetic defect is unknown, and linkage analyses were not 
possible due to the limited number of patients and small family sizes. 
Here, we report on a 5-year-old girl and her 1-year-old brother with cra -
nioectodermal dysplasia. Their healthy parents (16- and 25-year-old at 
the birth of the first child) are remotely consanguineous which supports 
the assumption of autosomal recessive inheritance. Clinical features 
included short stature with rhizomelic shortening of limbs, brachydac -
tyly, narrow chest, craniosynostosis, dolichocephaly, full cheeks, tele -
canthus, broad nasal bridge, small and widely spaced teeth, dysplastic 
auricles and fine, sparse hair, bilateral inguinal hernia and hyperelastic 
skin. Psychomotor development is normal. Both children suffer from 
tubulointerstitial nephropathy with more severe features in the brother. 
We present detailed clinical features of the patients in comparison to 
previously reported cases, as well as prenatal features of the syn -
drome detected on ultrasound examinations.
P0073. Spectrum of HLXB9 gene mutations in Currarino 
syndrome and genotype-phenotype correlation
C. Crétolle1, D. Sanlaville2, M. Zérah1, C. Fékété1, A. Munnich1, S. Lyonnet1;  
1Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, PARIS, France, 2Hôpital Hôtel-Dieu, LYON, 
France.
Currarino syndrome (CS) (OMIM 176450) is a rare congenital disease 
described in 1981 as an association of three main features: typical 
sacral malformation (sickled-shape sacrum or total sacral agenesis 
below S2), hindgut anomaly and pre-sacral tumor. Moreover, neuro -
logical defects, namely tethered cord and/or lipoma of the conus, are 
also frequent and has to be search for as they may lead to severe 
complications if not treated.
CS is ascribed in half of cases to heterozygous mutations of the HLXB9 
gene (OMIM 142994) located at 7q36, with an autosomal dominant 
mode of inheritance. HLXB9 gene encodes the HB9 protein, a 403 
amino acid transcription factor that interacts with DNA through a highly 
evolutionarily conserved homeodomain, involved in embryological de -
velopment. Thus far, 41 different heterozygous mutations have been 
described in clinically typical CS patients, mostly in familial cases (90 
% of cases).
In this work, we describe 23 novel mutations in 26 mutated patients 
of a 50 index patients’ series harbouring clinical CS (22 males and 28 
females). Mutations concerned 19/20 familial forms and 7/30 sporadic 
cases. Sex predominance was not observed. Truncating mutations 
(frameshift or non-sens) represents 56.4 % of cases, suggesting that 
haploinsufficiency is the basis of CS. No obvious genotype-phenotype 
correlation could be identified. A genetic heterogeneity is suspected as 
at least 16 from the 24/50 not mutated patients harboured subtle phe -
notypic variations, and other genes probably account for cases with no 
mutation of the HLXB9 gene.
P0074. Clinical and Molecular study of 17 patients with Cutis 
Laxa
S. Hadj-Rabia1, M. Devillers2, C. Bodemer2, H. Megarbané2, J. Pauchard2, C. 
Blanchet-Bardon2, P. Sommer2, J. Fischer2;  
1Dermatology, Paris, France, 2*Cutis laxa Network, contact: p.sommer@ibcp.fr 
or mdevillers@afm.genethon.fr, Evry, France.
Among different disorders with elastic fibres deficiencies, cutis laxa 
(CL) comprises a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of 
acquired and genetic disorders characterized by loose, sagging and 
inelastic skin. Mutations in at least two genes, elastin ( ELN) and fibu -
lin5 ( FBLN5 ), are known to be causative for CL.
Fifteen patients from four families presented: herniae (inguinal n=7, 
umbilical n=1), pulmonary emphysema (n=5), ankle laxity (n=2), mitral insufficiency (n=1), aorta dilatation (n=1), pulmonary arterial hyperten -
sion (n=1), vaginal prolapse (n=1), dysuria (n=3). Skin presented as 
inelastic on the face with inguinal folds during infancy (n=4), thick folds 
on the face during the third decade (n=5), and loose skin on the neck 
after 40 years (n=7). three deletions of 1 bp (n=13) and one deletion of 
15bp (n=2) were detected in ELN gene.
A 11y old boy and his 8 y old sister, presented both with loose skin, 
bilateral inguinal hernia and hoarse voice, right ventricle dilatation 
(n=1), pulmonary emphysema (n=1). Homozygous missense mutation 
in FBLN5  was identified.
CL is a systemic disorder with dermatologic, pulmonary and cardiovas -
cular features. Patients with mutations in FBNL5  all present a severe 
phenotype, whereas intrafamilial clinical heterogeneity is observed in 
families with mutations in ELN.
Skin involvement evolves over time: thick folds during infancy, wrinkled 
chin during third decade and loose skin after 40 years.
Patients affected by CL should undergo systematic exploration of clini -
cal features, but should also take advantage of molecular analysis to 
confirm the genetic basis of their phenotype.
P0075. Identification of two Alu insertions in the CFTR  gene
E. Masson1, M. Audrézet1, M. Macek2, O. Raguénès1, B. Fercot1, J. Chen3, C. 
Férec1;  
1CHU-INSERM U613, Brest, France, 2Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 
Prague, Czech Republic, 3EFS–Bretagne, Brest, France.
LINE-1 (long interspersed element-1) or L1-mediated retrotransposi -
tion is a potent force in human genome evolution and an occasional 
cause of human genetic disease. Since the first report of two de novo  
L1 insertions in the F8 gene causing hemophilia A, more than 50 L1-
mediated retrotranspositional events have been identified as causing 
human genetic disease.
On the basis of the observation that both L1 elements and Alu se-
quences are abundant in the human genome, the increasing number 
of genomic rearrangements reported in the CFTR  gene, and the fairly 
large size of the CFTR gene, we surmised that some previously unre -
solved CF chromosomes might carry hitherto undetected L1-mediated 
retrotranspositional insertions.
This study report the identification of two simple Alu insertions using 
quantitative high-performance liquid chromatography (QHPLC), tech -
nique previously employed to delineate the boundaries of large ge -
nomic deletions in the CFTR  gene.
The first one, identified in a 24-year-old French girl, carrying F508del 
on the other chromosome, correspond to a 103 pb antisense insertion 
in exon 16 containing an Alu sequence of 46pb and a poly(A) tail of 
57pb. The second one, identified in a 28-year-old Czech man, corre -
spond to a 337pb sense insertion of an Alu sequence of 281 pb and a 
poly(A) tail of 56 pb. Both mutations are presumed to lead to aberrant 
splicing.
The identification of these two simple Alu insertions in the CFTR  gene 
revealed a previously unknown mutational mechanism responsible for 
CF and also represents an important addition to the already diverse 
spectrum of CFTR  gene mutations.
P0076. Attempts to explain why Cystic Fibrosis is of lower 
prevalence in the Greek-Cypriot population
N. Stavrou1, K. Voskarides1, V. Neokleous2, C. Deltas1,2;  
1Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, Lefkosia, Cyprus, 
2The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Lefkosia, Cyprus.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is one of the most frequent autosomal recessive 
diseases in Europe. In Cyprus, the prevalence appears lower com -
pared to the rest of European populations (carrier frequency 1/44). 
An exception is a village in which 1:14 individuals is carrier of muta -
tion F508del probably because of a founder effect. We hypothesised 
that undiagnosed mild cases on the island may give an erroneous im -
pression of lower prevalence while mild mutations may be responsible 
for cases of male sterility.Mild mutations R117C and L346P were not 
found in 200 Greek-Cypriot samples, concluding that their frequency is 
lower that 0.25%. Variant M348K was found in two individuals in het -
erozygosity, giving allele frequency of 0.5%. Two other polymorphisms 
next to each other in intron 8 are: a TG repeat with known alleles of 11, 
12 or 13 repeats and a stretch of 5, 7 or 9 thymines. We designed a 
new approach for detecting the disease allele 5T, that includes nested Clinical genetics
PCR with a modified primer and use of the restriction enzyme PsiI and 
agarose gel electrophoresis. By testing 100 individuals of the general 
population we found that allele 5T has a frequency of 3.5%. In six men 
with azoospermia or CF patients with a single known mutation, the 5T 
allele was not found. Also, allele 13TG was not found in 10 random 
samples that were sequenced. The 5T allele does not seem to con -
tribute to pathology in our population, unless it is found in combination 
with other mutations on undiagnosed patients.
P0077. Estimation of CFTR  mutation carrier frequency in Iran 
based on known frequency of p.F508del
H. Nezari1, S. S. Banihosseini2, R. Kalhor3, A. Khodadad4, F. Mirzajani5, E. 
Elahi1;  
1University of Tehran, Faculty of Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
2Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Uni-
versity of Tehran, Dept Biotechnology, Faculty of Sciences, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 4Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Tehran University of Med -
ical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5National Institute for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is the most common life-threatening autosomal 
recessive disease in many Caucasian populations. Approximately one 
in 2500 newborns in populations of European ancestry are affected, 
wherein the average carrier frequency is 1:25. The disease is caused 
by mutations in CFTR  gene. Among the more than 1000 mutations 
identified in the CFTR  gene, the p.F508del allele is the most common 
worldwide. Its frequency exhibits a northwest to southeast gradient, 
ranging from a high of 88% in Denmark to a low of approximately 16% 
in Iran. It has generally been believed that the incidence of CF also 
follows a northwest to southeast gradient and that incidence in low 
in non-European populations. However, relatively high incidences of 
CF were predicted in Turkey and Iran based on data of frequency of 
individuals carrying homozygous mutations and extent of inbreeding 
in those populations. Specifically the carrier frequency in Iran was es -
timated to be 1:40, similar to that of European populations. We have 
now experimentally determined the frequency of p.F508del carriers 
among 500 randomly selected Iranians. Based on the number of car -
riers identified and the observation that this allele accounts for 16% 
of the CFTR mutated alleles of the Iranian population, the frequency 
of carriers of CFTR mutations was calculated to be 0.037 (95% confi -
dence level of 0.037+/- 0.016). This figure corresponds to 1:27, close 
to the carrier frequency previously estimated. It is concluded that CF is 
a disease of considerable public health importance in Iran, and prob -
ably in other countries of the Middle East.
P0078. Description of large CFTR gene rearrangements in Italian 
population
V. Paracchini1, C. Colombo2, L. Porcaro1, L. Costantino1, P. Capasso1, D. De -
giorgio1, D. Coviello1, L. Claut2, R. Padoan3, M. Seia1;  
1Fondazione IRCCS Opedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, 
Milan, Italy, 2Cystic Fibrosis Centre - Fondazione IRCCS Opedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 3Cystic Fibrosis Support 
Centre - A.O. Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is mainly caused by small molecular defects of the 
CFTR gene; despite the genotype is define in the majority of patients, 
a number of CF cases still remain uncharacterized. These unidentified 
mutations may escape detection using PCR-base techniques. The CF 
mutation database lists more than 25 large rearrangements.
We report here the results of our screening for CTFR gene rearrange -
ments, performed on Italian CF patients.
A sample of 689 unrelated Italian patients (for a total of 1378 alleles), 
followed at CF Centre of Regione Lombardia (Milan, Italy), was col -
lected. All patients had classical form of CF with typical pulmonary and 
gastrointestinal findings, and positive sweat test.
The Innogenetics assay and the DHPLC screening showed a mutation 
detection rate of 93%. After these analyses , 100 alleles still remain 
unidentified (7%).
In order to detect the rearrangements in the CFTR gene, the 27 exons 
were screened in these patients with the MLPA assay based on com -
mercial Kit “SALSA P091 CFTR MALPA Kit” .
The MLPA assay was performed for 38 patients (76 alleles).
We characterized 10 different deletions for a total of 19 deleted alleles. 
In conclusion, 25% (19/76) alleles had a large gene deletion. The dele -
tion of exons 22-23 (6/76) is the most frequent in our cohort.The analysis of CF patients performed with MLPA techniques has 
made possible to reach a 94.4% detection rate, improving the process 
of carrier detection and genetic counselling in Italian population.
P0079. Cystic Fibrosis: A frequent disease with heterogenous 
mutation spectrum in Iran
R. Mirfakhraie1, M. Gorgipoor2, M. Houshmand3, H. Kianifar4, M. Rafiee5, E. 
Talachian6, F. Mirzajani3;  
1Islamic Azad University of Tehran, Science & Research Campus, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
3National Institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 4Mashhad Medical University, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 5Tabriz Medical University, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Iran Medical 
University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common autosomal recessive disorder 
in European populations with about 1:25 carrier frequency and regional 
variation. Since the identification of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
regulator (CFTR) gene, over 1000 mutations have been reported in 
which ΔF508 is the most frequent. However for non European popu -
lations, the incidence of CF and the spectrum of mutations that are 
responsible for the disease are not critically assessed.
A few comprehensive studies are focused on the molecular basis of 
CF in the Iranian population. In this research we are going to present 
the results obtained from a 4 year study on the 110 Iranian CF patients 
including molecular analysis of the CFTR gene.
Our results suggest that CF is a very heterogenic disease among our 
population in which about 15 different mutations and polymorphisms 
have been detected till now.  DelF508, G542X, N1303K, G551D and 
W1282X, the 5 most common mutations in Europeans with the overall 
frequency of 75%, only contain 23% of CFTR mutant alleles in Iran.  
The other detected mutations are rare with relative frequencies of 
lower than 1%.
The information provided here on the distribution of CF mutations in 
Iranian population may assist in the development of more appropriate 
diagnosis tests in Iran and also it may facilitates the mutation analysis 
in the neighboring countries.
P0080. 8-Years experience in cystic fibrosis neonatal screening 
in Castilla-Leon (Spain)
M. Alonso1,2, J. Telleria1,2, I. Fernandez1,2, A. Blanco1,2;  
1IBGM (Instituto de Bioloogía y Genética Molecular), VALLADOLID, Spain, 
2Universidad Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain.
Since the implementation of the Cystic Fibrosis (CF) Newborn Screen -
ing in our region in 1999, we have analysed 126.385 newborn samples 
for CF. According to the Guidelines of the European Concerted Action 
of Cystic Fibrosis our protocol combines the assay of immunoreactive 
trypsinogen (IRT) with the analysis of the most common mutations of 
the CFTR gene in our population . Thus, the IRT raised samples are 
analysed for the F508del mutation with the PAGE method, and for the 
exons 7, 11, 12, 13, 14b and 17b by DGGE . The coverage of this 
study in our population reaches the 83% of CF causing mutations. The 
diagnose is established when two CF causing mutations are detected, 
or when only one mutation is detected but the sweat test is positive. 
Newborns with only one mutation detected but negative sweat test are 
considered carriers .
RESULTS:
YEAR NEWBORNSIrt RAISED 
SAMPLESCFCARRIERS
1999 17.128 141 5 1
2000 17.698 97 2 8
2001 17.380 146 5 10
2002 17.835 195 5 9
2003 18.395 210 3 15
2004 18.900 150 4 10
2005 19.049 169 7 11
2006 19.431 159 2 11
TOTAL 126.385 1267 33 75
Additionally, we have extended the mutation detection to other members in some 
families, including:
18 siblings
11 couples of carriers
3 prenatal diagnosis
The frequency of the F508del mutation in CF alleles was 60.6% (40/66)Clinical genetics
P0081. Cystic Fibrosis testing among Israeli Arabs
Y. M. Hujeirat1, V. Adir2, Z. Borochowitz2, F. Fars3, M. Ben-David3, S. A. Sha -
lev1;  
1Institute of Genetics, Ha Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel, 2The Simon Win -
ter Institute for Human Genetics, Bnai Zion Medical Center, Technion-Rappa -
port Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, Israel, 3Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Carmel 
Medical Center, Haifa, Israel.
Since the cloning of cystic fibrosis (CF) gene in 1989, more than 1,000 
mutations were identified. CF is recognized in all ethnic subgroups 
of Israeli Arabs. Tweleve mutations were found in the CFTR gene of 
individuals affected with CF from Israeli Arab origin. A total of 1080 
healthy Arab individuals underwent CF carrier screening, 712 (65%) 
individuals at high risk and 368 individuals at lower risk. All individuals 
were tested for the twelve “CF Arab mutations” and three mutations 
that were found in non Ashkenazi Jews.
A total of 55 CF carriers were identified among the 1080 individuals 
screened, leading to an overall observed carrier frequency of 1/15 
among the group at higher risk, and 1/60 among the lower risk one.
We conclude that any screening for CF among Arab Israeli com -
munity should therefore include at least the more common 7 mu -
tations (N1303K, deltaF508, W1282X, G85E, 4010delTATT, 
3120+1Kbdel8.6Kb and 2183AA>G) found in both groups examined. 
We doubt the benefit of testing the other mutations which seems to be 
rare and confined to only a small populations, unless the counselees 
are known to be at higher risk for their presence based on family/vil -
lage history and investigation.
P0082. Psychomotor delay, facial dysmorphism and multiple 
cysts of the corpus callosum: a new syndrome?
A. Masurel-Paulet1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, F. Huet2, L. Guibaud3, M. Chou -
chane2, L. Faivre1;  
1Centre de Génétique, Dijon, France, 2Service de Pédiatrie 1, Dijon, France, 
3Département de Pédiatrie et d’Imagerie Foetale, Lyon, France.
We report on a 16 months old child presenting with psychomotor delay, 
facial dysmorphism and multiple cysts of the corpus callosum. Family 
history was negative and he was born at term (BW: 2730g, OFC: 33,5 
cm). He had generalised hypotonia and could sat at age 14 months 
only. At age 16 months, the language was limited to sounds. Facial 
dysmorphism included a large forehead, bilateral epicanthic folds, rare 
eyebrows, anteverted ear lobes, micrognathism and glossoptosis. A 
micropenis was also noted. There were no seizures. Etiological inves -
tigations included normal audiograms, electroencephalogram, heart 
and abdomino-renal ultrasound scans, standard and high resolution 
chromosome analyses, plasmatic amino-acid and urinary organic-acid 
chromatographies. Ophthalmologic investigations revealed anisocoria 
and a strabism. Finally, cerebral MRI showed multiple cysts of the cor -
pus callosum. The gyration and myelinisation were normal, and the 
cysts did not take the contrast. A traumatic or vascular etiology was 
ruled out and there was no evidence of a toxic intake or infection dur -
ing pregnancy. A foetopathy cannot be ruled out but the association 
of facial dysmorphism and micropenis argue for a syndromic origin. 
A review of the literature did not permit to find similar observations, in 
favour of a new syndromic association.
P0083. Czech Dysplasia Metatarsal Type: Another Type II 
Collagen Disorder
K. P. Hoornaert1, I. Marik2, K. Kozlowski3, T. Cole4, M. Le Merrer5, J. G. Leroy1, 
P. J. Coucke1, D. Sillence6, G. R. Mortier1;  
1Center for Medical Genetics, Gent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 2Ambu -
lant Centre for Defects of Locomotor Apparatus, Prague, Czech Republic, 3De-
partment of Medical Imaging, The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, 
Australia, 4Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, 
United Kingdom, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Hopital Necker, Paris, 
France, 6Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Hospital at West -
mead, Sydney, Australia.
Background: Czech dysplasia metatarsal type is an autosomal domi -
nant disorder characterized by an early-onset, progressive spondylo -
arthropathy with normal stature. Shortness of 3rd and/or 4th toes is a 
frequently observed clinical feature. Similarities between individuals 
with this dysplasia and patients with an R275C mutation in the CO -
L2A1 gene, prompted us to analyze the COL2A1 gene in the original 
families reported with Czech dysplasia.
Methods: Targeted sequencing of exon 13 of the COL2A1 gene was performed, followed by sequencing of the remaining exons in case the 
R275C mutation was not identified.
Results: We identified the R275C substitution in two of the original pa -
tients reported with Czech dysplasia and three additional patients. All 
affected individuals had a similar phenotype characterized by normal 
height, spondyloarthropathy, short postaxial toes and absence of ocu -
lar and orofacial anomalies. The R275C mutation was excluded in a 
third patient reported with Czech dysplasia. However, the identification 
of the Y1391C mutation in this patient with disproportionate short stat -
ure made the diagnosis of spondyloperipheral dysplasia (SPD) more 
likely. The Y1391C mutation is located in the carboxy-propeptide of 
the procollagen chain and has been reported before in a patient with 
the Torrance type of lethal platyspondylic skeletal dysplasia (PLSD-T). 
Our observation of the same Y1391 mutation in an additional unrelated 
patient with SPD further supports the evidence that PLSD-T and SPD 
represent a phenotypic continuum.
Conclusions: The R275C mutation in the COL2A1 gene causes a pe -
culiar type II collagen disorder that was recently delineated as Czech 
dysplasia.
P0084. Investigation on Mitochondrial DNA deletions in Iranian 
Dilated Cardiomyopathy patients
M. Montazeri1, M. Houshmand1, M. Eftekharzadeh2;  
1NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran Arrhythmia Clinic, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Cardiomyopathies are complex disease process that can affect the 
heart of a person of any age. In addition, an important cause of morbid -
ity and mortality among the world is aging population. Cardiomyopa -
thies are conditions in which the normal muscular function of the myo -
cardium has been altered by specific or multiple etiologies, with vary -
ing degrees of physiologic compensation for that malfunction. Persons 
with cardiomyopathy may have asymptomatic left ventricular systolic 
dysfunction, left ventricular diastolic dysfunction, or both. The reported 
incidence is 400,000-500,000 cases per year, with a prevalence of 2-
3 million people. Recently mitochondrial DNA mutations have been 
associated with cardiomyopathy. Mitochondria are the major site of 
energy production in the cell. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that 
energy dependant tissues such as heart, affected by mitochondrial 
dysfunction. In this study, we screened 40 Iranian DCM patients for 
mitochondrial DNA deletions. With specific primers, four different de -
letions were found 37.5% 9/5 kb, 22.5% ≈7/9 kb 22.5 % ≈8 kb and 
one patient (2.5%) had 4977 bp “common deletion. Mitochondrial DNA 
deletions may occur because of aging; on the other hand, mtDNA dele -
tions may affect myocardium and lead to secondary DCM. However, 
the question regarding primary or secondary role of mtDNA deletions 
in dilated cardiomyopathy remains unanswered
P0085. A novel 355-356 delGA framshift mutation and frequency 
of connexin-26 (GJB2) mutation in Iranian patients
M. Hamid1,2, M. Hashemzadeh chaleshtori3, S. Zare2,4, F. Mahjoubi5, M. T. Ak -
bari6,2;  
1Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Akbari Medical 
Genetic labaratory, No.98, Taleghani Street, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
3Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord University of Medical 
sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Islamic Azad Unversity Science and 
Research Compus, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5National Institute for Ge -
netic Engineering & Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
6Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modaras 
University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The commonest form of non-syndromic recessive deafness is caused 
by mutation in GJB2, encoding gap junction beta 2 protein on chromo -
some location 13q11. It is known as DFNB1 responsible for half of 
autosomal recessive non-syndromic deafness. The most frequent mu -
tation 35delG accounts for about 30-63% of mutations in white people 
of European.
In this study we report the frequency of the GJB2 gene mutations in 51 
Iranian individuals affected by hearing loss.
Eight different variants were detected in 13 individuals (25.5%) by us -
ing direct-sequencing technique in coding region of GJB2 gene. Cx26 
related deafness mutations (35delG, R127H, V27I+E114G, Y155X, 
M163V and a novel 355-356 delGA) were identified in 9(17.6%) sub -
jects in heterozygous form, 3(5.9%) (35delG/35delG and R143W/ 
R143W) and 1 (2%) (R32H+35delG) were homozygous and com -Clinical genetics
pound heterozygous respectively.
S86T polymorphism was observed in all families (100%), V153I and 
(F154F +F146F) polymorphisms also were detected in 5 persons.
In this population study our data showed that the rate of GJB2 mu -
tations is high in heterozygous form so other loci and genes related 
to deafness must be investigated in these individuals. Moreover the 
most frequent mutation was 35delG because 9 out of 18(50%) mu -
tant alleles had this mutation .This is comparable with White European 
population.
P0086. Absence of mutations in GJB2 (Connexin-26) gene in an 
Ethnic Group of Iranian Population
H. Galehdari1, A. Foroughmand1, M. Naderi soorki11, G. Mohammadian2,3;  
1University, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Welfare Organization, Ahwaz, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetic Consulting Centre, Welfare Organization,, 
Ahwaz,, Islamic Republic of Iran.
We have investigated the prevalence of mutations in the GJB2 gene 
in Iranian deaf population with Arabian background using direct DNA 
sequencing methods. A common GJB2 gene mutation (35delG) was 
screened in 25 families with at least two deaf members. To investigate 
other GJB2 mutations, we have amplified and sequenced DNA from 
59 deaf patients and 25 control subjects. None of the samples stud -
ied, by sequencing, revealed any deafness-associated mutations in 
the coding region of the GJB2 gene. These findings differ from many 
reports on the GJB2 gene, describing various mutations as the cause 
of congenital recessive deafness.
P0087. Phenotype and molecular mapping of the breakpoints in 
a new case with del(4) (q33)
S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, C. Sismani2, G. Koumbaris2, M. Ioannides2, V. Touliatou1, A. 
Kolialexi1, A. Mavrou1, E. Kanavakis1, P. C. Patsalis2;  
1Aghia Sophia Childrens Hospital, University of Athens, Department of Medical 
Genetics, Choremio Research Laboratory, Athens, Greece, 2The Cyprus Insti -
tute of Neurology and Genetics, Department of Cytogenetics, Nicosia, Cyprus.
The 4q deletion syndrome, comprising all microscopically visible (inter -
stitial and terminal) is a well-recognized distinctive malformation entity, 
with an estimated incidence of 1: 10.000. Here we present the clinical 
and molecular findings in a 3 year old male with a de novo  deletion 
of 4q33 [46,XY,del(4q)(q33)]. The breakpoint of the deletion was re -
fined by 1Mb resolution array-CGH where 23 clones on chromosome 
4q were found deleted. Subsequently, several FISH analyses using 3 
BAC clones, subtelomeric and paint probes were performed. Based 
on the array and FISH results the breakpoint of the deletion is located 
at the beginning of 4q33 and extending to the telomere. The size of 
the deletion was estimated to be approximately 18.9-22.9Mb. Clinical 
findings of the patient include: hypertelorism, broad nasal bridge, short 
nose with anteverted nares, long upper philtrum, thin upper lip, micro-
retrognathia, low-set and protruding ears, right pre-auricular tag uni -
laterally, low posterior hairline, clinodactyly of the 5th fingers, tappering 
fingers, hypospadias, and severe psychomotor retardation. Soon after 
birth he developed severe hypotonia and feeding difficulties. Echocar -
diography at 15 months documented aortic supravalvular membrane 
resulting in mild aortic stenosis and dysplasia of the pulmonary valve. 
At age of 18 months the cleft palate was surgically repaired. The de -
scription of additional cases with similar deletions in proximal 4q will 
allow a more precise prognosis and is therefore of great value for ge -
netic counsellors, while detailed molecular characterization in any well 
clinically characterized patient is expected to track down individual 
candidate genes for specific features of the 4q-syndrome.
P0088. Detection of chromosomal imbalances in children with 
developmental delay/mental retardation and dismorphic features 
by array-CGH.
A. Battaglia1, J. Carey2, A. Novelli3, T. Filippi1, L. Bernardini3;  
1Stella Maris Research Institute, CALAMBRONE (Pisa), Italy, 2Dept. of Pediat -
rics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 3CSS-Mendel Insti -
tute, Roma, Italy.
Chromosomal aberrations are a common cause of MCA/MR syn -
dromes. Novel high resolutions, whole genome technologies, such as 
array based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH), improve 
the detection rate of submicroscopic chromosomal rearrangements, 
allowing reinvestigation of patients in whom conventional cytogenetic 
techniques and subtelomeric FISH failed to detect abnormalities. We analyzed 102 children and adolescents, with developmental delay/
mental retardation and dysmorphic features, using array-CGH with 
a resolution of approximately 0.8-1 Mb (IntegraChip, Technogenet -
ics, Milan). Standard cytogenetics (>450 bands per haploid genome) 
showed no chromosome rearrangements. In addition, subtelomeric 
FISH analysis, carried out in most of our patients, did not detect any 
abnormality. Using array-CGH we detected copy number imbalances 
in 10 patients (9.8%). There were 4 deletions, 4 duplications, 1 inter -
stitial deletion, and 1 deletion/duplication. Five of them were de novo, 
one derived from a malsegregation of a maternal reciprocal transloca -
tion, and one was inherited from the phenotypically normal mother. 
Array-CGH is a powerful tool for the accurate detection of genomic 
imbalances in clinical practice, and has the potential to identify genes 
involved in mental retardation.
P0089. Novel mutations in Pejvakin are associated with 
autosomal recessive non syndromic hearing loss in Iranian 
families
M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori1, E. Farrokhi1, M. A. Simpson2, M. Dolati3, L. 
Hoghoughi Rad3, M. Shahrani1, A. H. Crosby2;  
1Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord University of Medical 
Sciences, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Ge -
netics, St Georges Hospital Medical School, University of London, Cranmer 
Terrace, London SW17 ORE, UK., London, United Kingdom, 3Department of 
Biology, School of Basic Sciences, Sciences and Research Campus, Islamic 
Azad University, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Hearing loss is a very heterogenous disorder and may be due to ge -
netic or environmental causes, or both. More than 100 genes may be 
involved in non syndromic hearing loss. A novel gene, DFNB59 encod -
ing pejvakin located on chromosome 2q31.2, has been very recently 
shown to cause neuronal deafness in four Iranian families. We have 
conducted mutation analysis of the DFNB59 gene in a cohort of 30 
large autosomal recessive non syndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) 
families from Iran. We have identified Two polymorphisms (R265C, 
R265G) and three novel allelic variants (726delT, G292R, 988delG) 
from which two family-specific DFNB59 mutations including 726delT 
and 988delG were detected. Our finding revealed that DFNB59-as -
sociated deafness accounting for 6.7% of ARNSHL families examined, 
suggesting DNB59 mutation is of significant clinical importance in 
Iran.
P0090. Studies of DMD/BMD deletion carriers by microsatellite 
markers analysis and FISH
J. G. Zimowski , B. Pawlowska, M. Holding, J. Bogdanowicz, A. Ilnicka, E. 
Fidzianska;  
Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland.
Detection of carriers is very important to offer genetic counseling and 
prenatal diagnosis to families with Duchenne/Becker muscular dystro -
phy. Results of DNA and FISH studies on 54 women at risk of being 
carriers (only one son affected with Duchene muscular dystrophy in 
the family) are presented. In 27 females microsatelite markers and 
pedigree analysis allowed to confirm or exclude carriers. In 27 remain -
ing females microsatellite markers analysis was not informative - ho -
mozygosity of polymorphic sites was found. In 4 of these cases FISH 
using exon-specifc DNA probes was applied. As a control of correct 
hybrydisation reaction X centromere probe was used. All 4 suspected 
females were identified as a deletion carriers in metaphase or inter -
phase nucleus.
P0091. Advanced grandmaternal age is not a risk factor for the 
occurrence of Down syndrome (DS) in St. Petersburg, Russian 
Federation
M. Tahmasebi-Hesari , N. V. Kovaleva;  
St. Petersburg Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies under the Federal 
Agency of Health Care, Saint-Petesburg, Russian Federation.
Background. Advanced maternal age is a well-established factor of 
DS occurrence. However the majority of DS cases are born to young 
couples. Despite great efforts, etiological factors different from those 
proposed for maternal age have not been clearly defined. Malini and 
Ramachandra’s recent study [BMC Med Genet 2006,7:4] has revived 
the old idea that grandmaternal age may increase the risk of their 
grandchild being born with DS. Objectives. Analysis of grandparental 
ages in families of DS babies with regular trisomy 21 to study if ma -Clinical genetics
ternal grandmother’s age in DS families where the mother is young 
is higher comparing to controls. Methods. Extraction of the data on 
grandparental ages in DS families and in families of healthy newborns 
from questionnaires collected in the course of a case-control study on 
congenital malformations in St.Petersburg, 1990-1999. The data were 
analyzed according to two categories of maternal ages, <35 yr and ≥35 
yr. Results. Data on 243 families of DS and 330 control families were 
obtained. We did not find systematic differences in grandparental age 
distribution between studied groups. Specifically, in 148 young couples 
with DS, mean maternal grandmother’s age (26.6 yr) was not higher 
comparing to paternal grandmother’s age (26.3 yr) and corresponding 
figures in 284 young controls (27 yr and 27.1 yr). Similarly, there was 
no difference in age distribution between 95 older couples with DS and 
44 control couples. Conclusion. We failed to support the suggestion 
that advanced age of the DS grandmother is responsible for meiotic 
disturbance in her daughter.
P0092. Sensitivity and frequencies of Dystrophin gene mutations 
in Thai males as detected by multiplex PCR
J. Eu-ahsunthornwattana , M. Busabaratana, S. Pingsuthiwong, T. Sura;  
Ramathibodi Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand.
Background . Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is a lethal X-linked 
disease affecting 1 in 3500 male births. Both DMD and its more be -
nign variant, Becker’s muscular dystrophy (BMD), are caused by mu -
tations in the dystrophin gene. It is not possible to analyse the whole 
gene because of its enormous size. Methods have been developed to 
detect the commonest mutations, namely the deletions of the exons. 
Although these tests are highly specific, their sensitivity is inherently 
less than perfect and should be quantified.
Methods. We reviewed our database for the results of Dystrophin gene 
mutation detection by means of multiplex PCR in Thai males, diag -
nosed clinically with DMD or BMD from July 1994 to November 2006. 
Only one index patient was chosen from each family for statistical 
analysis. The overall sensitity of the test, the number of exon deleted, 
and the deletion frequency of each exon were calculated, along with 
their 95% confidence intervals (C.I.).
Results. We found deletions in 99 out of the 202 index patients (49%; 
Agresti-Coull 95% C.I. = 42%-56%). 51% of these had deletion in one 
exon, while the patient with the most extensive deletions had 14 ex -
ons deleted. The mean number of deleted exons were 2.84 (bootstrap 
95% C.I. = 2.37-3.48). The region spanning exons 44-52 was the most 
frequently deleted.
Conclusion. The multiplex PCR detected deletions only in about half 
of the cases, and if DMD/BMD is strongly suspected, should be con -
firmed by more sensitive tests.
P0093. Dystrophin gene’s hotspots in Iranian patients suspected 
to DMD orBMD
M. Ebrahimi1, M. Dehghan Manshadi2, M. Rostami2, T. Majidi zadeh2, M. seyed 
hassani2, M. Houshmand2;  
1Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute 
Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The dystrophinopathies_Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and 
Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD)_are the most common inherited 
disorders of muscle. Although reliable prevalence data are lacking, the 
prevalence of DMD is generally estimated at 1:3,500 live male births. 
Both DMD and BMD are due to mutations in the dystrophin gene, locat -
ed at Xp21, which comprises 79 exons and 8 tissue-specificpromoters
Distributed across 2.2 Mb of genomic sequence_making dystrophin 
the largest gene yet described.
Dystrophin gene deletions are found in 55%of patients with BMD and 
65% of patients DMD; point mutations account for 30% of mutations, 
and duplications account for the remainder.
Genetic testing for deletions relies on a multiplex PCR technique, with 
amplification of fragments containing 20 of the gene’s 79 exons and 
with deletions detected as absent or size-shifted bands on poly Acryl 
amide gel analysis. Because deletions tend to occur in “hotspots” with -
in the dystrophin gene, analysis of this limited number of exons can 
detect 98% of dystrophin deletions.
Hot spots are exons 3-19 and 42-60.We studied all of these exons for 
23 Iranian families.
In our study most common of deletion were in exon6, exon44, exon50, 
exon4 respectively.  P0094. DHPLC-based whole-gene mutation scanning of the 
dystrophin gene in Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy 
patients
K. Storm1, E. Reyniers1, W. Wuyts1, J. J. Martin2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Department of Neurology, 
Antwerp, Belgium.
Background: Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD and 
BMD) are caused by mutations in the dystrophin gene. Large rear -
rangements in the gene are found in about two-thirds of DMD/BMD 
patients, with ~ 60 % carrying deletions and 5-10 % carrying duplica -
tions. Most of the remaining 30-35 % of patients is expected to have 
small nucleotide substitutions, insertions, or deletions. Since the dys -
trophin gene is very large, 79 exons spanning 2.4 Mb and pathogenic 
changes are scattered throughout the gene, most molecular diagnostic 
laboratories focus only on the identification of large deletions/duplica -
tions. Objective: To detect the remaining 30-35 % of small mutations 
within the coding and splice site determining sequences of the dystro -
phin gene, we optimized denaturing high performance liquid chroma -
tography (DHPLC) mutation screening followed by direct sequencing. 
Validation was performed using DNA samples harboring known dys -
trophin variants. Clinical inclusion criteria for extended analysis of the 
dystrophin gene were set. Results and discussion: DHPLC mutation 
scanning was applied to analyze a cohort of DMD/BMD patients with -
out large deletion/duplication. We identified sixteen clear pathogenic 
changes and one unclassified variant. The inclusion criteria were used 
to evaluate the detection efficiency of our DHPLC-conditions.
P0095. Association of dysferlinopathy and Antley-Bixler 
syndrome in the same patient mimicking muscular dystrophy 
with early contractures
K. Nguyen1, C. Vial2, M. Krahn1, N. Wein3, V. Labelle1, B. Eymard4, N. Lévy1,3, 
N. Philip1,3;  
1Département de Génétique Médicale, APHM, Marseille, France, 2Hopital Neu -
rologique Pierre Wertheimer, Lyon, France, 3INSERM U491, Faculté de Méde -
cine, Marseille, France, 4Institut de Myologie, Pitié Salpétrière, Paris, France.
Dysferlinopathies are autosomal recessive muscular dystrophies 
caused by DYSF  mutations and are clinically heterogenous, including 
Miyoshi myopathy, LGMD2B and proximo-distal myopathy. Onset is 
usually in the young adult, and early contractures are not a character -
istic feature of the disease.
We report a 40 year-old woman born to related French parents. She 
was referred for muscle weakness of the lower limbs starting at age 25, 
associated with severe contractures, affecting mostly the elbows, and 
at a lesser extent the knees and the ankles, and thus was suspected to 
have muscular dystrophy with early contractures. Of importance, she 
had a craniosynostosis treated by surgery at age 2. At examination, 
she presented with proximal weakness of the lower limbs and severe 
atrophy of the calves. In addition, we noted dysmorphic features related 
to craniosynostosis, such as frontal bossing and proptosis, and severe 
elbow contractures which turned out to result from radiohumeral syn -
ostosis. All those features were consistent with Antley-Bixler syndrome 
(ABS) (OMIM 207410). Chromosomal analysis was normal.
Creatine Kinases were massively increased and muscle biopsy 
showed a dysferlin deficiency consistent with the diagnosis of primary 
dysferlinopathy, further confirmed by genetic investigations that identi -
fied a homozygous intragenic deletion in DYSF  predicted to produce a 
truncated protein. To confirm the diagnosis of Antley-Bixler syndrome, 
FGFR2 and POR genes, which cause autosomal dominant ABS and 
autosomal recessive ABS-like respectively, are under investigation. 
Therefore, this case associating Antley-Bixler syndrome and dysfer -
linopathy, illustrates the clinical diagnostic pitfalls in patients carrying 
fortuitously two rare genetic disorders with overlapping features.
P0096. The patient with severe dysmorphic features and 
chromosomes abnormality with unidentified marker
A. Matulevičienė1, B. Aleksiūnienė1,2, E. Zarakauskaitė2, V. Kučinskas1,2;  
1The Center for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariškių 
Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vil -
nius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
We present a patient with chromosomal abnormality with unidentified 
marker and severe dysmorphic features of phenotype. Our patient is a 
three-year-old girl, third child of healthy non consanguineous parents 
from uncomplicated pregnancy. The genealogy of this family is com -Clinical genetics
plicated: two cousins - brother and sister with symptoms of psycho -
motoric retardation and one child with Down syndrome from the other 
cousin‘s family. The dysmorphic features were seen from the birth of 
this girl. Facial dysmorphism is characterised by the triangular high 
forehead with expressed sagital suture, hypertrichosis, wide spaced 
eyes, ptosis, down-slanting palpebral fissures, strabismus, broad na -
sal root, very short nose with anteverted nares, short grooved philtrum, 
triangular mouth, thin upper lip, everted lower lip, high narrow palate, 
micrognathia, malformed ears with preauricular sinus on one of sides. 
The characteristic skin lesions are typical for chromosomal mosaicism: 
they involve streaked, whorled and mottled areas of hypopigmentation 
on trunk and limbs. The psychomotor development of our patient is 
with severe features of delay: she sat alone only at two years. Clini -
cal follow-up showed these clinical findings: CT scan showed corpus 
callosum agenesis and hydrocephaly, X-ray: abnormal feet position 
- equinovarus bilaterally.
Cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes revealed a mo -
saic karyotype 47,XX, +mar/46,XX in girl with dysmorphism of pheno -
type. Chromosome analysis was performed from GTG banded meta -
phases. The resolution level was 400-500 bands. The exact nature of 
the marker chromosome could not be identified in our patient. Parental 
karyotypes were normal.
P0097. Disproportional high frequency of CLCN1 mutations 
among patients with myotonic dystrophy type 2.
T. Suominen1, B. Schoser2, O. Raheem3, S. Auvinen4, R. Krahe5, H. Lochmül -
ler2, W. Kress6, B. Udd7;  
1Neurogenetics, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, 2Friedrich-Baur-Insti -
tute, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Germany, 3Department of Pathol -
ogy, Pirkanmaa Hospital District, Center for Laboratory Medicine, Tampere, 
Finland, 4Department of Neurology, Central Finland Central Hospital, Jyväskylä, 
Finland, 5Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Ander -
son Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States, 6Institute of Human Genetics, 
University of Wuerzburg, Germany, 7Department of Neurology, Tampere Univer -
sity Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
Background: Myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2) is a multiorgan disease 
caused by (CCTG)n repeat expansion mutation in ZNF9  gene. Clini -
cal core features are myotonia, muscle weakness and cataracts. The 
phenotype is highly variable ranging from mild to severe forms, which 
makes clinical classification difficult. DM2 mutation causes aberrant 
splicing of different genes including CLCN1 . Mutations in ClC1 chloride 
channel gene ( CLCN1 ) cause recessive and rarely dominant myotonia 
congenita (MC), characterized by myotonia and muscle hypertrophy.
Objective: to clarify whether co-segregation of frequent recessive 
CLC1 mutations may have a modifier effect on the DM2 phenotype.
Methods: CLCN1  mutations R894X, F413C and A531V were analysed 
in 200 Finnish and German DM2 patients and 200 controls by TaqMan 
Sequence Detection System (ABI) using specific primers for PCR and 
fluorescent oligonucleotide probes.
Results: CLCN1  mutations R894X, F413C and A531V in DM2 patients 
and controls.
Cohorts R894X hoz R894X hez F413C hez A531V hez total
Finnish DM2 patients 
(n=100)0 3 2 0 5
German DM2 patients 
(n=100)1 4 0 0 5
Finnish controls 
(n=100)0 2 1 0 3
German controls 
(n=100)0 1 0 0 1
Conclusions: In German DM2 patients the frequency of CLC1 co-segregation was 
5-fold and in the Finnish DM2 patients almost twofold compared to control population. 
The results clearly indicate a considerable contributing effect on the clinical symptoms 
and the likelihood of a patient to be diagnosed with DM2. Thus recessive CLCN1  
mutations are genetic modifiers in DM2.
P0098. A novel Italian family with ectodermal dysplasia-
syndactyly-mental retardation syndrome
F. Brancati1,2, G. D’Amato1,2, R. Mingarelli1, B. Dallapiccola1,2;  
1IRCCS CSS Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medi -
cine and Pathology, “La Sapienza” University, Rome, Italy.
Ectodermal Dysplasias (EDs) are a heterogeneous group of conditions 
presenting with hair, tooth, nails and sweat glands abnormalities. EDs 
may be sub-classified into pure forms and syndromic EDs, where ecto -dermal signs are combined with other anomalies. We studied two sibs, 
a 26 year-old man and his 9 year-old sister, born to unrelated healthy 
parents showing a distinct phenotype. Hair, eyebrows and eyelashes 
were sparse, coarse and brittle with areas of progressive scalp alo -
pecia. The older patient showed axillary and pubic hypotrichosis and 
mildly dystrophic nails. Oral findings included multiple frenula, small, 
wide-spaced teeth with peg-shaped and conical crowns. Spontane -
ous sweating was normal. There were also broad nasal bridge, short 
philtrum with anteverted nares, and small ears with thickened, over-
folded helices. The older brother showed 2-3 toes syndactyly and un -
derwent surgical correction of 2-3 and 3-4 cutaneous syndactyly at the 
hands, while his sister had 3-4 hands syndactyly and toes 2-3 and 4-5. 
An abnormal pattern of palmar flexion creases was present in both 
sibs, with bilateral four-finger lines in the male. The oldest patient had 
also mild mental retardation (MR) and unilateral conductive deafness. 
These subjects add to the 7 previously reported (one family with 4 af -
fected sibs and 3 sporadic cases) presenting the association of hidrotic 
ectodermal dysplasia, cutaneous syndactyly and variable mental retar -
dation and ease the delineation of an autosomal recessive (AR) ED-
syndactyly-MR syndrome. Differential diagnosis, among AR syndromic 
EDs, include Zlotogora-Orun syndrome, consisting of ectodermal dys -
plasia, syndactyly, mental retardation in addition to cleft lip/palate.
P0099. Lessons from two families affected with borderline 
forms of Vascular Elhers-Danlos syndrome: Genetic testing is 
necessary!
A. Plancke1, N. Ruiz-Pallares1, I. Quere2, H. Plauchu3, M. Claustres1, P. Khau 
van Kien1;  
1CHU Montpellier/INSERM U827, Montpellier, France, 2CHU Montpellier, Mont -
pellier, France, 3Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
Vascular Elhers-Danlos syndrome (V-EDS) is a rare dominantly in -
herited disorder cause by mutations in the type III procollagen gene 
(COL3A1). The diagnosis is particularly difficult to establish and a 
marked intra/inter-familial phenotypic variability occurs with frequent 
sub-clinical manifestations revealed by genetic testing and familial in -
vestigations. In view to help to the diagnosis work-up, the Villefranche 
criteria define the indications of laboratory testing that in practice only 
provides diagnosis certainty.
We had the opportunity to study two unrelated young women with a V-
EDS suspicion and a strong familial history of Familial Thoracic Aortic 
Aneurysm and/or Aortic Dissection (TAA/AD). Attentive familial inves -
tigation also suggested the possibility of V-EDS manifestations. Thus, 
we performed a first screening of the COL3A1 gene from skin cultured 
fibroblast. We identified heterozygous transversion in each probant: 
c.1835G>A and c.2357G>T. Both mutations are predicted to result in a 
glycine substitution (p.Gly612Asp and p.Gly786Val). Theses missens -
es alter an obligatory glycine residue of the Gly-X-Y tripe-helix repeat -
ed domain of the type III procollagen. The mutations were confirmed at 
the genomic level and mutation-based familial investigation allowed to 
clarify affected-status in relatives with ambiguous phenotype.
In conclusion, V-EDS must be carefully evaluated at a familial level. 
Suggestive familial history such TAAD/AD, sudden death but also 
other events may reinforce the V-EDS suspicion and genetic testing is 
crucial for diagnosis certainty, efficient familial screening, risk assess -
ment and preventive follow-up.
P0100. Adult onset forms of eIF2B related disorders: diagnostic 
value of MRI and molecular analysis
P. Labauge1, F. Niel2,3, L. Horzinski2, M. Petit3, C. Confavreux4, D. Rodriguez5, 
C. Goizet6, S. Vukusic4, F. Maugière4, F. Bouhour4, G. Casterlnovo1, A. Fogli2,3, 
O. Boespflug-Tanguy2,7;  
1CHU Carmeau, service Neurologie, NIMES, France, 2INSERM UMR 384, 
Clermont ferrand, France, 3CHU de Clermont Ferrand, service de Biochimie 
Médicale, Clermont ferrand, France, 4Hospices civils de Lyon, Service de 
Neurologie A, Hôpital Neurologique, Lyon, France, 5Assistance publique-Ho -
pitaux de Paris, service de neuropédiatrie, Hopital Armand Trousseau, Paris, 
France, 6CHU Pellegrin, Service de Neurologie, BORDEAUX, France, 7CHU de 
Clermont Ferrand, service de génétique Médicale, Clermont ferrand, France.
Mutations in the five subunits of the eIF2B translation initiation fac -
tor have been reported in a heterogeneous group of autosomal re -
cessive leukodystrophies characterized by a CSF-like aspect of the 
white matter (vanishing white matter)on magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI), leading to the concept of eIF2B related disorders. The key role Clinical genetics
of eIF2B in stress response explains the episodes of rapid deteriora -
tion following febrile infection or head trauma. Severity is correlated 
to age at disease onset, distinguishing between early infantile (<2 
years), childhood (2-5 years, CACH) and juvenile-adults (>5 years) 
forms. Adult onset forms have been initially individualized as ovarioleu -
kodystrophies due to associated primary ovarian failure (POF). We 
report 14 eIF2B mutated patients (2 males, 12 females) with an adult 
onset (mean age 30). Initial neurological symptoms were motor (9) 
as well as cognitive/psychiatric (4), whereas two patient has no neu -
rological signs (1 POF, 1 asymptomatic). Abnormal stress response 
was observed in 5 patients and POF in 50% of females. MRI showed 
extensive leukoencephalopathy in all cases with cavitation in only 9. 
Disease evolution was rapid in one case (death after 9 months) but 
slowly progressive (7) or stable (5) in the 13 others (mean follow-up 
10 years). The eIF2B5 recurrent mutation, c.338G>A or p.Arg113His, 
was present in the majority of patients (11) mainly at an homozygote 
state (9). In adult patients, despite an heterogeneous clinical presenta -
tion, diagnosis of eIF2B related disorders could be suggested by the 
MRI features and rapidly confirmed by detection of the p.Arg113His 
mutation.
P0101. Genotype influences epilepsy outcome in patients with 
CDKL  mutations  
N. Bahi-Buisson1,2, A. Kaminska1, N. Boddaert1, M. Rio1, A. Afenjar3, M. Ge -
rard4, F. Giuliano5, J. Motte6, D. Heron7, M. N’Guyen Morel8, C. Richelme5, P. 
Plouin1, C. Chiron1, C. Philippe9, T. Bienvenu10;  
1Necker Enfants Malades, APHP, Université Paris V, Paris, France, 2INSERM 
U567 Faculté Cochin,, Paris, France, 3Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 4Robert 
Debré, APHP,, Paris, France, 5Nice University Hospital, Nice, France, 6Reims 
University Hospital, Reims, France, 7Pitié Salpétrière, APHP,, Paris, France, 
8Grenoble University Hospital, Grenoble, France, 9Nancy University Hospital, 
Nancy, France, 10Cochin, APHP, Université Paris V, Paris, France.
Mutations in the X-linked cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 ( CDKL5 ) 
gene are responsible for a severe encephalopathy with early epilepsy. 
So far, the electroclinical phenotype remains mostly unknown and no 
clear genotype-phenotype correlation has been established.
Objective: To characterize the epilepsy associated with CDKL5  muta -
tions and look for a relationship between the genotype and the course 
of epilepsy.
Methods: We retrospectively analyzed the electroclinical phenotype of 
13 CDKL5  mutated girls and examined whether the severity of the 
epilepsy was linked to the type and location of mutations.
Results: Epilepsy course discloses three successive stages: early epi -
lepsy (Stage I) (onset 1-10 weeks) with normal interictal EEG (10/13) 
despite frequent convulsive seizures; epileptic encephalopathy (Stage 
II) with infantile spasms (8/8) and hypsarrhythmia (8/8). At the age of 
evaluation (2.5-19 years), 7 patients were seizure free and 6 had de -
veloped refractory epilepsy (stage III) with tonic seizures and myoclo -
nia (5/6). According to the presence of a functional catalytic domain 
of the protein, patients were divided in two groups: those with early 
truncating mutations that lead to a truncation of the catalytic domain 
(7/13) and those with late truncating mutations (6/13). We observed 
that the former developed refractory epilepsy (5/7) more frequently 
than the latter (1/6). Moreover, infantile spasms were more frequently 
controlled in patients with late truncating mutations.
Interpretation: Our data suggest that the course of the epilepsy is more 
severe in patients with CDKL5 mutations that impair the catalytic do -
main of the protein than in patients with late truncating mutations.
P0102. Epistatic Effect of CETP and LIPC on Serum HDL Levels: 
The Rotterdam Study
A. Isaacs1, Y. Aulchenko1, A. Hofman1, E. Sijbrands1, F. Sayed-Tabatabaei2, O. 
Klungel3, A. Maitland-van der Zee3, B. Stricker1, B. Oostra1, J. Witteman1, C. 
van Duijn1;  
1Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 2Dutch Medicines 
Evaluation Board Agency, Den Haag, The Netherlands, 3Utrecht Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Objectives: Polymorphisms in the hepatic lipase (LIPC -514C>T) and 
cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP I405V) genes affect HDL lev -
els but their relationship with cardiovascular disease, and their com -
bined effect, is unclear. The objectives of the current study were to 
characterize the effect of the hepatic lipase variant, and it’s interaction 
with the CETP variant, in terms of cholesterol levels, atherosclerosis, and risk of myocardial infarction (MI).
Design: The study was conducted in the Rotterdam Study, a large sin -
gle-center prospective cohort study in people aged 55 years and older. 
Lipid levels were analyzed using linear regression models and risk of 
MI was assessed with Cox’ proportional hazards models.
Results: The hepatic lipase variant was associated with an increase in 
serum HDL levels of 0.11 mmol/L in both genders, while an increased 
risk of MI was observed only in men (hazard ratio=1.32 [95% Confi -
dence Interval (C.I.): 1.05-1.66] for CT versus CC and 1.75 [95% C.I.: 
1.39-2.20] for TT versus CC). This effect was independent of serum 
HDL levels. LIPC -514C>T interacted with CETP I405V with respect 
to serum HDL levels. Those homozygous for both mutations saw a 
marked elevation in HDL levels (0.29 mmol/L, pinteraction = 0.05). These 
increased HDL levels, however, were not inversely associated with 
atherosclerosis or MI risk.
Conclusions: LIPC genotype affects HDL levels, and risk of MI in 
males. The interaction of this variant with CETP on HDL levels helps 
elucidate the underlying mechanisms and suggests that the beneficial 
effects of CETP inhibition may vary in particular subgroups.
P0103. Female monozygotic twins with Familial juvenile 
nephronophthisis - a case report
M. Gafencu1, G. Doros1, R. Costa2, M. Puiu1, M. Serban1;  
1Univ. of medicine V. Babes Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2Emergency Chil -
dren Hospital Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania.
Nephronophthisis (NPHP) or Familial juvenile nephronophthisis (FJN) 
is an autosomal recessive condition equally distributed in males and 
females that almost always progresses to end-stage renal disease 
usually during adolescence. Smith and Graham first reported NPHP 
in 1945, but the first description has been attributed to Fanconi et al in 
1951. A gene involved in the disease - NPHP 1 has been mapped to 
chromosome 2q13. It has been estimated that FJN is responsible for 
approximately 2.4% of the cases of end-stage renal disease in children 
in the United States but this it may be underestimated as studies from 
Europe have revealed a higher frequency of 15% (Konrad et al). We 
present here a case of monozygotic twins emphasizing the identical 
progresion of the disease and importance of examination in children 
with deterioration of renal function, for determining a correct diagnosis. 
The first symptoms developed in our twins after the age of 10 and they 
consist of polyuria with polydipsia and than anemia. Renal ultrasonog -
raphy revealed normal-sized kidneys.
P0104. The second observation of familial congenital tetramelic 
oligodactyly
A. Tészás1, R. Møller2, N. Tommerup2, G. Kosztolányi1, K. W. Kjaer2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, 
Pécs, Hungary, 2Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Congenital limb deficiencies are rare conditions, occurring in 5-6 of 
every 10,000 live births. Most are sporadic, additional malformations 
can be detected in approximately one third of the cases. Upper limbs 
are involved significantly more often than lower; both are affected only 
in 10% of the cases. Postaxial/ulnar deficiencies are often elements 
of more common disorders, like the ulnar-mammary syndrome - an 
autosomal dominant disorder caused by a mutation of the TBX3  gene. 
The TBX2  gene considered to have similar roles in limb development 
as the TBX3 . Deletion of the 4q33 region has been also described in 
the background of ulnar ray deficiencies.
We report on a family, an affected mother and her 2 affected children, 
with apparently autosomal dominant postaxial oligodactyly and/or 
brachydactyly affecting the 5th fingers and toes, in non-syndromic 
form. Postaxial deficiency occurs in a number of genetic and sporadic 
syndromes, but isolated inherited tetramelic, postaxial oligodactyly - 
exactly similar to our case - has been described to our knowledge 
only once (Wulfsberg et al., 1993). We performed G-banded chromo -
somal analysis with normal result. ArrayCGH revealed a small deletion 
and duplication; however, both of the mutations have been described 
earlier as normal variants. Linkage to the chromosomal region har -
bouring the TBX2 and TBX3 gene and 4q33 chromosomal region was 
tested with STS markers. Although the exact genetic background has 
remained unclear, we could exclude the most likely candidate regions’ 
role in the development of this condition. Further investigations may 
reveal the cause of this new, existing syndrome.Clinical genetics
P0105. APC gene mutations in Polish FAP patients
A. Plawski1, M. Podralska1, T. Banasiewicz2, P. Krokowicz3, D. Lipinski1, R. 
Slomski1;  
1Instytitute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Department of General, 
Gastroenterological and Endocrinological Surgery, University of the Medical 
Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Surgery University of the Medical 
Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant, pre -
disposed disorder that results in the development of numerous polyps 
in the colon and rectum, usually beginning in childhood or adolescence. 
Other extracolonic features may include polyps in the upper parts of 
the gastroenterological tract, desmoid tumours, ocular lesions, osteo -
mas, dental abnormalities, and malignancies in other organs. FAP inci -
dence is estimated at 1:10,000. FAP arises due to germ line mutations 
in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene, consisting of 8.529 bp 
open reading frame and encoding a 2.843 amino acid protein.
Seven hundreds DNA samples from persons belonging to 280 Polish 
FAP families were collected. 380 patients were diagnosed with FAP. 
The entire APC gene was screened for mutations in 240 families. The 
APC gene point mutations were identified in 115 FAP families. Thirty of 
them have not been described before. Seven mutation types recurred 
two or more times. The recurrent mutations were detected in 52% of 
diagnosed families. The large rearrangements of the APC gene were 
studied in 95 FAP families without the point mutation. In this group we 
identified 14 large APC gene rearrangements with two cases of whole 
APC gene deletions.
This work was funded by the Ministry of Education and Science, Po -
land, grant number 2PO5A10728
P0106. A new familial case of Gollop-Wolfgang syndrome 
confirming an Autosomal Recessive mode of inheritance
B. I. Dimitrov1, A. Debeer2, L. Johan3, K. Devriendt1;  
1Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 
2Neonatology Unit, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Department 
of Orthopedics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
Gollop-Wolfgang syndrome is a rare condition of unknown aetiology 
characterized by the presence of femur bifurcation, tibial agenesis and 
ectrodactyly. Several additional abnormalities such as congenital heart 
defects, vertebral segmentation defects, ribs and CNS anomalies have 
been described. Based on an affected child of a consanguineous Arab 
family with additionally similarly diseased relatives, an autosomal re -
cessive type of inheritance was supposed. However the presence of 
sporadic cases with unrelated parents as well as an association of a 
single case with proximal deletion of chromosome 8p suggests the 
existence of a dominant form.
We report on a newborn child of consanguineous Turkish family pre -
senting unilateral bifid femur and ipsilateral ectrodactyly of the hand 
and foot. No additional abnormalities have been observed. Later on 
we were able to examine her 13 year old uncle who has similar but bi -
lateral hand and limb anomalies. Mental development was normal, and 
he presented no other anomalies. The present case strongly supports 
an autosomal recessive type of inheritance of this condition. A possible 
pathway and classification of the femur bifurcation-tibial a/hypoplasia 
complex will be discussed.
P0107. Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder - a clinical study and 
suggestions for an adapted questionaire concerning fetal 
exposure in Romania
R. Popescu1, C. Rusu2, M. Volosciuc2, E. Braha2, L. Butnariu2, M. Covic2;  
1Children’s Hospital Iasi - Medical Genetics Center, Iasi, Romania, 2University 
of Medicine and Pharmacy- Department of Medical Genetics, Iasi, Romania.
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) refers to disabilities caused 
by prenatal exposure to alcohol - fetal alcohol syndrome(FAS), partial 
fetal alcohol syndrome(p-FAS) and alcohol related neurodevelopmen -
tal disorders(ARND). FAS is defined by: pre/postnatal growth retarda -
tion, facial dismorphysm and SNC dysfunction.
We have used the Canadian guidelines for FASD to analyze our pa -
tients in order to appreciate their importance in establishing the diag -
nosis. This involved evaluation score for upper lip, philtrum, palpebral 
fissures, impaired pre/postnatal growth, CNS/neurobehavioural disor -
ders and gestational exposure to alcohol.
63 children (FASD in observation between 1994-2006) were selected 
for the study. Only 47 patients fulfilled the criteria for FASD (25 -definite FAS, 6 -p-FAS and 5 -ARND). The 11 children left remain in observa -
tion due to young age.
We have analyzed the frequency of defining characteristics for every 
category: for FAS children - microcephaly (100%), postnatal growth re -
tardation (76%), smooth/flattened philtrum rank 5 (56%), thin upper lip 
rank 5 (60%), moderate mental retardation (80%), learning difficulties 
and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (100%). Prenatal alcohol ex -
posure was confirmed in 44% of cases. Other defects recorded: heart 
defects, genitourinary, ocular abnormalities and hernia.
Patients diagnosed with p-FAS and ARND present similar characteris -
tics. The screening questionaire for maternal alcohol history didn’t fit to 
our population and we have adapted it. The detailed protocol as well 
as the differential diagnosis will be presented.
In conclusion, we appreciate that the guidelines are very useful for 
FASD diagnosis and we have adapted the protocol for our population 
in order to optimize FASD diagnosis.
P0108. Clinical features in patients with Opitz-Kaveggia (FG) 
syndrome and a recurrent mutation, p.R961W, in the MED12 
gene
J. M. Graham1, H. Risheg2, R. C. Rogers2, R. D. Clark3, K. Jones4, J. B. Moe -
schler5, M. May2, S. M. Joseph2, J. R. Jones2, C. E. Schwartz2, M. J. Friez2, R. 
E. Stevenson2;  
1Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2Greenwood 
Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 3Loma Linda University Chil -
dren’s Hospital, Loma Linda, CA, United States, 4USCD School of Medicine, 
San Diego, CA, United States, 5Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, 
NH, United States.
Opitz and Kaveggia (1974) reported a family of 5 affected males with 
mental retardation, macrocephaly, imperforate anus and hypotonia, 
and Risheg et al. (2007) reported an identical nucleotide substitution 
(c.2881C>T) in exon 21 of MED12  causing tryptophan to replace ar -
ginine at amino acid 961 (p.R961W) in 6 families with Opitz-Kaveggia 
syndrome (13% of 45 clinically-diagnosed cases), including the only 
surviving affected male from the original Opitz-Kaveggia family. Mod -
erately severe mental retardation with behavioral abnormalities was 
present in all males old enough for cognitive assessment. Partial or 
complete absence of the corpus callosum was noted in all six cases 
in which brain imaging was available, and congenital hypotonia was 
noted in all but one case. High prominent forehead and small, low set, 
simple ears were the most consistent craniofacial manifestations. Only 
one individual had macrocephaly (OFC >97th centile), although the oc -
cipitofrontal circumference centile was greater than the height centile 
in 7 of 9 cases. Imperforate anus and wide flat thumbs and great toes 
were present in 7 of 10 cases. Cryptorchidism, inguinal hernia, car -
diac defects, and short stature were noted in less than half of affected 
males. Constipation was noted in 5 of 8 cases, one case had dystonia 
of the head and neck, one case had sagittal craniosynostosis, and one 
case had duplicated great toes with a split right hand. Hyperactivity, 
affability, and excessive talkativeness were frequent manifestations, 
along with socially-oriented, attention-seeking behaviors.
P0109. Fibrous Dysplasia: report of two portuguese patients
A. M. Fortuna1, J. Silva1, M. Barbosa1, M. Gonçalves2;  
1Instituto Genetica Medica, Porto, Portugal, 2Hospital Pedro Hispano, Porto, 
Portugal.
Fibrous Dysplasia (McCune-Albright syndrome #MIM 174800), of 
bone is characterized by the replacement of bone by dysplastic fibrous 
tissue. It is classified on the basis of whether the lesions involve one 
bone or more than one bone. The cutaneous lesions consist of brown 
flat patches of pigmentation that follow an irregular contour. Sexual 
precocity and hyperthyroidism are common features. The condition is 
mostly sporadic and usually results from postzygotic activating muta -
tions in GNAS1.
We present a short review of the McCune-Albright syndrome and two 
clinical cases of patients with the clinical diagnosis of this syndrome 
from our genetic clinic.
Patient 1, a female, age 17, with vaginal bleeding at age 3, and at 
present time with one café-au-lait spot in the dorsal region respecting 
the midline and polyostotic fibrous dysplasia affecting the skull caus -
ing facial asymmetry and the long bones of the four members, with 
more expressive lesion near the right knee. Patient 2 is a male, age 
31, presented at age 25 an expansive and suggestive lesion of two left Clinical genetics0
ribs causing compression and the need for surgical treatment. He later 
developed some more severe lesions and there is also a café-au-lait 
spot in the dorsal region.
Diagnosis of McCune-Albright syndrome is established on clinical 
grounds. Early diagnosis allows for opportune intervention and for spe -
cific aspects of follow-up and management of skeletal and endocrine 
involvement that should be considered. We address the issue that this 
condition probably remains underdiagnosed. We emphasize the im -
portance of early referral for genetic counselling.
P0110. The recessive form of Larsen syndrome is not due to 
FLNB mutations
L. Devisme1, M. Holder-Espinasse2, A. Valat3, O. Boute-Benejean2, A. Dieux-
Coeslier2, S. Robertson4, S. Manouvrier-Hanu2;  
1Service d’anatomopathologie, Eurasanté, Lille, France, 2Service de Génétique 
Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 3Maternité, Hôpital de Lens, 
Lille, France, 4Department of Paediatrics, University of Otago, Dunedin, New 
Zealand.
Larsen syndrome shows a broad spectrum of clinical manifestations 
ranging from a lethal form of the disorder to a mild clinical expression 
with absence of major diagnostic features. Autosomal recessive as 
well as autosomal dominant mode of inheritance have been reported.
We report on two cases of this rare condition. The first child was a 
dizygotic twin born at 29 weeks’ gestation from non-consanguineous 
and healthy parents, after a normal pregnancy. She presented with 
multiple congenital anomalies and died soon after birth. Pathological 
examination and x-rays showed intrauterine growth retardation, hy -
drocephalus, short limbs, talipes, severe vertebral anomalies, multiple 
costal synostosis and dislocated knees. The diagnosis of autosomal 
recessive Larsen syndrome was suggested, and genetic counselling 
was cautious. During a further pregnancy, the first trimester ultrasound 
scan revealed bilateral talipes, abnormal vertebrae and dislocated 
knees. Fetal chromosomes were normal 46XX. Termination of preg -
nancy was performed at 14 weeks’ gestation. Pathological examina -
tion and x-rays confirmed the talipes and revealed associated features 
such as cleft palate and multiple skeletal anomalies, compatible with 
the diagnosis of autosomal recessive Larsen syndrome.
Recently, mutations in the gene encoding filamin B have been identi -
fied in four human skeletal disorders, i.e. autosomal recessive spon -
dylocarpotarsal syndrome, autosomal dominant Larsen syndrome and 
atelosteogenesis type I and III. Since the spondylocostal aspects of 
autosomal recessive Larsen syndrome resemble the autosomal reces -
sive spondylocarpotarsal syndrome, we performed FLNB molecular 
analysis in the second case, but no mutation was identified.
Therefore, we conclude that FLNB mutations do not cause autosomal 
recessive Larsen syndrome.
P0111. MEFV gene mutations in armenian FMF patients
T. F. Sarkisian , H. Hajrapetyan, G. Shahsuvaryan, A. Beglaryan;  
Center of medical genetics, Yerevan, Armenia.
Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an inherited inflammatory 
condition usually occurred in populations from Mediterranean decent 
with prevalence as high as 1 in 5 individuals. Identification of MEFV 
gene mutations have been of tremendous help for diagnosis of difficult 
cases. Testing is helpful for carrier screening and pregnancy planning 
since certain mutations have been shown to have significant correla -
tion with renal amyloidosis, the worst possible manifestation of FMF. 12 
MEFV mutations are identified in 6500 Armenian patients. Identifica -
tion of MEFV mutations in FMF patients (heterozygotes, homozygotes 
and compound heterozygotes) in comparison with healthy individuals 
have revealed the most frequent mutations and genotypes, and give 
the information of carriers and genotype - phenotype correlation. In 
heterozygote carriers the most prevalent and severe cases are caused 
by the presence of a single M694V mutation.
We have revealed the FMF cases with following concurrent morbidity: 
epilepsy (M694V/M694V; V726A/M680I); Sjogren syndrome (M694V/
M694V); monozygotic twins, heterozygous carriers for M680I muta -
tion: one with FMF, and the other - non-FMF, but with epilepsy; bron -
chial asthma (M694V/V726A, V726A/M680I, M680I); β-thalassemia 
(M694V/M694V); hyperthyroidism (M694V/M680I); Tourette syndrome 
(M694V/M694V); ulcerative colitis (M694V/M694V); renal amyloido -
sis and multiple sclerosis (M680I/M680I). Neurological features are 
accompanied along with administration of colchicines. About 20% FMF patients (predominantly M694V homozygotes) had ankylosing 
spondilitis-like syndrome. For Armenian FMF children the onset of the 
disease presented by monoarthritis is peculiar phenomenon. In 141 
patients with some FMF features no MEFV mutations were found.
In 90% of cases, Colchicine is effective to keep the inflammation under 
control.
P0112. Goltz syndrome or focal dermal hypoplasia: family case 
report with affected mother and two stillborn daughters
N. Canki-Klain ;  
Univ. Med.School and Univ.Hospital Centre, Croatian Institute for Brain Re -
search and Dept. of Neurology, ZAGREB, Croatia.
INTRODUCTION. Focal dermal hypoplasia or Goltz syndrome is a rare 
mesoectodermal dysplasia with multisystem involvement. Patient suf -
fers from skin, skeletal, dental, ocular and other anomalies. Although 
the mutated gene has not been identified, there is predominance in 
affected females, suggesting X -linked dominant inheritance with le -
thality in men who are hemizygous for the X chromosome.
PATIENTS. We describe a family in which affected mother with one 
apparently normal daughter was undiagnosed until the birth of se -
verely affected female stillborn of 34 weeks gestation. The diagnosis 
was confirmed by the second very malformed stillborn daughter of 25 
weeks gestation. Clinical features of the mother were characterized by 
typical ,,lobster claw“ deformity of the right hand, ectrodactily of right 
foot, typical cutaneous lesions with rather asymmetrical distribution, 
and upper median incisors spacing. Stillborns had diffuse distribution 
of typical skin lesions, ectrodactily, exomphalos, microphthalmia and 
anophthalmia, dysmorphic face with malformed pinnae and microgna -
thia.
DISCUSSION. Reported family seems interesting because ,,mildly“ 
affected mother with rather asymmetrical (right sided, as majority of 
reported cases) lesions’ distribution could be somatic and germ line 
mosaic for an X-linked dominant mutation which would explain her less 
severe phenotype in comparison with two very malformed female still -
borns. Unavailable mother’s family study does not permit the exclusion 
of transmitted mutation.
In CONCLUSION. The extraordinary variable expressivity of X-linked 
disorders should be explained by multiple mechanisms including 
skewed X-inactivation, clonal expansion, cell autonomous expression 
and somatic mosaicism that can result in disease expression in fe -
males.
P0113. MS-MLPA as a tool to distinguish FMR1 premutations 
from full mutations
R. Carvalho1, W. Friedl2, S. Lens1, J. P. Schouten1, A. O. H. Nygren1;  
1MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Bonn, 
Germany.
The FMR1  gene is directly associated with three distinct conditions: 
fragile X syndrome, fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FX -
TAS) and premature ovarian failure (POF). FMR1  is highly conserved 
and contains a CGG trinucleotide repeat in the 5’ UTR of exon 1. 
Based on the number of repeats, it is possible to distinguish four types 
of alleles: normal (5-50 repeats), intermediate (45-60), premutation 
(55-200), and full mutation (>200). Excess FMR1  transcription occurs 
in the premutation setting and is associated with both FXTAS and POF, 
whereas FMR1  silencing through promoter hypermethylation and/or 
translational suppression of FMR1  occurs in the full mutation setting, 
and is strongly linked to fragile X syndrome.
Experimental determination of expansions greater than ~100-150 re -
peats is difficult to achieve through standard PCR, due to high GC 
content of the target sequence. Analysis of cases not amplifiable by 
PCR is normally performed using Southern blot analysis, a low-resolu -
tion, time-consuming technique that requires large amounts of patient 
material.
In this study, we use methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent 
probe amplification (MS-MLPA) to analyse fragile X syndrome cases 
not amplifiable by PCR.
Whereas results of male unaffected controls, premutants and full mu -
tants were unequivocal, analysis of female patients was complicated 
by the variability of both the level of imprinting and of hypermethylation 
of fully mutated alleles.
We conclude that MS-MLPA can be used to correctly diagnose male 
patient material not amplifiable through conventional PCR, and gives Clinical genetics1
an indication of the presence of FMR1  mRNA in female patients, which 
might have clinical implications regarding subsequent therapy.
P0114. Prevalence of Fragile X Premutation and Intermediate/
Grey Zone Alleles in a Basque Sample
I. Arrieta Saez1, O. Peñagarikano2, M. Telez1, L. Valverde1, B. Criado3, J. 
Ramirez1, B. Ortega1, A. Gonzalez4, P. Flores5, C. Lostao1;  
1Department of Genetics, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of the 
Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, 2Departments of Human Genetics, Emory Uni -
versity School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, 3High School Da Maia, CESPU, 
Porto, Portugal, 4Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Basque 
Country University., Bilbao, Spain, 5Department of Nursery, School of Nursery, 
University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain.
The Fragile X Syndrome (FXS; OMIM: 309550) is the most common 
inherited form of mental retardation. The molecular basis is usually the 
unstable expansion of a CGG trinucleotide repeat in the FMR 1 gene 
witch resides at chromosome position Xq27.3 and is coincident with 
the fragile site FRAXA.Based on the size of CGG secuence individu -
als are classified as having normal (6-54 CGG), premutation (55-200 
CGG) and full mutation alleles (>200 CGG). In adition the term inter -
mediate/grey zone alleles has been used to define alleles with sizes 
at high range of normal alleles (35-54 CGG). Our previous cytogenetic 
and molecular screening for Fragile X Syndrome among mental re -
tarded people of Basque and no Basque origin showed and absence 
of full mutation among Basque Sample. In the present work we anal -
ized the prevalence of FMR 1 premutated and intermedite/grey zone 
alleles, because recent clinical and molecular studies have changed 
the view that premutated alleles serve only as a source for full muta -
tion alleles in transmision of FXS and that functional and phenotyphic 
effects are not associated with FMR 1 repeat size in the high end of 
the normal range alleles. A total of 298 unrelated male individuals were 
included in this study. The results obtained showed that the estimated 
prevalence of the intermediate/grey zone alleles 1/10 in Basque males 
(7.32 %) was lower than that reported in Caucasian populations. The 
prevalence of premutation alleles is 1/298 in males. The prevalence 
of premutation alleles in the general populated is estimated in 1/813 
males.
P0115. 47,XYY male with the fragile X syndrome: rare genetic 
assotiation
M. Simandlova , D. Novotna, Z. Musova, M. Havlovicova;  
Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University Second Medical 
School and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
We report on a 26 year-old developmentally disabled man referred to 
our clinic for evaluation because of pregnancy of his younger sister. 
Cytogenetic and molecular analysis revealed a 47, XYY karyotype and 
the presence of a trinucleotide repeat expansion resulting in fragile 
X syndrome. Direct detection of the pre- and full mutation for the af -
fected individual and his at-risk female relatives were performed . To 
our knowledge, this is the third report of concurrence of XYY and frag -
ile X syndrome in the medical literature ( but one of these patients was 
46,XY/47,XYY mosaic male with fragile X syndrome) . Review of sex 
chromosome abnormalities associated with fragile X syndrome and 
phenotypic considerations are presented.
This work is supported by the Grant number: 00000064203-MZCR.
P0116. Cardiac evaluation of 34 individuals with Fragile X 
Syndrome
M. Alikaşifoğlu , Y. Alanay, D. Alehan, G. Utine, B. Volkan-Salancı, K. 
Boduroğlu, D. Aktaş, E. Tunçbilek;  
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
Fragile X syndrome is the most common inherited cause of mental 
retardation. Patients with fragile X syndrome have cardiac defects 
similar to those seen in other disorders of connective tissue such as 
Marfan’s syndrome and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. These, and other 
somatic features, suggest an underlying connective tissue dysplasia. 
The underlying connection between Fragile X Mental Retardation 
Protein (FMRP) and the connective tissue dysplasia seen in FXS is 
still unclear. The limited numbers of studies evaluating cardiovascular 
aspects of FXS have yielded different results. In this study, transtho -
racic echocardiogram and ECG were available in 34 male participants. 
Mean age was 9,17 years [2-34 yrs]. There were two adult patients, 
one with mitral valve prolapsus (MVP), the other with aortic insuffi -ciency. The mean age of participants under 18 years was 8,06 (the 
eldest 17 years old). We compared our results with the data provided 
in the largest study yet (n=40) by Loehr et al. (1986). The comparison 
suggests that the prevalence of MVP is somewhat lower 8/32 (25%) 
in our study, while it was 35.2% in the latter, with a similar mean age 
of 8.6 years, while aortic annulus dilation was higher in the current 
study, 5/32 (15,6%) versus (10%). There was no significant correlation 
between metacarpophalangeal joint hyperextensibility and MVP. This 
data supports previous recommendations towards routine echocardio -
graphic evaluation in individuals with FXS. Re-evaluation of the same 
group especially follow-up measurements of aortic annulus diameters 
in our ongoing longitudinal study will reveal the natural history of car -
diac complications in FXS.
P0117. Audiological evaluation of 63 males with Fragile X
D. Aktas , Y. Alanay, G. Utine, B. Volkan-Salancı, A. Genç, F. Başer, S. Sevinç, 
U. Akyol, K. Boduroğlu, M. Alikaşifoğlu, E. Belgin, E. Tunçbilek;  
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
Fragile X syndrome is the most common inherited cause of mental 
retardation. Medical problems other than cognitive and behavioural is -
sues have been rarely addressed in individuals with FXS.
In this study 36 individuals molecularly diagnosed with FXS were eval -
uated. Mean age of the participants was 8,41 yrs [1,5-27]. Median IQ 
score was 45 [25-103] Seventy-two percent were having occupational 
therapy, while 25% also attended a public school.
ENT examination revealed cerumen in 12 (33%), opaque ear drum in 4 
(11%) Audiologic evaluation revealed normal hearing in 29 participants  
(80,5), while 7 (19,5) had minimal conductive type hearing loss. In gen -
eral , infants from birth to 6 months underwent observation audiometry; 
children between 6-36 months of age underwent Visual Response Au -
diometry (VRA) in soundfield; and children 36 months of age and older 
underwent play audiometry in soundfield or with earphones according 
to the degree of the child’s cooperation. Cooperation problems due 
to mental retardation affected this rule negatively. 19 non-cooperative 
patients (52,78%)(age range 7-27 yrs) were tested by VRA or play 
audiometry. In 7 patients(19,45%), suprathresholds responses were 
observed. For these patients, objective test methods were used effec -
tively for final decision. There was no correlation between IQ scores 
and hearing status. Objective test methods were more feasible for di -
agnose in patients with Fragil X syndrome. Mean age at diagnosis was 
significantly lower in the group with hearing loss. This may reflect the 
earlier referral to a physician with recurrent infection or speech delay 
may have prompted earlier diagnosis.
P0118. Fragile X syndrome in Estonia
H. Puusepp1,2, T. Kahre3, I. Lind3, E. Raukas3,4, V. Soo3, H. Sibul1,4, A. Kurg1, K. 
Õunap2,3;  
1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2De-
partment of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3United Laboratories, 
Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 4Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia.
The Fragile X syndrome is the most common human chromosomal 
monogenic disease associated with heritable mental retardation, and 
is the second most frequent cause of mental retardation after Down 
syndrome. Our study consists of the screening of 561 Estonian chil -
dren having mental retardation, autism, delayed speech and/or behav -
ioral problems. The patient samples were sent to the United Laborato -
ries of Tartu University Hospital for screening of fragile X mutation from 
year 1997 to 2006. The molecular study for the diagnosis has been 
performed by two different techniques. During 1997-2001 the South -
ern blot analysis and later PCR with fluorescently marked primers fol -
lowed by CGG repeat length detection at ABI PRISM 377 was used. 
Among 561 (477 boys/84 girls) patients we found 15 full mutations 
(14 boys/ 1 girl), and 1 premutation in a girl. The main indication for 
the analysis in diagnosed boys was mental retardation in 11 patients, 
autism in 2 patients, and characteristic phenotype in 1 patient. The girl 
with a full mutation was investigated due to psychomotor retardation 
and delayed speech. The girl with a premutation had mild mental re -
tardation and primary ovarian failure. The birth prevalence of full muta -
tion in FMR1 gene causing fragile X syndrome is 1 in 25,308 among 
individuals born during 1984-2006. We found that birth prevalence of 
the fragile X syndrome is significantly lower in Estonia than in other 
countries. The reason for that is still unknown for us.Clinical genetics2
P0119. Is she a carrier of fragile-X? Discrepancies in the results 
of fragile-X tests using different agarose.
R. Shomrat , T. Naiman, S. Tsabary, D. Barel;  
Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Routinely, we perform genetic and prenatal testing for the fragile-X 
syndrome using Gene Scan (GS) and Southern Blot (SB) analyses. 
About 140 women are being tested each month and the DNA extrac -
tion is being done by routine salting-out procedure for all women. 
When using EL-agarose ( Seakam ) for SB, about 3% of the women 
reveal a „smear“ of the upper allele, suspected as an unstable allele. 
This smear starts in the normal range of the repeats and reaches into 
the premutation zone. This unstable allele appears stable in GS rang -
ing between of 42-55 repeats. These women undergo a second DNA 
extraction from fresh blood sample and again the same pattern of in -
stability appears in SB. This result leads us to suspect that there is a 
biological background for this discrepancy. When the women showing 
the „smear“ undergo prenatal diagnosis, all fetuses revealed a stable 
allele. Testing the same women with other agarose gels (agarose1gel  
-Amaresco , or agarose D1 hylabs ), the „smear“ of the upper allele was 
not apparent and the band appears stable.
A double dilemma thus ensues. First, which of the technique reflects 
the biological reality? To answer this, we are currently performing se -
quencing of the FMR1 gene in women who show the smear in SB 
and in women with a stable SB allele. Second, until the reason for the 
discrepancy is made clear, should we consult the women with a sus -
pected „unstable allele“ to undergo a procedure of invasive prenatal 
diagnosis?
P0120. A case report of monozygotic twins discordant for 
frontonasal dysplasia: The etiology of this affection is probably 
not genetic
F. Giuliano1, S. Monnot1, F. Casagrande2, C. Dageville2, H. Karmous-Benailly1, 
J. C. Lambert1;  
1Department of Genetics, Nice, France, 2Department of Pediatrics, Nice, 
France.
Frontonasal dysplasia (FND), also called the median cleft face syn -
drome, encompasses a pattern of anomalies limited to the face and 
head. The main features include marked hypertelorism, lack of nasal 
tip, anterior cranium bifidum occultum and a “widow’s peak”. Associ -
ated midline defects include median clefting involving the nose, upper 
lip, or rarely the palate and alae nasi and an anterior encephalocoele. 
Intellectual development is usually normal and most of cases are spo -
radic. Sometimes, the cranio facial malformations of the FND are as -
sociated with extra cranial malformations such Fallot tetralogy, absent 
tibia or auricular abnormalities. In this syndromic form, mental retarda -
tion is a common feature and familial cases are described. The etiol -
ogy of non syndromic and syndromic FND is probably not the same. In 
the literature several sets of monozygotic twins in which only a single 
twin was affected with non syndromic FND were reported.
Here we describe a patient issue from a monozygotic pair of twins 
with pronounced hypertelorism, short palpebral fissures, coloboma in -
volving cranial nerves, choanal atresia, broad and bifid nasal tip, cleft 
palate and anterior encephalocoele corresponding to the set of cranio -
facial malformations of FND. The other twin is normal. This case leads 
us to discuss the embryologic support of these malformations with the 
hypothesis that FND is non-genetic in origin but a form of embryonic 
disturbance that can result from the twinning process itself.
P0121. Multi-infarct dementia in two brothers with a pre-mutation 
in the FMR1 gene : different presentation of FXTAS ?
J. J. van den Ende , F. Kooy, K. Storm;  
Department of Medical Genetics, Wilrijk (Antwerp), Belgium.
Fragile X syndrome is one of the most common causes of mental retar -
dation, caused by expansion of the CGG repeat in the FMR1 gene. A 
full mutation (>200 repeat) leads to serious neurodevelopmental prob -
lems, especially in males, while males with a pre-mutation are gener -
ally spared the mental retardation.
Since several years however, it is known that more than one third of 
male pre-mutation carriers (55-200 repeats) over 50 years of age de -
velop neurological symptoms, most frequently characterized by ataxia, 
tremor, dementia and Parkinsonism. The condition was called FXTAS 
(fragile X associated tremor/ataxia syndrome).
Typical MRI changes are seen, with cerebral atrophy and T2 hyper -intensive signals in cerebellar peduncles, pons, or subcortical white 
matter.
Postmortem studies show eosinophilic intra-nuclear inclusions through -
out the brain of affected males, and more recently it was shown that 
FXTAS occurred in males with elevated levels of FMR1 mRNA, leading 
to the suggestion that the syndrome is caused by toxic gain-of-function 
of mRNA.
We describe a family with Fragile X syndrome, in which two broth -
ers with the pre-mutation show a neurological pattern, slightly distinct 
from the symptoms normally seen in FXTAS. It might be a variable 
presentation of the syndrome or a coincidental picture, not linked to 
the pre-mutation.
P0122. Long term outcome in 20 Iranian galactosemia patients
F. Mirzajani1, R. Mirfakhraie1, H. Kianifar2, E. Talachian3, M. Houshmand1;  
1National Institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Mashhad Medical University, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 3Iran Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
During last 6 years more than on hundred and fifty cases suspected to 
be affected by Galactosemia were refered to the National Institute for 
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB) for biochemical and 
molecular analysis.
In a retrospective study, 20 galactosemic patients, were traced during 
2001-2007 and their long term outcome were evaluated. Correlation 
between genotype and phenotype was studied.
Although most of the patients were diagnosed on the basis of clinical 
symptoms in advance, Investigation of long term results of treating ga -
lactosemia by clinical, psychometric and laboratory testing has shown 
poor results.
Three cases with normal GALT activity but with clinical manifestations 
of galactosemia (cases of non classic galactosemia) were found.
All the findings emphasis on the need of a new look and a new chal -
lenge for galactosemia in Iran concerning screening tests, differential 
diagnosis tests and metabolites assays for Iranian newborns.
P0123. Two cases of subacute neuronopathic type of Gaucher 
disease
N. V. Olkhovich1, N. A. Pichkur1, A. N. Nedoboy1, O. N. Kochneva1, T. P. Iva -
nova1, N. G. Gorovenko2;  
1Ukrainian Children Hospital “OKhMATDET”, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2National Academy 
of Postdiploma Education, Kyiv, Ukraine.
We report two Gaucher disease (GD) patients with subacute neurono -
pathic type of disease with rare genotypes.
Patient 1  was an 11 years old girl. She was diagnosed at the age of 
2 years as GD. The first clinical symptoms were hepatomegaly with 
marked splenomegaly, mild or moderate anemia, thrombocytopenia 
and weakness. Bone marrow showed the presence of Gaucher cells. 
At age 2 years old she had undergone total splenectomy. Bone lesions 
in the both femur were appeared when she was 3 years old. The pa -
tient suffered from bone crises. Neurological symptoms appeared at 
age of 9 years. There were mild disturbance of eye movements and 
severe involuntary movements like as choreoathetoses, which made 
gait impossible. She has had three episodes of generalized seizures. 
Now she has mild hemiparesis. MRI of the brain with contrast revealed 
moderately extensive changes in the capsula interna. Height and 
weight were below normal. The ß-glucocerebrosidase activity was 2,9 
nmol/h/mg protein, genotype G377S/c999G→A.
Patient 2  was a 15 years old boy. He was diagnosed as GD after bone 
marrow biopsy. The initial clinical symptoms were disturbance of eye 
movements that appeared at the age of 2 years. At the age of 3 years 
mild hepatosplenomegaly with mild anemia and thrombocytopenia 
was noted. Height and weight were normal. The patient did not suffer 
from bone crises. Now his main problems are mild hyperkinesis of the 
head and disturbance of eye movements. The ß-glucocerebrosidase 
activity was 4,2 nmol/h/mg protein, genotype D409H/R120W/G202R.
P0124. Results of 5 years Genetic Counseling in Iranian 
Province of Hormozgan
P. Nikuei , G. Tabasi, M. Saberi;  
Social Welfare Organization, Bandarabbas, Islamic Republic of Iran.
- Genetic diseases have high frequency in Iran because of consan -
gious marriages.According to clerical approval of therapeutic abortion 
for some genetic diseases after 1997 in Iran genetic counseling has a Clinical genetics
great importance prior pregnancy.
From 2001-2006 we performed a total of 1523 genetic counselings. 
Results were as follows:
- 679 couples (44.5%) came for genetic counseling because of involve -
ment with a genetic disease and 844 couples (55.5%) came without 
any genetic problem and only for assurance. Consangious marriages 
905 cases (59.4%) was more common than unconsangious marriages. 
Requesting for genetic counseling was: 678 couples (44.5%) prepreg -
nancy, 588 couples (38.6%) prior marriage and 257 couples (16.9%) 
during pregnancy. The most genetic disorders were:
Hemoglobinopathies: 307 cases (45.2% includes β- thalassemia,α-
thalassemia,sickle cell anemia and other hemoglobinopathies)
Mental Retardation: 228 cases (33.9%)
Genetic syndromes: 40 cases (5.9% like apert,Turner,Ehlers-Dan -
los,…)
Recurrent abortion: 29 cases (4.2%)
Physical disabilithies: 29 cases (4.2%)
Deafness: 17 cases (2.5%)
Infertility: 12 cases (1,7%)
Neural tube defects: 8 cases (1.2%)
Blindness: 4 cases (0.5%)
Primary amenorrhea: 4 cases (0.5%)
The main conclusion is importance of genetic counseling prior mar -
riage and pregnancy because of high frequency of autosomal reces -
sive diseases due to consangious marriages in Iran.
P0125. Incomplete penetrance of G61E and R390H mutations in 
CYP1B1 among Iranian Primary Congenital Glaucoma patients
F. Suri1,2, H. Amini Saroei3, S. Yazdani4, M. Pakravan4, N. Nilforooshan5, B. 
Bayat1, E. Elahi1,2,6;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Department of Biological Sciences, University of Tehran, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Farabi Eye Research Center, Department of 
Ophthalmology, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Repub -
lic of Iran, 4Ophthalmic Research Center, Shaheed Beheshti University of Medi -
cal Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Department of Ophthalmology, 
Iran University of Medical Sciences, Hazrat Rasool Hospital, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 6Bioinformatics Center, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophys -
ics, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Glaucoma is a heterogeneous group of optic neuropathies character -
ized by degeneration of the optic nerve, usually associated with elevat -
ed intraocular pressure. It is the cause of 15% of blindness worldwide. 
Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG), one of the three major forms of 
the disease, becomes apparent at birth or before the age of three and 
is a major cause of childhood blindness. Mutations in both alleles of 
the cytochrome P4501B1 ( CYP1B1 ) gene, which is the only gene thus 
far linked to PCG, result in the disease phenotype. It has been re -
cently shown that mutations in this gene is cause of disease in approxi -
mately 70% of Iranian PCG patients and that the common mutations 
in the population are G61E, R368H, R390H, and R469W. We have 
now done a mutation screen in apparently unaffected family members 
of pedigrees whose proband carried the G61E or R390H mutations. 
Two apparently unaffected individuals carried G61E in the homozy -
gous state and one carried the R390H mutation in the homozygous 
state. This indicates incomplete penetrance for these two mutaitons. 
Incomplete penetrance for R390H has not been previously reported. 
Incomplete penetrance has implications for role of the CYP1B1 gene 
in pathogenesis and for diagnosis. 
P0126. Screening for GCK and HNF1α mutations in Polish 
women with gestational diabetes.
D. Januszkiewicz1,2, M. Zurawek3, E. Wender-Ozegowska1, J. Nowak3;  
1Academy of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics, 
Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Human Genetics Polish Academy of Sciences, 
Poznan, Poland.
Mutations in the glucokinase ( GCK ) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1α 
(HNF1α ) gene cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) 
type 2 and 3, respectively. The aim of the study was to examine the 
prevalence of mutations in GCK  and HNF 1α genes, in Polish women 
with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). SSCP analysis and/or direct 
sequencing of the coding regions of GCK and HNF 1α  gene were done 
in 119 Caucasian gestational diabetic subjects, fulfilling tree from the 
following criteria: age <35 years, BMI before pregnant <30, an incre -ment in glucose level during 2-h glucose tolerance test (OGTT) <3 
mmol/l, and a family history of type 2 diabetes mellitus (type 2 DM) or 
gestational diabetes. In 11 probands (9%) we detected three GCK  mu-
tations: G448fs, E312Q, S383L and four intronic variants: IVS2-12C>T, 
IVS3-8G>A, IVS7-13A>G, IVS4+26C>A. All mutations were absent 
from 210 control subjects ( P< 0.05). In families carrying GCK  muta -
tions the genotype- phenotype correlations were analyzed. In HNF1α  
gene we identified 11 polymorphisms and 1 rare variant sequence 
IVS5-27C>T. Our results indicated, that the frequency of mutations in 
GCK  in Polish population of gestational diabetes patients is not high.
P0127. Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez-Syndrome in a 6-yaers old boy 
with behavior problems but normal intelligence
M. Hempel1,2, A. Pfeufer1,2, A. Weitensteiner3, P. Freisinger3, T. Meitinger1,2;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, TU Munich, Munich, Germany, 2GSF National 
Research Center, Neuherberg, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, TU Mu -
nich, Munich, Germany.
We are reporting a boy who is the first child of healthy parents, born 
in time after an uneventfull pregnancy with normal birth weight, lentgh 
and head circumference. In the first year of his life feeding problems 
occurred, failure to thrive, hypotonia and strabismus were noted. Mo -
tor development was delayed. The boy started to walk at 18 month 
and ataxia was diagnosed. The parents observed a sleep disturbance 
beginning in the first weeks after birth. During the day the boy exhibited 
hyperactive and aggressive behavior, as well as attention deficits. An 
intelligence test revealed a normal IQ of 118. MRI of the brain at the 
age of 6 years showed fusion of cerebellar hemispheres and agenesis 
of the cerebellar vermis, the typical features of rhompencephalosynap -
sis. No further abnormalities were found. An examination at the age of 
6 years showed a long face with a high forehead, mid-face hypoplasia, 
deeply set eyes, telecanthus, epicanthus inversus, broad nasal bridge, 
pointed chin, deeply set posterior rotated ears and bitemporal alopecia 
areata. Syndactyly of the toes II/III on both feet was present. Alopecia 
and rhombencephalosynapsis together with trigeminal anesthesia are 
the major symptoms of Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez-Syndrome, a very 
rare sporadic syndrome. Since the first report in 1979 ten cases of 
Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez-Syndrome have been reported. Additional 
symptomes frequently described in Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez-Syn -
drome are facial dysmorphism and craniosynostisis/asymmetric skull. 
While the intellectual impairment is common in this syndrome our pa -
tient showed normal intelligence. Difficulties in behaviour may be due 
to the cerebellar abnormalities.
P0128. Gorlin syndrome in seven patients
E. Tunçbilek , G. E. Utine, F. Taşar, Y. Alanay, C. Tümer, H. Çetin, M. Saysel, S. 
Balcı, D. Aktaş, K. Boduroğlu, M. Alikaşifoğlu;  
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
Gorlin syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized 
by cutaneous basal cell carcinomas, odontogenic keratocysts and 
skeletal anomalies. The prevalence is estimated from 1:57000 to 
1:164000. Seven patients with Gorlin syndrome are presented. First 
patient presented with macrocephaly, thick and prominent eyebrows, 
a flat maxillary region, prognathism with mandibular hypertrophy and 
cystic mandibular lesions, multiple hyperpigmented lesions and hypo -
gonadotropic hypogonadism. Triventricular widening and aqueductal 
narrowing were detected. Chromosome analysis revealed 46,XX/
46,X,t(X;11)(q24;q13). The second patient had palmar pits, maxillary 
hypoplasia and prognathism, odontogenic keratocysts and pigmen -
tary skin abnormalities. Third patient had mandibular and maxillary 
odontogenic keratocysts and at two years of age hydrocephaly was 
diagnosed. He had macrocephaly, thick eyebrows, synophrys, down-
slanting and wide palpebral fissures, generalised skin hyperpigmen -
tation and mild prognathism. Other two patients were a mother and 
her daughter. The mother had maxillary and mandibular cysts, basal 
cell carcinoma and scoliosis. Her father died of skin cancer. Her 5-
year-old daughter had macrocephaly, coarse facies, partial agenesis 
of corpus callosum and café-au-lait spot. Last two patients were two 
brothers, both having gingival hyperplasia and odontogenic cysts. The 
elder brother had millimetric calcifications on the anterior part of falx 
cerebri, as demonstrated by cranial tomography. Both had atrophic 
depigmented skin lesions and the elder brother had palmar pits. The 
younger brother was unable to read, he had diffuse calvarial thicken -
ing in cranial CT and his chromosome analysis was 47,XXY. Gorlin Clinical genetics
syndrome is a very heterogeneous condition and the patients should 
be followed for future development of clinical criteria.
P0129. Psychological manifestations in Romanian haemophilics
M. Mihailov , M. Serban, S. Arghirescu, M. Puiu;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania.
Introduction. Haemophiliacs often have to adjust their aspirations, life -
style and employment options. In Romania and in other developing 
countries, lack of adequate therapy generates fear and uncertainty. 
Patients with high complications rate may develop psychological dis -
orders.
Aim of the study was to evaluate frequency and type of psychological 
manifestations in haemophiliacs.
Material and method. Our study group consisted of 234 haemophiliacs 
registered and treated in Haemophilia Center Timisoara. We analyzed 
psychological complications according to haemophilia severity and pa -
tients’ age.
Results. In our patients, psychological complications appeared in 
16.24% of cases. 31.58% of patients with psychological complications 
presented associated psychological manifestations. In 4.27% of hae -
mophiliacs with psychological manifestations neuro-sensitive-senso -
rial complications were noticed. 
The majority of patients with psychological complications (81.6%) had 
severe haemophilia. High frequency of haemartrosis in these patients, 
frequent and long hospitalizations, high chronic arthropathy rate which 
produces disability and affects body image are important factors of psy -
chological manifestations appearance. Most patients with psychologi -
cal complications (76.3%) were from other counties, major deficiencies 
in haemophilia care representing a permanent distress. Mean age of 
patients with mental complications at diagnose was 14.2 (SD=9.840. 
Opioid abuse (12 cases) was the main complication and was signal -
ized only in adults, the explanation being that in this age group, most 
of the patients present severe chronic haemophilic arthropathy, which 
causes chronic pain and disability.
Discussions and conclusions. Despite all difficulties, it is essential 
to diagnose and treat psychological complications in haemophiliacs, 
presence of a psychologist in the multidisciplinary haemophilia care 
team being indispensable.
P0130. Role of mtDNA in Iranian patients with Hypertrophic 
Cardiomyopathy
M. Montazeri1, E. V. Zaklyazminskaya2, M. Houshmand1, M. Peyghambari3, G. 
Estahbanati3;  
1NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2RussianResearch Center of Medi -
cal Genetics, Laboratory of DNA Research, Moscow, Russia, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 32Iran University of Medical Sciences, Shaheed Rajaei Cardiovas -
cular Medical Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is characterized by hypertrophy 
of ventricles and intrventricular septum. Patients could develop serious 
complications including heart failure, arrhythmias and sudden death. 
Recently mitochondrial DNA mutations have been associated with car -
diomyopathies. Mitochondria are the major site of energy production 
in the cell. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that energy dependant 
tissues such as heart, affected by mitochondrial dysfunction. Mito -
chondrial (mt) DNA mutations are hypothesized to be involved in the 
pathogenesis of HCM. In this study, 31 Iranian HCM patients were 
screened for mitochondrial DNA point mutations and deletions. Our 
result showed three patients (5.76%) with a 7.4 kb deletion and one 
patient (1.92%) with 4977 bp “common deletion. Mutations in G3338A 
(Val>Met), G9053A (Ser>Asn), G9055A (Ala>Thr) and T3285C in 
tRNA Leucine were found. We detected 41 polymorphisms in mtDNA 
that 15 polymorphisms of them have not been reported before. Our 
results suggest that an increased level of mitochondrial mutations may 
be an indicator of DNA instability. Furthermore, mtDNA mutations may 
play an important role in pathogenesis of cardiac arrest which has re -
mained unexplained for long. We are investigating pathogenesis these 
findingsP0131. Screening of TMC1 gene mutations in DFNB7(11) locus 
in autosomal recessive non- syndromic hearing loss Iranian 
population.
N. Bazazzadegan1, N. Meyer2, K. Kahrizi1, M. Mohseni1, P. Imani1, N. Nikzat1, 
S. Arzhangi1, M. Seifati1, K. Jalalvand1, J. Malbin1, K. Javan1, M. Farhadi3, R. J. 
H. Smith2, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci -
ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Research 
Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Universi -
ty of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States, 3Research Centre of Ear, Nose, Throat, and 
Head and Neck Surgery, Iran university of Medical sciences, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Mutations in the transmembrane channel-like gene 1 (TMC1) cause 
prelingual autosomal recessive (DFNB7/11) and postlingual progres -
sive autosomal dominant (DFNA36) nonsyndromic hearing loss sug -
gesting that this protein plays an important role in the inner ear. These 
loci map to the same interval on 9q13-q21. The TMC1 protein is pre -
dicted to contain 6 transmembrane domains and to have cytoplasmic 
orientation of N and C termini. Mutations in this gene have been re -
ported in North America in a family with autosomal dominant inheri -
tance, Sudan, also in our two neighbor countries Pakistan and Turkey. 
Therefore we decided to study this locus in our population.
Thirty nine families with autosomal recessive and one family with auto -
somal dominant non-syndromic hearing loss that include two or more 
affected children were screened for DFNB7(11) locus by linkage analy -
sis. These families originated from different ethnic groups of Iranian 
population and were negative for GJB2 and GJB6 mutations in locus 
DFNB1 . We used D9S301, D9S175, D9S1876 and D9S1837 STR 
(short Tandem Repeat) markers for this study.
Three out of forty families were linked to this locus. Mutation screen -
ing of TMC1 gene in these families revealed a homozygous framshift 
mutation (P.N150kfrx26) in one of the recessive families and a hetero -
zygous mutation (G417R) in dominant family. Mutation detection for 
the other recessive family is undergoing.
We concluded that after DFNB1 and DFNB21 mutations, TMC1 gene 
mutations are responsible for the most prevalent cause of non- syn -
dromic hearing loss in Iranian population.
P0132. Screening for 15 loci in the Iranian patients with 
autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss
H. Najmabadi1, C. Nishimura2, K. Kahrizi1, N. Bazazzadegan1, M. Mohseni1, 
Y. Riazalhoseini1, G. Asaadi Tehrani1, A. Daneshi3, M. Farhadi3, S. Yahyavi3, E. 
Taherzadeh1, P. Imani1, R. Vazifehmand1, A. Anousheh1, A. Nazeri1, S. Abedini1, 
N. Nikzat1, S. Arzhangi1, R. J. H. Smith2;  
1 Genetics Research Center, The Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences 
University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Re -
search Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa, 
IA, United States, 3Research Center of Ear, Nose, Throat, and Head and Neck 
Surgery, Iran university of Medical sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss is the most common 
form of severe inherited hearing impairment. Mutations in GJB2 gene 
have been reported to be the most common cause of ARNSHL in the 
Northern European populations. These mutations are followed closely 
by GJB6 deletion. Our previous studies showed that GJB2 mutations 
and the GJB6 deletion do not play a significant role in the etiology of 
deafness in Iran. In this study, we assessed the contributions made by 
other loci to the ARNSHL genetic load in Iran. We have been screening 
50 families with normal GJB2 and GJB6 alleles for DFNB1, DFNB2, 
DFNB3, DFNB4, DFNB9 , DFNB21 and DFNB40 by linkage analy -
sis using, 3 STR markers for each locus. Some of the families have 
been localized to above- mentioned loci. Then with exclusion of linked 
families, the rest of families were screened for DFNB6, DFNB7(11), 
DFNB8 (10) , DFNB12, DFNB16, DFNB18 , DFNB23 and DFNB29 
loci. Seventeen families showed linkage to some of these loci. Three 
families have been localized to DFNB4 with G334V, R409H and T420I/
1197DelT mutations in SLC26A4 gene , two families to DFNB21 with a 
9611 bp deletion in exon 10 and 266 delT mutation in TECTA gene and 
one family to DFNB7(11) with P.N150kfrx26 mutation in TMC1 gene. 
Mutation screening of SLC26A4, MYOVIIA, TMPRS53, MYO15A, 
Harmonin and TMC1 genes for other 11 families is undergoing . Our 
results suggest that other loci may have the major causative roles in 
ARNSHL in Iran.
Key words: Linkage analysis, ARNSHL, DFNB.Clinical genetics
P0133. Hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia in a Tunisian family
R. M‘rad1,2, F. Maazoul1, K. Lilia1, E. Chabchoub1, M. Chaabouni1,2, L. Ben je -
maa1,2, I. Chelly1, I. Ouertani1, Z. Marrakchi3, H. Chaabouni1,2;  
1Department of human genetics, Charles Nicolle hospital Tunis, Tunisia, 2De-
partment of human genetics, Faculty of medicine Tunis, Tunisia, 3Department of 
neonatology, Charles Nicolle hospital Tunis, Tunisia.
Hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED, Clouston syndrome, MIM 129500) 
was 1rst described in 1895 and later by Clouston, in families from Que -
bec. Although most common in French Canadians, the disorder has 
been identified in several ethnic groups. Clouston hidrotic ectodermal 
dysplasia (HED) is transmitted as an autosomal dominant condition 
with complete penetrance and variable expressivity. The main features 
of this rare form of genodermatosis are partial to complete alopecia, 
palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, and nail dystrophy. Sweat gland func -
tion in these patients is normal. Recently, mutations in the GJB6 gene 
encoding the gap junction protein connexin 30 have been shown to 
cause this disorder.
Here we report a girl born to consanguineous parents presenting with 
complete alopecia and onychodysplasia without neither oligodentia 
nor sweat gland function anomalies. Her father, her paternal uncle and 
her paternal aunt are similarly affected. The paternal grandparents are 
normal .The comparison with other ectodermal dysplasias is present -
ed and discussed. The possibility of an autosomal recessive form of 
hidrotic ectodermal dysplasia is raised.
P0134. Mutation IVS2-2A>G in SLC2A (Prestin)  gene in two 
Estonian families with hearing loss
R. Teek1,2, E. Raukas2, E. Oitmaa3, K. Kruustük4, R. Zordania5, K. Joost5, P. 
Gardner6, I. Schrijver7, M. Kull1, K. Õunap2,8;  
1Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 
2United Laboratories, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 3Asper Biotech, 
Tartu, Estonia, 4Ear Clinic, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 5Tallinn 
Children’s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 6Department of Medicine, Stanford Univer -
sity Medical Center, Stanford, CA, United States, 7Department of Pathology and 
Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, 
8Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
Introduction: Prestin is a multipass transmembrane protein of the outer 
hair cells of the mammalian cochlea and it was encoded by human 
gene SLC26A5 . In humans, a single nucleotide change - IVS2-2A>G 
in the second intron of SLC26A5  has been reported in association with 
hearing loss.
During 2005-2006 we have screened 183 individuals with hereditary 
impaired hearing (HIH) by arrayed primer extension method, which 
covers 201 mutations in 8 genes ( GJB2, Connexin-30, Connexin-31, 
Connexin-43, Prestin  and Pendrin  gene, and 2 mitochondrial genes). 
In 3 individuals we found IVS2-2A>G mutation in one allele of Prestin  
gene (1.6%).
We report two families with mutation IVS2-2A>G in SLC26A5 (Prestin)  
gene. First family: 2 children with severe hearing loss (HL) and geno -
type 35delG/IVS1+1G>A. Mother has mild HL and mutations 35delG/ 
V37l; father has normal hearing, mutation IVS1+G>A in GJB2 gene 
and IVS2-2A>G in SLC26A5 gene. Second family: mother and daugh -
ter have genotype IVS2-2A>G. Mother has severe HL and 3 years old 
daughter has normal hearing.
Conclusions: We found 3 persons with IVS2-2A>G mutation, only in 
one of them sensorineural hearing loss was found. However, hearing 
loss may still develop of two others. In 1.6% of investigated persons 
with HIH IVS2-2A>G mutation in Prestin  gene was found. This in the 
correlation with previous data: 4% Caucasians and 1.3% Hispanics 
carry this mutation (Tang et al. 2005). Our data support the hypothesis 
that heterozygosity for the mutation IVS2-2A>G in SLC26A5 gene may 
be not be, by itself, sufficient to cause hearing loss.
P0135. Copy number alterations in hereditary spastic paraplegia 
genes
C. Beetz1, A. Brice2, P. Byrne3, C. Depienne2, A. Durr2, A. O. H. Nygren4, E. 
Reid5, L. Schoels6, T. Deufel1;  
1Uniklinikum, Jena, Germany, 2INSERM, Paris, France, 3University of Dublin, 
Dublin, Ireland, 4MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 5Adenbrooke’s 
Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Uniklinikum, Tübingen, Germany.
Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a neurodegenerative condi -
tion causing progressive leg spasticity and weakness. SPG4  (SPAST  
gene, spastin protein) is the major HSP locus; there is large hetero -geneity underlying the remaining ~60% of cases. We have previously 
shown for SPG4  that large genomic deletions represent a surprisingly 
frequent class of disease-causing alterations. We subsequently wid -
ened pertinent analyses to (i) investigate the very extend of SPAST  
deletions and (ii) screen for copy number aberrations in other HSP 
genes.
In 18/18 cases investigated so far, deletion of SPAST  exon 1 is ac -
companied by deletion of the promotor. This finding establishes a loss 
of function mechanisms, i.e. haploinsufficiency, as underlying at least 
some cases of SPG4  HSP. We also identified copy number aberrations 
in SPG3A , SPG6 , SPG7 , and SPG31 . As not all of these are associ -
ated with an HSP phenotype, haploinsufficiency is of no relevance for 
the corresponding HSP genes. This information impacts on the strate -
gies for choosing appropriate cellular and animal disease models as 
well as on molecular therapeutic considerations. Current efforts there -
fore aim at uncovering the disease-association of copy number altera -
tions in the complete spectrum of known HSP genes.
P0136. Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome: report of two portuguese 
families
C. Dias1, J. Silva1, S. Morais2, E. Oliveira3, E. Silva4, S. Gonçalves5, J. Barbot6, 
M. Sousa3, M. Reis Lima1;  
1Genetics Clinic, Instituto de Genética Médica, Porto, Portugal, 2Haematology 
Department, Hospital Geral de Santo António, Porto, Portugal, 3Cell Biology 
Lab, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Porto, Portugal, 4Ophtal -
mology Department, Hospitais da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 
5Ophtalmology Department, Hospital de Crianças Maria Pia, Porto, Portugal, 
6Haematology Department, Hospital de Crianças Maria Pia, Porto, Portugal.
Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome (HPS) [MIM#203300] is a geneti -
cally heterogeneous autossomic recessive disorder, characterized 
by oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) and platelet dysfunction, caused 
by defects in lysosome-related organelles. Eight human subtypes of 
HPS have been described. Patients show hypopigmentation of hair 
and skin. Ocular findings include nystagmus, iris transillumination, 
hypopigmentation of retina and decreased visual acuity. They have 
prolonged bleeding with easy bruising. Severe bleeding diathesis is 
more frequent in subtypes 1 and 4. Patients may also have pulmonary 
fibrosis in the third and fourth decades. Granulomatous colitis is highly 
variable. Electron microscopic examination of platelets shows absent 
or greatly decreased number of platelet dense granules.
We present two unrelated families with a clinical and electron micro -
scopic diagnosis of Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome. The first family, with 
consanguineous first cousin parents, has two affected children: the el -
dest daughter has clinical features of HPS along with epilepsy and mild 
mental retardation; the youngest son has identical clinical features but 
with normal development.
In the second family, parents are non-consanguineous and their only 
son is affected. He was initially diagnosed as having OCA. When easy 
bruising was noticed, the investigation of platelet function revealed ab -
normalities.
Patients were submitted to platelet function tests and electron micro -
scopic evaluation of platelets. The clinical presentation of HPS is re -
viewed, as well as differential diagnosis. Though this condition is more 
frequent in Puerto Rican patients it has been described in many other 
parts of the world.
P0137. The syndrome comprising myopathy with excess of 
muscle spindles, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and Noonan-like 
phenotype is caused by mutations in HRAS ; The severe end of 
Costello syndrome
I. van der Burgt1, W. Kupsky2, S. Katechis3, A. Nadroo3, C. Kratz4, H. ter Laak5, 
E. Sistermans5, M. Zenker6;  
1University Medical Centre St Radboud, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 
2Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, United States, 3New York Methodist Hos -
pital, New York, NY, United States, 4University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 
5University Medical Centre St Radboud, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 6Univer -
sity of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.
In the recent time, great progress has been achieved in the under -
standing of the molecular basis of Noonan syndrome (NS; OMIM 
163950), Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous syndrome (CFC; OMIM 115150), 
and Costello syndrome (CS; OMIM 218040). These disorders rep -
resent distinct entities wich share a common pattern of congenital 
anomalies. They are all caused by mutations in genes involved in the Clinical genetics
Ras-MAPK signaling cascade, leading to constitutive activation of the 
pathway, with specific mutations in HRAS  being detected in the major -
ity of individuals with CS.
We screened four unrelated patients (2 male , 2 female) previously 
reported with myopathy, muscle spindle excess in striated muscle, 
HOCM, variable features of NS and early death for mutations in 
PTPN11, KRAS, NRAS and HRAS . Heterozygous de novo  HRAS  
mutations were found in three of the four patients examined. In the 
first case the 2 bp substitution c.35-36GC->TT predicting the amino 
acid exchange G12V was present, and in the second case another 
missense mutation at the same codon, G12S (c.34G->A). In the third 
patiënt a novel HRAS  mutation c.187G->A (E63K)was detected in 
DNA derived from blood cells.
We present the clinical details and results of the molecular studies in 
the four patients with HOCM, myopathy with muscle spindle excess 
and NS features and conclude that these patients represent the severe 
end of CS.
P0138. HTRA1 Polymorphism in Dry and Wet Age-Related 
Macular Degeneration
J. Lin , F. Tsai, Y. Tsai;  
China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
Objective: To investigate HTRA1 polymorphisms in unrelated Taiwan 
Chinese patients with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and 
control subjects without AMD.
Methods: 95 unrelated Taiwan Chinese patients with AMD and 90 age- 
and sex-matched control subjects were enrolled in our study. Genomic 
DNA was prepared from peripheral blood obtained from all AMD pa -
tients and control subjects. Polymerase chain reactions were used to 
analyze two HTRA1 single-nucleotide polymorphisms [rs11200638 (G/
A) and rs10490924 (G/T)].
Results: Of the 95 participants with AMD, dry AMD was diagnosed 
in 52 patients and wet AMD in 43 patients. Both rs11200638 (G/A) 
and rs10490924 (G/T) were significantly associated with all AMD 
[rs11200638: P = 6.7 × 10-7 for an additive allele-dosage model, ORhet 
= 1.97 (0.81, 4.81), ORhom = 8.59 (3.28, 22.49), A allele: 73% in all AMD 
versus 47% in controls; rs10490924: P = 9.2 × 10-6, ORhet = 1.86 (0.79, 
4.35), ORhom = 5.08 (2.21, 11.70), T allele: 73% in all AMD versus 50% 
in controls]. In terms of significance of association, rs11200638 was 
the most significantly associated variant. Subtype analysis including 
dry and wet AMD also revealed the similar results. Haplotype analy -
sis demonstrated that AT was significantly associated with wet and all 
AMD ( P = 0.011 and 0.004, respectively), whereas GG was signifi -
cantly associated with the control group when compared with all AMD 
(P = 0.035).
Conclusions: Our study demonstrated that both SNPs were significant -
ly associated with dry and wet AMD and the rs11200638 was the most 
significantly associated variant in a Taiwan Chinese population.
P0139. Early energy deficit in Huntington disease: identification 
of a plasma biomarker traceable during disease progression.
F. Mochel1, P. Charles2, F. Seguin3, J. Barritault3, C. Coussieu4, L. Perin5, Y. 
Le Bouc5, C. Gervais6, G. Carcelain7, A. Vassault8, J. Feingold2, D. Rabier8, A. 
Durr1,2;  
1INSERM U679, Hôpital La Salpetrière, Paris, France, 2Département de géné -
tique et cytogénétique, Hôpital La Salpetrière, Paris, France, 3Faculté de mé -
decine et de pharmacie and Hôpital La Milétrie, Poitiers, France, 4Laboratoire 
d´endocrinologie, Hôpital La Salpetrière, Paris, France, 5Explorations fonction -
nelles endocriniennes, Hôpital d´enfants Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 
6Service de diététique, Hôpital La Salpetrière, Paris, France, 7Laboratoire 
d´immunologie, Hôpital La Salpetrière, Paris, France, 8Laboratoire de biochimie 
métabolique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, Paris, France.
Huntington disease (HD) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder, without 
effective treatment. In the absence of clear underlying mechanisms 
in HD, weight loss is an appealing phenotype associated with chorea 
and cognitive decline. We performed a multiparametric study explor -
ing body weight and the mechanisms of its loss in 32 presymptomatic 
carriers and HD patients in the early stages of the disease, compared 
to 21 controls. We combined it to a multivariate statistical analysis, 
based on proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) spectroscopy 
of plasma. We demonstrated an early hypermetabolic state in HD. 
Weight loss was observed in the HD group even in presymptomatic 
carriers, although their caloric intake was higher than controls. Inflam -matory processes and primary hormonal dysfunction were excluded. 
1H NMR spectroscopy on plasma did, however, distinguish HD pa -
tients at different stages of the disease and presymptomatic carriers 
from controls. This distinction was attributable to low levels of the 
branched chain amino acids (BCAA), valine, leucine and isoleucine. 
BCAA levels were correlated with weight loss and, importantly, with 
disease progression and abnormal triplet repeat expansion size in the 
HD1 gene. Levels of IGF1, which is regulated by BCAA, were also 
significantly lower in the HD group. Therefore, early weight loss in HD 
is associated with a systemic metabolic defect. BCAA levels may be 
used as a biomarker, indicative of disease onset and early progres -
sion. The decreased plasma BCAA levels in HD likely represent a criti -
cal need for Krebs cycle energetic substrates provided by peripheral 
organ metabolism for the brain.
P0140. Vitamin D dependent Rickets Type II; Report of Two 
Affected Siblings in a Consanguineous Iranian family with a 
Novel Mutation in VDR Gene
N. Momenin1, Y. Shafeghati1, S. Esfahani2, E. Reyniers3, W. Wuyts4;  
1Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Children`s Hospi -
tal Medical Center,Tehran Medical Science University, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 3Medical Genetics Center, University and University Hospital, Antwerp 
(UA/UZA), Belgium, 4Medical Genetics Center, University and University Hospi -
tal of Antwerp (UA/UZA)., Antwerp, Belgium.
Hereditary vitamin D resistant rickets type II(HVDDRII) is a rare auto -
somal recessive disorder, most often caused by mutations in the VitD 
receptor gene. It is usually presented with rickets not responsive to 
VitD treatment. Circulating levels of 1,25(OH)2 VitD3 are elevated. 
Alopecia of the scalp or totalis is seen in some families with HVDDRII. 
This is usually associated with a more severe phenotype.
In this report, we present clinical findings on a family with the typical 
clinical features and molecular findings in two affected siblings..
The cardinal findings in the index patient were: alopecia totalis, renal 
tubular acidosis, mild generalized aminoaciduria, refractory rickets, 
high alkaline phosphatase, and hyperparathyroidism. Other routine 
biochemical tests were WNL. Skin biopsy was performed and was 
compatible with alopecia areata. Proband has had an older brother just 
with the same disease he deceased at the age of 32 months. Mutation 
analysis of the VDR gene by direct sequencing analysis of all coding 
exons showed a homozygous c.122G>A(p.Cys41Tyr)  variant in exon 
2 with several arguments pointing to a pathogenic effect. It was a novel 
mutation in VDR gene has not been reported before.
Two children of a consanguineous Iranian family showed the classical 
clinical features of HVDRR II and a novel mutation in VDR gene. We 
should be aware of this very rare disease, whenever we see a patient 
who is suffering from refractory rickets with alopecia.
P0141. Early neurological phenotype in 4 children with biallelic 
PRODH  mutations
A. Afenjar1, M. Moutard1, D. Doummar1, L. Burglen2, D. Heron3, D. Campion4, 
T. Billette de Villemeur1, D. Rodriguez1;  
1AP-HP, Service de neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, 75012 Paris, 
France, 2AP-HP, Service de génétique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, 75012 
Paris, France, 3AP-HP, Service de génétique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpétrière, 75012 
Paris, France, 4INSERM U614 Faculté de Médecine, Rouen, France.
Hyperprolinemia type I (HPI) results from a deficiency of proline oxi -
dase (POX), involved in the first step in the conversion of proline to 
glutamate. Diverse phenotypes were described in patients with HPI, 
prior to the identification of the POX  gene ( PRODH) : whereas various 
patients were asymptomatic, others had neurological and extraneuro -
logical defects. PRODH  gene is located in the region deleted in velo -
cardiofacial syndrome (VCFS). Heterozygous and homozygous mu -
tations have been identified in patients with variable hyperprolinemia 
and various features (patients with schizophrenia, chromosome 22q11 
microdeletions and/or neurological defects). A functional study has di -
vided the PRODH  missense mutations into three groups: those lead -
ing to mild, moderate, or severe reduction of POX activity. In this study, 
we report four unrelated children with HPI and a homogeneous se -
vere neurological phenotype. We identified biallelic abnormalities in 
PRODH  in these patients that led to severe reduction of POX activ -
ity. These included missense and nonsense mutations, deletions of 
PRODH and a 22q11 microdeletion. Four other children have been re -
ported with severe biallelic PRODH mutations. The phenotype of these Clinical genetics
eight patients associates early psychomotor development delay with 
predominant cognitive defects, autistic features and epilepsy. Their 
values of hyperprolinemia ranged from 400 to 2200 µmol/L. Patients 
with biallelic PRODH  alterations resulting in severely impaired POX 
activity had an early onset and severe neurological features. Thus, 
children with this phenotype and those with a microdeletion in chromo -
some 22q11, especially those with mental retardation and autistic fea -
tures, should be tested for hyperprolinemia. Hyperprolinemic patients 
should be screened for PRODH  mutations
P0142. A novel mutation L324V in the fibroblast growth factor 
receptor 3 in familial hypochondroplasia
C. Collet1, A. Verloes2, M. Lenne1, J. L. Laplanche1;  
1Service de biochimie et biologie moléculaire, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, Fran -
ce, 2Unité fonctionnelle de génétique clinique, Fédération de génétique, Hôpital 
Robert Debré, Paris, France.
Hypochondroplasia is an autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasia char -
acterized by short-limb dwarfism with rhizomelic shortening. This phe -
notype is similar to achondroplasia, but the features tend to be milder, 
as macrocephaly with relatively normal facies. Diagnosis is made by 
careful physical examination and x-rays. The diagnosis is also often 
made later in childhood (2-4 years of age). Before three years of age, 
the diagnosis is difficult, as skeletal disproportion tends to be mild and 
many of the radiographic features are subtle during infancy. Its inci -
dence is 1:30000 live births. Actually, about 80 percent of hypochon -
droplasia cases are caused by heterozygous mutations in the FGFR3 
gene, unique gene known to be associated with hypochondroplasia. 
Two recurrent mutations in exon 13, c.1620C>G or c.1620C>A, result -
ing in an p.N540K substitution in the proximal tyrosine kinase domain 
represent ~ 60% of all cases of hypochondroplasia. Sequence analy -
sis of others FGFR3  exons detects rare mutations. We report a new 
heterozygous mutation in exon 9 of FGFR3 , p.L324V, c. 970C>G, in 
a familial hypochondroplasia. The father and his son presented mild 
phenotype with a more severe expression in the father than in his son. 
This mutation, not reported as SNP, is located in the third immunoglob -
ulin (Ig)-like domain, in a highly conserved tripeptide sequence residue 
within the FGFR family. This result strongly suggests that p.L324V mu -
tation is responsible for hypochondroplasia.
P0143. Dental symptoms - clue to the diagnosis of 
hypophosphatasia of childhood type
B. Tumiene1, A. Utkus1, R. Cerkauskiene2, K. Becker3, W. Reardon4, R. Janavi -
cius1, J. Songailiene1, L. J. M. Spaapen5, V. Kucinskas1;  
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Vilnius 
University Children’s hospital, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3North Wales Clinical Genet -
ics Service, Glan Clwyd Hospital, North Wales, United Kingdom, 4Our Lady’s 
Hospital for Sick Children, Crumlin, Ireland, 5Dept. of Biochemical Genetics, 
Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
Hypophosphatasia is an inherited disorder characterized by defective 
bone and teeth mineralization. The disease is due to mutations in the 
ALPL  gene. Variable clinical expression of the disease ranging from 
stillbirth to pathologic skeletal fractures in adult years reflects allelic 
heterogeneity in this disease.
Our presented patient is a 4 year old female with uneventful pre- and 
postnatal history until the age of 3 months. A head deformity was no -
ticed at that time (turricephaly) and progressed thereafter with prema -
ture closure of cranial sutures and fontanelles. Increased intracranial 
pressure developed and became symptomatic (bulging fontanelle, 
bilateral edema of optical nerve, exophthalmos, prominent subcuta -
neous veins, nausea and vomiting). Skeletal symptoms appeared at 
about 6 months of age with the signs of rickets and waddling gait. 
Dental symptoms included delayed eruption of deciduous teeth (the 
first at 9 months of age), premature loss of both incisors and later ad -
ditional 6 teeth and severe caries. These dental symptoms specifically 
pointed to a possible diagnosis of hypophosphatasia. Additional signs 
were small stature and muscular hypotony. Biochemical assays re -
vealed low-normal serum alkaline phosphatase (37.3 UI/l, n.35-281 UI/
l), significant hyperphosphaturia (fractional excretion 19.1→24.8 %), 
and low serum intact parathormone (1-6 pg/ml, n.10-69 pg/ml). Clearly 
increased phosphoetanolamine in urine was detected (152 μmol/mmol 
creat., n.0-21 μmol/mmol creat), plasma pyridoxal 5’-phosphate was 
also highly elevated (1233 nmol/l, ref.<100 nmol/l). This has confirmed 
the diagnosis of hypophosphatasia, childhood type.Serum alkaline phosphatase in mother and father was investigated; 
it revealed 35 UI/l (n.35-104 UI/l) and 16 UI/l (n.40-129 UI/l), accord -
ingly.
P0144. A new clinical picture with hypopigmented hair, 
microcephaly, motor-mental retardation and renal anomalies
A. Aykut , A. Akarslan, B. Durmaz, F. Tuzun, O. Cogulu, F. Ozkinay;  
Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey.
Anomalies of hair pigmentation are very important signs for the diag -
nosis of a number of genetic, metabolic and neurological disorders. 
These findings may be of considerable value in the diagnosis of genet -
ic syndromes such as Griscelli syndrome, Menkes syndrome, Elejalde 
disease, Chediak-Higashi syndrome and  Werner syndrome. Here we 
report a 4-year-old female who presented sparse, hypopigmented sil -
very gray hair with microcephaly, dysmorphological facial features and 
renal anomalies. She was born to consanguineous parents at thirty-
two weeks. She was small for gestational age. Her developmental 
milestones were delayed. She was hospitalized due to her recurrent 
lung and urinary infections. Her clinical findings were microcephaly, 
low frontal hairline, telecanthus, long eyelashes, broad nasal bridge, 
micrognathia and joint laxity. She had a history of kidney stone, ecto -
pic kidney, vesicoureteral reflux and recurrent urinary infections. Chro -
mosome analysis by routine G-banding revealed a normal karyotype. 
Other laboratory investigations were normal. Her clinical and labora -
tory findings were not supporting any genetic syndrome which was as -
sociated with hair pigmentation anomalies. In conclusion, a new clini -
cal picture covering silvery gray and sparse hair with urinary system 
anomalies and mental-motor retardation is presented
P0145. Experience of the complex genetic counselling for the 
patients with inherited arrhythmias in Russia
E. V. Zaklyazminskaya , A. V. Polyakov;  
Russian Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Estimated to affect up to 1 in 3000 individuals, the inherited arrhyth -
mias are a common reason for referral to a medical genetics unit. Since 
1998, 110 families with inherited arrhythmia’s have been inspected in 
our Center: Long QT syndrome (76%), Brugada Syndrome (11%), Id -
iopathic Ventricular Tachycardia (4.5%), sick sinus syndrome (4%), 
Short QT syndrome (2%) and mixed phenotypes (2.5%). It seems that 
this ratio does not reflect the true distribution of the inherited arrhyth -
mias in Russia but it could mirror the different awareness of the car -
diologists about genetic basis of these diseases, and the benefits of 
genetic counseling. The clinical course was dependent on the affected 
gene, and the type of mutation for most of these disorders. Silent mu -
tation carriers have been detected in 12%. About 7% of probands had 
two mutations in responsible genes. We hypothesize that identification 
of more than one mutation in these genes is unfavorable and can be 
considered as an independent genetic risk factor  for cardiac sudden 
death, and could therefore be a reason of surgical intervention. Based 
on complex analysis of familial, personal, clinical and molecular ge -
netic data we developed an algorithm for genetic counseling, molecu -
lar screening and results reading, and provide recommendations for 
patients with the inherited arrhythmia’s studied here.
This work was partly supported by Russian President’s grants NSh-
5736.2006.7; RFFI 06-04-08363-ofi
P0146. Intractable diarrhea with “phenotypic anomalies” & 
tricho-hepato-enteric syndrome : time to scrape up?
A. Fabre1, N. André2, C. Badens1, A. Breton3, C. Lacoste1, P. Broue3, B. Roque -
laure4, J. Sarles4;  
1Department of genetics, Marseille, France, 2Department of oncology pediat -
rics, Marseille, France, 3Department of pediatric gastro-enterology, Toulouse, 
France, 4Department of pediatric gastro-enterology, Marseille, France.
Tricho-hepato-enteric syndrome and syndromic diarrhea are quite rare 
conditions with only 15 cases described to date. Both include severe 
diarrhea requiring total parenteral nutrition, facial dysmorphism, im -
munity defect and hair abnormalities (mostly trichorrhexis nodosa). A 
definite clear clinical description of the 2 syndromes lacks and the out -
come is poorly known.
Here, we report 2 additional cases: one boy born with low birth weight 
at 32 weeks, presenting intractable diarrhea associated with facial dys -
morphism, hair anomaly and immunologic defect; the second born at 
term presenting the same set of symptoms associated with a cirrhosis Clinical genetics
due to iron storage resolving with time. Metabolic investigations and 
karyotype were normal for both.
Analysis of these observations together with a review of previously 
published cases suggests that patients suffering from tricho-hepato-
enteric syndrome and/or syndromic diarrhea actually present the same 
heterogeneous disease that has been wrongly and confusingly sepa -
rated into 2 differents entities. The 5 mains signs are the same ( Low 
birth weight, Intractable diarrhea, hair anomaly, facial dysmorphism 
and immunological defect) and the cirrhosis is found inconsistently but 
in both groups.
The acknowledgment that these two syndromes represent the same 
disease is a crucial step toward a better description of this syndrome, 
of its outcome and to set studies trying to identify a putative underlying 
genetic defect.
P0147. Mild phenotype in a child with low-rate mosaic 11q 
deletion
E. Sukarova-Angelovska , M. Kocova, N. Angelkova, G. Ilieva;  
Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
Monosomy of the long arm of chromosome 11 is a rare structural chro -
mosomal aberration with facial dysmorphism and severe mental re -
tardation. Folate-sensitive fragile site of this chromosome, located at 
the band 11q23.3, facilitates breakage of this part of the chromosome. 
Distal part of the chromosome is being lost, and causes characteristic 
features of Jacobsen syndrome. Mosaic deletion of the chromosome 
11q has rarely been reported.
We report on a girl aged 2 years with slight developmental delay. Fa -
cial dysmorphism included bitemporal narrowing, prominent glabella, 
hypertelorism, up-slanted eyes, short upturned nose and wide-opened 
mouth. The height and head circumference were at the 3rd percentile 
curve. Short arms and narrow thorax were present. Neurological evalu -
ation showed slight degree of hypotonia, but motor achievements were 
satisfactory for the age. Speech delay was present. Ultrasound ex -
amination of the heart showed atrial septal defect. Cerebral computed 
tomography, renal studies and hematological evaluation were normal. 
The karyotype was 46XX/46,XX,del(11)(q24-> qter) (90%/10%). The 
parental karyograms were normal. This finding suggests a postzygotic 
event resulting in a child with mild clinical findings of Jacobsen syn -
drome. The follow-up of the child and genetic counseling is needed 
since the mosaic cell line could be found in ovaries as well.
P0148. Johanson-Blizzard Syndrome - The importance of genetic 
counseling and multi-disciplinary approach to rare diseases and 
neurodevelopmental delay
B. Bozorgmehr , A. Karimi-Nejad, A. Mirblooki, M. H. Karimi-Nejad;  
Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
We are reporting a 11-month-old Iranian girl with Johanson-Blizzard 
Syndrome, third offspring of first cousin parents. Their first and second 
child died in the neonatal period due to midline scalp defect and sec -
ondary infection. We believe they were also affected with Johanson-
Blizzard Syndrome. This syndrome is an extremely rare ectodermal 
dysplastic disorder considered to be an autosomal ressecive disor -
der. Each clinical manifestation has different differential diagnosis so 
it shows the importance of genetic counseling to help the family. The 
proband had growth and developmental delay, short stature, micro -
cephaly, hypoplastic alae nasi, scar of a repaired scalp defect, up -
sweeped hair, hypothyroidism, deafness, and malabsorption, consis -
tent with Johanson-Blizzard Syndrome.
P0149. The birth prevalence of Joubert syndrome: a population 
based study in the Netherlands.
H. Y. Kroes , D. E. Fransen van de Putte, C. J. Ravesloot, D. Lindhout;  
Dept. of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
The Joubert syndrome (JBS) is a clinically variable and genetically 
heterogeneous developmental brain disorder with autosomal reces -
sive inheritance. The birth prevalence of JBS, necessary for carrier 
frequency calculation in genetic counseling, is not clear yet. We un -
dertook a nationwide survey of JBS in the Netherlands. Since 2002, 
patients were systematically ascertained prospectively and retrospec -
tively from multiple sources.
A total of 54 patients were ascertained. The date of birth ranged from 
1973 to 2005. Male:female ratio was 32:22. The number of newborn JBS patients per year ranged between 0 and 2. Numbers increased 
over the years, with a maximum and stable number of around 2 new -
born JBS patients per year from 1998 to 2005, probably due to im -
proved ascertainment. This renders a mean birth prevalence of JBS of 
1 in 113,797 over the period 1998-2005. When also counting the un -
certain cases, the birth prevalence over this period was 1 in 83,850.
We conclude that, for practical purposes, a JBS birth prevalence of 1 in 
100,000 can be used. This is considerably higher than the estimate of 
1 in 258,000 by Flannery & Hudson in 2004. On the basis of the Har -
dy- Weinberg equilibrium and the relative contribution of the different 
genes involved in JBS, carrier frequencies can be calculated. For the 
AHI1 gene , that was estimated to be responsible for 7 to 16 percent of 
JBS cases, this results in a carrier frequency of 1 in 598 to 1 in 395.
P0150. BMPR1A gene mutations status in Polish JPS patients
M. Podralska1, W. Cichy2, E. Czkwanianc3, D. Nowakowska4, M. Teisseyre5, R. 
Slomski1, A. Plawski1;  
1Instytitute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Karol Marcinkowski University 
of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Pediatrics and Gastro -
enterology, Institute of Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital, Lodz, Poland, Lodz, 
Poland, 4Genetic Counseling Unit Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, 
Warsaw, Poland, 5Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Immunol -
ogy, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
The Juvenile Polyposis Syndrome (JPS), OMIM 174900 is an autoso -
mal dominant hamartoma polyposis syndrome predisposing to gas -
trointestinal cancer. Autosomal dominant inheritance of the disease is 
associated with the mutations in one of the tumor suppressor genes 
MADH4 (mothers against decapentaplegic, drosophila, homolog of, 4) 
or BMPR1A (bone morphogenetic protein receptor, type 1A). The JPS 
is characterized by the occurrence of juvenile polyps in colon and up -
per parts of the gastrointestinal tract, the average frequency of JPS 
is 1:100000. The polyps occurring in childhood in most are the ham -
artoma polyps. The solitary or not numerous and self-limited polyps 
are not associated with the genetic predisposition. The characteristic 
feature of the occurrence juvenile polyps is rectal bleeding what is an 
indication for further diagnostics. The JPS encompasses the cases of 
numerous polyps and/or a familial component. The characteristic fea -
ture of the juvenile polyps are a markedly expanded lamina propria 
containing dilated cystic glands, inflammatory cells, and prominent 
stroma with a normal overlying epithelium.
The five juvenile polyposis patients were diagnosed in specialized 
clinics. The recognition of the JPS syndrome in 3 cases was based 
on observations over 100 juvenile polyps in colon and in two cases 
on observation over 5 juvenile polyps in colon. The entire coding se -
quences of the MADH4 and BMPR1A genes were sequenced by direct 
PCR product sequencing. The novel BMPR1A gene mutations were 
detected in three JPS families.
The study was financed by the Ministry of Education and Science, Po -
land, grant number 2PO5E02630
P0151. A new case with homoplasmic mitohondrial mutation of 
MT-ATP-6 and MCAD
M. K. Stancheva ;  
University Children Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria.
The authors report a 2 year and 5 months old girl from second nor -
mal pregnancy and delivery.Family history- grandmother with cerebral 
stroke, with delay in psychomotor development, convulsions, hypoto -
nia, bilateral ptosis of eyelids, more pronounced at left, divergent alter -
nating strabismus, atrophy of nervi optici, complementary chordus in 
left ventricle-variant of normal, hypoplasia of right ramus communicans 
-variant of normal, selective metabolic screening showed MCAD and 
investigation of mit. DNA / PCR-SBT method, showed polymorphisms, 
C7028T/MT-CO1/, T 1700C/MT-RNR2, T 3197C/MT-RNR 2, A1479G/
MT-CYB/, A1146G, MT ND4, G11719A/MT-ND4/, A 8860G/MT-ATP6, 
T9477A/MT-CO3/, T5495/MT-ND2, A16399G/D-loop/, A263G/D-loop, 
309inc C/D-loop and homoplasmic mutation T8705CC in the gene of 
MT-ATP 6, with aminoacid change methionin with treonin, with MRI 
finding of delay in white matter and hiasmic atrophy.The reported child 
is the fifth Case in Bulgaria with mitohondrial mutation of the MT-ATP6.
The mutation is not described in literature and has unknown effect on 
mitohondrial function.The clinical picture is common in all cases .The 
presence of MCAD will be further evaluated.Clinical genetics  
P0152. Kabuki syndrome - clinical study of six cases.
R. Zordania1, O. Kostina2, K. Joost1;  
1Tallinn Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Institute of General and Molecular 
Pathology Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia.
Kabuki syndrome (KS) (OMIM 147920) is a syndrome, estimated at 
1:32000 births. KS is a complex disorder characterized by distinctive 
facial features, dermatoglyphic abnormalities, short stature and men -
tal retardation. Some cases associate congenital anomalies of heart, 
kidneys, cleft palate and/or lip and recurrent infections. The underlying 
genetic mechanism of KS remains unknown. Most cases are sporadic. 
KS diagnosis is based on phenotypical signs and clinical investiga -
tions.
We focus on the medical data and present clinical data of six children 
diagnosed Kabuki syndrome (five boys and one girl), at the age of 
7-17 years. All the patients had specific ocular and auricular defects: 
long palpebral fissures, eversion of lower lateral eyelid, arched eye -
brows, long eyelashes and large/prominent ears, fetal pads at finger -
tips and mental retardation. Two children were born praematurely with 
antenatal hypotrophy, three patients had short stature (< 2 SD) during 
investigation. Congenital anomalies were diagnosed in five patients- 
horseshore kidney (one child), thoracolumbal scoliosis (two children), 
thoracal kyphosis (one child), pectus excavatum (one child). None of 
our patients had congenital heart defect, none had microcephaly.
Kabuki syndrome is a complex condition, guidelines for preventive 
managment are given: 1.growth and development should be moni -
tored, 2.overweight can occur in early puberty, 3.recurrent ear infec -
tions and possible hearing loss are important issues.
P0153. Benign lymphoepithelial lesion of parotid gland in a 
patient with Keutel syndrome and her two sibs with classic 
Keutel syndrome
A. Yüksel1, G. Acar2, E. Karaca1, B. Tüysüz1, S. Boyd3;  
1Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Medical Genetics, İstanbul, 
Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, department of Otorhi -
nolaryngology, İstanbul, Turkey, 3Children’s Miracle, Network Endowed Chair, 
MIND Institute, UC, CA, United States.
Keutel syndrome is a rare autosomal ressesive disorder that mainly 
consists of abnormal cartilage calcification, sensorineural hearing 
loss, peripheral pulmoner stenosis, brachiotelephalangism and maxil -
lar hypoplasia. The molecular etiology of disorder was shown with the 
mutation in human matrix GLa protein gene. Defect in this gene is 
thoughted to be responsible for this disase. We report 3 sibs with Keu -
tel syndrome. One of them with Keutel syndrome findings and she also 
has a recurrent benign lymphoepithelial lesion of the left parotid gland. 
In this patient we identified a new nonsense mutation in exon 2 (at c. 
79C>T causing termination codon at aminoacid position 27). Other two 
sibs had classic Keutel syndrome whose parents were first cousins.
P0154. Molecular and clinical findings of Larsen syndrome in a 
large Iranian family caused by a mutation in FLNB gene.
Y. Shafeghati1, N. Al-Madani2, M. H. Karimi-Nejad2, K. Azadbakht3, L. S. Bick -
nell4, S. P. Robertson5;  
1Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Karimi-Nejad 
Najmabadi Genetics Centre, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Science and 
Research Unit, Azad university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department 
of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Otago, Otago, New Zealand, 
5Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Otago, Dunedin, 
New Zealand.
Larsen syndrome (LS) is an autosomal dominant osteochondrodyspla -
sia characterised by
large joint dislocations and craniofacial anomalies such as cleft palate 
and midface
hypoplasia. Recently LS was shown to be caused by missense muta -
tions or small in-frame deletions in FLNB gene, encoding the cytoskel -
etal protein filamin B.
We found a large Iranian family with at least 30 affected members. 
Clinical findings were typical. Cardinal features were: short stature, 
multiple joints dislocation or subluxation, prominent forehead, midface 
hypoplasia, hypertelorism, depressed nasal bridge, carpal, tarsal, 
phalyngeal bone abnormalities, and spatulate fingers. Cleft palate was 
detected only in one case. Most of them were suffering from deaf -
ness, but none was mentally retarded. Club feet was common. A wide 
range of skeletal abnormalities such as craniofacial, distal humeral hy -poplasia, supernumerary carpal and tarsal ossification centers, distal 
phalyngeal, cervical vertebral anomalies, and thoracolumbar scoliosis 
all were common findings in our patients.
Patients were evaluated clinically and radiographically. After ascertain -
ment they screened for mutations in FLNB gene, using a combination 
of dHPLC, direct sequencing and restriction endonuclease digestion.
In this large family intrafamilial phenotypic variations for LS was stud -
ied and segregation of a recurrent mutation 679G>A, leading to the 
substitution of E227K was detected. Recent molecular studies showed 
that distribution of mutations within the FLNB gene is non-random. Our 
findings in this large family collectively show an autosomal dominant 
Larsen syndrome and demonstrate causative mutation in FLNB gene.  
So we can provide accurate genetic counseling and prevent further 
cases in future pregnancies.
P0155. A novel mutation in SURF1 gene in Russian patient with 
Leigh syndrome
E. Y. Zakharova1, P. G. Tsygankova1, I. D. Fedonyuk2, E. S. Il’ina2;  
1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russia, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 2Russian Child Hospital, Moscow, Russia, Moscow, Russian Fed -
eration.
Leigh syndrome (LS) is one of the most frequent forms of mitochon -
drial diseases in infancy and childhood. Typical presentation of LS is 
in the first year of life with failure to thrive, psychomotor regression, 
ataxia, signs of brainstem dysfunction, and peripheral neuropathy. LS 
is characterized by symmetrical bilateral lesions in the brainstem and 
basal ganglia. Etiologies of LS includes both mitochondrial and nuclear 
DNA defects. Mutations in SURF1 have been shown to be the main 
cause of LS with cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficiency. The human 
SURF1 gene encodes a protein localized in the inner mitochondrial 
membrane and is thought to be involved in the assembly and biogen -
esis of the cytochrome c oxidase complex. Most of known SURF1 mu -
tations in LS patients predict a truncated protein product. We describe 
a new mutation in Surf1 gene found in one Russian patient with LS. 
It is related to the group of complex rearrangements and represents a 
114bp duplication with the 2bp deletion inside of the duplicated frag -
ment. The duplicated fragment starts with 45bp upstream exon 8 and 
ends in exon 8 at nucleotide 816. This fragment except nucleotide AG 
at the position 749 (749delAG) is inserted after nucleotide 816. The 
duplication shifts the reading frame and predicts a preliminary stop-co -
don at the 278 amino acid position and as a consequence skipping the 
exon 9 of the gene. The phenotypic features of the patient are typical 
for Leigh syndrome.
P0156. Atypical Leigh syndrome caused by T8993C mtDNA 
mutation
P. G. Tsigankova, G. Rudenskaya ;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
A case of early-onset Leigh syndrome with atypically mild course in 
a 11-year-old girl is presented. Family history is negative apart from 
ischemic stroke with complete recovery at the age of 52 years in ma -
ternal grandmother. The child was born of uncomplicated pregnancy 
and delivery. Since infancy she presented spasticity, generalized hy -
perkinesia, and ataxia with motor and speech delay but normal mental 
development. With age, her movement disorders and dysarthria dimin -
ished. The girl walked independently, managed some everyday activi -
ties, and was educated at home up to age. Her diagnosis was cerebral 
palsy, there were no somatic disorders or ocular signs. MRI showed 
moderate lesions of capsula externa and putamen. At the age of 9 
years, epileptic seizures appeared but regressed soon with anticonvul -
sants. In 10 years, with no provoking factors, she developed an acute 
episode of somnolence, severe dysarthria, ataxia, hyperkinesias, and 
inability to walk. Second MRI showed no deterioration. Moderate lactic 
acidosis in plasma (2,33 mM) and homoplasmy for T8993C mtDNA 
mutation in blood cells confirmed a supposed mitochondrial disorder. 
With treatment, the girl’s status improved and returned to initial in 
5_6 weeks. Nine months later, she remains stable and seizure-free. 
T8993C mutation of ATP synthase 6 gene is known to be responsible 
for diverse phenotypes of Leigh syndrome including juvenile forms. 
However, a prolonged and relatively mild course with normal mental 
development in a very early-onset case, like ours, is uncommon. The 
observation contributes into phenotypic variability of Leigh syndrome.Clinical genetics0
P0157. Associated malformations in cases with limb reduction 
defects
C. Stoll , Y. Alembik, B. Dott, M. P. Roth;  
Genetique Médicale, Strasbourg, France.
Infants with limb reduction defects(LRD)often have other associated 
congenital defects.The purpose of this investigation was to assess the 
prevalence and the types of associated malformations in a defined 
population.The associated malformations in infants with LRD were 
collected in all livebirths,stillbirths and terminations of pregnancy dur -
ing 25 years in 334,262 consecutive births in the area covered by our 
population based registry of congenital anomalies.Of the 255 LRD in -
fants born during this period,58.1% had associated malformations.As -
sociated malformations were more frequent in infants who had upper 
limb reduction defect(63.2%) than in infants with lower limb reduction 
defects(48.4%).Malformations in the cardiac system and in the central 
nervous system were the most common other malformations,15.2% 
and 10.6% of the associated anomalies,respectively,followed by 
anomalies in the genital system(10.1%),in the renal system(6.8%),and 
in the digestive system(6.3%).There were 16(6.5%)cases with chro -
mosomal abnormalities,including 8 trisomies 18,and 2 22 q 11 dele -
tion, and 56(22.8%) nonchromosomal dysmorphic syndromes.There 
were no predominant dysmorphic syndromes,but VA(C)TER(L) as -
sociation.However numerous dysmorphic syndromes were regis -
tered including,among them,the following : EEC,OFD,Klippel-Tre -
naunay-Weber,OAVS,CHARGE,Townes Brocks,Moebius,Du Pan, 
SLO,hypoglossia-hypodactyly,amniotic band,De Lange,Rubinstein-
Taybi, Fanconi,TAR,Roberts,Holt-Oram,and fetal diethylstilbestrol.
Seventy one(28.8 %)of the cases were multiply,non syndromic,non 
chromosomal malformed infants.Prenatal diagnosis was performed in 
48.8 % of dysmorphic syndromes with LRD,whereas prenatal ultraso -
nographic detection was only 23.9 % in cases with isolated LRD.The 
overall prevalence of associated malformations,which was more than 
one in two infants,emphasizes the need for a thorough investigation of 
infants with LRD.A routine screening for other malformations especially 
cardiac,central nervous system,urogenital system,facial clefts,and di -
gestive system may be considered in infants and in fetuses with LRD.
P0158. The phenotypic variability of laminopathies: a trap for the 
clinicians
V. Drouin-Garraud1, L. Guyant-Maréchal2, A. Bedat-Millet2, F. Anselme3, G. 
Savoure3, A. Laquerrière4, P. Richard5, T. Frebourg1;  
1Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, and Inserm U614, Institute 
for Biomedical Research, Rouen, France, 2Department of Neurology, Rouen 
University Hospital, Institute for Biomedical Research, Rouen, France, 3Depart -
ment of Cardiology, Rouen University Hospital, Institute for Biomedical Re -
search, Rouen, France, 4Department of Pathology, Rouen University Hospital, 
Institute for Biomedical Research, Rouen, France, 5Molecular Cardiogenetics, 
La Pitié-Salpétrière University Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France.
Laminopathies constitute a group of diseases caused by mutations of 
the LMNA  gene which encodes two nuclear envelope proteins, lamin 
A and lamin C. Since the identification in 1999 of LMNA  mutations in 
the autosomal dominant form of Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, 
LMNA  mutations have been shown to result in a wide range of pheno -
types including autosomal recessive form of EDMD, dilated cardiomy -
opathy, familial partial lipodystrophy of the Dunnigan type, mandibu -
loacral dysplasia, Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy, Hutchinson-Gil -
ford Progeria or Werner Syndrome, lethal restrictive dermopathy and 
other complex phenotypes. Here we report our clinical experience on 
the inter- and intra- variability of the LMNA  mutation phenotype based 
on the extensive investigation of 38 patients from 13 families. Fourteen 
patients from 5 families showed a muscular disease associated with 
cardiac involvement, and 2 of these patients had clinical involvement 
since infancy. Eighteen patients from 3 families had isolated severe 
cardiac disease and these families were dramatically affected by an 
autosomal dominant form of sudden death. Three patients had partial 
lipodystrophy. Finally, 3 patients from 2 families showed an unusual 
complex phenotype associating cardiac involvement, mild dysmorphic 
facial features and acrogeria. Most of these patients had a severe car -
diac disease. This series highlights that the diagnostic of laminopa -
thies should be considered in patients with supraventricular arrhythmia 
and conduction system disease, even in the absence of dilated cardio -
myopathy. The frequency of ventricular arrhythmia justifies to perform 
presymptomatic diagnosis in order to implant in mutation carriers car -dioverter defibrillator which allow, in contrast to pace-maker, to prevent 
sudden death.
P0159. Retrospective study of a cohort of 49 french patients 
with Lowe syndrome. No evidence for genotype-phenotype 
correlation.
G. Baujat1, V. Satre2, A. Postel-Vinay1, I. Giurgia1, I. Desguerre1, M. Polak1, L. 
Robel1, O. Roche1, A. Munnich1, R. Salomon1, J. Lunardi2;  
1Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Universitaire, Greno -
ble, France.
Background: Oculocerebrorenal Lowe syndrome is a rare X-linked dis -
order, characterized by major anomalies affecting the eye, nervous 
system and kidneys. This syndrome is caused by mutations in OCRL1 
gene, which encodes OCRL1, an inositol polyphosphate 5-phospha -
tase.
Objective: To describe the clinical features of a large cohort of Lowe 
patients and to correlate genotypes to phenotypes.
Methods: A retrospective multicentric review of the medical, surgical 
and socio-educative records of patients clinically diagnosed as Lowe 
syndrome. Molecular investigations included sequencing analysis of 
the OCRL1 gene.
Results: Forty nine patients were included (2 to 50 years).
a) Proximal tubular dysfunction was found in 100% of cases with se -
vere acidosis in 1/3, rickets in 1/2, and among the 27 older patients, 
the mean age for the beginning of reduced glomerule filtration rate 
was 15 years.
b) Significant bilateral cataracts were diagnosed in 47/49 patients. The 
mean age at cataract extraction was 3.4 months. Glaucoma was de -
tected in 63% of cases.
c) Mean age for walking alone was 48 months. Mental retardation was 
estimated severe in 40% of patients but moderate in 60% of the se -
ries.
d) Atypical minor features were also observed, including anemia, li -
poma, hemorragic manifestations and hypercholesterolemia.
e) All the patients harboured an OCRL1  gene abnormality. No cor -
relation between the type or position of the mutation and the clinical 
phenotype was demonstrated.
Conclusion: This clinical description about the largest Lowe cohort 
ever published emphasizes the phenotypic heterogeneity in OCRL. 
The lack of genotype-phenotype correlation may result from unknown 
factors including modifier genes.
P0160. Clinical report: a new case of macrocephaly/autism 
syndrome ( MIM00 ) with a germline PTEN  tumor suppressor 
gene mutation
E. Bieth1, N. Sévenet2, N. Chassaing1, C. Cances3, P. Calvas1, M. Longy2;  
1Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 2Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France, 3Hôpi-
tal des Enfants, Toulouse, France.
Macrocephaly is found in approximately 20% of patients with autism. 
In a subset of 18 individuals with autism spectrum disorders and ex -
treme macrocephaly, Butler et al. recently reported 3 young boys with a 
germline missense PTEN  mutation ( J Med Genet 2005;42:318 ). Here, 
we report on a 6 year old girl referred for global developmental delay, 
language regression and pervasive developmental disorder. The asso -
ciation with progressive macrocephaly (+3DS at birth and +5DS at 6y) 
prompted us to perform a PTEN  gene analysis in the leucocyte DNA of 
the patient. We identified a heterozygous G-to-A transition in exon 6 of 
PTEN , resulting in an arginine173-to-histidine (p.Arg173His) substitu -
tion. Arginine173 is a highly evolutionarily conserved residue whose 
subsitution by histidine has been shown to lead, in an in vitro  assay, 
to a drastic reduction (95%) of the phosphatase activity of PTEN . In-
terestingly, this p.Arg173His missense mutation has already been re -
ported by several authors but only as a somatic mutation identified in 
glioblastomas and astrocytomas. Initially, germline mutations of PTEN  
have been found in patients with Cowden disease or Bannayan-Riley-
Ruvalcaba syndrome. However, as in the three previously reported 
cases, the present patient had no mucocutaneous lesions suggestive 
of these two hamartoma syndromes. The possibility of developing spe -
cific alterations of Cowden disease during the second decade should 
be considered. Our findings confirm that molecular testing for PTEN  
mutation should be performed in patients with autistic behaviour and 
macrocephaly.Clinical genetics1
P0161. Intrafamilial phenotypic variability in Malpuech 
Syndrome: Report of Three Siblings and a Review.
T. Ben-Omran1, M. Almureikhi1, A. Teebi2;  
1Section of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Hamad 
Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar, 2Department of Pediatrics, Weil- Cornell 
Medical College, Doha, Qatar.
We report on three sibs (2 girls, one boy) with Malpuech syndrome, 
born to a phenotypically normal first cousin Qatari Arab parents. This 
is an extremely rare autosomal recessive syndrome first described in 
1983 by Malpuech et al., with few (13) patients reported so far. It is 
characterized by facial clefting, hypertelorism and ptosis; malar hy -
poplasia, urogenital anomalies, caudal appendage and sacral dimple; 
and growth and mental retardation. All three sibs showing the range of 
anomalies found in Malpuech syndrome. They have growth and men -
tal retardation, facial dysmorphism including ptosis, thick eye brows 
and flat malar region; and eye abnormalities. In addition, one sister 
and the brother have hypertelorism, caudal appendage, and bilateral 
cleft lip and palate and pseudocleft respectively. While expression of 
the syndrome was relatively mild in the older sister, the brother and 
the younger sister showed the full-blown syndrome. This family fur -
ther supports the autosomal recessive inheritance for this syndrome. 
The constellation of clinical manifestations in this sibship emphasizes 
the phenomenon of intrafamilial variability that may lead to difficulty in 
diagnosis. We will review the previously published reports and further 
expand the phenotype of this rare condition. Attention is drawn to the 
clustering of such rare syndromes in this area.
P0162. Clinical factors associated with the occurrence of an 
aortic dilatation within a cohort of 1013 patients with Marfan 
syndrome or another type I fibrillinopathy
L. Faivre1, G. Collod-Beroud2, B. Loeys3, A. Child4, C. Binquet5, G. Elodie5, B. 
Callewaert3, E. Arbustini6, K. Mayer7, M. Arslan-Krichner8, P. Comeglio4, C. Ber -
oud9, C. Bonithon-Kopp5, M. Claustres9, L. Ades10, J. De Backer3, P. Coucke3, 
U. Francke11, A. De Paepe3, C. Boileau12, G. Jondeau13;  
1Departement de Genetique, Dijon, France, 2INSERM U827, Montpellier, 
France, 3Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium, 4St George’s Hospital, London, 
United Kingdom, 5CIC-EC, Dijon, France, 6Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 
7Human Genetics, Martinsried, Germany, 8Institut fur Humangenetik, Hannover, 
Germany, 9Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, France, 10Marfan research 
group, Sidney, Australia, 11Genetics and Pediatrics, Stanford, CA, United 
States, 12Génétique Moléculaire, Ambroise Paré, Boulogne, France, 13Centre de 
Référence Marfan, Hopital Bichat, Paris, France.
The cardinal features of MFS involve the ocular, cardiovascular and 
skeletal systems. Clinical care is complicated by variable age of onset 
and the wide range of severity of aortic features. Taking advantage of 
the data of a large collaborative study designed for a genotype-phe -
notype correlation study including 1013 probands with a pathogenic 
FBN1  mutation, we searched for clinical factors associated with the 
occurrence of ascending aortic dilatation (AAD) over time. Probabili -
ties of AAD were described using Kaplan-Meier method and compared 
using logrank tests according to the following clinical signs: 1) 5 or 
more skeletal features of the MFS spectrum (n=272); 2) ectopia lentis 
(n=542); 3) mitral valve prolapse (n=533); 4) striae (n=444); 5) pneu -
mothorax (n=73) or 6) dural ectasia (n=154). Baseline was considered 
as the date of birth. Among the 1013 included probands, aged in me -
dian of 29 years old (IQR [15-40]) at their last follow-up, 775 (77%) 
had AAD. Ectopia lentis and pneumothorax were not significantly as -
sociated with the risk of AAD. Striae and dural ectasia were associated 
with a lower risk of developing an AAD (p=0.001 and p=0.03 respec -
tively). Conversely, patients with 5 or more skeletal features, or a mi -
tral valve prolapse had a higher risk of AAD (p<0.0001 and p<0.0001 
respectively). In conclusion, the presence of a high number of skeletal 
features and cardiac features appear to be the prognostic factors of 
AAD in FBN1  mutations carriers.
P0163. Matthew-Wood syndrome is caused by truncating 
mutations in the retinol binding protein receptor gene STRA6
C. Golzio1,2, J. Martinovic-Bouriel3, S. Thomas1, S. Mougou-Zrelli3, B. Gratta -
gliano-Bessières4, M. Bonnière3, S. Delahaye5,2, A. Munnich1,2, F. Encha-Ra -
zavi3,2, S. Lyonnet1,2, M. Vekemans1,3, T. Attié-Bitach1,2, H. C. Etchevers1,6;  
1INSERM U781-Hopital necker, Paris, France, 2Université René Descartes-Pa -
ris 5, Hôpital Necker – Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3Assistance Publique 
– Hôpitaux de Paris; Hôpital Necker – Enfants Malades, Dept. of Genetics, Paris, France, 4Institut de Puériculture, Dept. of Fetal Pathology, Paris, France, 
5Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Necker – Enfants Malades, 
Dept. of Obstetrics, Paris, France, 6INSERM U563, Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, 
France.
Retinoic acid (RA) is a potent teratogen in all vertebrates when tight 
homeostatic controls on its endogenous dose, location or timing are 
perturbed during early embryogenesis. STRA6 encodes an integral 
cell membrane protein that favors RA uptake from soluble retinol-bind -
ing protein; its transcription is directly regulated by RA levels. Molecu -
lar analysis of STRA6 was undertaken in two consanguineous human 
fetuses we previously described with the Matthew-Wood syndrome 
[MIM 601186] in a context of severe microphthalmia, pulmonary agen -
esis, bilateral diaphragmatic eventration, duodenal stenosis, pancreat -
ic malformations and intrauterine growth retardation. The two fetuses 
had both homozygous truncating mutations predicting a premature 
stop codon in STRA6 transcripts. Five other fetuses presenting at 
least one of the two major signs of clinical anophthalmia or pulmonary 
hypoplasia with at least one of the two associated signs of diaphrag -
matic closure defect or cardiopathy had no STRA6 mutations. These 
findings suggest a molecular basis for the prenatal manifestations of 
Matthew-Wood syndrome and and that phenotypic overlap with other 
associations may be due to genetic heterogeneity of elements com -
mon to the RA and fibroblast growth factor signaling cascades.
P0164. Genotype-phenotype correlations at the MKS1  and MKS  
loci in Meckel-Gruber and Joubert syndromes
S. Audollent1,2, U. Smith3, C. Ozilou1,2, L. Baala2, R. Khaddour2, J. Martinovic1, 
S. Romano4, C. Esculpavit2, S. Lyonnet1,2, A. Munnich1,2, F. Encha-Razavi1,2, C. 
Antignac1,5, M. C. Gubler5, C. A. Johnson6, M. Vekemans1,2, T. Attié-Bitach1,2;  
1Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, 
France, 2Unité INSERM U-781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Université 
Paris V, Paris, France, 3Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University 
of Birmingham Medical School, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 4Département 
de Pédiatrie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, France, 5Unité 
INSERM U-574, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Université Paris V, Paris, 
France, 6Institute of Molecular Medicine, St. James’s University Hospital, 
Leeds, United Kingdom.
Meckel syndrome (MKS) is a lethal autosomal recessive syndrome 
characterized by cystic kidneys, a brain malformation (usually oc -
cipital encephalocele), polydactyly, and bile duct proliferation of liver. 
Recently, two genes have been identified: MKS1/FLJ20345  on 17q in 
Finnish kindreds and MKS3/TMEM67 on 8q in families from Pakistan 
and Oman, encoding ciliary proteins.
In order to evaluate the involvement of MKS1  and MKS3 in MKS, and 
to determine phenotype-genotype correlations, we performed the mo -
lecular studies of MKS1  and MKS3 in a large multhiethnic cohort of 
120 MKS and 45 Meckel-like fetuses. Our results indicate that MKS1  
and MKS3 genes are each responsible for about 10 % of MKS cases 
with various mutations in different populations. A strong phenotype-
genotype correlation depending on the mutated gene was observed, 
regarding the type of central nervous system malformation, the fre -
quency of polydactyly, bone dysplasia and situs inversus . The iden -
tification of MKS3  mutations in sibs presenting vermis agenesis and 
small cysts in renal medulla, lead us to hypothethise that mutations in 
MKS  genes may cause Joubert syndrome (JS). Analysis of MKS1 and 
MKS3  in a series of 22 JS patients identified MKS3  mutations in three 
JS cases, defining MKS3  as the sixth JS locus ( JBTS6 ). No MKS1  
mutations were identified in this series, suggesting that the allelism is 
restricted to MKS3  .
These data along with our previous identification of severe prenatal 
forms of Bardet-Biedl syndromes among MKS - like fetuses further 
demonstrate that MKS is the severe end of spectrum of human cil -
iopathies.
P0165. MecP2 Duplication Syndrome: Description of two 
additional cases
E. Kirk1, N. Philip2, N. Martini2, N. Levy2, C. Badens2;  
1Sydney’s children hospital, Sydney, Australia, 2Hospital La Timone, Marseille, 
France.
In 2005, small duplications at Xq28 including MecP2  and L1CAM  have 
been shown to cause syndromic X-linked Mental Retardation (XLMR) 
in 4 families. Since then, 2 other series of respectively 6 and 7 fami -
lies have been reported, where affected patients exhibit a remarkably Clinical genetics2
homogeneous phenotype. The clinical picture of affected males con -
sisted of severe mental retardation, neurological abnormalities, severe 
recurrent respiratory infections and death before 25 years of age. 
Here, we report two additional cases found by genomic Q-PCR in 35 
XLMR families.
Case A is of French origin and presents with profound mental retarda -
tion, absence of speech, spasticity and recurrent respiratory infections 
necessitating partial pneumonectomy. Currently aged 43, he is the 
eldest patient reported so far, all previously reported patients being 
under 25 or being deceased before 25. Case B is 8 years old and is of 
Nepalese and Lebanese origins. He presents also profound mental re -
tardation, absence of speech and recurrent respiratory infections. His 
maternal uncle died at 11 from pneumonia and presented the same 
clinical features. Both mothers carry the duplication and show marked 
skewing of chromosome X inactivation.The predisposition toward se -
vere pulmonary infections is the hallmark of this XLMR syndrome. It is 
a common feature shared to some extent, with Rett syndrome in which 
pneumonia has been shown to be the most frequent cause of death. 
It remains to determine if, like in Rett syndrome, this clinical feature is 
associated to breathing disturbances due to dysfunction of the autono -
mous nervous system.
P0166. Brothers with a microduplication including the MECP2  
gene: rapid head growth in infancy and transient tendency to 
recurrent infections
T. E. Prescott1, A. Bjørnstad1, O. K. Rødningen2;  
1Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway, 2Ullevål Uni -
versity Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
Males with microduplications of Xq28 encompassing the MECP2  gene 
have been reported to have a phenotype characterized by severe de -
velopmental delay, infantile hypotonia, spasticity evolving in childhood, 
absent or limited speech, absent or limited ambulation, seizures, mild 
facial dysmorphism and severe, recurrent respiratory tract infections.
We report two mentally retarded brothers who are mildly dysmorphic. 
The older boy is 11 years old. He was shunted for communicating 
hydrocephalus at age 7 months. He walked at age 2 ½ years. The 
younger boy is 6 ½ years old. He walked at age 3 years. He was 
investigated in infancy because of rapid head growth, but had normal 
intracranial pressure. Both boys had normal development in the first 
few months of life. They are generally healthy but without speech.They 
had frequent respiratory tract infections, but only during the first few 
years of life. Neither boy has required mechanical ventilation because 
of respiratory tract infections.
The parents have no other children. The family history is otherwise 
non-contributory.
The mother who is cognitively normal, has a completely skewed X-
inactivation pattern in blood (98:2). MLPA analysis revealed that both 
boys have a microduplication which includes the MECP2  gene. Fur -
ther studies are being done to delineate the extent of the duplication.
These brothers suggest that the phenotype which results from micro -
duplications including MECP2  may be broader than previously appre -
ciated. Rapid head growth in infancy may be present in some individu -
als and persistence of serious recurrent respiratory infections may not 
be a mandatory feature.
P0167. Phenotypic features of males with mental retardation 
(MR) and mutations of the MECP2 gene
S. Psoni , J. Traeger-Synodinos, C. Sofocleous, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli, A. Mavrou, E. 
Kanavakis, H. Fryssira;  
Medical Genetics/Choremio Research Laboratory/Univ. of Athens/St Sophia’s 
Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece.
The MECP2 gene causes Rett syndrome (RS) (OMIM: 312750), a 
well-defined X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental disorder affect -
ing primarily girls. Until recently RS was considered lethal in males, 
although now approximately 60 cases have been reported. Males with 
MECP2 mutations present with a broad spectrum of phenotypes rang -
ing from neonatal encephalopathy to non-syndromic MR.
Five males (aged 3-16 years) evaluated for MR, had normal karyotype 
and four of them were evaluated for molecular variation associated 
with the FMR1 locus, with negative results. Patient 1 presented with 
features of FXS, including long face, protruding ears and behavioral 
problems. Patient 2 had spasticity, pyramidal signs and trunk stereoty -
pies, while his brother (Patient 3) showed slight psychomotor retarda -tion. Patients 4 and 5 presented with autistic features. MECP2 analysis 
of the exons 3 and 4 was performed by Denaturant Gradient Gel Elec -
trophoresis, sequencing and GAP-PCR, using specifically designed 
sets of primers.
The polymorphism p.T203M was identified in Patient 1, but not in 
his mother, raising questions about its contribution to the phenotype. 
Patient 2 and 3 had a novel deletion at the deletion-prone region of 
MECP2 (c.1140del86) inherited from their unaffected carrier mother. 
The GAP-PCR in Patient 4 showed evidence of a large rearrangement 
encompassing exons 3 and 4, which requires further evaluation. His 
mother was normal. Patient 5 presented the p.R106W classic RS mu -
tation, although his mother was unavailable for analysis.
MECP2 mutations should be considered as a rare cause of MR in 
males , although great phenotypic variation hinders genotype-pheno -
type correlation.
P0168. MED12 (HOPA) mutation in a family overlapping Opiz-
Kaveggia (FG) and Lujan-Fryns syndromes
A. Verloes1, C. E. Schwartz2, R. E. Stevenson2;  
1Dept of Genetics, Robert DEBRE University Hospital, PARIS, France, 2JC Self 
Research Institute of Human Genetics, Greenwood Genetic Center, Green -
wood, SC, United States.
The MED12 (aka HOPA/TRAP230) gene located in Xq12 is a subunit 
of the TRAP/Mediator complex, a multi-component complex that can 
regulate transcription by transducing the signals between activators 
and RNA polymerase II. A recurrent p.R961W mutation in the MED12 
was recently reported in five FG families including the original FG fam -
ily (Risheg, Nature Genet 2007). A p.N1007S was then found in the 
original Lujan syndrome family (Schwartz, J Med Genet 2007). We re -
port here further clinical details on the 2d family reported by Schwartz. 
In this family, a p.N1007S was found in a male proband and his two 
nephews, who were clinally diagnosed as FG syndrome. The proband, 
examined at age 19 (in 1989) had global developmental delay (mod -
erate to severe), agenesis of the corpus callosum, normal OFC, long 
narrow face with high square forehead, bulbous nasal tip, flat malar 
area, short philtrum, bowed upper lip, prominent lower jaw, a hairy 
nevus on the right forearm and normal neurological examination. He 
had poor speech abilities and showed temper tantrums and aggres -
siveness. The two nephews showed mild to moderate developmental 
delay, and ectomorphic habitus. Both were tall and slender, with long 
face and high forehead, short philtrum, small mouth, narrow palate and 
crowded teeth. Brain CT was normal in both, and constipation was not 
a problem. One of the children had skull surgery for scaphocephaly. 
They showed similar behavioral problems, with hyperactivity, attention 
deficit, tantrums and aggressiveness, worsening with time. Nosologic 
overlap between FG and Lujan-Fryns syndrome will be discussed.
P0169. Megalencephaly, thick corpus callosum, dysmorphic 
facial features, seizures, and mental retardation in two unrelated 
patients: a new syndrome ?
M. RIO1, I. Desguerre2, N. Boddaert3, M. Le Merrer1, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-
Daire1;  
1Medical Genetics, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 2Pediatric Neurology, Neck -
er Hospital, Paris, France, 3Pediatric Radiology, Necker Hospital, Paris, France.
Macrocephaly associated with mental retardation is a part of various 
syndromes including overgrowth conditions, cutis marmorata telangi -
ectatica, Cowden disease, and neuro-metabolic disorders. We report 
here a new association characterized by megalencephaly, thick corpus 
callosum, mental retardation, seizures, specific facial features in two 
unrelated boys. Case 1 was able to walk alone at 3 years of age, de -
veloped seizures at the age of 5 and had limited speech. The physical 
examination at the age of 9 revealed normal weight and length but a 
large head circumference (+3SD) and dysmorphic features including 
downslanting palpebral fissures, long and expressionless face, small 
mouth, enamel defect, and strabismus. Case 2 developped seizures at 
3, was able to walk at 8 and had limited speech. Head circumference 
curve was above + 4 SD whereas length and weight curve were in the 
normal. He had the same dysmorphic features (long expressionless 
face, downslanting palpebral fissures, small mouth, enamel defect). 
Extensive metabolic and cytogenetic studies were normal in the two 
boys. In addition, molecular screening of NSD1, GPC3 and the 11p15 
region was negative in case 2. In the two children, brain MRI detected 
bilateral megalencephaly, a thick corpus callosum, an enlarged white Clinical genetics
matter and normal ventricles.This association of megalencephaly and 
thick corpus callosum has been previously reported by G. Göhlich-Rat -
mann in 1998 in 3 children who had in addition pachygyria and com -
plete lack of motor development, features not observed in our cases. 
We hope that ongoing cytogenetic and molecular studies will further 
define this new entity.
P0170. Study about the family history in a population with 
mental deficiency
I. Tomulescu , C. Pusta;  
University of Oradea, Oradea, Romania.
Introduction. Mental deficiency is a very severe and common disease. 
There are many causes of mental deficiency. Thus, we can mention 
the congenital abnormalities, metabolic diseases, cranial trauma, frag -
ile X syndrome, monogenic or polygenic syndromes and chromosomal 
syndromes. Also, we can mention the critical age of parents (especially 
of mother’s), some physical, biological and chemical factors in appear -
ance of mental deficiency.
Objectives. In this study we show the importance of hereditary factors 
in appearance of mental deficiency.
Material and methods. We investigated 596 children interned in Neuro -
psychiatry Infantile Section of Neurology and Psychiatry Clinical Hos -
pital of Oradea, during the 1999-2001 period. Out of 596 children that 
were examined, 393 presented different levels of mental deficiency. 
We performed family studies and inspected the pedigrees.
Results. More than 65% of children with mental deficiency have one 
or more affected relatives in their family. The relatives may be affected 
by congenital abnormalities and/ or mental diseases. The frequency of 
similarly affected relatives is greatest in groups with mild and moder -
ate mental deficiency. In the group with severe mental deficiency, the 
incidence of affected relatives is lower.
Conclusion. This result may be an argument for the hypothesis that 
genetic factors are very important in the inheritance of mental defi -
ciency. The increased incidence in groups with mild and moderate 
mental deficiency may be partly explained by harmful factors, critical 
age of parents and the presence of fragile X syndrome. It seems that 
severe mental deficiency commonly reflects the effects of genes and 
chromosomal disorders.
P0171. Contributions as concerns to the incidence of cranial and 
facial dysmorphism in a population with mental deficiency
C. Pusta , I. Tomulescu;  
University of Oradea, Oradea, Romania.
Introduction. The mental deficiency is a very severe illness because it 
is associated in many cases with different other malformative diseas -
es. Also, the etiology of mental deficiency is diverse, and depending on 
etiological cause, the number and types of traits in mentally affected 
person varies in large limits.
Objectives. Our study is about the incidence of cranial and facial dys -
morphism in a population with mental deficiency. We decided to make 
this research because of different etiology of mental deficiency. Also, 
we wanted to establish if the cranial and facial dysmorphism is an im -
portant element in description of different types of mental deficiency.
Material and method. This research was realised on 393 children with 
diverse types of mental deficiency. The children were interned in Neu -
ropsychiatry Infantile Section of Neurology and Psychiatry Clinical 
Hospital of Oradea, during the 1999-2001 period. The children were 
clinical examinated. Also, we used the methods for chromosomes 
analysis.
Results. We observed that the incidence of cranial and facial dysmor -
phism increase in accordance with the level of the mental deficiency. 
In the group with severe mental deficiency, we obtained an incidence 
over the 40% of this abnormality. The explanation for these results may 
be the presence of some genes and chromosomes syndromes which 
associate cranial and facial dysmorphism, too.
Conclusion. The cranial and facial dysmorphism is a common feature 
in description of mental deficiency disease. The incidence of this ab -
normality increase in accordance with the worsening of the mental 
deficiency.P0172. Experiences of a routine diagnostic laboratory with oligo-
based array CGH in the diagnosis of mental retardation
A. Lott , P. Jagiello, H. Gabriel, M. Gencik;  
ZMG Osnabrueck, Osnabrueck, Germany.
Array CGH is a novel diagnostic tool for the detection of submicro -
scopic chromosomal imbalances. Such imbalances are regarded as 
an important cause of congenital mental retardation. In June 2006 
oligo-based array CGH was diagnostically implemented in our genetic 
service in order to reach a resolution for screening the whole genome 
that extends far beyond routine cytogenetic analysis. Array CGH was 
performed using 44k or 105k 60mer oligonucleotide arrays (Agilent) 
with a theoretical resolution of about 100kb or 40kb, respectively.
First we give an overview of our cases so far examined by array CGH, 
followed by the representation of selected cases. These examples will 
demonstrate the usefulness of high resolution array CGH for differ -
ent tasks: (1) further analysis of patients with syndromic mental re -
tardation, showing initially a normal karyotype; (2) confirmation and 
breakpoint analysis of imbalances detected by standard cytogenetic 
analysis, sometimes finding additionally submicroscopic chromosomal 
aberrations; (3) screening of apparently balanced translocations for 
cryptic imbalances.
Additionally, the selected cases will show the challenges of the vali -
dation and interpretation of results revealed by array CGH analysis. 
Since the discovery of a rapidly increasing number of so called ,,copy 
number variations“ (CNVs) in the genome of normal individuals, the 
assumption of an imbalance as casual for a specific phenotype must 
be carefully considered.
In conclusion, our experiences show that array CGH should be con -
sidered as an essential tool for the genetic analysis of patients with 
syndromic mental retardation.
P0173. Subtelomeric FISH ananlysis in 92 patients with mental 
retardation
E. F. Belligni1, J. Messa2, M. Pierluigi3, M. DeGregori2, L. Sorasio1, G. B. Fer -
rero1, F. Faravelli4, O. Zuffardi2, M. Silengo1;  
1Department of Paediatrics - University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 2Department of 
Genetics - University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Department of Genetics - Galliera 
Hospital, Genova, Italy, 4Department of Genetics - Galliera Hospital, Genova, 
Italy.
Mental retardation (MR) affects approximately 1 to 3% of the general 
population. Cryptic subtelomeric aberrations have been found in 5 to 
7% of all cases. We performed a subtelomeric FISH analysis in 92 unre -
lated children with normal standard karyotype ascertained by a check -
list that evaluates the grade of developmental delay, dysmorphisms, 
growth defect and congenital malformations. Ten cryptic chromosomal 
anomalies have been identified (10,8%): three de novo deletions, four 
unbalanced translocations of parental origin, a t(9;16)(9pter;16q24.3
qter) pat; der(20)t(16q24;20q13.3)pat; a der(6) t(6;1)(p22.3,q44) mat 
and a der(7)t(7;12)(q34;q24.32)mat; and three de novo unbalanced 
translocations: t(6pter; 6qter); a t(5;10)(pter;qter); a t(1;13)(p31.3;q22.
2),ish.. Interestingly a patient presenting a dysmorphic phenotype and 
multiple malformations, not associated to neurodevelopment delay 
carried a de novo t(6pter; 6qter). Microcephaly, agenesis of corpus cal -
losum, upslanting palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, synophris, short 
nose, anteverted nares and low set ears were the clinical features 
observed in the cases affected by 9q34-qter deletion, in agreement 
with the literature. In the patient carring t(9;16)(9q34qter;16q24.3qte
r)pat, the clinical diagnosis of Donnai-Barrow syndrome was initially 
proposed; in this case, subtelomeric FISH analysis allowed us to sug -
gest the hypothesis that some o Donnai-Barrow cases observed might 
be ascribed to 9q terminal deletion. Clinical features of most of these 
patients are consistent with the corresponding new emerging chromo -
some phenotypes, further supporting the role of cryptic subtelomeric 
analysis in the work-up of children affected by MR.
P0174. Mental retardation disease among Israeli Arab: Clinical 
and epidemiological study in a single village
R. A. Sharkia1, Q. Kaiyal2, N. Zelnik2, M. Mahajnah2;  
1The Triangle Regional Research and Development Center, P. O. Box-2167, 
Kfar Qari’- 30075, Israel, 2Child Neurology and Development Center and Pedi -
atric Department, Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel.
Mental retardation (MR) is a frequently occurring disease with a major 
impact on the life of affected person, the family and society. MR is Clinical genetics
defined as a disability characterized by a remarkably low intellectual 
functioning (IQ<70) in conjunction with significant limitations in adap -
tive functioning and it is estimated 1-3% of the general population. 
The genetic etiologies of MR are diverse and include chromosomal 
anomalies, recognizable malformation syndromes, monogenic syn -
dromes, structural brain abnormalities and environmental factors. 
About 1,400 different conditions associated with mental retardation 
have been recognized to date and many more are yet to be character -
ized. The prevalence of genetic diseases and congenital malformation 
in the Israeli Arab community is relatively high, as a result of high rate 
of consanguinity, but their distribution is not uniform. The aim of this 
study was to determine the frequency of neurological manifestations 
with a special emphasis on the MR spectrum disorders and its asso -
ciation with consanguinity within a single village. Out of 4,166 children 
(below 18 y of age), the prevalence of neurologically related hereditary 
disease was 4.3% (180 children) with about 40% of these cases (73 
patients) were identified with MR. About 65% of neurologically related 
hereditary disease cases and 80% of MR cases were outcome paren -
tal consanguineous marriages. The high prevalence of neurologically 
related hereditary disease that significantly associated with consan -
guinity prompts the necessity of implement preventive programs and 
design future strategies leading to avoiding the occurrence of these 
inherited genetic disorders.
P0175. C8002T polymorphism in endothelin-1 gene and 
metabolic syndrome
S. Manea , C. Heltianu;  
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology “N. Simionescu”, Bucharest, Roma -
nia.
BACKGROUND: Metabolic syndrome (MS) is characterized by a cluster 
of disorders including type 2 diabetes mellitus, obesity, glucose intoler -
ance, dyslipidemia, prothrombotic and proinflammatory states. Insulin 
resistance, the main contributor to MS is associated with endothelial 
dysfunction. The latter represents the clue element in appearance of 
the vasoconstriction when the level of vasoconstrictors factors, mainly 
endothelin-1 (ET-1) increases. There is an important role of ET-1 in the 
microvascular complications of type 2 diabetes mellitus. OBJECTIVE: 
This study investigates a possible association of the C8002T poly -
morphism in ET-1 gene with MS-associated microvascular disorders 
including diabetic retinopathy, neuropathy and nephropathy. METH -
ODS: We screened 208 Romanian subjects (123 MS patients and 85 
control individuals). ET-1 genotypes were determined by polymerase 
chain reaction-restriction fragment-length polymorphism analysis. Cor -
relations between C8002T polymorphism and clinically manifested mi -
crovascular disorders in MS patients were performed by multivariate 
regression analysis using SPSS Advanced Statistics 10.0. RESULTS: 
No significant differences were found for ET-1 gene variant between 
MS patients and control, or between sub-selected MS patients with 
or without diabetic retinopathy or nephropathy. Multivariate logistic re -
gression analysis in MS patients showed that C8002T polymorphism 
was an independent risk factor (P=0.03) for diabetic neuropathy, which 
remained significant after adjustment for potential risk factors (age, 
gender, body mass index, smoking, fasting blood glucose, total-cho -
lesterol and triglycerides). CONCLUSION: These data suggest for the 
first time that C8002T polymorphism of ET-1 gene may influence the 
development of diabetic neuropathy in MS patients.
This study was supported by Romanian Academy and Romanian grant 
CEEX (no. 100/2006).
P0176. The dinamic observation of the adult form of 
metachromatic leukodystrophy in two sibs
N. A. Pichkur1, N. V. Olkhovich1, A. N. Nedoboy1, N. G. Gorovenko2;  
1Ukrainian Children Hospital, Kiyv, Ukraine, 2National Academy of Postdiploma 
Education, Kiyv, Ukraine.
Metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) is the lysosomal storage dis -
ease with arylsulfatase A (ASA) deficiency. The adult form of MLD 
averages approximately 15% of all MLD cases. In contrast to other 
forms of MLD that start with movement problems, adult form of this 
disease is presented as psychiatric disturbance with schizophrenia-
like disorder. There are two sibs (male and female) with adult MLD 
was being under our observation during five years. The diagnosis was 
confirmed by enzymatic assay at the age 15 for brother and at the age 
20 for sister, the ASA activity was found 1% and 3% of control value accordingly. The initial sings of disease appeared at the age 14 in both 
patients in similar way. The major features were the teaching difficul -
ties, memory disturbance, marked emotional lability with irrational fear, 
marked decrease of self-criticism and unequal behavior. The MRI of 
the brain revealed typical changes in the perivenricular zones. After 
the five years observation there are no movement disturbance in both 
patients. The psychiatric problems are stable in sister but progressive 
in brother. Generally the brother’s disease progress faster than sister’s 
one. This report illustrates the importance of differential diagnostics of 
MLD in cohort of psychiatric patients with behavior disturbances.
P0177. Prevalence and phenotypes associated with double 
Fibrillin 1  gene heterozygosity: clinical relevance for diagnosis, 
prognosis and prenatal diagnosis
M. Grasso1, E. Disabella1, N. Marziliano2, M. Pasotti1, A. Brega3,4, S. Man -
narino5, C. Lucchelli1, D. Larizza6, L. Lanzarini7, E. Antoniazzi8, R. Dore9, M. 
Mosconi10, L. Magrassi11, E. Arbustini1;  
1Centre for Inherithed Cardiovascular Diseases,Foundation IRCCS Policlinico 
San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 2Centre for inherited Cardiovascular Diseases, Foun -
dation IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3Department of Biology and 
Genetics, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Genetics and Microbi -
ology, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 5Pediatric Cardiology, Foundation IRCCS 
Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 6Pediatrics, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico 
San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 7Cardiology, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Mat -
teo, Pavia, Italy, 8Ophthalmology, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 
Pavia, Italy, 9Magnetic Resonance Radiology, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico 
San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 10Orthopaedics, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San 
Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 11Neurosurgery, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 
Pavia, Italy.
Marfan syndrome type I (MFS1) is an autosomal dominant disorder of 
the connective tissue diagnosed following Ghent criteria and caused 
by mutations of the Fibrillin 1 gene ( FBN1 ). Double FBN1  compound 
heterozygosity seems to be exceptional and associated with neonatal 
severe and early lethal phenotypes.
We describe the prevalence and the clinical phenotypes of carriers of 
double FBN1  gene mutations.
We identified five unrelated double FBN1 compound heterozygotes (9 
mutations) in five out of 141 consecutively genotyped families (3.5%). 
In three of five families, each parent carried a different mutation and 
one of the offspring inherited both: one mutation (major) was associ -
ated with MFS in at least one family member and one (minor) with mild, 
incomplete or nearly normal phenotypes not satisfying Ghent criteria 
for MFS. Carriers of the major mutation alone or of double mutations 
(compound heterozygotes) fulfilled Ghent criteria for MFS while car -
riers of “minor” mutations did not. In two families, the major mutation 
was de novo  and the “minor” one was inherited from the mother or the 
father, both healthy and showing minor, non-diagnostic MFS traits.
Our data are in accord with the dominant pattern of inheritance of the 
MFS, however they document the double FBN1  compound heterozy -
gosity in a minority of MFS cases. The clinical implications must con -
sider the contribution of the positive family history for the diagnosis, 
the recognition of the “major” mutation for prenatal diagnosis and the 
possible contribution of the “minor” mutation to the overall phenotype 
in double mutation carriers.
P0178. Using microarray based CGH for studying the Delleman 
phenotype
D. P. Cavalcanti1, L. Bernardini2, A. Novelli2, I. Torrente2, M. Cintra1, F. Cen -
des1, B. Dallapiccola2;  
1UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 2Istituto CSS-Mendel, Roma, Italy.
Delleman syndrome (DS) or oculocerebrocutaneous syndrome has 
been described in a heterogeneous number of patients presenting all 
or some the following main syndrome’s features: orbital cysts/microph -
thalmia, cerebral malformations, and skin lesions specifically charac -
terized by focal dermal hypoplasia and cutaneous appendages. Array-
CGH method has been successfully used to identify submicroscopic 
rearrangements in different series of mentally retarded patients with or 
without associated dysmorphic signs. The purpose of this presentation 
is reporting the study of three patients with the phenotype of DS by 
using the microarray-CGH methodology. The first patient, a sporadic 
case, has presented all the main clinical signs of DS. The others two 
patients were sibs that showed discordant phenotypes between them, 
but suggesting the DS. All the studied three patients had normal karyo -Clinical genetics
type at 550 bands resolution level. No microrearrangements were 
found in the first patient by array-CGH method at 0.8Mb resolution. 
However, using the same method and also microsatellite marker stud -
ies it was possible founding a reciprocal translocation t(6;7)(q27;q34) 
in the father and a different segregation of the both involved chromo -
some to the two sibs. While one sib carried out a deletion at 6q27 band 
associated with a duplication of the 7q34-q36.3 region, the other sib 
presents the inverted microrearrangement - a partial duplication 6q 
plus a partial deletion 7q. We conclude that the Delleman phenotype 
is etiologically heterogeneous and that the involved chromosomal re -
gions, 6q27 and 7q34 should be considered as candidate regions to 
looking for genes related to DS.
P0179. A study of candidate genes for dominant non-syndromic 
microcephaly in a family with inherited chromosomal 
translocations t(5q35.2;18q22.3)
A. Crepel , T. Voet, B. Thienpont, A. Vogels, J. Fryns, J. Vermeesch, K. Devr -
iendt;  
Center of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium.
In a large pedigree a balanced chromosomal translocation 
t(5q35.2;18q22.3) segregates with non-syndromic microcephaly (-2 
to -3.7 SD) in 7 carriers, with the exception of 1 macrocephalic (+3.2 
SD) carrier. No genes were directly disrupted by the breakpoints, sug -
gesting a positional effect to alter gene expression levels. 2 candidate 
genes were identified near the breakpoints of the translocation: STC2  
(stanniocalcin 2) ~72 kb downstream of the breakpoint on chr5 and 
NETO1  (neuropilin-and-tolloid precursor 1) ~105kb downstream of the 
breakpoint on chr18.
Both candidate genes are expressed in brain and the neuropilin-do -
main in NETO1 points towards a possible role in axonal guidance. Pa -
tients with microdeletions of 5q35 encompassing STC2  present mild 
microcephaly.
Measurement of RNA-expression levels for the candidates was ham -
pered by variable expression of the genes in EBV cell-lines, the only 
patient material available. Heterozygous transcribed SNPs to test 
mono-allelic expression on cDNA level were absent.
No mutations were detected in either genes in 3 other patients with 
non-syndromic microcephaly. Using a morpholino knock-down (KD) 
approach in zebrafish, severe cell death spreading from the dienceph -
alon was observed for stc2 KD during somitogenesis (~10-24 hpf), 
coinciding with the time of primary brain development. For neto1 , one 
morpholino generated similar cell death, 2 other independent morpho -
linos only generated general developmental delay.
Confirmation of the role of one of these genes in microcephaly will be 
done by further mutation analysis in additional patients as well as fur -
ther structural studies in the knockdown zebrafish embryo’s.
P0180. Clinical, neuropathological and neuropsychological 
phenotype in two families with primary microcephaly due to 
ASPM/MCPH5 mutations
L. Titomanlio1,2, F. Guimiot3, A. Afenjar4, L. Burglen4, T. Billette de Villemeur5, K. 
Hernandez1, J. Gadisseux1, B. Gerard1, A. Verloes1,2;  
1Dept of Genetics, Robert DEBRE University Hospital, PARIS, France, 2IN-
SERM U676, Paris, France, 3Dept of Fetal Pathology, Robert DEBRE Universi -
ty Hospital, PARIS, France, 4Dept of Genetics, Armand TROUSSEAU Hospital, 
PARIS, France, 5Dept of Pediatric Neurology, Armand TROUSSEAU Hospital, 
PARIS, France.
Human autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a het -
erogeneous disorder with at least six genetic loci (MCPH1-6). MCPH5, 
caused by ASPM (Abnormal Spindle-like, Microcephaly-associated - 
location: 1q31) gene mutations is the most commonly involved. We 
report new mutations in 2 families with MCPH5. In family 1 (non-con -
sanguineous), the proband was born with an OFC of 32 cm. At age 4, 
OFC is -5SD and height is at -1SD. The boy shows mild psychomotor 
delay. A further pregnancy was terminated after echographic diagnosis 
of microcephaly. Neuropathology showed a small brain (biometry of 
27-28 GW for 33 GW) with a mildly simplified gyral pattern for age, de -
creased neuronal population in cortical plate and premature depletion 
of the germinal zone. We found coumpound heterozygocyty for 1 non-
sense and 1 frameshift (1 bp deletion) mutations: p.Gly26AlafsX42/
p.Arg2078X. In family 2 (consanguineous), two brothers were af -
fected, although with different severity. The eldest one, aged 25, had 
an OFC < -8SD. His IQ was 55, with homogeneous scores and pre -served memory functions. The youngest, aged 10, has an OFC at -
5SD. His IQ was 70 with normal memory functioning but weaknesses 
in executive functions. He was still in mainstream schooling. Mutation 
screening showed an homozygous 2 bp deletion leading to frameshift 
p.Lys2595fsX6. Our patients illustrate intrafamial variability of ASPM 
mutants, confirm surprisingly good preservation of cognition despite 
major reduction in brain size, and confirm the absence of specific his -
tological anomalies in ASPM-related MCPH. Detailed neuropsycho -
logical profile of family 2 will be presented.
P0181. Familial microduplication 22q11.2 without cardiac 
anomaly
T. Reimand1, K. Muru1, K. Kuuse1, K. Õunap1,2;  
11Medical Genetics Center, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, 
Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
The chromosomal rearrangements in region 22q11.2 lead to various 
types of congenital malformations and mental retardation. The most 
common molecular defect in region 22q11.2 is microdeletion, but re -
cently the microduplication 22q11.2 syndrome has been identified. We 
describe mother and daughter with microduplication 22q11.2.
Twenty-seven-year old patient was referred for genetic evaluation by 
cardiologist because of facial dysmorphism. She has short stature, fa -
cial dysmorphism, velopharyngeal insufficiency, toes anomalies, and 
learning disabilities. She had also one seizure episode without special 
findings in EEG. She has also diagnosed depression and arthropathy 
with contractures. She had no cardiac anomaly, only some tahhycar -
dial episodes.
Routine chromosome analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes was 
performed using standard laboratory protocols and the karyotype was 
normal. Metaphase FISH-analysis with DiGeorge/VCFS TUPLE1 Re -
gion Probe (Cytocell, Aquarius) was performed only due to the refer -
ral doctor was a cardiologist. The analysis revealed unexpectedly two 
signals with different intensities on 22q11.2 (TUPLE1) regions. Further 
analysis of interphase nucleus revealed three signals of TUPLE1 of 
similar intensity and two signals of control probe located on 22q13.3 
(N85A3) in each cell. The relatives of the proband were investigated.  
Her mother had the same cytogenetic finding - karyotype: 46,XX.ish 
dup(22)(q11.2q11.2). She has similar, but milder facial features. She 
had had some problems with fertility before her first pregnancy (now 
she has 5 children), she has premature menopause (39 years). She 
has no seizures, cardiac disturbances or psychiatric disorders. The 
other members of the family are under investigation.
P0182. Implications of Spontaneous Excess Expression of Fra 
(16)(q22): An Emerging Syndrome?
D. Babovic-Vuksanovic , M. Lega, Y. S. Zou, S. M. Jalal;  
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.
A twelve year old girl was referred to Medical Genetics following as -
sessment in Craniofacial Clinic for a possible cosmetic surgery. This 
patient had microstomia, cleft palate, micrognathia and dental crowd -
ing. Physical and mental development was normal. Her father and one 
of her sisters had remarkably similar physical features. Upon examina -
tion, it was thought that this family had a condition similar to what had 
been described previously in four other families, whom had an elevation 
of spontaneous 16q22.1 fragility and overlapping clinical features with 
our patients. Chromosome analyses were performed on metaphase 
lymphocytes grown in PHA-stimulated blood cultures by standard pro -
cedures. Our patient had an unusually high spontaneous expression of 
chromosome fragility at 16q22.1, with an otherwise normal karyotype. 
The fragility was expressed as either a deletion or a chromosome gap 
in 5 of the 30 metaphase cells (16.7%) analyzed. Likewise, the sponta -
neous expression of the fragile site was found to be 20% and 30% for 
this patient’s sister and father, respectively. An unaffected sister had a 
normal karyotype and no expression of 16q22.1 fragility. Our observa -
tion of fragility at 16q22.1 seems to segregate with phenotypic features 
of microstomia, cleft palate, micrognathia and dental crowding in this 
family. Our findings, in conjunction with those of previous case reports, 
have lead us to speculate that fragility at 16q22.1 and microstomia is 
an emerging syndrome, possibly caused by a regulatory disturbance 
of genes involved especially in jaw development.Clinical genetics
P0183. Minor physical anomalies in children and teenagers with 
neurological disorders
D. Stoicanescu1, M. Cevei2, A. Belengeanu1, V. Belengeanu1;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of 
Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania.
Minor physical anomalies are defects that in themselves, have neither 
medical, nor cosmetic importance. They may occur even in healthy 
individuals. The incidence of minor anomalies has been studied in 
search for a relationship between different non-syndromic diseases 
and abnormal embryogenesis. They are used as indicators of altered 
embryonic differentiation. Their positive correlation with disturbances 
of neurological development occurring during embryogenesis has 
been established. Patients with mental retardation, cerebral palsy and 
autism were evaluated for the presence of minor anomalies. Data were 
compared with those obtained from a control group. The frequency of 
the minor anomalies was not significantly different in the two groups. 
When expressing the mean values as minor anomalies per child, the 
figures were 2.92 in affected individuals and 1.43 in the healthy ones. A 
positive correlation with the severity of mental retardation was noticed. 
64% of the cases with cerebral palsy and 56% of the patients with 
autism had at least three minor anomalies. The presence of minor con -
genital anomalies, especially more than three, may predict the future 
onset of a neurological disorder.
P0184. Unilateral mirror-image polydactyly of the hand, with 
cutis aplasia
S. Farrell1, S. Unger2,3;  
1Division of Genetics, Credit Valley Hospital, Mississauga, ON, Canada, 2Insti-
tute for Human Genetics, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 3Centre for 
Human Genetics, Univeristy of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
Mirror-image polydactyly is rare. It is syndromic or isolated. Laurin-
Sandrow syndrome (LSS) includes fibular and ulnar duplication, ab -
sent radius and tibia, polysyndactyly of the hands and feet, often de -
scribed as mirror-like, and nasal/philtral anomalies. Transplantation of 
a zone of chick distal limb bud polarizing activity to the anterior limb 
margin causes mirror image duplication of limb elements. This sug -
gests mutations in genes for limb differentiation might be associated 
with mirror-image polydactyly. A number of possible candidate genes 
contributing to pathways directing limb development have been de -
scribed. Dominant inheritance has been proposed, based on a few 
families with vertical transmission. The features of isolated and familial 
cases are variable, suggesting etiologic heterogeneity is possible. The 
cause of isolated cases affecting only one limb is not clear and is not 
necessarily genetic in origin.
The right hand of this female infant had seven triphalangeal fingers ar -
rayed around a central digit, ulnar duplication resulting in limited wrist 
and elbow movement, and a small area of cutis aplasia of right an -
terior shoulder. No other anomalies were noted. Chromosomes were 
normal. At 6 weeks, motor/social development was appropriate. Her 
parents had normal extremities and were not consanguineous.
Innis and Hedera [2004] speculated that isolated single limb mirror-
image (SLMIP) polydactyly might represent natural variability of LSS 
but there are no reports of familial transmission of SLMIP. Postzygotic 
somatic mosaicism of affecting one limb bud is another possible expla -
nation. Cutis aplasia is unique to our case and suggests disruption of 
limb bud development as a possible cause.
P0185. Familial aggregation of congenitally missing lower 
central incisors
E. Severin , C. Albu, D. F. Albu, R. Purcarea;  
“Carol Davila” Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania.
Background - The isolated form of congenitally missing teeth is often 
familial.Family studies have suggested that hypodontia may aggregate 
within families. Familial aggregation of a trait can suggest genetic etiol-
ogy. Absence of lower central incisor is less common than the other 
forms of hypodontia. Objectives - To describe the clinical phenotypes, 
familial aggregation, inheritance and molecular diagnosis of congeni -
tally missing incisors. Patients and Methods - Familial aggregation was 
investigated in 5 unrelated families with at least 2 cases with lower 
central incisors hypodontia. Patients were evaluated clinically and ra -
diographically. A pedigree analysis was performed to determine famil -
ial correlations and pattern of inheritance of the hypodontia phenotype. 
Familial aggregation was measured by relative reccurrence risk. For DNA analysis, blood samples were collected from patients, their af -
fected and unaffected relatives. Results - All patients and their affected 
family members presented hypodontia of permanent incisors as an 
isolated trait. Affected members within the families exhibited variable 
expression of hypodontia with regard to the region, symetry and num -
ber of teeth involved. Significant parent-offspring (father-son, father-
daughter and mother-son) correlations in lower incisors hypodontia 
were observed. The type of inheritance was autosomal dominant with 
variable expressivity and complete penetrance. No mutations were 
detected in the PAX9 gene known to cause hypodontia. Conclusions 
- Hypodontia in one family member increased the likelihood of another 
family member missing a tooth. Genetic cause of congenitally missing 
lower incisors is attributable to a single dominant gene, but not PAX9 
gene.
P0186. Mutational screening of the mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR) 
and tRNAGlu genes in leucocytes and mucosal cells of Tunisian 
patients with mitochondrial Diabetes
N. Mezghani1, E. Mkaouar1, M. Mnif2, N. Charfi2, M. Abid2, F. Fakhfakh1;  
1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine. Faculté de Médecine de Sfax, 
Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service d’Endocrinologie. CHU Hedi Chaker. Sfax, Tunisia, Sfax, 
Tunisia.
Mitochondrial diseases are very heterogeneous group of disorder with 
respiratory chain deficiency caused by either mutations in mitochon -
drial DNA or nuclear DNA encoding mitochondrial proteins. Several 
polymorphisms and mutations occurring in the mitochondrial tRNALeu 
(UUR) and tRNAGlu genes were found to be associated with mitochondrial 
diabetes.
In this study, 5 patients belonging to 5 unrelated Tunisian families 
with a clinical presentation highly suggestive of mitochondrial diabe -
tes have been tested. Either mitochondrial DNA from leucocytes and 
from buccal mucosa has been extracted in these 5 patients. Mutational 
analysis in tRNALeu (UUR) and tRNAGlu genes have been performed by 
PCR-RFLP and direct sequencing in ABI PRISM® 3100 Avant auto -
mated DNA sequencer.
After PCR-RFLP analysis, none of the five patients were found to carry 
A3243G tRNALeu(UUR) gene in the homoplasmic or in the heteroplasmic 
forms in leucocytes and in buccal mucosa. Sequencing of tRNALeu(UUR) 
gene did not revealed any other mutations or polymorphisms in this 
gene.
After PCR-RFLP and direct sequencing of the mitochondrial tRNAGlu 
gene, we revealed the T14709C mutation in this gene in heteroplasmic 
form in leucocytes and buccal mucosa of 4 out of the five diabetes pa -
tients. Searching of this mutation in members of the proband’s families 
is in process.
P0187. Use of MLPA testing in subtelomeric rearrangements 
detection
C. Rusu1, M. Bembea2, C. Skrypnyk2, M. Volosciuc1, A. Sireteanu1, E. Tomes -
cu3, M. Puiu4, L. Barbarii5;  
1University of Medicine, Iasi, Romania, 2University of Medicine, Oradea, Roma -
nia, 3IOMC, Bucuresti, Romania, 4University of Medicine, Timisoara, Romania, 
5INML, Bucuresti, Romania.
Genetic causes of mental retardation (MR) are very heterogeneous. 
Subtelomeric rearrangements play an important role in idiopatic MR 
determinism. Different methods have been used to identify subtelo -
meric rearrangements, but recently introduced MLPA (Multiplex Liga -
tion Probe Amplification) technique seems to provide the best results. 
We have used MLPA to identify subtelomeric rearrangements in chil -
dren with idiopatic MR. The protocol included the following sequence 
of steps: clinical selection based on de Vries score; karyotype; anti -
FMRP test for Fragile X syndrome screening; MLPA testing using 2 
independent kits in order to separate polymorphisms. We have se -
lected cases using de Vries diagnostic score, only those with a score 
of 3/ more being selected. All patient data were recorded in a database 
that will be presented. The initial group was formed of 142 children 
with idiopatic MR. In 24 of them (16.9%) the karyotype revealed differ -
ent abnormalities. 16 cases (11.3%) presented speech delay/ autism, 
but antiFMRP test was normal. 60 MLPA tests were done: 46 cases 
(76.7% were normal, 6 (10%) abnormal, 4 (6.7%) had polymorphism 
and 4 (6.7%) could not be interpreted. Clinical features of the cases 
identified with different subtelomeric rearrangements and polymor -
phisms are illustrated with photos and discussed in detail. The results Clinical genetics
will be confirmed with FISH. In conclusion, the diagnostic score is use -
ful in case selection for further testing and MLPA proves to be efficient 
in diagnosing subtelomeric rearrangements as a possible cause of 
idiopatic MR.
P0188. A 2-years old girl with hypoplastic glomerulocystic 
kidney disease caused by a novel de novo  mutation in HNF1- β  
gene
B. Brasseur1, N. Godefroid2, K. Dahan3;  
1Pediatric Endocrinology and Nephrology, UCL Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 
2Pediatric Nephrology Unit, UCL Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 3Centre for Hu -
man Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
We report the case of a 2-years old girl with renal cysts. She initially 
presented with a suspicion of febrile urinary tract infection. Biological 
work-up revealed an increased creatinine and ultrasound showed re -
nal cysts. Both kidneys were small for age displaying 20 small bilateral 
cysts. Familial history was relevant for unilateral renal agenesia in the 
paternal grandfather and one isolated renal cyst in the father. Personal 
history was uninformative, except for a neonatal pyelocalicial hypoto -
ny. She was transferred to our university hospital with a diagnosis of 
ADPKD. Because of the family history and the presence of tubular pro -
teinuria, HNF1β  gene was screened for mutation. Sequencing analysis 
revealed a heterozygous p.His149Gln substitution in the DNA binding 
region of HNF1-β factor (TCF2). This mutation not reported sofar was 
surprisingly undetectable in both parents, confirming a de novo trans -
mission. There is no perturbation of liver enzymes nor cholestasis, and 
no arguments for glucose intolerance. In conclusion: HNF1-β  gene 
mutations are often associated with renal findings that can manifest 
early in life. They should be included in the differential diagnosis of 
cystic renal diseases in children. Positive family history of various renal 
pictures, early deterioration of renal function, the presence of tubular 
proteinuria and the presence of extrarenal manifestations may distin -
guish the HNF1-β -related renal cystic disease from the others. Genetic 
analysis will bring definite diagnosis.
P0189. Monosomy 1p36; an atypical case with duodenal atresia 
and an interstitial deletion
J. Rankin1, C. Delmege2, N. Canham3, A. Allwood4, V. Maloney5, J. Crolla5;  
1Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Bristol Genetics 
Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3North West Thames Regional Genet -
ics Service, London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Paediatrics, Derriford 
Hospital, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 5National Genetics Reference Laboratory, 
Salisbury, United Kingdom.
Monosomy 1p36 is one of the commonest chromosomal deletion syn -
dromes affecting about 1 in 5000 newborns. Clinical features include 
microcephaly, developmental delay, hypotonia, seizures, hearing loss, 
feeding difficulty, structural heart defects and dilated cardiomyopathy. 
Typical facial features include deep set eyes with straight eyebrows, 
midface hypoplasia and small mouth with pointed chin. Most patients 
have subtelomeric deletions but interstitial deletions have been report -
ed in a minority of cases.
We report a 2 year old girl with duodenal atresia, atrial septal defect, 
mild developmental delay and the facial gestalt of monosomy 1p36. 
Microcephaly, epilepsy and hearing loss were absent. Initial blood 
chromosome analysis and in situ hybridization using the Vysis To -
TelVysion telomeric probe set were normal. However, analysis of a 
further G-banded chromosome preparation revealed a very subtle 
anomalous banding pattern in the short arm of chromosome 1. FISH 
using the 1p36 microdeletion probe set (Vysis), which includes a sub -
telomeric probe and an additional probe located 600kb more proxi -
mally, showed normal signal patterns but an interstitial 1p36.3 deletion 
was subsequently confirmed by FISH with a panel of tiling path BAC 
clones mapping to distal 1p. This report illustrates the importance of 
testing for interstitial deletions in patients with a phenotype suggestive 
of monosomy 1p36 and, to our knowledge, is the first reported case 
with duodenal atresia.
Julia.rankin@rdeft.nhs.uk
P0190. Monozygotic sisters with Hurler syndrome
D. Poliakov1, S. E. Ornitsan2, M. O. Mkheidze3;  
1Paediatric Medical Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Children 
Hospice, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Medical Academy for postgradu -ate studying, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
In memoriam of Dr. Leonora M. Sandomirskaya.
Mucopolysaccharidose type 1 (MPS1, Hurler syndrome) is an inher -
ited
lysosomal storage disease caused by deficiency of the lysosomal en -
zyme alpha-L-iduronidase (IDUA; EC 3.2.1.76) that results in under -
graded glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). GAGs are either stored in the 
lysosome or excreted in the urine. IDUA gene maps to 4p16.3.
We report on a family with monozygotic sisters suffered from MPS1. 
They were born after the third properly prolonged gestation from 32 
yr-old female by spontaneous vaginal delivery. Their parents deny con -
sanguinity and hereditary diseases. At birth twins weights were 2690g 
and 2470g, their length were 49cm and 47cm. They have two elder 
healthy sisters, 11 and 9 yr. aged. The first year of twins’ life was calm 
but their mother noted twins to have lackluster eyes. Probands came 
to clinical attention with umbilical hernia at the age of 14 months. By 
the age of 5 yr clinical symptoms conformed to MPS 1: course facial 
features, corneal clouding, hearing loss, short stature, joint stiffness, 
skeletal deformities, liver and spleen enlarged and GAGs urinary ex -
cretion elevated. In addition to these symptoms upper respiratory in -
fections, ear infections and continuous nasal discharge were frequent. 
Molecular diagnosis was performed in Moscow (Centre of Medical 
Genetics) and the twins were found to be homozygous (Q70X, MIM 
252800.0002). Now we try to find sponsors to start enzyme treatment 
for these girls from a large family
P0191. MPS 1H (Hurler)
S. Mahdavi1,2, M. Asgarshirazi1;  
1MPS, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetic Institute, Tehran, Islamic Re -
public of Iran.
I would like to introduce a dizygotic twin (boy & girl) who are affected 
by hurler disease (mps 1h) a lysosomal storage disorder. They have 
mental retardation, coarse facies, enlarged tongue , skeletal deformi -
ties ,short stature, short and wide hands, hepatosplenomegaly, umbli -
cal hernia (only in the girl),and conductive hearing loss.
The radiologic changes of dysostosis multiplex are seen.These include 
a thickened calvarium, shallow orbit, enlarged j-shaped sella, anterior 
hypoplasia of lumbar vertebrae whith kyphosis, oar-like ribs, pelvic 
dysplasia, and shortened tubular bone+expanded diaphyses. The uri -
nary excretion of dermatan sulfate and heparan sulfate is increased . 
Their parents have third degree of family relationship.
P0192. Facial dysmorphy, blindness and a mutation in the 
mtATP6 gene
R. S. Tincheva1, S. Mihailova2, E. Naumova2;  
1University Pediatric Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Central Laboratory of Clinical 
Immunology, University Hospital “Alexandrovska”, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Mitochondrial ATP production via oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) 
is essential for normal function and maintenance of human organ sys -
tems. Since OXPHOS biogenesis depends on both nuclear- and mi -
tochondrial-encoded gene products, mutations in both genomes can 
result in impaired electron transport and ATP synthesis, thus causing 
tissue dysfunction and human disease. Over 30 mitochondrial DNA 
(mtDNA) point mutations and over 100 mtDNA rearrangements have 
now been identified as etiological factors in human disease. These 
mutations result in an extraordinarily broad spectrum of clinical phe -
notypes.
We present an 1 and ½ year old girl from first uneventful pregnancy 
and delivery, born on time with birth weight 2800g , length 51cm and 
head circumference 31 cm.. At the age of 28 days atrophia of n.opticus 
was suspected. A brain MRI showed severe internal and external hy -
drocephaly and athrophia cerebri. Dysmorphic features consisting of 
microcephaly, high palate, exsophtalmus and low placed ears were 
noted. The child is with increased deep tendon reflexes, hyper muscle 
tonus and profound mental retardation. She can not seat and walk 
and she is practically blind. An EEG suggested a locus of paroxis -
mal activity in the left frontal region. Convulsions are not observed. 
Sequence-based analysis on mtDNA genom revealed G8573A-muta -
tion in MT-ATP6 gene reflecting in amino acid change glycine-aspartic 
acid (second base pair of the codon). The same mutation was recently 
reported in Italian patient with LHON phenotype and the influence of 
this substitution on mitochondrion respiratory function remain to be 
determined.Clinical genetics
P0193. Investigation of Polymorphisms in Non-coding Region of 
Human Mitochondrial DNA in 31 Persian HCM Patients
M. Montazeri1, M. Houshmand1, E. V. Zaklyazminskaya2, M. Paygambari3, M. 
Paygambari3, G. Stahbanati3;  
1NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Research Center of Medical 
Genetics, MoscowLaboratory of DNA Research, , Russia, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 3University of Medical Sciences, Shaheed Rajaei Cardiovascular 
Medical Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The D-loop region is a hot spot for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) altera -
tions, containing two HyperVariable Segments, HVS-I and HVS-II. In 
order to identify polymorphic sites and potential genetic background 
accounting for Hypertrophic CardioMyopathy (HCM) disease, the com -
plete non-coding region of mtDNA from 31 unrelated HCM patients 
and 45 normal controls were sequenced. The sequences were aligned 
upon the revised Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS) and any 
incompatibilities were recorded as numerical changes in homoPoly -
meric C Tract (PCT), single base substitutions (SBS), insertions and 
deletions (Indels). Nucleotide substitutions were found to make up the 
majority of the mutations, rather than indels. We drew significantly 
high transition rate (81.8%) versus lower frequency of transversions 
(18.2%). 12 polymorphisms were identified in this study which had not 
been published in the MitoMap database. PCT changes at positions 
303-309 were detected in 83% of our samples. Our results suggest 
that an increased level of HVS-I and HVS-II substitutions may be an 
indicator of mitochondrial DNA instability. Furthermore, mtDNA mu -
tations may play an important role in pathogenesis of cardiac arrest 
which has remained unexplained for long.
P0194. Prevalence and Genetic Profile of 
Mucopolysaccharidosis Type 1 in the Irish population
A. Murphy1, E. P. Treacy1, A. O’ Meara2, S. Lynch3;  
1National Centre for Inherited metabolic Disorders,The Children’s University 
Hospital,Temple Street,, Dublin, Ireland, 2Department of Hematology and On -
cology, Our Lady’s Hospital for Sick Children, Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland, 3The 
National Centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady’s Hospital for Sick Children, 
Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland.
Aims: To document prevalence rates of the three clinical phenotypes of 
Mucopolysaccharidosis Type 1 Hurler (severe), Hurler-Scheie (inter -
mediate) and Scheie(mild) in the Republic of Ireland using population 
data from the Government of Ireland census in April 2002.
Methods: Database and chart review of all live patients with MPS1 
attending two specialised centres in 2002.Patient genotypes, iduroni -
dase activity, ethnic background, province of origin, age at diagnosis 
and presenting clinical features were recorded.
Results: 30 patients were alive.One patient had Scheie, four Hurler 
- Scheie and 25 had Hurler syndrome, giving an overall prevalence 
of 7.66 per million for MPS 1 in Ireland. 19/25 (76%) patients from 
the Hurler group (age range 4 months to 14 years 10 months) were 
members of the “Irish Traveller” community.All had the same W402X 
homozygous mutation.There are 23,681 Travellers in Ireland. 10,001 
are under 15 years of age giving a prevalence of 19 per 10,001 or 1 in 
526 for Hurler’s syndrome amongst Irish Traveller children.
The patient with the mild phenotype and all for patients with the inter -
mediate phenotype hail from the same province.3/4 carry the same 
heterozygous W402X/P496L mutation.
Conclusion: A prevalence 1/526 for hurler syndrome amongst “Trav -
eller” children is the highest recorded for this condition worldwide 
and equates with a carrier frequency of 1/11. Given the catastrophic 
morbidity of delayed treatment and availability of effective treatment 
(Enzyme replacement therapy by iv infusion and stem cell transplant) 
we recommend screening all babies from this population for Hurler 
syndrome
P0195. Chromosome aberration and multiple exostoses in 3 
family generations
N. A. Gladkova1, V. V. Krasilnikov1, V. A. Tikhonov1, M. O. Mkheidze2;  
1Municipal Centre of Medical Genetics, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Medical Academy for postgraduate studying, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion.
Hereditary multiple exostoses (HME) is a genetically heterogeneous 
autosomal dominant disorder with near-complete penetrance that is 
associated with mutations in at least 3 different genes termed EXT 
ones. Three separate loci at 8q24, 11p11-12 and 19p11-13 are identi -fied by linkage analysis. This disease is characterized with short stat -
ure, multiple osteochondromas, asymmetric growth at the knees and 
ankles, which may result in deformities.
We report on a family with rare coexistence HME and chromosomal 
aberration in three generations. For the first time we examined the pro -
band at the age of 14 yr. He was born after the first properly prolonged 
gestation from 21 yr-old female by spontaneous vaginal delivery. At 
birth proband weight was 3250g, his length was 51cm, Apgar score 
was 7/8. The first bony lumps were found on tibiae and right scapula 
at proband’s age of 4 yr. At the age of 14 yr his height was 154cm, 
his weight was 55kg, head circumference was 57cm. He also had hy -
poplastic scrotum, cryptorchidism and progressive osseous lesions. 
X-ray examination confirmed multiple scapular exostoses and exos -
toses in juxtaepiphyseal regions of long bones, genu valgum, short 
metacarpal, Madelung-like forearm deformities. His mother suffered 
from dysarthria and dyslexia, painless multiple exostoses of tibiae. 
His grandmother from the maternal side has short stature and mul -
tiple exostoses of the distal part of fibulae. Karyotypes of the proband, 
his mother and his grandmother were found to be abnormal 46XY, 
inv(5)(q13.1;q15) and 46XX, inv(5)(q13.1;q15)
P0196. Mulvihill-Smith progerioid syndrome: clinical evaluation 
and molecular characterization of a complex phenotype
A. G. Delmonaco1, C. A. Bena1, E. Biamino1, F. Cerutti1, A. Veltri2, F. Gennari3, 
O. Zuffardi4, M. Silengo1, G. B. Ferrero1;  
1Department of Paediatrics, Torino, Italy, 2Department of Radiology - San 
Giovanni Battista General Hospital, Torino, Italy, 3Department of Surgery - San 
Giovanni Battista General Hospital, Torino, Italy, 4Department of Genetics - Uni -
versity of Pavia, Torino, Italy.
Mulvihill-Smith syndrome (MS) (McKusick 176690) is an extremely 
rare disorder, with only eight cases described. It is characterized by 
premature aging, multiple pigmented nevi, lack of facial subcutane -
ous adipose tissue, microcephaly, short stature and mental retarda -
tion. The proposita, a 10 years old girl, was the first child of healthy 
non-consanguineous parents, with a phenotype characterized by 
premature aging appearance, pinched nose, microcephaly, microgna -
tia, oligodontia, deep set-eyes and narrow nasal bridge, scarce sub -
cutaneous adipose tissue in the face, abdomen and limbs, multiple 
cutaneous pigmented lesions. Reduced mobility of knee and elbow 
joints associated with multiple skeletal abormalities was documented 
by x-rays. The patient was found to have an atrial septal defect. Neu -
rologic examination was normal, and a conductive hypoacusia and 
photophobia were present. Our patient presented diabetes mellitus 
type II associated with fatty liver and lypodistrophy, glucose levels and 
liver steatosis decreased after metformine therapy. Abdominal ultraso -
nography, CT and MRI disclosed remarkable liver steatosis with mul -
tiple hyperecogenic nodules, evolved in hepatocarcinoma within few 
months and treated by endoscopic radio-frequency local coagulation. 
G-banded karyotype was 46,XX. LAMIN A/C gene mutation screening 
disclosed an heterozygous C>T substitution at the codon 1698 in exon 
10, previously described as a polymorphism. CGH Arrays analysis 
showed a 4 Mb interstitial deletion on chromosome 3 (3q26.1) inher -
ited from the phenotypically normal mother. The genetic bases of MS 
remain to be established. The etiopathogenetic relevance of the large 
deletion on chromosome 3 in our patient and in her normal mother is 
open to speculations.
P0197. Expanding the phenotype of the 22q11deletion 
syndrome: the MURCS association.
V. Uliana1, N. Giordano2, R. Caselli1, F. T. Papa1, F. Ariani1, I. Meloni1, I. Longo1, 
F. Mari1, R. Nuti2, A. Renieri1;  
1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Internal Medicine, Univer -
sity of Siena, Siena, Italy.
The MURCS association consists of Müllerian Duct aplasia or hypo -
plasia, unilateral renal agenesis and cervicothoracic somite dysplasia. 
We report a 22 year-old female with bicornuate uterus, right renal agen -
esis and C2-C3 vertebral fusion (MURCS association) and 22q11.2 
deletion identified by array-CGH. Angio-MRI revealed aberrant origin 
of arch arteries with brachiocephalic vessels agenesis and hypoplas -
tic left carotid artery originating from the aortic arch, left subclavian 
artery originating from descending thoracic aorta and hypoplastic left 
vertebral artery. Hashimoto thyroiditis, micropolycystic ovaries with a 
dermoid cyst in the right ovary and mild osteoporosis were also diag -Clinical genetics
nosed. Accurate revision of Xrays permitted to identify cervical lordo -
sis, C2-C3 fusion, lumbar scoliosis, thoracolumbar vertebral differen -
tiation defects with lumbar ribs and S1 lumbarization. Audiometry and 
echocardiogram were normal.
Presently, she has short stature, obesity (BMI 30.7) and head circum -
ference at the 3rd percentile. Long face, tubular nose with bulbous tip, 
low-set and small ears, high palate, nasal speech and slender hands 
are noted. The karyotype was normal. Unexpectedly, array-CGH anal -
ysis (75 kb resolution) revealed a 22q11.2 deletion, of about 2,5 Mb in 
size. MLPA analysis showed that the deletion was absent in her par -
ents, demonstrating that the deletion was de novo. In 2006, Cheroki et 
al., reported another case of a 22q11 deletion in a patient with Mayer-
Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser anomaly (Müllerian Duct aplasia), Hashi -
moto thyroiditis and renal, cardiac and skeletal defects. We discuss 
whether this is a casual association or one additional syndrome due to 
the well known extensive phenotypic variability of the 22q11 deletion 
syndrome.
P0198. Screening human genes for small alterations performing 
an enzymatic cleavage mismatched analysis (ECMA) protocol
N. Vogiatzakis , K. Kekou, C. Sophocleous, S. Kitsiou, A. Mavrou, E. Kanava -
kis;  
University of Athens,School of Medicine, Athens, Greece.
Many human diseases are caused by small alterations in the genes 
and in the majority of cases sophisticated protocols are required for 
their detection. In this study we estimated the efficacy of an enzymatic 
protocol, which using a new mismatch-specific DNA plant endonucle -
ase from celery (CEL family) recognizes and cleaves mismatched al -
leles between mutant and normal PCR products. The protocol was 
standardized on a variety of known mutations, in 11 patients with cystic 
fibrosis (CF), Fabry’s disease (FD), steroid 21-hydroxylase deficiency 
(21-HD) and Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD). The 
results showed that the method is rapid, effective, safe, reliable and 
very simple, as the mutations are visualized on agarose or nusieve/
agarose gels where the location of the alteration is indicated by a size 
marker. The method does not require special equipment, labeling or 
standardization for every PCR product, since conditions of heterodu -
plex formation and enzyme digestion are universal for all products. 
The protocol was furthermore evaluated in three DMD patients with the 
detection of three alterations, which after sequencing, were character -
ized as disease causative mutations (all of them nonsense on exons 
21 and 44). The proposed assay, which was applied for the first time 
in a variety of monogenic disorders, indicates that point mutation iden -
tification is feasible in any conventional molecular lab. Alternatively it 
could be performed for cases where other techniques have failed.
P0199. LMX1B and Nail patella syndrome: experience in 16 
families and genotype-phenotype correlation
S. N. Manouvrier1, F. Escande2, A. Dieux-Coeslier1, A. Mezel3, M. Holder-Es -
pinasse1;  
1Clinical genetic departement, university hospital, Lille, France, 2Molecular Biol -
ogy laboratory, University Hospital, Lille, France, 3Paediatric Surgery depart -
ment, University Hospital, Lille, France.
NPS is characterized by cardinal limb anomalies (nail dysplasia, ab -
sent or hypoplastic patellae, iliac horns, abnormality of the elbows …), 
in some cases nephropathy (glomerulonephritis) and/or eye involve -
ment (glaucoma, cataract). Hearing loss and scoliosis have also been 
described. NPS is due to mutations in LMX1B , a gene located at 
9q34.1.  LMX1B  codes for LIM-homeodomain transcription factor in -
volved in normal patterning of the dorsoventral axis of the limb and 
early morphogenesis of the glomerular basement membrane
We sequenced LMX1B gene in 16 families (22 patients) with nail-pa -
tella syndrome (NPS).
The diagnosis of nail patella syndrome was typical in 13 index pa -
tients, due to characteristic limb anomalies. The tree remaining pa -
tients were a boy with limb features of NPS and mental retardation, 
but no 9q34.1deletion; a man with isolated nephropathy, and a woman 
with atypical limb anomalies.
We found LMX1B “stop” or “frame shift” mutations in 8/13 (62%) typi -
cal index patients and nonsense mutations in two atypical patients (the 
boy with NPS and mental retardation, and the woman with atypical 
NPS).
In all but one mutated families limb anomalies were isolated. In one sporadic patient with p.Gln37X mutation nephropathy was present and 
typical limb anomalies were associated with radio-ulnar synostosis.
The identified mutations were more frequent in exons 2, 4 and 5. No 
clear genotype-phenotype correlation appeared in this small series.
The non-mutated cases were 3 typical familial NPS with renal involve -
ment in two instances, and one sporadic typical NPS case with protein -
uria. We are searching for LMX1B deletion in these cases.
P0200. A novel type of TPM  mutation causing autosomal 
recessive nemaline myopathy in two Turkish families
V. L. Lehtokari1,2, K. Pelin3, K. Donner4, T. Voit5, S. Rudnik-Schöneborn6, C. 
Wallgren-Pettersson1,2;  
1The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Medial 
Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Biological 
and Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Re-
search Program for Molecular Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Fin -
land, 5Institut de Myologie, Paris, France, 6Institute for Human Genetics, RWTH 
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
Congenital myopathies include a wide spectrum of clinically, histo -
logically and genetically variable neuromuscular disorders defined by 
structural abnormalities in the muscle fibres. Nemaline (rod) myopathy 
(NM) is a rare congenital myopathy diagnosed on the basis of muscle 
weakness and nemaline bodies in the muscle fibres. The nemaline 
bodies are protein aggregates derived from sarcomeric Z discs and 
thin filaments. The six known NM genes all encode proteins for the 
thin filament of the muscle sarcomere: nebulin, alpha-actin1, beta- and 
gamma-tropomyosins, troponin T1 and cofilin 2. In order to identify the 
seventh NM gene we performed a genome-wide linkage study using 
microsatellite markers in 12 Turkish families with recessive NM. The 
hunt for the new gene is still ongoing, but in the context of this link -
age study we identified a novel mutational mechanism for nemaline 
myopathy caused by alterations of the TPM3  gene.
Two consanguineous Turkish families with two children each affected 
by a severe form of nemaline myopathy were found to have a homo -
zygous deletion of the first nucleotide, an adenine, of the last exon 
of TPM3 . The mutation in the last nucleotide before the STOP codon 
disrupts the reading frame and causes read-through across the STOP 
codon. The parents are healthy mutation carriers. RT-PCR predicts 
this to result in a TPM3 protein elongated by 75 amino acids. This is 
the first deletion to be identified in TPM3,  and it may turn out to be 
a founder mutation among Turkish NM families. Further studies are 
ongoing.
P0201. Processing of Data Records on Patients with 
Neurofibromatosis Type 1 Using the Artificial Intelligence 
Methods
T. Marikova1, S. Bendova1, B. Petrak1, L. Kinstova1, M. Zakova2, L. Novakova2, 
O. Stepankova2;  
12nd Medical School, Prague 5 - Motol, Czech Republic, 2Czech Technical 
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
250 patients with NF1 were clinically examined in detail. The patients 
were tested according to the NIH diagnostic criteria. The DNA bank 
for these patients was created containing 110 DNA samples. We have 
implemented direct DNA analysis of the NF1 gene using the MLPA 
and DHPLC methods and found NF1 mutations in 17 patients: 15 
causal mutations were detected exploring the DHPLC method. Using 
the MPLA method, two large deletions have been identified.12 of the 
above mentioned mutations were newly found.
The patient records are stored in the form of text files. Their content 
has to be presented in a database format to analyze them by available 
machine learning techniques. To support this transformation we have 
implemented MedAT - a tool for annotation and analysis of text files. 
Our program currently contains four knowledge ontologies - anamne -
sis, clinic symptoms, genealogy and mutations, which shape computer 
supported extraction of important information from patients’ records. 
The set of ontologies can be easily modified. This approach enables 
dynamic processing and efficient analysis of available patients’ data 
and it significantly contributes to achieving the main goals of this re -
search:
• specification of diagnostic criteria for NF1 for Czech population
• genotype/phenotype correlation for patients with different types of 
mutations,
• determining the incidence and prevalenceClinical genetics0
Particular results will be presented.
supported by grant AV-CR-1ET 101210513
P0202. A clinical and molecular study in a child under 1 year of 
age affected by Neurofibromatosis type 2
A. L. Gabriele1, M. Ruggieri2,3, C. Nucifora3, A. Patitucci1, T. Sprovieri1, A. 
Magariello1, R. Mazzei1, F. L. Conforti1, C. Ungaro1, G. Di Palma1, M. Muglia1, 
A. Quattrone1,4;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences (ISN), National Research Council (CNR), 
Mangone (CS), Italy, 2ISN, CNR, Section of Catania, Catania, Italy, 3Depart -
ment of Paediatrics, University of Catania, Catania, Italy, 4Institute of Neurology, 
University of Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy.
The aim of present study was to identify the earliest (i.e., disease on -
set < 1 year of age) clinical presentations of neurofibromatosis type 2 
(NF2) in childhood and to investigate the presence of NF2 mutations 
at this young age. A NF2 child had his first disease manifestations un -
der 1 year of age and was prospectively followed up and investigated 
according to our protocol for paediatric NF2. Molecular analysis of the 
NF2 gene was carried out by means of Denaturing High Performance 
Liquid Chromatography (DHPLC) and sequence analysis. The child 
presented at age 4 months right lens opacities and MRI scan showed 
colpocephaly and lesions in the posterior periventricular regions. MRI 
scans at age 8 months confirmed these findings and revealed bilateral 
vestibular schwannoma and the presence of multiple (> 40) skin NF2-
plaques in the limbs. At his last head and spinal MRI the schwannoma 
and the periventricular lesions did not progress with any additional 
lesions. Molecular genetic analysis revealed a novel mutation in the 
exon 3 of the NF2 gene: this mutation was a small insertion of 4 bases 
pair at codon 94 (c.281_282 ins CCTT). This mutation was not detect -
ed in 100 control chromosomes from matched healthy individuals. This 
is the first time that: (1) a bilateral eight nerve tumour in a NF2 child do 
not show progression after a long follow-up period; and (2) a NF2 child 
develops large numbers of skin NF2-plaques in atypical localisations.
P0203. Evidence for high rate of gonadal failure in female 
patients with Nijmegen breakage syndrome - a Polish study
M. Gajdulewicz , K. H. Chrzanowska, M. Szarras-Czapnik, M. Walewska-Wolf, 
J. Szufladowicz-Woźniak, K. Spodar, H. Rysiewski, R. Janas, M. Syczewska, 
M. Krajewska-Walasek;  
The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is an autosomal recessive dis -
ease with defects in DNA repair and is characterized by microcephaly, 
growth retardation, immunodeficiency, radiosensitivity, and an elevat -
ed risk of cancer. The relatively frequent occurrence of NBS in Poland, 
which is in line with the relatively high frequency of 657del5 mutation 
carriership in the Polish population (0.6%), allowed us to undertake in -
tensive follow-up studies of a large and uniform group of patients. Lon -
gitudinal observation drew our attention to lack of a pubertal growth 
spurt and to primary amenorrhea in all but one girl who reached pu -
bertal age. A total of 36 female NBS patients, aged from 1 to over 20 
years, observed at a single centre (CMHI) were enrolled in this study. 
The aim was to verify our earlier observations and to establish the 
frequency of ovarian failure among NBS females. The gonadotropin 
concentrations were found to resemble the pattern described in pa -
tients with Turner syndrome: high levels 1-3 years after birth, normal 
in mid-childhood, increasing to postmenopausal levels at puberty. Our 
findings indicate a very high rate of ovarian failure in NBS, which leads 
to psychological problems related to lack of acquisition of secondary 
sex characteristics and to reduction of bone density. Puberty must be 
induced or completed in such patients. Given the enhanced general 
predisposition for malignancy in NBS, and the additional danger of 
ovarian tumors arising from dysgenetic gonads, female NBS patients 
should be carefully monitored and diagnosed in this context.
This study was supported by grant MNiSzW 2P05E06628.
P0204. Germline KRAS mutations in Noonan syndrome: study 
of 4 NS patients with KRAS mutation in a cohort of 82 patients 
without PTPN11 mutations
C. Michot1, C. Nava1, N. Hanna2, S. Pereira1, B. Parfait2, J. Elion1, A. Verloes1, 
H. Cavé1;  
1department of Genetics, APHP, Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 2Inserm 
U745, Faculté des Sciences Pharmaceutiques et biologiques, Université Paris V, Paris, France.
Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disorder charac -
terized by short stature, congenital heart defect, typical facial dys -
morphism and mild intellectual deficit in less than half of cases. NS 
is genetically heterogeneous. In 40% to 50% of cases, the disease 
is caused by missense mutations in the PTPN11 gene, resulting in a 
gain of function of the phosphatase SHP2 resulting in overactivation 
of the Ras-MAPK signaling pathway. Recently mutations have been 
identified in two other genes in the same pathway: KRAS is mutated in 
approximatively 2.5% of NS and SOS1 in roughly 10% of cases. Most 
KRAS mutations result in CFC syndrome. Here, we report mutation 
analysis of KRAS in 82 NS patients without PTPN11 mutations. We 
found 4 KRAS mutations in these patients (p.Val14Ile in 2 patients, 
p.Thr58Ile, and p.Phe156Ile). All patients present the classic dysmor -
phism of NS. They appear to have a severe phenotype: short stature, 
developmental delay and heart defect were present in all patients. 
Failure to thrive (3/4 patients), sparse hair (2/4) and eyebrows (1/4) 
indicated a significant clinical overlap with CFC in these patients, but 
keratinisation defects . Dilatation of the ventricles was observed in 2 
patients, confirming that abnormal CNS development could be more 
common with KRAS mutants than with other genetic etiologies.
P0205. Molecular, clinical and new haematological insight in 
Noonan Syndrome.
G. Baldassarre1, F. Timeus1, N. Crescenzio1, E. Banaudi2, C. Rossi3, M. Si -
lengo1, G. B. Ferrero1;  
1Department of Paediatrics, Torino, Italy, 2Department of Cardiology - Regina 
Margherita Children’s Hospital, Torino, Italy, 3Department of Genetics - Univer -
sity of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
Noonan syndrome (NS, OMIM 163950) is an autosomal dominant dis -
order, with a prevalence at birth of 1:1000-1:2500 live births, character -
ized by short stature, facial and skeletal dysmorphisms, cardiovascu -
lar defects and haematological anomalies including an increased risk 
of leukaemia. Missense mutations of PTPN11 gene (12q24) account 
for approximately 50% of NS cases, while molecular lesions of other 
genes of the Ras pathway - KRAS and SOS1 - play a minor role in 
the molecular pathogenesis of the disease. Twenty-two patients were 
enrolled in the study with a PTPN11 mutation detection rate of 35%, 
and no additional mutation in KRAS gene. A statistically significant as -
sociation with pulmonic stenosis was found in the group positive for 
PTPN11 mutations whereas a statistically significant association with 
HCM was observed in negative ones. We heve observed a novel mis -
sense mutation, Phe285Ile, in a familial case. Cultures of peripheral 
blood haematopoietic progenitors were performed in the presence of 
decreasing concentrations of GM-CSF. Circulating haematopoietic 
progenitors of PTPN11- mutated NS subjects did not show the hyper -
sensitivity to GM-CSF observed in PTPN11-mutated juvenile myelo -
monocytic leukaemia patients. Therefore, we propose this functional 
evaluation of circulating haematopoietic progenitors as a non-invasive 
technique useful in the follow-up of NS patients for early detection of 
leukaemic evolution.
P0206. The investigation of NPHS2 gene coding region in group 
with Hereditary Proteinuria Syndromes.
N. Poltavets1, L. Prihodina2, O. Ryzhkova1, E. Zaklyazminskaya1, A. Polyakov1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Re-
search Сenter of Pediatrics and Child Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Hereditary Proteinuria Syndromes (HPS) is a group of inherited dis -
eases in which proteinuria is the main clinical manifestation. The 
courses of these diseases vary in the age of onset, in the severity of 
injury, and in the morphologic diagnosis. The genetic cause of these 
diseases is mutations in genes providing the structure and function of 
filtration barrier.
We have examined 48 children with biopsy proven SRNS and 15 chil -
dren with isolated proteinuria syndrome (IPS) in age ranged from 2 to 
17 years (SRNS group). The disease manifestation has been observed 
at the age ranged from 1 month to 16 years. We have investigated 
DNA samples for mutation in NPHS2 gene coding areas by SSCP, 
ACRS methods and direct sequencing. We have identified new poly -
morphism c.872+7A>G. The allele frequencies of this polymorphism 
among our patients and in population group is similar (5% and 4.76%). 
We have found heterozygous mutation c.328G>T (p.87Glu>Stop) in 
coding region of the first exon in one having been transplanted patient, Clinical genetics1
which has not been reported previously. This is SRNS patient of 2 
years old, with manifestation of disease at the age of 1 month with 
rapid progression to the End Stage Renal Disease. In this case we can 
propose digenic type of inheritance. Perhaps, the most our patients` 
disease is caused by mutation in over genes coding proteins being in -
volved in the structure and the function of the kidney filtration barrier .
This work was partly supported by Russian President`s grant NSh-
5736.2006.7.
P0207. Mutation screening of melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) in 
a Norwegian cohort of obese patients reveals a low prevalence 
and four novel mutations.
T. Wangensteen1,2, M. Pollestad3, M. Mattingsdal4, S. Tonstad5, D. Undlien2,1, 
L. Retterstøl1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 
2Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 3Department of 
Pediatrics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4Department of Medical 
Informatics, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway, 5Department of 
Preventive Cardiology, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
Backgound: Heterozygous mutations in the melanocortin 4 receptor 
(MC4R) gene are the most frequent monogenic cause of obesity. Pre -
vious studies of such mutations have given prevalences varying from 
0.5 up to 5.8%.
Materials and methods: We sequenced the coding region of the MC4R 
gene in 703 obese Norwegian subjects. The patients were recruited 
from an ongoing study at Ullevål University Hospital. Adults with 
BMI>35 kg/m² and children whose bodyweight was above the 97.5 
th percentile for height were asked to participate. All novel mutations 
were analyzed by a bioinformatic approach and family studies.
Results: 6 mutations were identified, two previously described and four 
new ones. A total of three different mutations were found among the 
459 adults, giving a prevalence of 0.65%. Four patients with muta -
tions were found among 244 children corresponding to a prevalence of 
1.6%. Several known polymorphisms were also identified.
All mutations identified in the pediatric group were in second-genera -
tion immigrants, who made up more than half of this group. The same 
novel mutation was found in two siblings whose parents are first cous -
ins. Both children are homozygous for a 3-bp-deletion in the MC4R-
gene. The other patients were all heterozygous for their mutation.
Two previously described mutations, p.Tyr35X and p.Thr150Ile were 
found in female patients with adult onset obesity.
Conclusions: Mutations in the MC4R gene are not a common cause of 
obesity in Norway. Four of the six mutations identified have not been 
described previously.
P0208. Oculo-Facio-Cardio-Dental (OFCD) syndrome: Somatic 
mosaicism of a large BCOR  gene deletion in 2 monozygotic 
twins and three novel mutations
S. Whalen1, S. Manouvrier2, O. Boute2, F. Fellmann3, F. Dastot-Le Moal1, P. Bi -
toun4, M. Cordier5, I. Bailleul-Forrestier6, M. Goossens1, A. Verloes6, I. Giurgea1;  
1Dpt de génétique et INSERM U841, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 
2Service de génétique clinique, Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de 
Lille, Lille, France, 3Service de génétique médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universi -
taire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Dpt de génétique, Hôpital Jean Verdier, 
Bondy, France, 5Dpt de génétique médicale, Hôpital Edouard Herriot, Lyon, 
France, 6Dpt de génétique médicale, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France.
Oculo-Facio-Cardio-Dental (OFCD) syndrome  is a rare disorder  as-
sociating congenital cataract, microphthalmia, characteristic dys -
morphia, congenital heart defects, oligodontia, and radiculomegaly. 
OFCD syndrome results from mutations in the BCOR  gene, located 
on Xp11.4, encoding a key transcriptional regulator during early em -
bryogenesis. X-linked dominant inheritance is suggested, although a 
singular BCOR  missense mutation, whose relevance remains contro -
versial, was described in a male presenting with Lenz microphtalmia 
syndrome (microphtalmia, mental retardation, and multiple congenital 
abnormalities).
To further delineate the clinical spectrum of these disorders, we stu -
died seven females with OFCD syndrome and four males with Lenz 
microphtalmia, from six unrelated families. BCOR  mutations were 
screened by direct sequencing, QM-PSF, and deletions were confir -
med by FISH analysis.
Somatic mosaicism for a large deletion of BCOR  (45 % in peripheral 
leukocytes) was identified in two monozygotic twins presenting with typical OFCD syndrome. One twin transmitted this large deletion ho -
mogeneously to her daughter. In addition, three novel mutations were 
identified in three unrelated females: two frameshift (p.Pro288ArgfsX90 
and p.Pro190ProfsX26), and one nonsense (p.Arg1480X) mutation. 
No mutation of BCOR  was found in the male patients with Lenz mi -
crophtalmia.
In conclusion, we report four novel BCOR  mutations in females with 
OFCD syndrome. These results broaden the clinical spectrum of OFCD 
syndrome, as three patients did not present heart defects, and one pa -
tient had mild mental retardation, thus suggesting that the condition is 
underdiagnosed. The first description of somatic mosaicism in OFCD 
syndrome is of particular relevance to genetic counselling.
P0209. A natural history of a six years-old girl with Ohdo 
syndrome
R. Posmyk , A. T. Midro;  
Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical Academy, Bialystok, Poland.
Ohdo blepharophimosis syndrome (OBS) (249620 #OMIM) is a rare 
genetic entity characterized by blepharophimosis, blepharoptosis, 
dental hypoplasia, heart disease, short stature and intellectual disabil -
ity. The phenotypic variability in OBS has been reported . We present 
a natural history of a girl observed during six years from the birth. OBS 
has been recognized on the basis of following features: short stature, 
blepharophimosis, ptosis of eyelids, epicanthic folds, microphtalmia, 
flat, wide nasal bridge, narrow mouth fissure, long philtrum, thin upper 
lip, high palate, hypoplastic teeth, dysplastic, low-set ears, joint laxity, 
scoliosis, sacral dimple, congenital heart anomaly (pulmonary steno -
sis, VSD, PDA, PFO), severe hypotonia and distinct developmental 
profile. Morphological phenotype has been described according to 
the catalogue elaborated by Stengel Rutkowski et al. and evolution of 
some traits has been found. Interestingly, some features as: a very soft 
skin, curly, fragile hair , a lack of nose cartilage, small maxilla and, a 
radiological abnormalities in knees resembling Blout disease were not 
previously described in relation to this syndrome.
We suggest that a better knowledge of the clinical and anthropological 
spectrum of OBS can be helpful for setting a diagnosis as molecular 
basis of this disorder remains still unknown.
P0210. Ophthalmic status of patients with Goldenhar syndrome
O. K. Yanvareva , E. Drozdova, M. O. Mkheidze;  
Medical Academy for postgraduate studying, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion.
Aim of the work: investigation of ophthalmic status of patients with 
Goldenhar (facio-auriculo-vertebral) syndrome.
Material and methods. There were 5 patients (10 eyes, 3 males and 
2 females aged from 6 to 27 yr) with Goldenhar syndrome under our 
observation. Routine basic ophthalmic investigation was performed for 
all patients.
Results. Ophthalmic status of all patients included sclera-corneal li -
podermoid (6eyes) followed by reduced vision and demanding partial 
fibered keratoplasty (1 case) and optic correction picking up of all the 
patients because of astigmatism (5 patients). Two clients had petite 
lipodermoid of sclera without surgical correction. One client had inborn 
anomaly in the form of the upper lid coloboma removed with surgical 
intervention. All clients were operated on in early childhood apropos of 
a cleft lip and a palate. A 10 year-old boy had atresia of the auditory 
passage and the malformed ear followed by unilateral inborn hear -
ing disorder. Mental development of all clients was intact. Our clients’ 
relatives denied congenital and inherited pathology. Correction of re -
fractional amblyopia with spectacles resulted in stable and high visual 
function. Development of xerotic cornea of the eye with the upper lid 
coloboma was prevented.
Conclusion. To make diagnosis at proper time and correct face, eye 
and ear dysplastic features using surgical intervention by ophthalmolo -
gists, orthodontists and specialists of aesthetic surgery are sine qua 
non for successful life and disease prognosis.
P0211. Orofacial clefts with associated anomalies in Lithuania
E. Zarakauskaitė1, A. Matulevičienė2, A. Utkus1,2, L. Linkevičienė3, V. 
Kučinskas1,2;  
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithu -
ania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu 
Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Institute of Odontology, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Clinical genetics2
Lithuania.
The aim was to investigate the incidence and type of orofacial clefts 
(OCs) associated with congenital defects in Lithuanian population.
Patients and methods. There were included 235 cases of OCs with one 
or more major congenital anomalies investigated from 1993 to 2005 in 
the study. OCs were subdivided into three groups: cleft palate alone 
(CP), cleft lip alone (CL) and cleft lip with cleft palate (CLP). Each case 
was assigned to one of categories: nonchromosomal syndromes, OCs 
with chromosomal anomalies and unidentified syndromic OCs with 
one or more associated major anomalies, which were grouped accord -
ing British Pediatric Association Classification of Diseases.
Results. There were 70 cases of nonchromosomal syndromes (20 dif -
ferent syndromes), 26 cases of OCs with different chromosomal ab -
normalities and 141 non-syndromic patients with OCs and one or more 
associated major anomalies of total 235 persons with OCs and addi -
tional anomalies. There were 420 different anomalies in patients with 
unidentified syndromic OCs, a mean of 2,9/proband. The commonest 
organ system affected was the musculoskeletal system (133 anoma -
lies), followed by cardiovascular (90) and anomalies of face (including 
eye and ear) and neck (64).
Conclusions: This study expanded the phenotype of patients with 
OCs. According to the results of this study we can propose that all pa -
tients with OCs should be examined by the team of specialists such as 
pediatricians, plastic surgeons, orthodontists, cardiologists and others 
with closer collaboration of clinical geneticists. A routine screening for 
other associated malformations, especially skeletal, central nervous 
system, and cardiac defects, is required.
P0212. Tunisian family with ocular, squelettal and abdominal 
malformations
R. M‘rad1,2, F. Maazoul1, I. Chelly1, M. Chaabouni1,2, L. Kraoua1, L. Ben jemaa1, 
H. Chaabouni1;  
1department of human genetics, Charles Nicolle hospital Tunis, Tunisia, 2depart -
ment of human genetics, faculty of medicine Tunis, Tunisia.
We report on two sisters who had a unique association of facial, ocu -
lar , skelettal defects and abdominal muscle hypoplasia. They are the 
fourth and the fifth sibs, born to healthy first cousin parents originating 
from Tunisia. The family history is unremarkable. The phenotypic find -
ings are compared with the previously reported patients referred to as 
Carnevale, OSA, Michels and Malpuech syndromes. All are autosomal 
recessive. We conclude that the present patients resemble most pa -
tients with OSA syndrome previousely reported in 1996 by Mingnarelli 
et al .
Despite the presence of apparently distinctive key features, it appears 
that these four entities share multiple similarities in the facial and the 
pattern of malformations.
P0213. Osteopetrosis mutation study among an Iranian family; 
TCIRG1 gene
T. Majidizadeh1, M. Dehghan Manshadi1, M. Rostami1, K. Banihashemi2, S. 
Akbaroghli3, M. Houshmand1;  
1National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is -
lamic Republic of Iran, 2GPEF, Ministry of Science, Research and Technology, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Iranian Behzisti Organization, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Autosomal-recessive osteopetrosis is a severe genetically heteroge -
neous disorder due to osteoclast failure. Dense bones prone to frac -
ture, severe hematological failure, and neurological impairment are 
among the prominent features of the disease.
It has been shown that mutations in the TCIRG1 gene may result in 
three disaese phenotypes characterized as autosomal recessive, in -
fantile malignant and also in association with bone mass forms associ -
ated with 38, 10 and 1 mutations respectively.
Previous studies showed that 19 out of total 50 known mutations (38%) 
were splicing mutations, which may also be expected to be the most 
common mutations in Iran.
In our study a family of 37 members was the subject of investigation for 
TCIRG1 gene mutations for 3 cases of severe osteopetrosis after the 
clinical diagnosis of the proband who have been involved with the dis -
order through the first seven years of his life using the standard PCR 
method for all 20 exons and then sequencing to detect the risk of next 
pregnancies involvements in the parents of the dead proband.P0214. Epidemiological study of some familial cases with 
primary osteoporosis.
M. Cevei1, D. Stoicanescu2, M. Mihailov1, D. Farcas1;  
1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, 
2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania.
Osteoporosis is a multifactorial disease characterized by a decrease 
in bone mass and deterioration of bone architecture. Genetic factors 
are determinants of peak bone mass and may influence age-related 
decreases of bone mass. WHO has established an operational crite -
rion based on bone density measuring, the T-score. 122 cases were 
studied, 51 diagnosed with primary osteoporosis. Mean age was 57.6 
years. The main inclusion criterion was the acceptance of affected in -
dividuals to participate in the study. Accurate family history was taken. 
Daughters of affected persons were evaluated by DEXA technique. 
67.2% of them had T-score values that indicated osteopenia or osteo -
porosis (mean value -2.3SD). Molecular testing was not available. We 
are interested in future collaborations. In conclusion, descendents of 
affected parents are at a high risk for osteoporosis, important aspect 
for primary prevention.
P0215. Otopalatodigital type I syndrome: report of a familial case
L. M. J. Albano1, S. P. Robertson2, L. A. N. Oliveira1, D. R. Bertola1, C. A. Kim1;  
1Instituto da Crianca, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Dept Paediatrics and Child Health, 
Dunedin School of Medicine, Otago University, Dunedin, New Zealand.
Otopalatodigital syndrome spectrum disorders include four phenotypi -
cally related conditions: otopalatodigital syndrome (OPD) type I and 
II, frontometaphyseal dysplasia and Melnick-Needles syndrome . Mu -
tations in the FLNA  gene have been reported in the majority of the 
patients. Most pedigrees are consistent with X-linked inheritance. We 
report on a typical OPD type I familial case, a 7y7mo-old boy present -
ing characteristic dysmorphisms with prominent supraorbital ridges, 
hypertelorism, submucous cleft palate, deafness, short broad thumbs, 
spatulate finger tips, partial syndactily of the fingers, overlengthening 
of the second toes and foreshortening of the great toes, broad terminal 
phalanges of the other digits. His mother was considered normal with 
normal stature (1.55m), without facial dysmorphism, exhibiting only bi -
fid uvula and longitudinal darkish lines striates on nails of the 1th, 2 th 
and 3 th fingers, similar to the ones found in craniofrontonasal dyspla -
sia. They showed unimpaired intellect. A mutation in the FLNA  gene 
was detected in both mother and son. Our case reinforces the phe -
notypic variability in OPD syndrome type I, and also the importance 
of molecular analysis in mild phenotypes and in females to confirm a 
carrier status, in order to perform a more precise genetic counseling.
P0216. Parkinsonism and essential tremor in a family with 
pseudodominant inheritance of PARK2
F. E. Rocca1, F. Annesi1, P. Tarantino1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, S. Carrideo1, D. 
Civitelli1, M. T. Pellecchia2, P. Barone2, G. Provenzano1, E. V. De Marco1, G. 
Squillace1, V. Greco1, G. Annesi1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 2Department of 
Neurological Sciences, University Federico II, Napoli, Italy.
The Parkin  gene (park2)  plays an important role in the early onset 
forms of Parkinson’s disease (PD). Mutations in this gene have been 
described in approximately 50% of familiar cases and in the 10-20% of 
sporadic cases with an onset age ≤ 45 years. This study shows the re -
sults of a parkin  gene analysis in a family from Southern Italy.This fam -
ily included five affected individuals showing either essential tremor 
(ET), parkinsonism, or both, consistent with pseudo-dominant inheri -
tance of PARK2 . The affected patients were screened for mutations 
in the parkin  gene by a combination of gene dosage and sequencing 
of entire coding region. We identified a 226 C>G homozygous mis -
sense mutation leading to the amino acid substitution R42P in two 
parkinsonian subjects and in 2 other not affected members of the fam -
ily. Four subjects carried the R42P substitution in heterozygotic form. 
Exon rearrangements were excluded. Striatal dopamine transporter 
density was reduced in accordance with phenotype and number of 
mutated alleles. Apparently, this family did not show consanguinity, but 
haplotype analysis revealed a common chromosomic region shared by 
some members of both branches of the kindred, suggesting a single 
founder. Whether postural and kinetic tremor in this family really rep -
resents ET or is a first manifestation of parkinsonism requires further 
follow-up. Nevertheless, we suggest that parkin  mutations may have a 
role in families with occurrence of both diseases.Clinical genetics
P0217. Partial mosaic duplication (X)(q21.3q24) in a girl with 
clinical signs of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease
B. Albrecht1, B. Schweiger2, S. Fuchs3, A. Küchler1;  
1Institut fuer Humangenetik, Essen, Germany, 2Institut fuer diagnostische und 
interventionelle Radiologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Germany, 3Institut fuer 
Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum, Hamburg, Germany.
We report on the first child of a healthy non consanguineous German 
couple. During pregnancy prenatal diagnosis was performed because 
of advanced maternal age. An interstitial duplication Xq in about 40 
percent of amniotic cells was detected. The girl was born after 41 
weeks of gestation with normal birth measurements (weight 2820g 
= 3rd-10th percentile, length 50cm = 10th-25th percentile) and normal 
APGAR score (10/10). Feeding difficulties and muscular hypotonia 
were noted after birth. Motor delay became obvious between six and 
twelve months (no sitting, no crawling, no turning), but good social 
communication was observed. Clinical investigation at the age of 12 
months showed no facial dysmorphisms and normal body measure -
ments (length 73cm = 25th percentile, weight 7.7 kg = 10th percentile, 
OFC 45cm = 25th percentile). As a clinical sign of chromosomal mosa -
icism streaky and patchy hypopigmentation of the right leg was noted. 
Cytogenetic investigations of blood lymphocytes showed a similar dis -
tribution of normal and duplicated cells compared to amniocytes (mos 
46,XX[17]/46,X,dup(X)(q21.3q24)[13]). Parents had normal karyo -
types. MRI of the brain of the girl with 10 months showed no myelina -
tion like in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. FISH analysis with probes 
specific for the PLP1  region confirmed the suspected duplication in 
40% of cells. A duplication of the PLP1  gene is the cause of Pelizaeus-
Merzbacher disease in most male patients with this X-chromosomal 
recessive disorder and was described as cause of clinical symptoms 
in several female heterozygote carriers, so we speculated that the Xq 
duplication might explain the girl’s developmental delay.
P0218. Genetic variants of the phosphodiesterase (PDE) gene 
superfamily in patients with bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasias
A. D. Horvath1, C. Giatzakis1, E. Levine1, P. Osorio1, S. Boikos1, J. Siegel1, J. 
Moran1, V. Kamvissi1, I. Bossis1, J. Bertherat2, C. Stratakis1;  
1National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Institut National de 
la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale U567, Paris, France.
Several types of adrenocortical tumors that lead to Cushing syndrome 
may be caused by aberrant cyclic AMP (cAMP) signaling. In search 
for cAMP-signaling related genetic factors involved in adrenocortical 
tumorigenesis we have performed association and loss-of-heterozy -
gosity analysis based on genome-wide 10K SNP mapping of both 
tumor and germline DNA from patients with bilateral adrenocortical 
hyperplasia (BACH). We found inactivating mutations in 2q32-located 
phosphodiesterase (PDE) 11A ( PDE11A ) gene to be associated with 
the disease in a subset of our BACH patients. We further selected sev -
eral other genes from the PDE superfamily including PDE3A , PDE4A , 
PDE4B , PDE7A , PDE8A , PDE8B , and PDE9A  that were favored by 
our analysis and have shown relatively high expression in the adrenal 
gland. We identified a number of synonymous and non-synonymous 
substitutions to be present in our BACH patients and not in normal 
control individuals from a variety of sources. We further investigated 
the effect of these variations on cAMP and cGMP degradation in vi-
tro. We speculate that variations in genes coding for PDEs may be 
involved in adrenocortical tumorigenesis by affecting the efficiency of 
cyclic nucleotide degradation and other means that lead to increased 
cAMP signaling.
P0219. Germline and somatic mosaicism at the PHOX2B locus in 
Late-Onset Central Hypoventilation syndrome.
D. Trochet , L. de Pontual, A. Munnich, S. Lyonnet, J. Amiel;  
Département de Génétique et Unité INSERM U781, PARIS, France.
Idiopathic late-onset central hypoventilation syndrome (LO-CHS) is a 
rare disorder occurring from early childhood to adulthood. The phys -
iopathological relationships between LO-CHS and congenital central 
hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) have been debated and it has now 
been shown that they are allelic disorders.
Here we report a series of 26 patients with LO-CHS referred from 5 
weeks of age to adulthood. We identified a heterozygous PHOX2B 
gene mutation in 14/26 patients. The most frequent mutant allele re -
sults in a +5 alanine expansion of the series of 20 alanines C-terminal 
to the homeodomain of the protein (10 cases). We observed also one +8 alanine, twos truncating mutations and one missense within the 
homeodomain. Semi quantitative PCR showed somatic mosaicism 
in one case only. This has major consequences in terms of genetic 
counselling. In this series, one adult with LO-CHS had a child with 
CCHS. These data raise also the question of the follow-up of appar -
ently healthy parents of a CCHS child who were found to harbour a 
somatic mosaicism for a PHOX2B gene mutation (5% of the parents 
in our series). Among the 12/26 patients with no PHOX2B mutation 
3 presented hypothalamic-related endocrinopathies and behavioral 
problems, suggesting genetic heterogeneity of idiopathic LO-CHS.
Altogether, these data demonstrate a genetic link between CCHS 
and, at least, a subgroup of LO-CHS. Furthermore, combined genetic 
and environmental factors may explain the variability of disease onset 
ranging from neonatal period to adulthood for an identical PHOX2B 
gene mutation (+5 alanine expansion).
P0220. Clinic and genetic study in a family with a clinical picture 
of pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration
I. Cirò Candiano , F. Annesi, S. Carrideo, E. V. De Marco, D. Civitelli, P. Ta -
rantino, F. E. Rocca, M. Caracciolo, G. Provenzano, G. Squillace, V. Greco, G. 
Annesi;  
Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy.
Pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) is a dis -
order characterized by dystonia, parkinsonism, and iron accumulation 
in the brain. Many patients with PKAN have mutations in the gene 
encoding pantothenate kinase2 (PANK2) and a specific MRI pattern of 
hyperintensity within the hypointense medial globus pallidus (eyes of 
the tiger). Abnormal accumulation of iron in the brain is detected also in 
other neurodegenerative diseases such as neuroferritinopathy associ -
ated to mutations in the ferritin light polypeptide (FTL) and in the ferritin 
heavy polypeptide (FTH1) genes. We performed a molecular study in 
a family with a PKAN classic phenotype. The patient, a 21-year-old 
woman, originated from Southern Italy. Her parents were healthy and 
consanguineous. Brain MRI study showed the eyes of the tiger pat -
tern. Serum ferritin was 16 ng/mL (N= 20 to 300). On the basis of the 
clinical and neuroimaging features, a diagnosis of classic PKAN was 
made but the sequencing analysis of PANK2  gene revealed absence 
of mutations and microsatellite analysis with 7 microsatellite markers 
from the PANK2 region (20p12.3-p13) excluded linkage with PANK2 
locus. Considering the abnormally low levels of ferritin in the serum 
of the patient, we supposed a ferritin-related neurodegeneration but 
the sequences of the FTH1  and FTL genes were found to be normal. 
These findings suggest a probable involvement of other iron regulatory 
proteins. Recently, a locus for neurodegeneration with brain iron ac -
cumulation was mapped to chromosome 22q12-q13 and mutations in 
PLA2G6 , encoding a calcium-indipendent phospholipase, was identi -
fied. Sequencing of PLA2G6  gene is being carried out.
P0221. Familial occurrence of Poland‘s Syndrome: further 
evidence of the genetic component.
M. Scutifero, G. Di Gregorio, L. Passamano, A. Palladino, V. R. Petretta, L. 
Politano ;  
Second University of Naples- Dept. of Experimental Medicine- Cardiomyology 
and Medical Genetics, Naples, Italy.
Poland’s syndrome consists of variable clinical features, but always 
includes unilateral aplasia of the chest wall muscles and ipsilateral 
anomalies of upper extremities. The incidence of Poland’s syndrome, 
reported by different authors, ranges from 1:10,000 to 1:100,000. It 
is observed more frequently in males than in females, with the right 
side of the body affected more often than the left. The aetiology of the 
Poland’s syndrome is still discussed and different etiologic factors are 
taken into account: genetic, embriogenetic but also teratogenetic ef -
fects of environmental xenobiotics .
However most of described cases were sporadic, rare familial inci -
dence of Poland’s syndrome was also reported, suggesting a possible 
autosomal dominant transmission.
We present 5 familial cases in which absence of the right pectoralis 
major muscle (RPMM) and aplasia of the ipsilateral breast was ob -
served in 4 males and hypoplasia of the RPMM in 1 female. The ab -
sence was confirmed by muscle ultrasound and MRI. Although none 
of 5 patients had congenital upper limb abnormalities, we believe that 
they still qualify as having a Poland’s syndrome.
Mild forms of Poland’s syndrome are in fact more frequent than severe Clinical genetics
forms, and may go undiagnosed, especially in females. Hypoplasia of 
one breast or a horizontal anterior axillary fold may be the sole clinical 
manifestation of this syndrome.
Data here reported while adding further evidence of the genetic com -
ponent of the Poland’s syndrome and of the AD pattern of inheritance, 
in the same time suggest a reduced penetrance and a variable pheno -
typic expression of the disease.
P0222. Paternal deletion 15q11-q13 versus maternal disomy 
- how different are these two Prader-Willi syndrome phenotypes 
in a Polish cohort?
K. Spodar , A. Gutkowska, D. Jurkiewicz, K. H. Chrzanowska, M. Gajdulewicz, 
H. Rysiewski, E. Popowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek;  
The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
We present the results of a study whose aim was to determine the im -
pact of a different genetic background on the phenotype of individuals 
with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS).
The molecular screening was performed in patients referred to our 
centre with a clinical diagnosis of PWS. The patients were divided into 
following groups: 25 with maternal disomy, 62 with de novo  deletion 
15q11-q13, 2 with deletion resulting from a balanced paternal trans -
location and 3 with a microdeletion in the imprinting center (IC). Two 
affected sibs inherited the microdeletion from their father and their pa -
ternal grandmother was the carrier. The third child’s father was mosaic 
for microdeletion which occured de novo . Forty seven patients with 
normal methylation pattern at 15q served as a control group. Detailed 
clinical investigations and data collected from the original question -
naire enabled us to characterise each group.
Although there were many statistically significant differences between 
patients from the control group and patients with confirmed PWS, 
comparison of individuals with deletion and disomy showed only slight 
differences. The children with disomy were taller, had longer trunk, 
broader chest, milder dysmorphic traits, less severe behavioral prob -
lems and started to walk earlier than those with deletion. The outcomes 
of the study are discussed in view of a current literature. The charac -
teristics of cases with unbalanced translocations and IC microdeletion 
will also be shown.
The work was supported in part by grant No 2PO5E06228 from the 
State Cometee for Scientific Research of the Republic of Poland.
P0223. Genotype and Phenotype Analyses of Prader-Willi 
Syndrome Patients in Taiwan
S. P. Lin1, H. Y. Lin1, C. K. Chuang1, C. Y. Huang1, J. L. Yen2, L. P. Tsai3, D. M. 
Niu4, M. C. Chao5, P. L. Kuo6;  
1Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Branch for Women and Children, 
Taipei City Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Tzu-Chi Hospital in Xindian, Taipei, Tai -
wan, 4Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 5Kaohsiung Medical 
University Chung-Ho Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, 6National Cheng-
Kung University Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan.
Aim: To compare the genotype and phenotype correlation of patients 
with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) in Taiwan.
Methods: We performed a retrospective analysis of 67 molecularly 
confirmed diagnoses of PWS from January 1980 through July 2006 in 
five medical centers in Taiwan. Clinical manifestations were compared 
between the deletion and maternal uniparental disomy (UPD) groups.
Results: The genetic analysis identified deletion in 56 (84%), UPD in 
10 (15%), and a probable imprinting center deletion or imprinting de -
fect in 1 (1%). Compared with UPD type, PWS patients with deletion 
type were more likely to have the phenotypes of hypogonadism ( p < 
0.001), small hands and feet ( p < 0.001), and hypopigmentation ( p < 
0.002). We also found a higher maternal age ( p = 0.015) and a higher 
paternal age ( p = 0.021) in the UPD group. No other clinical features 
were found to be significantly different between the two groups.
Conclusion: Our study in Taiwan is in contrast to most previous re -
ports in Western populations that indicated a higher incidence of UPD 
in PWS. The possible subtle phenotypic differences between patients 
with PWS on the basis of deletion type versus UPD type would be use -
ful both in clinical diagnosis and in understanding the genetic basis of 
the subtypes of PWS.P0224. Lack of Evidence of Monosomy 1p36 in Patients with 
Prader-Willi-Like Phenotype
V. R. Rodriguez1, L. F. Mazzucatto2, J. M. Pina Neto2;  
1Genetic department Medicine School of Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 
2Genetic Department Medicine School of Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
Some researchers suggested the existence of two possible pheno -
types for the 1p36 Monosomy. We would like to describe our experi -
ence about the possible correlation between 1p36 microdeletion and 
the Prader-Willi phenotype.
22 patients aged 8-23 years-old who tested negative for Prader-Willi 
syndrome by Souther blot.
Clinical characterization of the patients was performed using a pro -
tocol with the characteristics of 1p36 microdeletion Prader-Willi-Like 
syndrome. Hight Resolution Cytogenetic Studies performed at a 
550-850 bands level, and eleven polymorphic markers of 1p36 re -
gion (D1S243, D1S468, D1S2660, D1S2795, D1S2870, D1S2145, 
D1S214, D1S2663, D1S450, D1S244, D1S2667) were analyzed.
After cytogenetic analysis, no subtelomeric deletion was observed 
over 40 metaphases by patients, and all the polymorphic markers for 
1p36 were negative for microdeletions too.
According to the results, our sample is consistent with the Prader-Willi 
phenotype (mental retardation/obesity 100% hyperphagia 86.4% de -
velopmental delay 59% hypotonia 68.2% infant feeding problems 79% 
abusive behavior 63%).
It also can be suggested that our methodology is adequate, 98% of the 
1p36 microdeletions could be detected by high resolution cytogenetic 
and, the number and position of the markers used which are located in 
all six intervals suggested by Wu et al. 1999 observed clearly by Heisl -
stedt et al. 2003, even more we used 2 polymorphic markers inside the 
obesity/hyperphagia chromosomal segment 1p36.33-36.32 (D’Angelo 
et al. 2006).
The phenotype defined by Heilstedt et al. 2003 excluded hyperpha -
gia/obesity. Our results do not confirm the suggestion of D’Angelo et 
al. 2006 about a specific hyperphagia/obesity chromosomal region in 
1p36.
P0225. Detection of the G646C polymorphism of DYT1 gene in 
patients with primary focal dystonia.
E. Sarasola1, F. Sádaba2, B. Huete2, M. García-Barcina1;  
1Unidad de Genética del Hospital de Basurto, Osakidetza (Servicio Vasco de 
Salud), Bilbao, Spain, 2Servicio de Neurología del Hospital de Basurto, Osaki -
detza (Servicio Vasco de Salud), Bilbao, Spain.
Introduction: Early-onset generalized primary dystonia is a dominantly 
inherited movement disorder, mostly caused by a 3-bp (GAG) deletion 
in exon 5 of DYT1  (TOR1A ) gene encoding torsinA. It‘s penetrance is 
estimated to be 30-40%. Moreover, in some families, members carrying 
the same mutation could be either asymptomatic or display dystonia, 
which may be focal, segmental, multifocal, or generalized in distribu -
tion, suggesting the role of other genetics modifiers. It was shown that 
cells expressing the G646C polymorphism in exon 4 of DYT1  gene 
(replacement of aspartic acid with histidine at residue 216) developed 
inclusions similar to those associated with GAG-deleted torsinA. The 
aim of this study is to determine the putative role for this polymorphism 
in primary focal dystonia.
Patients and Methods: Genomic DNA from 50 patients with focal pri -
mary dystonia, in whom no GAG deletion in DYT1 gene had been 
identified, was purified by „salting-out“ method. The detection of the 
polymorphism was performed in an ABI PRISM 7500 Real-Time PCR 
system using a validated TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assay from Applied 
Biosystems. Data were analyzed with ABI PRISM Sequence Detection 
Software.
Results and Discussion: 7 patients were heterozygotes G/C for G646C 
polymorphism. The rest of the samples were homozygotes G/G and no 
homozygotes C/C were identified. No relationship between the poly -
morphism and the severity and evolution of the disease was found. In 
order to complete this work, G and C allele frequencies will be studied 
in healthy Basque Country population.
P0226. “Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch syndrome”: new case report
N. Rumyantseva , I. Naumchik, V. Kulak;  
Republican Medical Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus.
We presented a clinical data of new case of “Wiedemann-Rauten -
strauch syndrome” (WRs) - a rare autosomal recessive disorder, mani -Clinical genetics
fested progeroid features from infancy (OMIM 264090).
Proposita - 6 month age male is a single child of young healthy non -
consanguineous couple (G1;P1). He was born at 38 weeks gestation, 
labor was unremarkable (BW=2540; BL=47cm; OFC=34cm). Prenatal 
hypoplasia and aged signs was present at birth. At age of 6 months 
old progeroid appearance became more pronounced, patient showed 
growth delay (W=4.6kg; L=60cm,; OFC=41cm all<3rd centile), muscle 
hypotrophy, mental retardation, dystonia, prominent veins on scalp, 
aged face, wide forehead, sparse eyebrows, eyelashes and scalp hair, 
posteriorly rotated dysmorphic ears, shallow orbits, protruding eyes, 
nystagmus, angioretinopathy, thin lips, arched palate, severe micro -
gnathia, small narrow beaked nose with hypoplastic alae, subcutane -
ous tissue loss, abnormally visible subcutaneouse veins, thin limbs, 
camptodactyly II-V, adducted thumbs, heart defect (small ASD), large 
abdomen, scleroderma-like changes of skin on the buttocks. Sonog -
raphy of brain and abdomen was normal. Chromosomal, biochemical 
analyses were normal.
Clinical features of our patient were compared with published data of 
WRs, other premature aging syndromes, nonclassified progeroid con -
ditions. We have established “neonatal progeroid Wiedemann-Rauten -
strauch syndrome” based on association of characteristic aging ap -
pearance present at birth, failure to thrive, mental delay, hypotrichosis, 
signs of generalized lypodystrophy and paradoxal fat accumulation.
Because of high genetic risk early diagnostics is important for progno -
ses in affected families. New cases of progeroid disorders must be col -
lected for further delineation of phenotype and counseling improving.
P0227. Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum - a four-generation family 
with typical features but apparent absence of the ocular 
phenotype
M. L. P. Robert1, S. Tomkins2, M. James2, F. M. Pope3, R. Florijn4, P. D. Turn -
penny1;  
1Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2United Bristol 
Healthcare Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3Northwick Park Health Institute, 
London, United Kingdom, 4The Netherlands Ophthalmic Research Institute, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a progressive disorder of elastic 
fibres with ocular, dermatological and cardiovascular manifestations. 
Mutations in the ATP binding cassette transporter gene (ABCC6) have 
been identified and most familial cases show autosomal recessive 
inheritance. Autosomal dominant (AD) inheritance is rare. Plomp et 
al (Am J Med Genet 2004;126A:403-412) found only 3 families with 
definite PXE in 2 successive generations and no families with definite 
PXE in 3 or more generations.
We report a large, four-generation family showing typical skin signs of 
PXE and evidence of a major vascular phenotype with cardiac com -
plications, strokes and claudication. However, the ocular phenotype 
appears to be absent, and ABCC6 screening in one affected individual 
did not identify a pathogenic mutation. Linkage analysis at the ABCC6 
locus is planned for this family, with the possibility of progressing to 
genome-wide scanning.
This family has >60 individuals of whom 15 are believed to be affected. 
Fifty-three individuals are available for study, of whom 10 are affected. 
Clinical evaluation has been completed for 17 individuals, of whom 
eight are affected. Cutaneous signs were present in all affected indi -
viduals and elastorrhexia was confirmed on lesional skin biopsy in one. 
Most affected individuals have suffered cardiovascular complications 
but there is no evidence of angioid streaks in these cases.
The evidence for AD inheritance in this family is overwhelming. They 
may represent a variant of PXE without an ocular phenotype, and are 
likely to provide evidence for genetic heterogeneity in this condition.
P0228. Association of PSORS1 genes with psoriasis in Russian 
populations
E. Galimova , V. Akhmetova, E. Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of Biochemistry ang Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian Acad -
emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Background: Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory dermatosis affecting 
approximately 0,3-5% world-wide. Numerous population-, family- and 
twin-based studies point to a very strong genetic component of this dis -
ease. Knowledge of the genetic factors leading to this disease will lead 
to an understanding of the genetic, immune and pathogenetic aspects 
of psoriasis. So far 9 psoriasis susceptibility loci have been identified (PSORS1-9). The strongest genetic association has been found with 
the HLA-C region (PSORS1) on chromosome 6p21. Altogether, eigth 
genes are characterized in this completely sequenced region: HLA-C, 
OTF3, TCF19, HCR, CDSN, SEEK, SPR1, STG. Aims: To assess the 
genetic contribution of HCR single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
and HLA-C in the pathogenesis of psoriasis.
Methods: A case-control study with 400 psoriasis patients and 410 
controls in Russian populations was conducted. All individuals were 
genotyped for SNPs of HCR-305, 325, 477, 2327 and HLA-C associa -
tion.
Results: Significant increase of the HLA-Cw6 allele was found in pso -
riasis patients (44% vs.18%, OR=3.46, 95% CI 2.70-4.45, p=0.0005). 
The frequencies of the HCR-325*T, HCR-2327*G alleles were sig -
nificantly increased in psoriasis patients compared with controls 
(OR=3.61, p=0.005 and OR=2.45, p=0.0005, respectively). In subset 
analysis there were no other significant differences in allelic frequen -
cies for the HCR-305G/A, HCR-477T/C polymorphisms.
Conclusions: Our results suggest that HLA-Cw6 remains the major risk 
allele in Russian psoriatics, and that the HCR gene may play a role in 
the development of psoriasis.
P0229. Radial hypoplasia in an infant with trisomy 18
G. Utine , K. Erdoğan, Y. Alanay, D. Aktaş, K. Boduroğlu, M. Alikaşifoğlu, E. 
Tunçbilek;  
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
Trisomy 18 is a rather common autosomal trisomy with well-known 
pattern of malformations. These include prenatal growth deficiency, 
craniofacial dysmorphism, congenital heart disease, and overriding 
fingers. A five-months old baby girl, referred for multiple congenital 
anomalies including right radius hypoplasia and facial dysmorphic find -
ings, is presented. She was born at 34th gestational week with a birth 
weight of 1900 gr (25th-50th percentile) as the second child of healthy 
consanguineous parents. During the first month of life, she had feed -
ing problems. On physical examination, she was 54 cm, 3800 gr with 
a head circumference of 37 cm (all below 3rd percentile). She had 
thick eyebrows, wide and flat nasal bridge, bilateral epicanthic folds, 
strabismus, a prominent philtrum and low-set ears. Facial asymmetry 
with right facial microsomia was evident. Hypoplasia of the right ala 
nasi and posterior rotation of the right ear were noted. She had right-
sided radial hypoplasia, hypoplastic right thumb, bilateral club feet and 
overriding toes. Right side of the body appeared hyperpigmented as 
compared to the other side. A systolic murmur of 2nd degree was pres -
ent and echocardiography revealed ventricular septal defect, patent 
ductus arteriosus and pulmonary hypertension. Cranial MRI showed 
mega cisterna magna. The karyotype was 47,XX,+18. The patient rep -
resents an interesting presentation of trisomy 18, as radial aplasia and 
other preaxial limb deficiencies are seen rarely in patients with trisomy 
18.
P0230. Establishment of Rare Disease Services in the West 
Midlands: Translation of Research into Routine Molecular 
Diagnosis.
P. K. Rehal, J. Forsyth, E. Perrot, F. Macdonald ;  
West Midlands Regional Genetics Services, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
The West Midlands Regional Genetics laboratory has recently set up 
routine services for a number or rare genetic disorders. These include 
Wolfram syndrome (DIDMOAD), Combined Pituitary Hormone De -
ficiency (CPHD), Sotos syndrome, Alstrom syndrome and CHARGE 
syndrome. This is mainly due to the establishment of local clinical 
expertise within these medical sub-specialities which has driven re -
search into these areas. Furthermore, guidelines set out by the UK De -
partment of Health with regard to test rationalization, reporting times 
and increased automation have resulted in the production of a very 
successful rapid high-throughput screening strategy, which is now ap -
plied as a model for many new disorders within this laboratory.
The recent identification of genes involved in Micro syndrome, ARC 
syndrome and Infantile Neuroaxonal Dystrophy by the closely linked 
Medical Genetics Department has resulted in several requests for pre -
natal diagnosis in advance of the establishment of a routine diagnostic 
service.Results from interesting cases will be discussed together with 
the challenges faced in the provision of rare disease services.Clinical genetics
P0231. Renin-angiotensin system gene polymorphisms and 
arterial hypertension in children.
S. V. Kuzmina1, M. A. Bogdanova2, A. N. Voitovich2, O. A. Mutafyan1, V. I. Lari -
onova2;  
1St.Petersburg State Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies, Saint-Peters -
burg, Russian Federation, 2St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, 
Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
The I/D polymorphism of the angiotensin converting enzyme gene 
(ACE), the M235T polymorphism of the angiotensinogen gene( AGT), 
and the A1166C polymorphism of the angiotensin II type 1 receptor 
gene ( AGTR1 ) were identified in 85 children with arterial hypertension 
(aged 7-17), 146 controls (aged 7-17).
Arterial hypertension was defined as systolic/diastolic blood pressure 
measurements higher than 95 age-gender-height percentile of the ad -
opted reference values.
DNA was extracted from blood samples according to standard proto -
cols and analyzed by the PCR technique.
Table 1 shows the genotype distribution and allele frequency in two 
groups. The distribution of ACE genotypes and allele frequency did 
not differ significantly between patients with arterial hypertension and 
control subjects. The frequency of the AGT TT genotype and T al -
lele were significantly higher in hypertensive patients than in controls. 
There were significant increase in the CC genotype frequency and C 
allele of AGTR1 in children with arterial hypertension compared with 
control subjects.
These results suggest an association of the M235T polymorphism  
AGT and A1166C polymorphism AGTR1 with essential hypertension 
in children.
Table1. The allelic and genotypic frequencies of the renin-angiotensin 
system polymorphisms in hypertensive and control subjects.
ACE Hypertensive (n=85) Control (n=146) p
II 24 (28,2%) 44 (30,2%)
0,861 ID 41 (48,2%) 72 (49,3%)
DD 20 (23,6%) 30 (20,5%)
I 89 (52,3%) 160 (54,8%)
0,681 D 81 (47,7%) 132 (45,2%)
AGT Hypertensive (n=85) Control (n=96)
MM 16 (18,8%) 52 (54,2%)
0,001 TM 41 (48,2%) 37 (38,5%)
TT 28 (33%) 7 (7,3%)
M 73 (42%) 141 (73,4%)
0,001 T 97 (58%) 51 (26,6%)
AGTR1 Hypertensive (n=85) Control (n=56)
AA 21 (24,7%) 31 (55,4%)
0,001 AC 39 (45,9%) 19 (33,9%)
CC 25 (29,4%) 6 (10,7%)
A 81 (47,6%) 81 (72,3%)0,001C 89 (52,4%) 31 (27,7%)
P0232. Molecular genetic analysis of Rb1 gene - differentiation 
of hereditary and non-hereditary forms of retinoblastoma
R. Gaillyová , A. Kratochvílová, I. Valášková, T. Kepák, J. Štěrba, R. Autrata;  
University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic.
Retinoblastoma is an uncommon malignant tumour of the eye in chil -
dren( 1:18,000 - 30,000 in live born). It is a model example of ge -
netic disposition for tumour disorder. The fundamental part in genesis 
of retinoblastoma represents the tumour suppressor gene Rb1. The 
presence of at least one functional alela of the gene leads to normal 
production of protein pRB. The exact analysis of Rb1 gene in children 
with retinoblastoma influences the way of treatment received by the 
patients with retinoblastoma and their families. The hereditary form of 
retinoblastoma is in about half of the patients and is due to mutations 
in Rb1 gene. The differentiation of hereditary and non-hereditary forms 
has a fundamental influence on the treatment, prognosis and genetic 
counselling in the family. We perform an analysis of Rb1 gene in all 
children with retinoblastoma.
With conventional cytogenetics we can detect 8% of changes in Rb1 
gene, with FISH 10%, with Southern blot hybridisation 16%, with PCR 
and sequence analysis about 75%. At University Hospital Brno we use 
a combination of PCR amplification of all 27 exons of Rb1 gene and 
subsequent sequence analysis in DNA from peripheral blood. Up to 
the present time we have found a mutation in Rb1gene in 6 patients 
with hereditary form of retinoblastoma and in one foetus.
In the future we will introduce RNA and subsequent DNA analysis, MLPA and methylation analysis of the promoter, in cooperation with 
other oncological centres a population study to verify the causality of 
the found mutations.
P0233. Determination of direction of skewing demonstrates 
effect of X chromosome inactivation on phenotype of Rett 
syndrome associated with mutation in the X chromosome gene, 
MECP2
H. Archer1, J. Evans1, H. Leonard2, L. Colvin2, D. Ravine2, J. Christodoulou3, S. 
Williamson3, T. Charman4, M. Bailey5, J. Sampson1, N. de Klerk2, A. Clarke1;  
1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2University of Western Australia, 
Perth, Australia, 3University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 4University College 
London, London, United Kingdom, 5University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United 
Kingdom.
Previous attempts to demonstrate a genotype-phenotype correlation 
among patients with Rett syndrome (RTT) have shown some effect of 
the type of mutation (e.g. nonsense or frameshift versus missense) on 
severity of phenotype. It has been clear that the pattern of X chromo -
some inactivation has been important - as with the recognition of some 
clinically unaffected mutation carriers with highly skewed XCI - but it 
has been difficult to demonstrate the effect of XCI in lymphocytes on 
the severity of phenotype among affected individuals because only the 
extent of skewing but not its direction was known. This led us to exam -
ine the relationship between XCI in lymphocytes and disease sever -
ity in a group of UK and Australian patients in whom the direction as 
well as degree of skewing of XCI could be determined. Although lim -
ited by lack of informativeness for SNPs within the MECP2 gene, we 
have been able to show that the clinical severity in RTT patients with 
a p.R168X or p.T158M mutation is statistically related to the direction 
and degree of skewing of XCI in lymphocytes but that this is not likely 
to be helpful in establishing the prognosis in an individual case.
P0234. Novel mutation in the cellular retinaldehyde-binding 
protein gene RLBP1  associated with severe juvenile flecked 
retinal dystrophy
B. Krabichler1, I. Baldissera2, E. Schmid2, G. Haznedaroğlu3, G. Utermann1, A. 
Janecke1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Medi -
cal University, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Medical Uni -
versity, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Eye Department, Ege University, Izmir, Turkey.
Retinitis punctata albescens (RPA) is a rare form of autosomal reces -
sive (and rarely dominant) retinal dystrophy characterized by early-
onset severe night blindness, and aggregation of irregular white flecks 
throughout the fundus. RPA is progressive and evolves to generalized 
atrophy of the retina.
A distantly similar but distinct clinical entity, Fundus albipunctatus (FA) 
is also characterized by white dots of the fundus but is apparently a 
rare form of stationary night blindness. RPA is caused mostly by muta -
tions in the cellular retinaldehyde-binding protein ( RLBP1 ), and occa -
sionally in rhodopsin ( RHO ), retinal degeneration gene (slow) ( RDS ), 
and retinol dehydrogenase 5 ( RDH5 ). Three patients from a consan -
guineous family displaying a flecked retinal dystrophy were examined 
for best-corrected visual acuity, and by visual field and color-vision 
testing, electroretinography, dilated fundus examination, and fundus 
photography. We analyzed RLBP1 , RDH5  and RHO  by both linkage 
analysis and direct sequencing in this family. While an initial clinical 
diagnosis of FA was made in these patients, follow-up investigations 
revealed a significant progression of the disorder within a few years, 
which let to a reclassification of RPA. RDH5  and RHO sequencing 
did not reveal any variants, but in RLBP1  we identified a novel homo -
zygous 12-bp in-frame deletion (c.666-677del12). We conclude that 
mutation analysis of RLBP1  is suited to help differentiate between FA 
and RPA, which is important for counselling of concerned families, and 
RLBP1  is a major gene for RPA.
P0235. The first report of two cases of spino cerebellar ataxia 
(SCA) in Hamadan province, Iran
E. Ahmad,  M. S. Fallah, F. Ostadi, M. Shahghadam;   
Kowsar Medical genetics Center, Hmedan, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Two cases with ataxia and gait disturbance with first diagnosis as MS 
was referred to our Genetic counseling clinic in Hamadan, Explained 
as below:
Case 1: Clinical genetics
A 29 years old man with problem in walking and diagnosis of ataxia 
which was began from 5 years before with alternating dizziness, atax -
ia, tremor, vision disturbance and chocking.
Normal mental state, cranial nerve, autonomic function, motor exam 
in inspection with mild hypotonia and normal sensory were seen in 
examination.
In ophthalmologic exam all was normal but nystagmous with low speed 
and range.
All cerebellar exam was disturbed including, ataxic gait, scanning 
speech, intention tremor, hyperreflexia, dysphagia, dysmetria and dys -
diadokinesis. Brain MRI was normal.
There was history of such a problem in his mother, his mother’s 3 
sibling and also grandfather which was presented in higher age and in 
their children in lower age.
Case 2: 
A 36 years old man with progressive ataxia and tremor which was be -
gan from 6 years before with one apparently normal child, normal men -
tal state, disturbed cerebellar exam including progressive ataxic gait, 
dysartheria, intention and postural tremor, dysmetria, dysdiadokinesis 
was seen in exam. Brain MRI showed cerebellar atrophy.
There was some history of such a problem in his father, sib line and 
also in pedigree
Diagnosis:
Extracted DNA was investigated for the GAA expansion repeat in the 
FRDA gene and SCA types including 1,2,3,6,7.
The two probands showed abnormal pattern for SCA 7 and SCA 2 
respectively.
P0236. Juvenile and young adults SCA1 patients in Poland - 
genetic and clinical features.
E. Zdzienicka , M. Rakowicz, R. Rola, A. Sulek-Piatkowska, T. Jakubowska, W. 
Szirkowiec, R. Poniatowska, U. Zalewska, J. Zaremba, E. Bertrand;  
Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) is the most common form of 
ADCA in Poland. The phenotype and age at disease onset are highly 
variable. The aim of the study was to investigate the influence of the 
transmission pattern on genetic and clinical features of juvenile SCA1 
patients.
Methods: 125 SCA1 patients from 101 families were analysed retro -
spectively. The mean age at onset was 35.6 +/- 9.6 and the average 
CAG repeats in affected family members was 50.7 +/- 5.5, ranging 
from 42 to 72. Paternal and maternal transmission was equal. In 21 
SCA1 families with 25 juvenile patients, the relation of clinical severity, 
sex, CAG repeats number and age at disease onset of transmitting 
parents was analysed. The International Cooperative Ataxia Rating 
Scale (ICARS), electrophysiological and psychological examinations 
were compared in regard to transmission pattern.
Results: In 14 cases with paternal and in 11 patients with maternal 
transmission the mean age at onset 20.5 +/-3.6 y. (range 12 - 25 y.), 
disease duration 6.3 +/-3.7 y. and the CAG repeats number, mean 
58.0 +/- 5.7 were not different. However, mean age at onset of fathers 
was 33.0 y. and of mothers 29.1y. Severity of non-cerebellar signs and 
ataxia were more pronounced in patients with paternal than with ma -
ternal transmission: ICARS 34.8 and 32.8, Intelligence Quotient 92.9 
and 107, respectively.
Conclusions: In our SCA1 patients the anticipation was more promi -
nent in subjects with paternal than with maternal transmission.
Supported by Polish Ministry of Science grant 3PO5B 019 24, partly by 
EUROSCA/LSHM-CT-2004-503304.
P0237. A case of spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17) 
associated with homozygous 46/47 repeats of the TBP gene
P. Tarantino1, E. V. De Marco1, E. Pisano2, F. Annesi1, F. E. Rocca1, D. Civitelli1, 
I. C. Cirò Candiano1, S. Carrideo1, G. Provenzano1, V. Greco1, G. Squillace1, M. 
Caracciolo1, G. Annesi1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 2Department of 
Neurology Hospital Cosenza, Cosenza, Italy.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17) is a dominant progressive 
neurodegenerative disorder, caused by a triplet repeat expansion 
within the TATA-binding protein gene ( TBP); normal expansions range 
from 29 to 42 repeats, whereas abnormal expansions range from 43 
to 63 repeats. A reduced penetrance is associated to 43-48 repeats. 
The disease is characterized by progressive limb and gait ataxia, dys -arthria, motor, cognitive and psychiatric abnormalities.
In this study, we describe a SCA patient from Southern Italy with atax -
ia, pyramidal and extrapyramidal signs and peripheral neuropathy.
We investigated this patient for CAG repeat expansions in the genes of 
the spinocerebellar ataxias SCA1, SCA2, SCA3 SCA6, SCA7, SCA8, 
SCA12, SCA17 and DRPLA.
Genomic DNA was amplified with fluorescent primers spanning the 
SCA expansions. PCR products were separated onto a capillary se -
quencer (3130XL genetic analyzer-Applied Biosystems) and the length 
of specific SCA fragments was calculated referring to a size standard 
and to related SCA controls. We identified an abnormal CAG/CAA re -
peat expansion of 46/47 size, within the TBP gene, confirmed by direct 
sequencing of the expanded SCA17 alleles showing the following struc -
ture: (CAG)3 (CAA)3(CAG)9CAACAGCAA(CAG)26/27CAACAG.
This is the second case of homozygous expansion reported in a pa -
tient with SCA17. Currently, genetic and clinical analysis of other fam -
ily members are ongoing to evaluate the genotype-phenotype correla -
tion in this family.
P0238. Identification of genomic dosage variation of CNTNAP2 
in patients with schizophrenia and epilepsy
T. Vrijenhoek ;  
Radboud University Medical Centre Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Contactin-associated protein-like 2 (Caspr2) clusters voltage-gated 
potassium channels (K v1.1) at the nodes of Ranvier and is encoded 
by CNTNAP2 - the largest gene in the human genome. Homozygous 
stop mutations in exon 22 of this gene were recently identified in Old 
Order Amish children with cortical dysplasia, focal epilepsy, relative 
macrocephaly, and diminished deep-tendon reflexes. We identified 
deletions affecting (part of) CNTNAP2 in three patients by routine 
chromosome analysis and microarray-based genomic copy number 
analysis methods.
A deletion covering the chromosomal region 7q34-7q36.1 was re -
vealed in one severely mentally retarded epilepsy patient by routine 
chromosome analysis, and shown to be de novo by Fluorescent In-
Situ Hybridisation (FISH) analysis. The deletion was 10.7 Mb in size, 
affecting 58 genes including CNTNAP2. A second deletion was identi -
fied by array-based Comparative Genomic Hybridisation (arrayCGH) 
in a patient suffering from both epilepsy and schizophrenia. This dele -
tion of 1.5 Mb was confirmed by Multiplex Logation-dependent Probe 
Amplification (MLPA), and also affected CNTNAP2. To study the link 
between schizophrenia and CNTNAP2 further, we developed a target -
ed Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) array for this gene and its 
surrounding genomic region. Out of 315 patients and an equal number 
of controls, we identified a deletion in intron 3 of CNTNAP2 in a third 
schizophrenic patient, which also has a history of epilepsy.
Together these results confirm that CNTNAP2 is associated with epi -
lepsy, but they also show that genomic rearrangements resulting in 
haploinsufficiency of CNTNAP2 may lead to a more complex pheno -
type that also includes schizophrenia.
P0239. A Case of Seckel Syndrome conceived by Assisted 
Reproductive Technology
N. Andıran1, E. Tuncbilek2, E. Odemıs1, D. Aktas2;  
1Fatih University, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe Univer -
sity School of Medicine, Department of Genetics, Ankara, Turkey.
Seckel syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized 
by severe pre- and postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, mental 
retardation and typical facial appearance. It has also been called “bird-
headed dwarfism”. Related with Seckel syndrome, three loci have been 
mapped and to date the only causative mutation has been observed 
as a hypomorphic mutation in Ataxia telengiectasia and Rad3-related 
(ATR) gene. Although assisted reproductive technologies (ART) in -
cluding in vitro fertilization (IVF) and intracytoplasmic sperm injection 
(ICSI) are generally considered safe, some studies have suggested an 
excess occurrence of birth defects and low birth-weight. Recently, vari -
ous syndromes involving epigenetic alterations have been reported to 
occur in individuals following ART. Here we report a patient with Seckel 
Syndrome conceived by ICSI. To the best of our knowledge, Seckel 
syndrome has not been reported in patients conceived by ART and we 
think that epigenetic mechanisms may be related with this syndrome 
in our patient.Clinical genetics
P0240. Extended pedigree with multiple cases of XX sex reversal 
in the absence of SRY and of a mutation at the SOX  and RSPO1 
loci
S. G. Temel1, T. Gulten1, T. Yakut1, H. Saglam2, N. Kilic3, E. Bausch4, W. Jin4, 
M. Leipoldt4, O. Radi5, G. Camerino5, G. Scherer4;  
1Uludag University, Faculty of Medicine, Medical Genetics Department, BUR -
SA, Turkey, 2Uludag University, Faculty of Medicine, Pediatric Endocrinology 
Department, BURSA, Turkey, 3Uludag University, Faculty of Medicine, Pediatric 
Surgery Department, BURSA, Turkey, 4Institute of Human Genetics and Anthro -
pology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 5Istituto di Biologia Generale 
e Genetica Medica, Universita di Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
It is well established that testicular differentiation of the human embry -
onic gonad depends on the action of the Y-chromosomal gene SRY. 
However, exceptional cases such as SRY-negative cases of 46,XX 
testicular disorder of sexual development (DSD) (previously known as 
46,XX males) and of 46,XX ovotesticular DSD (previously known as 
46,XX true hermaphrodites) document that testicular tissue can de -
velop in the absence of the SRY gene. These SRY-negative XX sex 
reversal cases are very rare and usually sporadic, but a few familial 
cases have been reported. We present a large, consanguineous fam -
ily with nine affected individuals with phenotypes ranging from 46,XX 
testicular DSD to 46,XX ovotesticular DSD, with predominance of male 
characteristics. Absence of SRY in peripheral blood was documented 
by fluoresence in situ hybridization (FISH) and PCR analysis in all nine 
affected individuals, and by FISH analysis on gonadal sections with 
testicular tissue in four affected individuals. By quantitative PCR, a 
duplication of the SOX9  gene was excluded. In addition, as linkage 
analysis showed that the nine affected members of the family do not 
share a common SOX9  haplotype, any mutation at the SOX9  locus 
could be ruled out. Furthermore, no mutation within the RSPO1  gene 
that was recently implicated in XX sex reversal was found by sequence 
analysis. Together, these findings implicate a mutation at a sex-deter -
mining locus other than SRY, SOX9 and RSPO1  as the cause for the 
XX sex reversal trait in this family.
P0241. Unique phenotype associated with SHOX gene deletion
M. D. Schwab1,2, R. Wallerstein1,2, R. Wolf1, M. Liebling3;  
1Genetics Service, Department of Pediatrics, Hackensack University Medical 
Center, Hackensack, NJ, United States, 2Center for Human and Molecular 
Genetics, UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, United States, 
3Department of Radiology, Hackensack University Medical Center, Hackensack, 
NJ, United States.
SHOX (short stature homeobox-containing) gene haploinsufficien -
cy has been implicated in Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and 
SHOX-related short stature, while SHOX nullizygosity is associated 
with Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD). The classic clinical findings 
in SHOX-related disorders include short stature, Madelung deformity 
and mesomelia. We present a 10-month old male with short stature, 
height of 62 cm. (< -2 SD), arm span/height ratio of 0.95, with promi -
nent forehead, rhizomelic shortening of the extremities, bowing of the 
lower extremities, increased soft tissue folds and lordosis of the back. 
The skeletal survey revealed decreased interpedicular distances of the 
lower lumbar vertebrae, squaring of the iliac bones, small sciatic notch -
es and flattened acetabular angles; shortening of the tubular bones 
especially proximally with metaphyseal flaring; and an increased skull 
size. These findings were clinically and radiographically consistent 
with achondroplasia. Molecular analyses for FGFR3 1138G>A and 
1138G>C mutations, which account for over 99% of individuals with 
achondroplasia, were negative. Similarly, analysis for hypochondro -
plasia, specifically FGFR3, N540K mutation was also negative. How -
ever, analysis of the SHOX gene coding region showed a whole gene 
deletion. To our knowledge, the above clinical and radiographic find -
ings have not been described as part of SHOX gene deletion/mutation 
syndromes in the literature. This case report describes a unique phe -
notypic expression of SHOX gene deletion and indicates a need for 
further investigation of the SHOX gene and its modifiers.
P0242. Should Silver-Russell patients with UPD7(mat) develop 
myoclonic dystonia ?
B. Keren1, M. F. Portnoi2, E. Roze3, E. Guettard3, S. Rossignol4, P. Charles1, M. 
Vidailhet3, D. Héron1;  
1Département de Génétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, 
France, 2Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France, 3Service de Neurologie, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France, 4Laboratoire d’Ex -
plorations Fonctionnelles, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France.
Uniparental disomy (UPD) describes the inheritance of a chromosome 
pair from only one parent. This anomaly can result in human diseases 
when it affects chromosomes with imprinted genes. Silver-Russell syn -
drome (SRS) and myoclonus dystonia syndrome (MDS) can be both 
related to imprinting defects on chromosome 7. Approximately 10% of 
SRS have a maternal UPD7, and 20% of MDS have a mutation on the 
paternal allele of the maternally imprinted gene epsilon sarcoglycan 
(SGCE ) located on 7q21.3.
We report here on a 36 six-year-old man with both SRS and MDS. 
His features consistent with SRS included severe intrauterine and 
postnatal growth retardation with normal OFC, feeding difficulties in 
infancy, triangular face, prominent forehead, prominent low-set pos -
teriorly rotated ears, micrognathia and brachydactily. At the age of 17, 
he developed movement disorder with progressive worsening. On 
examination, he had shock-like myoclonic jerks of upper limbs, trunk 
and face. In addition he had mild cervicofacial dystonia with retrocollis 
and increased blinking. Neurophysiological study showed sub-cortical 
myoclonus.
Mutation screening of SGCE  was negative. Karyotype showed that 
75% of cells had a supernumerary small ring chromosome which hy -
bridized with the chromosome 7 centromeric probe. Supernumerary 
marker chromosomes are known to be associated with UPD, there -
fore, we would like to propose that our patient carry an UPD7(mat) 
that could explain both SRS and MDS. Validation of this hypothesis is 
under process.
P0243. Angulated Femurs and the Skeletal Dysplasias: 
Experience of the International Skeletal Dysplasia Registry 
(1988-2006)
Y. Alanay1,2, D. Krakow2,3, D. Rimoin2,4, R. Lachman2,5;  
1Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 2Medical Genet -
ics Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 
3Departments of Human Genetics, Obstetrics and Gynecology, David Geffen 
School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4Human Genet -
ics, Internal Medicine, Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, 
Los Angeles, CA, United States, 5Departments of Pediatrics and Radiological 
Sciences David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United 
States.
Angulated or bent femur (isolated or associated with other long bone 
bowing) in the fetus or newborn is relatively common when evaluat -
ing patients with skeletal dysplasias. To determine the extent and het -
erogeneity of disorders associated with angulated or bent femurs, we 
analyzed cases in the radiographic database (1998-2006) of the In -
ternational Skeletal Dysplasia Registry (ISDR) and determined which 
established skeletal dysplasias and genetic syndromes are associated 
wtih this finding. The results show that more than 40 distinct disorders 
with varying frequency (very rare to more commonly-occuring disor -
ders) can be associated with bowed/bent/angulated femurs. Sixty-six 
percent of the cases with angulated femurs belonged to three well de -
scribed groups of disorders; campomelic disorders (24.4 %), thana -
tophoric dysplasia (23.9 %) and finally osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) 
(18.1 %). With specific emphasis on these, this cross-sectional cohort 
provides discussion of data on other rare disorders associated with an -
gulated femurs and the importance of the finding relative to its occur -
rence within a diagnostic group. This study aims to provide differential 
diagnosis of entities to be considered when a fetus or newborn is found 
to have congenital bowing/angulation of the femur.
P0244. Identification of SLC26A4 gene mutations in Iranian 
Families with hereditary Hearing Impairment
M. Mohseni1, K. Kahrizi1, F. Azizi2, C. Nishimura3, N. Bazazzadegan1, A. Deh -
ghani1, M. Seifati1, M. Malekpour1, M. Taghdiri1, P. Jamali1, A. Daneshi4, R. J. H. 
Smith3, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Endocrine Research Center , 
Taleghani hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Otolaryngology 
Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, 
University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States, 4Research Center of Ear, Nose, 
Throat, and Head and Neck Surgery, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mutations in the SLC26A4 gene in DFNB4 locus is responsible for 
syndromic (Pendred syndrome) and non-syndromic hereditary hear -Clinical genetics
ing loss (HHL). In many populations mutations in this gene have been 
reported as a second cause of HHL. We investigated the prevalence of 
SLC26A4 mutations in our HHL consanguineous families. After com -
pleting clinical investigation the signed consent form was taken from 
each family. We included 80 families with two or more affected individ -
uals, who have been referred to GRC. All families who had previously 
been tested negative for the DFNB1 locus, were considered as can -
didates for homozygosity mapping using STR (Short tandem repeat)s 
linked to DFNB4 locus. Families localized to this region were subjected 
to complete DNA sequencing for SLC26A4 gene.  Ten out of eighty 
families were mapped to DFNB4. Sequence analysis of ten linked 
families revealed eight mutations in seven families (T420I, 1197delT, 
G334Y, R409H, T721M, R79X, S448L, L445W) and
The T420I , G334V and R79X were novel mutations. We have been 
able to localize total of 10 families (12.5%) from non-DFNB1 families 
to the DFNB4 locus. We detected in all ten families some degrees of 
diffuse or nodular goiter, eight out of 10 families showed normal thyroid 
function and in six of ten families we found positive prechlorate dis -
charge test. All of affected had normal temporal bone scan.
This investigation, demonstrated that the SLC26A4 gene mutation is 
the most prevalent syndromic hereditary hearing loss in Iran.This re -
sult is in accordance with reports from other countries.
Key words:, SLC26A4, hearing loss,pendred
P0245. Molecular analysis of SMN1 gene common deletions in 
some Iranian Spinal muscular Atrophy patients
M. T. Akbari1,2, s. zare1,3, f. mahjoubi1,4;  
1Akbari Medical Genetic labaratory, No.98, Taleghani Street, Tehran, Is -
lamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics,Tarbiat Modares 
University,Al-Ahmad Expressway, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Islamic 
Azad Unversity Science and Research Campus, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 4National Research Center for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology , Teh -
ran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive neuromus -
cular disorder caused by mutations in the SMN1 gene, mainly intra -
genic deletions, the commonest of which are deletion in exons 7 and 
8. The disorder is subdivided into three clinical groups (type I - III). 
The molecular basis for variation in clinical manifestation depends on 
the copy number of SMN2 gene in each patient. In this study we pres -
ent fifteen families who had at least one live affected SMA patient, 
selected for molecular characterization. They fulfilled criteria for inclu -
sion by demonstration of the characteristic clinical features of SMA 
phenotype. These clinical diagnoses were corroborated with EMG and 
NCV investigations as well as CPK measurement for the majority of 
the cases. The patients DNA samples were prepared from whole blood 
by standard salting out method. Characterization of deletions in exons 
7 and 8 of SMN 1 gene was carried out by utilizing a pair of mis -
matched primers which differentiate between SMN1 and SMN2 genes. 
We found deletion in seven patients, about 50%. Five patients had 
both exons 7 and 8 deleted and two patients had just exon 7 deletion. 
Although the present sample size is small, it may be concluded that 
the observed deletions has lower frequency compared to European 
populations which is 95%. Therefore other SMN1 gene defects should 
be looked in Iranian patients.
P0246. Case study: “A family with several cases of SMA type 1 
due to multiple consanguinous marriages in three consecutive 
generations, in the pedigree.”
S. Akbaroghli1,2, M. Houshmand3, T. Majidizadeh3;  
1Deputy for Cultural Affairs and Prevention of Welfare Organization, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dr. Susan Akbaroghli Genetic Counselling Center, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Re -
public of Iran.
The propand is a three months old floppy boy who is the result of third 
degree consanguinous marriage (the first sibling).
At birth his mother had hard NVD and the baby was born with cyano -
sis.
He had apnea and poor feeding for the first days of his life.
He was hospitalized for 12 days.
His grandparents from both sides have third degree relationships.
He has the typical clinical features and characteristics of SMA type 
1.His molecular test for SMA type 1was positive and he has deletion of 
exons 7 & 8 of SMN1 gene.The special point in this family is the existence of several cases of SMA 
type 1 due to multiple consanguinous marriages in three consecutive 
generations, in the pedigree.
P0247. Clinical forms of Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome and their 
relation to mutations in the DHCR  gene _ classification based 
on a group of 50 Polish patients
A. Jezela-Stanek1, E. Małunowicz2, E. Ciara1, E. Popowska1, M. Piotrowicz3, M. 
Gajdulewicz1, E. Kostyk4, K. Spodar1, A. Kruczek4, A. Pyrkosz5, E. Obersztyn6, 
D. Wolnik-Brzozowska7, M. Krajewska-Walasek1;  
1Dept. Of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, 
Poland, 2Dept. of Laboratory Diagnostics, The Children’s Memorial Health In -
stitute, Warsaw, Poland, 3Dept. of Medical Genetics, Polish Mother’s Memorial 
Hospital - Research Institute, Łódź, Poland, 4Dept. of Medical Genetics, Uni -
versity Children’s Hospital, Kraków, Poland, 5Department of General, Molecular 
Biology and Genetics, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland, 6Dept. 
of Medical Genetics, National Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 
7Dept. of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Poznań, Poland.
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is a metabolic malformation dis -
order, caused by impaired activity of 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase, 
the last enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis. Its best known dysmorphic 
features include: microcephaly, ptosis, short and up-turned nose, 2/3 
toe syndactyly, and external male genital malformations. Neverthe -
less, as the spectrum of observed features is very broad, a question 
about phenotype-genotype correlations still emerges.
Poland represents a unique distribution of mutations in the DHCR7  
gene. Moreover, one of them is thought to be spreading in our country, 
hence our effort to delineate the clinical variability of SLOS in relation 
to the causative molecular defect.
The study was based on a group of 50 patients with proven diagnosis 
(13 f and 27 m), classified into 3 severity forms: mild (13 cases), mod -
erate/classical (20 cases) and severe (17 cases). We analyzed: facial 
dysmorphy, congenital malformations (expressed as a Severity Score: 
0 - 100 points), biochemical chromatographic data (cholesterol and 7-, 
8DHC) and molecular data (mutations in DHCR7  gene).
While chromatographic data shown its significant correlation with clini -
cal forms of SLOS, the genotype-phenotype correlation was no so 
clear and we found as below:
Class of 
mutationNumber of 
patientsSeverity Score Congenital anomalies
0/0 3 55 (n=2), 60microcephaly, heart and renal defect, polidac -
tyly, abnormal male external genitals; CNS 
- dilated ventricles (1)
0/TM7 1520, 30 (n=3), 
35 (n=2), 40, 
50, 55 (n=4), 60 
(n=2), 65microcephaly (13); heart defect (11); cleft pal -
ate (6); renal anomaly (5); GI tract defect (4); 
CNS malformation (3); cataract (1); polidactyly 
(10); syndactyly other than 2/3 toe (1); abnor -
mal external genitals: male (9/11), female (2/4)
0/4L 3 40, 50, 65microcephaly, hart defect, 2/3 and 4/5 toe 
syndactyly, cleft palate, enlarged clitoris (2/2)
0/TM3 3 40, 55, 60microcephaly, cleft palate, hart defect, polidac -
tyly, abnormal male external genitals
0/TM8 520 (n=2), 30 
(n=2), 40microcephaly, abnormal male external genitals 
(4); pyloric stenosis (2); cleft palate, heart 
defect, cataract (1)
TM1/CT 2 5, 5 microcephaly, slight 2/3 toe syndactyly
TM7/1L 2 10, 15microcephaly, cryptorchidism, hypospadias (2); 
2/3 toe syndactyly (1)
TM7/TM7 3 15, 20, 30microcephaly, cleft palate (2); heart and renal 
defect, cryptorchidism, CNS - dilated ventri -
cles (1)
We hope that our study will give new insights into the genetics of Smith-Lemli-Opitz 
syndrome.
This work was supported in part by grants 2P05E06727 and PBZ-KBN 122/P05/01-
10.
P0248. Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome - novel mutation with a mild 
phenotype
M. Krajewska-Walasek1, L. Korniszewski2, E. Ciara1, E. Malunowicz1, A. Jez -
ela-Stanek1, M. Gajdulewicz1, K. Spodar1, E. Popowska1, A. Materna-Kiryluk3, 
K. H. Chrzanowska1, A. Latos-Bielenska3;  
1The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Genetic Counsel -
ling Unit, Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 
3University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is an autosomal recessive disor -
der of cholesterol biosynthesis, caused by mutations in DHCR7 gene. 
Although its phenotype is well characterized, SLOS is recognized Clinical genetics0
rarely with one of the reasons being underdiagnosis of mild variants. 
Our extensive 3-year prospective study (based on the structure of the 
Polish Register of Birth Defects) aimed at identifying all new cases of 
SLOS in Poland allowed us to detect a four year old boy with a mild 
phenotype of SLOS, in whom molecular study of DHCR7  gene dem -
onstrated a novel mutation.
He was born at 41 weeks of gestation with birth weight 3070 g, OFC - 
33,5 cm. Infancy was marked by poor weight gain and recurrent pneu -
monia. He walked at 24 months.
At the age of diagnosis he was able to communicate with only few 
words and had psychomotor hyperactivity. Weight was ~ 10 centile, 
length > 50 centile and OFC < 3 centile. On physical examination sub -
tle dysmorphic features were noted: bilateral epicanthal folds, blepha -
roptosis, short nose with anteverted nares. There was unilateral partial 
2nd and 3rd toe syndactyly and - within external genitalia - hypospadias 
and cryptorchidism. CT of the head revealed hypoplasia of corpus cal -
losum.
Laboratory tests confirmed the clinical diagnosis of SLOS. We found 
elevated serum 7-dehydrocholesterol and two missense mutations of 
the DHCR7  gene: a novel one mutation c.655T>G (p.Y219D) and a 
previously described mutation: c.461C>T (p.T154M), responsible in a 
compound heterozygous state for a mild form of SLOS.
The work was supported by grant PBZ-KBN-122/P05/01-10.
P0249. Mutation spectrum and clinical features of SPG4 HSP
C. Depienne1,2, E. Fedirko2, B. Bricka2, E. Denis2, S. Forlani1, A. Brice1,2, A. 
Durr1,2;  
1INSERM U679, Paris, France, 2Departement de genetique, cytogenetique et 
embryologie, Paris, France.
Mutations in SPAST/ SPG4 , the gene encoding spastin, are the most 
frequent cause of autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia 
(AD-HSP). In the context of a systematic routine diagnosis, we inves -
tigated the spectrum of SPG4  mutations and the associated clinical 
phenotypes. A large series of 543 patients with either pure or complex 
spastic paraplegia, was screneed by denaturing high performance 
liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and/or multiplex ligation-dependent 
probe amplification (MLPA). We identified 164 (30%) positive families, 
133 (25%) of which have substitutions or small deletions/insertions 
detected by DHPLC and 31 (6%) which have larger exonic deletions 
ranging from one exon to the whole gene, detected by MLPA. The 
great majority of the mutations were associated with pure HSP in the 
families. However, few families also showed additional features includ -
ing cognitive impairment, dementia, mental retardation, peripheral 
neuropathy or extra-pyramidal signs. A high proportion of mutations, 
especially of missense type, were found in sporadic patients. Pheno -
type-genotype correlation showed reduced and age-dependant pen -
etrance, and we also identified a de novo  mutation associated with mo -
saicism in one patient. Our findings support the hypothesis of several 
mechanisms underlying the penetrance and age at onset variability 
including genetic modifiers.
P0250. Delayed speech development with facial asymmetry and 
transverse earlobe creases
P. Sarda , L. Pinson, C. Coubes, C. Abadie, P. Blanchet;  
Service de Génétique Médicale, Montpellier, France.
Delayed speech is one of the most frequent features in patients with 
MCA/MR phenotype. In 1993, Mehes described a Hungarian family 
with three patients, a mother and her son and daughter, presenting 
delayed speech development, facial asymmetry, strabismus and trans -
verse earlobe creases (TEC). In 2005, four new unrelated Hungarian 
children were reported with similar features.
We describe a new patient, of Spanish and French origins, who pres -
ents a similar phenotype.
The girl was the eutrophic product of a 36 week gestation. No motor 
delay was observed but delayed speech marked the development of 
the girl. At 4 years autistic behaviour was suspected and psychiatric 
therapy was instored. The proposita began to speak at 5 years and her 
course was marked by mild mental retardation with anxious behaviour.
At 20 years, weight, height and OFC are in the normal range. The 
patient presents facial asymmetry, narrow down-slanting palpebral fis -
sures, low-set ears with TEC. She has umbilical hernia and hyper -
trophic small labia. Skeletal X-rays were normal, cerebral MRI shows 
abnormal signal of right putamen. Chromosome studies : metaphase karyotype, subtelomeric analysis (MLPA), and FISH studies (22q11.2, 
11p15) showed no anomaly. Molecular analysis for Beckwith-Wiede -
mann syndrome was also normal. This new observation of a patient 
with delayed speech development combined with facial asymmetry 
and transverse earlobe creases confirms the existence of this new 
syndrome. Transverse earlobe creases are a cardinal feature which 
is easily found on physical examination. To date, inheritance is not 
defined.
P0251. Analysis of the SMN and NAIP genes in Brazilian Spinal 
Muscular Atrophy Patients
V. G. Ramos1, A. P. Araújo2, P. H. Cabello1;  
1Oswaldo Cruz Institute - IOC (FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2Instituto de 
Puericultura e Pediatria Martagão Gesteira da Universidade Federal do Rio de 
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
Spinal muscular atrophies (SMAs) are inherited motor neuron degen -
erative disorders that cause progressive muscular weakness, with 
high mortality. Three types of SMA were studied, type I, which is the 
most severe form, type II or intermediate form, and type III. There are 
two genes linked to SMA: the survival motor neuron (SMN) and neu -
ronal apoptosis inhibitory protein (NAIP). This work has the objective 
of showing it is possible to make an efficient molecular diagnosis of 
the SMAs by studying genotypic composition of SMN and NAIP genes 
in individuals suspected clinically as SMA patients. Nested PCR was 
used for both exons 7 and 8 of SMN gene, frequently deleted in SMA 
patients, followed by enzymatic digestion and 12% poliacrilamide gel 
electrophoresis. For exons 5 and 6 of NAIP gene, PCR was performed 
followed by 2% agarose gel. In all groups but SMA patients, no dele -
tions were observed neither in exons 7 and 8 of SMN gene, nor in 
exons 5 and 6 of NAIP gene. This study showed a high frequency 
of deletions in SMA patients (88%), and 32% in NAIP gene. It was 
not possible to avoid SMA diagnosis, even in those patients without 
deletions. DNA study represents an efficient confirmatory test for SMA 
patients, demanding a non-invasive sample.
P0252. A rare autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia: Spondylo-
meta-epiphyseal dysplasia, short limb- abnormal calcification 
type
B. Tüysüz , S. Başaran Yılmaz;  
Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Medical Genetics, İstanbul, 
Turkey.
A boy 1-month-old boy was referred to our department because of 
considered achondroplasia on prenatal USG. The parents are first 
cousins. He had one healthy older brother. His weigth and heigth were 
3. centile and his head circumference was between 2 and 50 cen -
tile. Clinical findings consist on short limbs with small hands, narrow 
chest, flat face, hypertelorism, broad nasal bridge with wide nostils, 
hypertelorism, microretrognathia and wide open anterior fontanelle 
(6X5 cm). Radiological investigations showed severe platyspondyly, 
very short ribs, short tubular bones with irregular and flared metaphy -
ses, flared iliac wings with convex inferior iliac magrin. The patient was 
followed-up until he was 2 years old. His height is very short (61 cm) 
and he had language and social development were compatible with 2 
years of age but gross motor skill was delayed at that age. Re-evalu -
ation of radiologic finding revealed premature calcification on costal 
cartilages and femoral epiphyses . We diagnosed Spondylo-meta-
epiphyseal dysplasia (SMED), short limb-abnormal calcification type. 
This condition is a very rare autosomal recessive inheritance disorders 
characreristic by platyspondyly, short limbs with short hands, short 
ribs, meta-epiphyseal irregularity and cartilage calcification. Shorting 
of the tubuler bones, platyspondyly, meta-epiphyseal irregularity and 
cartilage calcification are also seen in chondrodysplasia punctata, re -
cessive type but severe platyspondyly, short hands and ribs associ -
ated with SMED, short limb- abnormal calcification type.
P0253. Mutations in TBX1  genocopy the 22q11.2 deletion and 
duplication syndromes: a new susceptibility factor for mental 
retardation
D. Heine-Suñer1, L. Torres-Juan1, X. Busquets1, M. Morla1, N. Govea1, M. Ber -
nues1, C. Vidal-Pou1, F. Garcia-Algas1, M. de la Fuente1, A. Perez-Granero1, M. 
Juan2, A. Tubau2, J. Rosell1;  
1Hospital Universitari Son Dureta, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 2Hospital Fun -Clinical genetics1
dació Son Llatzer, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
A screen for TBX1  gene mutations identified two mutations in patients 
with some features compatible with the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome 
but with no deletions. One is a de novo  missense mutation and the 
other is a 5’ UTR C>T change that affects a nucleotide with a remark -
able trans-species conservation. Computer modelling shows that the 
5’UTR change is likely to affect the mRNA structure, and in vitro  trans -
lation experiments demonstrate that it produces a two fold increase 
in translation efficiency. Recently, duplications in the 22q11.2 region 
were reported in patients referred for fragile-X determination because 
of cognitive and behavioural problems. Because the 5’UTR nucleotide 
change may be a functional equivalent of a duplication of the TBX1  
gene, we decided to screen 200 patients who had been referred for 
fragile-X determination and 400 healthy control individuals. As a result, 
we found the 5’UTR mutation to be present in three patients with men -
tal retardation or behavioural problems and absent in control individu -
als of the same ethnic background. This observation suggests that it 
may be reasonable to screen for such mutation among patients with 
unspecific cognitive deficits and we provide an easy and quick way 
to do it with an Amplification Refractory Mutation System (ARMS) ap -
proach. To our knowledge this is the first human mutation showing that 
TBX1  is a candidate to cause mental retardation associated with the 
22q11.2 duplication syndrome.
P0254. Association between Telomerase Complex Mutations and 
Autoimmune Diseases
J. A. Regal, R. T. Calado , N. S. Young;  
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States.
Some mutations in TERT  or TERC  impair telomerase activity by haplo -
insufficiency, and heterozygosity of these mutations is a risk factor for 
acquired aplastic anemia (AA), a disease in which the hematopoietic 
tissue is the target of an autoimmune process. We investigated wheth -
er loss-of-function mutations in the telomerase components TERT  
and TERC  predispose their carriers to the development of other au -
toimmune diseases that are associated with short telomeres. Among 
91 patients with multiple sclerosis (MS), 49 patients with ulcerative 
colitis (UC), and 96 patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 
(IDDM), we found three novel TERT  mutations; MS and UC patients 
were also found to carry a mutation that encodes TERT H412Y, which 
has been described previously in AA patients. Notably, TERT H412Y 
has only 50% the telomerase activity of wild-type TERT. The overall 
mutant allele frequency was significantly higher for patients with MS 
(1.6%; Fisher’s exact test, P=0.0343) and UC (2.0%, P=0.0424) as 
well as all patients with autoimmune disease (1.5%,  P=0.0143) than 
in 188 healthy controls. Additionally, the TERT A1062T-encoding poly -
morphism, which may be associated with reduced telomerase activity, 
was more commonly found in patients with autoimmune disease (al -
lele frequency=1.5%) than in 528 controls (0.7%) though the difference 
was not statistically significant ( P=0.0781). Functional studies are un -
derway to determine whether the novel mutations affect telomerase 
activity. Our findings suggest that abnormal telomere maintenance is a 
risk factor for multiple autoimmune diseases.
P0255. Observation of Hb Ernz [β(123)Thr-->Asn] for the first 
time in IRAN
P. Fouladi1,2, A. Fahim1, A. Ghahremani1, V. Lotfi1,2, M. M. Sajedi far1,2, R. Va -
hidi1, S. Zeinali3,4;  
1Medical Genetics Lab of Dr. Zeinali, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Young 
Researchers Club of research and science branch of Islamic Azad University, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Medical Genetics Lab of Dr.Zeinali, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Dep’t of Biotech, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Betha - thalassemia is one of the major genetic problem world wide 
in Iran. We have been running a national program for prevention of 
thalassemia since 1997.
Families come to our center for prenatal diagnosis. When a person has 
MCV<80 Fl , MCH<27 Pg and A2>3.5% . we regard them as carriers 
and start molecular analysis. Sometimes, due to different reasons, we 
may notice near normal values for MCV or MCH or normal A2 level.
A family had came to our center for prenatal diagnosis (PND). The 
husband had MCV 76/3 Fl, MCH 24/9 Pg, A2 2/8% and the wife had 
MCV 62/3 Fl, MCH 20/2 Pg and normal A2 5%.
We sequenced their DNA. and the husband only showed Hb Ernz [β(123)> Asn] (ACC > AAC) and the wife had Hb Ernz as above and 
also codon 22 /24 (-AAGTTGG) → (GAA GTT GGT > G T).Based on 
our finding Hb Ernz is harmless and is not the cause of raised A2 level 
or low MCV or MCH levels.
This is the first case of Hb Ernz reported in Iran and Second in the 
literature.
P0256. Partial trisomy 10q in a boy due to a paternal 
translocation t(7,10)(q36;q25.2)
M. S. Militaru1, R. Popp1, V. Pop1, M. Militaru1, E. Ormerod2, A. P. Trifa1;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2University of 
Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
We report a 2 years and 8 months old boy with a moderate psychomotor 
retardation and characteristic dysmorfic features.He is the first child of 
unrelated,healthy and yong parents.The pregnancy has a normal evo -
lution.He was born at term by caesearian section.The infant presented:
micropthalmia,epicanthus inversus,hypertelorism,blepharophimosis,p
alpebral ptosis,low-set ears,congenital heart disease,undescendend 
testis and anomalies of hands(bilateral simian creases,clinodactyly of 
the fifth finger) and feet(syndactyly).The weight and the length were at 
3-rd centile correspondingly.Conventional chromosome analysis(GTG-
banding) revealed additional material on chromosome 7q.The father 
has a balanced translocation t(7;10)(q36;q25.2).The additional mate -
rial on chromosome 7q was characterized by FISH using chromosome 
paints as part of chromosome 10.
P0257. Patau Syndrome - Clinical and gentical discussions over 
two cases
I. V. Pop , R. A. Popp, M. S. Militaru, A. P. Trifa;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Patau syndrome, also known as trisomy 13, represents a chromosom -
al disorder with an incidence of 1 case per 8,000 live births. Its clinical 
features consist of multiple malformations that involve the central ner -
vous system, the internal organs, the upper and lower extremities and 
the cranio-facial extremity.
Our paper presents two cases (patient S.A. aged 2 months and pa -
tient S.A. aged 20 days), which were suspected of chromosomal 
aneuploidy (trisomy 13 or 18) based on clinical features. For an ac -
curate diagnosis, the karyotype was determined in both cases using 
the classical cytogenetic technique with a 72-hour lymphocyte culture, 
followed by the G-banding of the chromosome preparations. The chro -
mosomal formulas obtained were 46,XX/47,XX, 13+ for patient S.A. 
and 47,XX, 13+ for patient P.A. In the case of patient S.A., clinical 
features correlate very well with the chromosomal formula determined 
by karyotyping; in the case of patient P.A., however, clinical features 
and child evolution at the moment of diagnosis would have pleaded for 
a somatic cellular mosaicism. Anyway, in cases of trisomy 13, patient’s 
evolution is difficult to evaluate and in most cases is unfavorable, being 
strongly related to the number and severity of malformations.
P0258. One female patient with trisomy 18 and bilateral 
congenital corneal opacity
A. Del Toro-Valero1, I. E. Arce2, R. E´Vega-Hernandez1, M. P. Casillas-Avila1, 
V. C. Ledezma-Rodriguez1, M. G. Lopez-Cardona1, A. Vargas2, S. Barrios2, N. 
O. Davalos1;  
1Instituto de Genética Humana, Universidad de Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico, 
2Hospital Regional Valentín Gómez Farías del ISSSTE, Jalisco, Mexico.
Introduction: Trisomy 18 was first described by Edwards et al. in 1960. 
It occurs in 1/8,000 live births. The principal features are clenched 
hands, rocker bottom feet, low set or malformed ears and ventricular 
septal defect. Low birth weight has been reported. We present one 
patient with prenatal diagnosis by kariotype of amniotic fluid of trisomy 
18 and bilateral congenital corneal opacity. Case report: Propositus 
is a female of 2 months of age, product of the III full term pregnancy, 
characterized by polyhydramnios, intrauterine growth delay and moth -
er, with gestational diabetes during the pregnancy, of 42 (Gravida:3; 
abortion:2; caesarean:1) and the father 39 years-old at the time of 
conception. Bilateral congenital corneal opacity and dysmosphism 
was detected. Actually somatometry under 3rd centile, dolichocepha -
ly, microphthalmia, hypertelorism, bilateral corneal opacity, ears with 
overlapping of helix over antehelix and down rotate, hands show 1st 
and 2nd fingers with bilateral ulna deviation, overlapping of 2nd over 3rd 
and 4th over 5th fingers, feet with hypoplasia of nails, 1st trigger toe and Clinical genetics2
brachydactyly and generalized hypotonia. Discussion: Trisomy 18, is 
the second most common autosomal trisomy in newborns. The fre -
quency of the associated findings are: heart (38.1%), gastrointestinal 
(25.4%), limb (24.6%), head (20.3%), eye (11%) and genital anoma -
lies (9.3%). Conclusion: We present a case with trisomy 18, showing 
unusual clinical findings. This case should make us to be careful at 
the time to establish the diagnosis and to suspect a chromosomopaty. 
By the wide clinical spectrum of this syndrome the karyotype give the 
final diagnosis.
P0259. A novel mutation in SLC19A2 gene in an Iranian patient 
with TRMA syndrome.
S. Zare1,2, b. keikhaei3,4, f. mahjoubi1,5, M. T. akbari1,6;  
1Akbari Medical Genetic labaratory, No.98, Taleghani Street, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad Unversity Science and Research Campus, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Faculty of Medicine, Ahwaz Medical Science 
University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Ahwaz Research Center for Thal -
assemia and Hemaoglobinopathy, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5National 
Research Center for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Tarbiat Modares University, 
Al-Ahmad Expressway, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Thiamine - Responsive Megaloblatic Anemia (TRMA) or Roger syn -
drome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder with childhood onset. 
This disorder is characterized by the occurrence of multiple clinical 
manifestations including megaloblastic anemia, diabetes mellitus and 
sensorineural deafness, responding in varying degrees to thiamine 
treatment. The gene SLC19A2 which codes for a thiamine transport -
er is responsible for this syndrome and it is located at chromosome 
1q. To date 15 different mutations have been reported in 28 families 
worldwide. Here we present a new case with a novel mutation, a 20 
years old male patient with characteristic features of TRMA with good 
response to thiamine therapy. His SLC19A2 gene was screened by 
direct sequencing and a single nucleotide base substitution in homo -
zygous form was found. This mutation leads to a premature stop co -
don (W233X), and can be considered diseases causing because of its 
nature. Considering the limited number of affected cases reported so 
far in the literature, it is evident that TRMA is a very rare condition with 
heterogenous molecular basis. As far as its distribution is concerned, 
out of 28 reported TRMA families worldwide, five families including this 
present case are from Iran who had different mutations. The rest of the 
patients were from Indian subcontinent (India, Kashmir and Pakistan) 
suggestive of higher frequency in Asian populations.
P0260. Six pregnancies in a woman with Turner syndrome, 
including a case of holoprosencephaly
E. S. Ramos1, A. Araújo1, C. D. Martinhago1, L. R. Martelli1, R. M. Reis1, D. G. 
Melo2;  
1University of São Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil, 2Federal University of São 
Carlos, São Carlos, Brazil.
Ovarian failure is a typical feature of Turner syndrome (TS). Only 2% 
of these patients (pure 45,X or mosaic) have natural pregnancies. 
Furthermore, these pregnancies have been plagued not only by chro -
mosome anomalies and fetal malformations, but also by spontane -
ous abortions. We report an unusual case of a woman with TS and 
chromosome mosaicism (karyotype 45,X[2]/46,X,r(X)[4]/46,XX[94]) 
and normal fertility. At 12 years and 6 months of age, her height was 
127.5cm and she was forwarded to a clinical evaluation due to short 
stature. Menarche was at age 13 years and her menstrual cycle had 
varied from 25 to 30 days. At 24 years of age, she has had six docu -
mented pregnancies, including one child with holoprosencephaly with 
normal karyotype. For patients with TS and spontaneous puberty, ge -
netic counseling and prenatal diagnosis are indicated.
P0261. Turner Syndrome mosaicism: an unusual case with 
a large dicentric marker chromosome: 45,X/46,X,der(X), ter 
rea(X;X), de novo.
A. Nucaro1, P. Melis2, M. Casini3, R. Rossino4, M. Cau4, R. Congiu4, M. Melis4, 
S. Loche3;  
1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Monserrato( Cagliari), Italy, 2Di-
partimento di Scienze Pediatriche e Medicina Clinica, University Cagliari, Italy, 
3(2) Servizio di Endocrinologia Pediatrica,, Ospedale Regionale Microcitemie, 
ASL8 Cagliari, Italy, 4(4) Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, University Cagliari, Italy.
Turner’s Syndrome(TS) is characterized by the total or partial absence 
of one normal second X chromosome. TS occurs in 1/2500-3000 live-
born females. The phenotype is variable and include short stature and 
gonadal dysgenesis. Approximately 50 percent of the patients has a 
45,X0 karyotype with no second sex chromosome, and 5 to 10 percent 
have a duplication (isochromosome) of the long arm of one X. Most of 
the remaining cases involves mosaic karyotypes in which only a pro -
portion of cells is 45,X, with one or more additional cell lineages.
X/X translocations are quite rare in man. The effect of this anomaly on 
the phenotype depends on the amount of deleted material and wheth -
er the chromosomes are joined by their long or short arm.
We report an unusual case of Turner’s Syndrome mosaicism in a six -
teen year old girl, who was referred to our Institution for primary amen -
orrhea and short stature. Endocrine evaluation revealed hypergonado -
tropic hypogonadism, which required a study of the karyotype. Cyto -
genetic analysis, performed on peripheral blood leucocytes, showed 
a 45,X/46,X,der(X),ter rea (X;X)de novo karyotype. The prevalent cell 
line was 45,X(90% cells). A second cell line(10% cells) showed a very 
large marker chromosome, similar to a large metacentric chromo -
some. FISH and molecular analysis revealed that the marker chromo -
some was dicentric and totally derived from the paternal X chromo -
some. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of 
TS mosaicism with a marker 45,X/46,X,der(X), de novo, that has been 
characterized by molecular and FISH analysis.
P0262. Molecular investigation of Angelman and Prader Willi 
syndromes. Screening for UBE3A mutations: preliminary results
E. Tzagaraki1,2, C. Sofocleous1, S. Kitsiou1, H. Frysira1, G. Goulielmos2, E. 
Kanavakis1, A. Mavrou1;  
1University of Athens, School of Medicine, Athens, Greece, 2University of Crete, 
School of Medicine, Herakleion, Greece.
Molecular defects within chromosomal region 15q11- q13, which con -
tains genes regulated by the imprinting centre (IC), are responsible 
for Angelman (AS) and Prader Willi (PWS) syndromes. Differentially 
methylated regions of the IC play a major role in the establishment 
of the methylation pattern and genomic imprinting of the locus. PWS 
is considered a “contiguous gene syndrome”, while UBE3A imprinted 
gene has been implicated as the AS gene, since genomic mutations 
of which have been identified as the sole molecular defect in AS pa -
tients.
Routine molecular analysis with Methylation Specific PCR and Dinou -
cleotide Repeat Polymorphism analysis was performed in 185 patients 
referred for AS (87) and PWS (98).The diagnosis was confirmed in 
11 AS and 16 PWS patients. 30 patients referred for AS were further 
analyzed by mutation screening of the UBE3A gene by automated se -
quencing of exons 9,12, 15 and 16.
Large deletions were excluded by the presence of the expected PCR 
product and no mutations were identified.
4- 6% of AS patients are predicted to have mutations in UBE3A gene, 
most of which are located in exons 9, 12, 15, 16. Since 75- 80% of 
these mutations are familial characterization of the defect and genetic 
counselling are essential. Although this study, has not as yet detected 
any mutations, further screening of all exons of UBE3A, as well as 
other genes, related to AS like phenotypes (MECP2 gene) will prob -
ably identify mutations, confirming the clinical diagnosis and providing 
information about the molecular mechanisms.
P0263. The “characteristic” clinical phenotype of maternal 
UPD(14): does it really exist? A clinical, cytogenetic, and 
molecular study of three new unrelated subjects
M. Giovannucci Uzielli1, N. Dayan1, L. Giunti2, S. Guarducci2, V. Gimino1, A. 
Zeffiri1, E. Lapi2, U. Ricci2, M. Ottaviani1, M. Isoldi1, G. Scarselli1;  
1University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Children’s Hospital “Anna Meyer”, Flor -
ence, Italy.
Maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 14 [UPD(14)mat] is firm -
ly associated with abnormal phenotypes, including pre- and postnatal 
growth retardation, features overlapping PWS, and other abnormal 
clinical aspects. The presence, in a diploid genome, of a chromosome 
pair (or of a chromosome fragment) derived from one genitor, carries 
two main types of developmental risk: the occurrence of an imprinting 
disorder, or the inheritance of a duplicated mutant of a recessive trait 
leading to the homozygosity (Engel E., 2006).Clinical genetics
These preliminary remarks well support the hard comparison of the 
clinical phenotype and natural history of three new italian patients, two 
females and one male, with complete maternal isodisomy (two cases) 
or heterodisomy of chromosome 14. Growth parameters, including 
pre- and postnatal length, weight, and OFC, heavily differ from border -
line values to a hypochondroplasia-like phenotype. Similar variability 
was observed for the psychomotor development, completely normal 
in a subject, respectively mildly or seriously retarded in the two others. 
Feeding problems and obesity also differentiate the natural history of 
the three subjects. Precocious puberty was observed only in one of 
the two girls. In conclusion, we confirm the advisability of consider -
ing upd(14)mat in patients with low birth weight, growth retardation, 
neonatal feeding problems, muscular hypotonia, motor delay, preco -
cious puberty and truncal obesity, as well as in patients with PWS like 
phenotype, negative for SNRPN mutation. The rapid testing, by using 
the methylation status of the imprinted MEG3 locus represents a new 
useful diagnostic tool.
P0264. Molecular Analysis of Usher Syndrome Types 1 and 2 in 
Iranian Usher Patients
K. Kahrizi1, G. Asaadi Tehrani1,2, N. Sadeghpour1, N. Bazazzadegan1, M. 
Mohseni1, M. Jaberi3, K. Jalalvand1, S. Arzhangi1, H. Emamjomeh4, R. J. H. 
Smith5, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetic Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci -
ence, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetic Department, Science and Re -
search Unit , Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Retinitis 
Pigmentosa Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Research Center of Ear, 
Nose, Throat, and Head and Neck Surgery, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
5Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories , Department of Otolaryngol -
ogy Head and Neck Surgery , University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States.
Usher syndrome (USH) is the most frequent cause of combined deaf- 
blindness. It is clinically and genetically heterogeneous and mainly 
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. A total of 12 loci have been 
reported to be associated with the usher syndrome, assigned to the 
USH types (USH1A-G, USH2A-C and USH3A). From the three types 
are known for usher syndrome, type 1 and 2 are the most frequent 
forms and type 3 is the modest form, so the objective of this study was 
to investigate USH1 loci and USH2B between USH2 loci.
We have performed linkage analysis for 30 families using STR poly -
morphic markers, for DFNB2, DFNB12, DFNB18, DFNB23 and DFNB6 
which mutation in the gene located in these loci cause ARNSHL as 
the same as USH1B, USH1C, USH1D, USH1F and USH2B. Our data 
up to now showed that in three families 3 STR markers (D10S1432, 
D10S537 and D10S535), used in this investigation linked to DFNB12, 
in which results conclude usher syndrome 1D in these families and 
in one family 3 STR markers ( D10S1226, D10S546 and D10S1762 
) linked to DFNB23, which is related to usher syndrome 1F in this 
family. We found a mutation in MYO7A (USH1B) and a mutation in 
VLGR1(USH2C).
Based  on our results we suggest that the gene CDH23 causing non 
syndromic autosomal recessive deafness (DFNB12) and deafness as -
sociated with retinitis pigmentosa and vestibular dysfunction (USH1D) 
has a higher prevalence in our population in comparison with other 
Usher loci.
P0265. The development of uterine leiomyoma is associated with 
Val158Met polymorphism in COMT gene and the 3´-untranslated 
ApaI-IGF2 gene polymorphism in Russian population 
(Bashkortostan)
O. Egorova1, M. Bermisheva1, E. Khusnutdinova1, N. Glebova2, A. Dodonov2;  
1Institute of Biochemistry ang Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian Acad -
emy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkortostan State Medical Uni -
versity, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Leiomyoma, the most common benign uterine neoplasm, occurs 
in around one-forth of women during their lifetimes. Leiomyoma is 
caused by a complex interaction between multiple genes, hormone, 
growth factor, cytokines, and the environment. Cytochrome P4501A1 
(CYP1A1), catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) and glutation-s-
transferase (GSTM1) are key enzymes in the estrogen metabolism 
pathway that result in the hydroxylation, methylation and conjugation. 
Estrogen (ESR1) and progesterone (PR) receptors are mediators of 
hormonal bioeffects. The IGF-II growth factor is known to support myo -
blasts differentiation among other cell types. P53 is a tumor suppres -sor gene.
We evaluated the association between the GSTM1 null-allele, CYP1A1 
Ile462Val, COMT Val158Met, ESR1 PvuI and XbaII, p53 Arg72Pro, 
PR Progins and 3´-untranslated ApaI- IGF2 gene polymorphisms and 
uterine leiomyoma risk in a case-control study: 200 women with and 
200 without uterine leiomyoma living in the Bashkortostan (South Ural 
region of Russia).
The frequency of the low-activity COMT Met/Met genotype was sig -
nificantly higher in patients than in the healthy control group (44 % 
and 15%, respectively: x2= 29.96, p=0.0005; OR= 4.46, 95% CI 2.51-
7.96).
The frequency of AA homozygous (mutant allele) was significantly 
higher in women with leiomyomas than without (32 % and 16%, re -
spectively: x2= 11.0014, p=0.0017; OR=2.32, 95% CI 1.39-3.89).
There was no significant difference between the two groups regarding 
the distribution of the GSTM1, CYP1A1, ESR1, PR and p53 genes 
polymorphisms frequencies.
Our results suggest that the Val158Met polymorphism in COMT gene 
and the 3´-untranslated ApaI-IGF2 gene polymorphism are associated 
with increased risk of uterine leiomyoma in Bashkortostan population.
P0266. Severe kaposiform hemangioendothelioma associated 
with Kasabach-Merritt Syndrome - genes need to be identified
G. S. Doros1, B. S. Zoica1, M. Bataneant1, M. Serban1, M. Gafencu1, O. C. 
Ciocarlie2, J. Puiu1;  
1Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, Ti -
misoara, Romania, 2Louis Turcanu Emergency Hospital for Children, Timisoara, 
Romania.
Background: Vascular anomalies are localized errors of vascular de -
velopment. Vascular tumors include: hemangioma, kaposiform he -
mangioendothelioma (KH) and tufted angioma. Genetic studies led to 
the identification of a number of genes that cause vascular malforma -
tions.
KH is a rare vascular tumor usually presenting at birth or shortly there -
after. The tumor is locally aggressive and produces major complica -
tions.
Aim: To present a rare case of severe KH in a 5yo girl, diagnosed at 
7 months, unresponsive to medical treatment. She developed major 
complications: Kassabach-Merritt-Syndrome and CHF.
Matherial: At 7 months, the infant was admitted with a large vascular 
lesion involving the left side of the abdomen, left vulva and left leg. A 
large, rapidly growing, vascular tumor, warm, non pulsatile, red purple, 
tense, with significant distortion of anatomy was palpable in the abdo -
men. Clinical examination, Doppler ultrasound, MRI, biopsy and labo -
ratory tests were performed.
Results: KH was the diagnosis. Kassabach-Merritt-Syndrome was the 
first severe complication, manifested as thrombocytopenia and DIC. 
Parents refused chemotherapy; hence, treatment was: Prednisone, α-
2a-IFN, blood products. Surgery was considered too dangerous given 
the size and location of the tumor. Despite all efforts, the tumor be -
came giant, invalidating the child and life-threatening.
Conclusions: Kasabach-Merritt-Syndrome and heart failure in unre -
sponsive hemangioendothelioma to medical therapy raise the mortal -
ity risk from 30-40% to 50-55%. Gene therapy could be life-saving and 
despite the rarity of the disease no efforts should be spared to identify 
the genes involved in KH. In such cases gene therapy could be the 
only chance for survival.
P0267. Reverse-hybridization-based genetic testing for the 
prediction of anticoagulant dose requirement
H. Puehringer1, C. Stoellberger2, W. Krugluger3, C. Oberkanins1;  
1ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Second Medical Department, 
Rudolfstiftung Hospital, Vienna, Austria, 3Department of Clinical Chemistry, 
Rudolfstiftung Hospital, Vienna, Austria.
Coumarin derivatives (Warfarin, Phenprocoumon, Acenocoumarol) 
are the most widespread oral anticoagulant drugs for the prevention 
and treatment of arterial and venous thromboembolic disorders. How -
ever, these vitamin K antagonists have a narrow therapeutic range and 
a wide inter-individual variability in dose requirement. Despite adjust -
ment for clinical variables, adverse events, such as delay in achieving 
a stable maintenance dose or bleeding complications, are frequently 
encountered during the initial phase of therapy. Genetic polymor -
phisms in the drug-targeted vitamin K epoxide reductase complex 1 Clinical genetics
(VKORC1) and in the drug metabolizing cytochrome P450 isozyme 
CYP2C9 have been reported to account for the majority of variations 
in the therapeutic response to warfarin.
We have developed a genetic test (StripAssay) for the detection of 
-1639G>A and 3730G>A in the VKORC1 gene, and 430C>T and 
1075A>C in the CYP2C9 gene. The StripAssay is based on multiplex 
PCR, followed by reverse-hybridization of biotin-labeled amplifica -
tion products to a parallel array of allele-specific oligonucleotides on 
membrane teststrips. Genotyping for VKORC1 polymorphisms and the 
functionally defective CYP2C9 variants *2 and *3 allowed the clas -
sification of patients into high, intermediate and low dose responders 
to phenprocoumon (Marcumar), the most commonly used oral antico -
agulant in Central and North European countries. Favourable proper -
ties, such as the rapid DNA extraction protocol, ready-to-use reagents 
and teststrips, as well as the potential for automation of the hybridiza -
tion/detection step, make the StripAssay convenient and easy to per -
form within less than 6 hours. The results obtained in our study will as -
sist clinicians to achieve a more individualized anticoagulant therapy. 
(oberkanins@viennalab.co.at)
P0268. ‚De novo‘ SOX10  mutation in a 2-year-old child with Type 
4 Waardenburg syndrome: case report and literature review
C. I. Coldea1, F. Meire2, R. Touraine3, I. Delpierre4, T. Sekhara5, A. Mansbach6, 
Y. Sznajer7,8;  
1Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants, Bruxelles, Belgium, 2Ophthalmology Dept, 
Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants, Bruxelles, Belgium, 33Service de Génétique 
Clinique Chromosomique et Moléculaire, Hôpital Nord, St Etienne, France, 4Ra-
diology Dept, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants, Bruxelles, Belgium, 5Neurology, 
Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants, Bruxelles, Belgium, 6Ear Nose Throat Dept 
(ORL), HUDERF, U.L.B,Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants, Bruxelles, Belgium, 
7Clinical Genetics, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants, Bruxelles, Belgium, 8Cen-
ter for Human Genetics, ULB, Brussels, Belgium.
Type 4 Waardenburg syndrome (WS4) is part of neurocristopathy 
diseases resulting in absence of melanocytes in inner ear cells, on 
skin and variable degree of parasympathetic enteric neurons absence. 
SOX 10  gene acts as a key regulator for peripheral glial development. 
SOX10  gene haploinsufficiency was associated with a distinctive phe -
notype combining WS type 4, mental retardation and dysautonomic 
features. (1)
We report the natural history of a 2 year-old child with congenital deaf -
ness, delayed psychomotor development. Language retardation and 
autistic-like behaviour were noted. The cerebral MRI showed bilateral 
absence of the semi-circular canals and delayed myelinisation. The 
ophthalmological exam identified deep blue iris along with an albinotic-
like retina. These clinical features authorize the screening for SOX10  
gene mutation encountered in WS4 spectrum. The patient was identi -
fied with a 698-2 A→C SOX 10  gene substitution, responsible for a 
premature STOP codon. This mutation occurred ’de novo’ since both 
parents did not carried this substitution. Among 12 patients, Touraine 
et al. identified 3 children with SOX 10  mutation who developed WS 4 
phenotype with additional neurological symptoms: mental retardation, 
cerebellar ataxia, nystagmus, spasticity. They also had dysautonomic 
features (alacrima(2/3), asialia(1/3) or reduced sweating(1/3)). Notice -
ably, our patient so far did not show any digestive anormaly nor any 
dysautonomic sign. The precise phenotype features in this patient lead 
to specific molecular investigation. The genetic counseling is now ac -
curate to the patient and for his family.
Reference (1)- R. Touraine et al. Am J Hum Genet 2000;66:1496-
1503
P0269. A novel point mutation (Met387Ile) in the RECQL2  gene in 
a patient with Werner syndrome
N. Galeeva , A. Chuhrova, S. Tverskaya, A. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Werner syndrome is autosomal recessive disease, which character -
ized by symptoms of the adult-onset premature aging. The features 
of Werner syndrome are scleroderma-like skin changes, especially in 
the extremities, cataract, subcutaneous calcification, premature arte -
riosclerosis, diabetes mellitus, and a wizened and prematurely aged 
face. The RECQL2  gene, also known as WRN , is in charge of this 
disease and encodes a helicase.
We have investigated 4 Russian patients with Werner syndrome. We 
found out one novel mutation (ATG→ATA) in exon 9 in heterozygous state in this gene which leads to substitution of Met by Ile at posi -
tion 387 (p.M387I). Also we found out single nucleotide substitution 
c.355+4G>C and didn’t find it in 100 control DNA samples.
Also we investigated by SSCP-analysis LMNA gene, which encoded 
two protein products lamin A and C, and take part in beginnings of 
atypical Werner syndrome. Here we didn’t find any mutation in the 
patients.
This work was partly supported by Russian President’s grant NSh-
5736.2006.7.
P0270. Neonatal progeroid Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch 
syndrome: follow-up of new case in Belarus
S. V. Holubeva1, N. V. Rumyantseva2;  
1Vitebsk Regional Diagnostic Center, Vitebsk, Belarus, 2Belarusian Medical 
Academy of Post-Graduate Education, Minsk, Belarus.
Neonatal progeroid syndrome, or Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch (WRS) is 
a rare autosomal recessive disorder, with few published case reports. 
WRS is characterized by progeroid appearance at birth, lipoatrophy, 
slow growth (MIM 26409). We present results of 3 years observation 
of female patient, the first child of a young healthy nonconsanguine -
ous Belarusian couple. Pregnancy and labor were unremarkable. The 
newborn (BW 1890 g, BL 44 cm) showed typical progeroid features 
(aged triangular face, beak-shaped nose, telecanthus, microstomia, 
pseudohydrocephalus, widened fontanelles and sutures, hypotricho -
sis, wrinkled skin, prominent veins and lipoatrophy). The infant had 
feeding problems and small weight gain. Initial follow-up at 4 months 
demonstrated growth and mental retardation; myopia and hip joints 
dysplasia were revealed. Ultrasound examination of brain and heart 
did not reveal any abnormalities. At 12 months dentition was delayed, 
contractures at knees and elbows and paradoxical caudal fat accumu -
lation occurred. At age of 3 years progeroid signs became more pro -
nounced and psychomotor retardation was preserved. Chromosomal 
and biochemical analyses were normal. Differential diagnosis was 
done with other similar genetic syndromes (Cockayne syndrome, cutis 
laxa-growth defect, lipodystrophy syndrome, oculo-mandibulo-facial 
syndrome, progeria including progeroid syndrome with Ehlers-Danlos 
features). We have established WRS on the basis of association of 
neonatal progeroid appearance, lipoatrophy with consequent caudal 
fat accumulation, growth and mental retardation. Clinical features of 
the patient were compared with published data, which vary in expres -
sion and severity. The case presented differs in absence of natal teeth. 
The patient is alive; the parents are informed of the diagnosis and 
recurrence risk of 25%.
P0271. Intracranial space occupying lesions could be the forth 
component of Wildervanck (cervicoocculoacustic) syndrome
S. Balci1,2;  
1Hacettepe University, Clinical Genetics (emeritus), Ankara, Turkey, 2Kibris 
Sokak 17/8 Asagi Ayranci, Ankara, Turkey.
Cervicooculoacoustic (Wildervanck) syndrome (MIM 314600) is char -
acterized by the triad of Klippel-Feil anomaly, bilateral abdusence 
palsy with retractio bulbs (Duane’s syndrome) and hearing loss. Since 
it is commonly observed in female patients, X-linked dominant mode 
of inheritance with increased chance of lethality in males has been 
suggested. We have observed a total of 10 Wildervanck cases (8 fe -
males, 2 males) within a range of 7 months to 36 years old. All of 
them had cervical vertebral fusions and hemivertebrae, two of them 
had diastometamyelia, three of them had dermal sinus into intradural 
space. Along with these typical manifestations seven of them had oc -
cipital bone defects and mid-line masses. Closure defect examples 
such as, dermoid cysts, hamartomatous cyst, meningeal cyst, menin -
gomyelocelle and encephalocelle located in the posterior fossa were 
documented histopathologically in different cases with cranial masses. 
One female patient was suffer from three times meningitis due to der -
mal sinus. Postmortem examination of this patient demonstrated that a 
chronic infected dermoid cyst. Cleft palate malformation was observed 
in another female patient associated with typical symptoms. Those clo -
sure defects could be more frequent than it was previously anticipated 
in Wildervanck syndrome. MR examinations should be added in the 
diagnostic procedure of this syndrome in order to identify additional 
posterior fossa abnormalities and/or other intracranial space occupy -
ing lessions.Clinical genetics
P0272. Williams Syndrome in young child - case report
T. Marcovici1, I. Sabau1, I. Simedrea1, M. Puiu1, P. Lesovici2, E. Gamaniuc2;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2”Louis Turcanu” 
Children’s Emergency Hospital, Timisoara, Romania.
Williams syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by mild 
mental retardation, distinctive facial appearance, abnormalities in cal -
cium balance and blood vessel disease. It is present at birth and af -
fects males and females equally.The syndrome is caused by a deletion 
in the locus of the elastin gene localized at 7q11.23.
We present a 24 months old male admitted in our clinic for fever and 
vomiting. He is the second child of a healthy couple, the pregnancy 
was not followed-up and the birth weight was low. Feeding problems 
and slow weight gain were noticed.
By clinical examination we noticed failure to thrive (weight of 9400 g), 
short stature, characteristic facial features (microcephaly, broad fore -
head, short palpebral fisures, left eye strabismus, periorbital fullness, 
flattened nasal bridge, long philtrum, wide mouth with full lips, low 
placed proeminent ears). There were present musculoskeletal anoma -
lies (hyperextensible joints and lumbar scoliosis), anxiety, a friendly 
behaviour and mild delay in intellectual, motor and language skills. 
Calcium blood level was elevated and echocardiography was normal.
Conclusions: We diagnosed the syndrome by clinical features and hy -
percalcemia. Variable expression in the phenotype makes the absence 
of one of the main anomalies possible. FISH analysis may certify the 
diagnosis.
The child requires a comprehensive multidisciplinary approach to his 
care and periodic cardiovascular evaluations.
P0273. Presenting phenotype and clinical evaluation in a cohort 
of 22 Williams-Beuren syndrome patients
E. Biamino1, C. A. Bena1, L. Sorasio1, S. Forzano1, E. Banaudi2, L. Peruzzi3, G. 
B. Ferrero1, M. Silengo1;  
1Department of Paediatrics, Torino, Italy, 2Department of Cardiology - Regina 
Margherita Children’s Hospital, Torino, Italy, 3Department of Nephrology - Re -
gina Margherita Children’s Hospital, Torino, Italy.
Williams-Beuren Syndrome is a rare multi-system genomic disorder, 
caused by 7q11.23 microdeletion with a prevalence of 1/10000-1/20000 
live births. Clinical phenotype includes typical facial dysmorphism (elf -
in face), mental retardation associated with a peculiar neuropsycho -
logical profile and congenital heart defects. We investigated 22 WS 
patients (mean age of 9.7 years, range 1 day-39 years) with a multi-
specialistic follow-up protocol comprehensive of neuropsychological, 
cardiologic, nephrologic, ophthalmologic, endocrinologic, gastoen -
terologic, odontostomatologic and orthopaedic evaluations. The mean 
age at diagnosis was 5.38 years, being 1.02y when genetic evaluation 
was requested for congenital heart defects (CHD) and 10.68y in case 
of mental retardation/abnormal neuropsychological profile without an 
evident CHD. All patients showed facial dysmorphisms, with supra -
valvular aortic stenosis (SVAS) as the most common cardiovascular 
anomaly (12/22) associated, followed by peripheral pulmonary steno -
sis (9/22); interestingly, we detected in one patient a total anomalous 
pulmonary venous return (TAPVR), confirming the possible associa -
tion of this rare CHD with WS. Hypertension was detected by 24 hours 
ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in 7/22 cases. Mental retarda -
tion was observed in 9/22 patients, mostly (7/9) in a mild form and 
Chiari malformation type 1 was found in 3 patients. Our study under -
lines a remarkable diagnostic delay in patients who present to genetic 
evaluation because of mental retardation/neuropsychological profile 
lacking an evident cardiopathy and confirms the multi-systemic nature 
of WS leading to a high clinical presentation’s variability and complex 
follow-up strategies.
P0274. Monitoring minimal residual disease in pediatric ALL 
using real-time quantitative PCR for Wilms tumor gene (WT1): 
Prognostic significance, and correlation with disease status
S. Talebi1, Z. Badiei2, J. Tavakkol Afshari3, A. Brouk4, M. Golalipour5, F. Mah -
joubi6;  
1MUMSImmunology Research group, Division of Immunogenetics and Tissue 
Culture, Bu-Ali Research Institute, MUMS, Iran, Mashhad, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 2MUMS, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Immunology Research 
group, Division of Immunogenetics and Tissue Culture, Bu-Ali Research Insti -
tute, MUMS, Iran and Tissue Culture, Bu-Ali Research Institute, MUMS, Iran, 
Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Immunology Research group, Division of Immunogenetics and Tissue Culture, Bu-Ali Research Institute, MUMS, Iran, 
Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, National 
Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Is -
lamic Republic of Iran, 6NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Continuous Wilms’ tumor gene (WT1) expression is a typical feature 
of leukemic blasts in AML, ALL, and blast crisis CML patients. WT1 is 
only transiently expressed in normal hemopoiesis. levels of leukemic 
cells (MRD) in peripheral blood samples from children with ALL using 
WT1 as a marker should have clinical importance. We aimed to de -
velop a quantitative method based on the RQ-PCR in order to monitor 
WT1 level in children with ALL and assess its prognostic importance. 
Furthermore, we wished to compare the sensitivity, efficiency, and reli -
ability of this method with the conventional semi-quantitative RT-PCR 
.
Fourteen newly diagnosed ALL children were included in this study. 
The peripheral blood samples were collected before induction, at the 
second week of induction, at the start of consolidation and beginning of 
the maintenance phase of chemotherapy. The last blood sample was 
collected from each patient at random 2 to 6 month after the mainte -
nance phase started.
The proportion of patients with detectable WT1 was 92% at diagnosis 
and 42% at the second week of therapy, 38% at the start of consolida -
tion, and 0% at the beginning of maintenance. The absence of WT1 
showed accordance with the clinical course of patients. CQ PCR and 
RQ PCR results were correlated together.
results indicate that real time PCR can be employed to monitor MRD in 
the leukemic patients during chemotherapy. Successful development 
of RQ PCR by SYBR Green I resulted to an easier method with lower 
cost in comparison to probe based methods.
P0275. Clinical manifestation and molecular-genetic diagnosis 
of Wilson’s disease in Republic of Moldova
P. P. Cojocaru1, V. C. Sacara2;  
1State University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Nicolae Testemitanu”, Chisinau, 
Republic of Moldova, 2National Center of Reproductive Health and Medical 
Genetics, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova.
Hepatolenticular degeneration is an inherited disorder of copper me -
tabolism in an autosomal recessive manner. The gene is located on 
chromosome 13 and encodes a copper-transporting P-type ATPase 
protein, which controls the insertion of copper into apoceruloplasmin 
in the trans-Golgi network and the biliary excretion of excess copper 
through a vesicular-lysosomal-apical membrane route.
Our patients from 30 Wilson’s disease(WD) families had presented 
with predominantly hepatic, neurological or psychiatric manifestations. 
The varied neurological abnormalities displayed by patients include 
any combination of dyskinesia, rigidity, resting and intention tremor, 
dysarthria, dysphagia, abnormal gait and psychological disturbances.
The search was effectuated on two ATP7B exones(14, 15) using single 
strand conformation polymorphism method (SSCP) of DNA molecule. 
In the 14th exone was determined His1069Glu missense - mutation, 
which corresponds to the Thomas’s G. data recorded in 38% of Euro -
peans. Analysing 60 chromosomes of WD patients, missense - muta -
tion determined in 13,3%. In 2 patients the mutation was detected the 
homozygote form, but in 4 patients was detected the heterozygous 
form. The presences in patients with certain clinical manifestations the 
heterozygous occurrence of missense - mutation can presumably take 
part a compound phenomenon.
During the SSCP analysis of the 15th exone in our trials was not de -
tected the frames with abnormal electrophoretic activity. Thereby, 
the search of deletion in the 15th exone(C3400delCgene) in studied 
patients hadn’t any results. Searching Prp1134Pro-fs mutation in 60 
chromosomes showed its absence.
Conclusion: The missense mutation His1069Glu has been established 
in 13.3% cases, but the deletion Prp1134Pro-fs has not been deter -
mined.
P0276. Epilepsy in adults with Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome
J. C. Worthington1, O. W. Quarrell2;  
1Sheffield Teaching Hospitals, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 2Sheffield Children’s 
Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom.
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a well recognised malforma -
tion syndrome resulting from a partial 4p deletion. Features include 
pre- and post-natal growth delay, microcephaly, characteristic facies, Clinical genetics
midline defects and epilepsy. The cause of WHS is heterogeneous; 
some individuals have deletions which may be large or small whereas 
others have unbalanced translocations. The epilepsy may be of early 
onset and difficult to control but there have been some reports of the 
seizures ceasing after a period of years. However, relatively limited 
information exists detailing the seizure activity in adults with WHS.
We investigated seizure onset and frequency in 21 young adults over 
the age of 16 years diagnosed with WHS. They had a mean age of 24 
years; range 17-34 years. Data were obtained by contacting parents 
using a telephone interview.
Epilepsy was found to occur in all 21 cases, with one exception onset 
of seizures was between 1 and 2 years of age. In 8 cases (mean age 
26 years; range 17 - 34 years), a seizure had occurred within the last 3 
years. Whereas in 13 cases (mean age 23 years; range 17 - 33 years), 
the most recent seizure had occurred more than 3 years previously 
(mean number of years 15; range 6 - 28 years). For those 13 cases 
the last year of seizure occurred at a mean age of 9 (age range 2 - 15 
years).
These data may be valuable in counselling families of a newly diag -
nosed child.
P0277. Detection of genomic copy number changes in patients 
with idiopathic mental retardation by high-resolution X-array-
CGH: frequent increased gene dosage of known XLMR genes
G. Froyen1, H. Van Esch2, M. Bauters1, S. Frints3, J. Vermeesch2, K. Devri -
endt2, J. Fryns2, P. Marynen1;  
1VIB, Dept. Human Genetics, K.U.Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2University Hospi -
tal, Dept. Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 3University Hospital, Dept. Clini -
cal Genetics, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
A tiling X-chromosome-specific genomic array with a theoretical reso -
lution of 80 kb was developed to screen mental retardation (MR) pa -
tients for submicroscopic copy number differences. We first validated 
the X-array using 4 MR patients with aberrations previously detected 
at lower resolution. This allowed for delineation of the location and 
extent of the aberration at high resolution and subsequently, more 
precise genotype-phenotype analyses. Next, we screened a cohort of 
108 patients with idiopathic MR consisting of 57 patients suspected 
of X-linked mental retardation (XLMR), 27 probands of brother pairs, 
and 24 sporadic patients. We identified 15 copy number changes in 14 
patients (13%). These include 2 deletions and 13 duplications rang -
ing from 0.1 - 2.7 Mb. The aberration is considered to be associated 
with the phenotype in 5 patients (4.6%) based on the following crite -
ria: de novo  aberration; involvement of a known or candidate MRX(S) 
gene; segregation with the disease in the family; absence in control 
individuals, and skewed X-inactivation in carrier females. These in -
clude deletions that contain the MRX(S) genes CDKL5,  OPHN1 and 
CASK , and duplications harboring CDKL5, NXF5, MECP2  and GDI1 . 
In addition, seven unbalances are apparent novel polymorphic regions 
because they do not follow the proposed criteria. Taken together, our 
data strongly suggest that not only deletions but also duplications on 
the X chromosome might contribute to the phenotype more often than 
expected, supporting the increased gene dosage mechanism for de -
regulation of normal cognitive development.
P0278. Female phenotype with karyotype 47,XYY
K. Ørstavik1, C. van der Hagen2, E. Ormerod2, T. Saether Hagen3, L. Walaas4, 
C. Mørk5, B. Andersen6, A. Wedell7, A. Myhre8;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet -Radiumhospitalet Medical 
Centre, Oslo, Norway, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Ullevål University 
Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Section of Pediatric Surgery, Surgical Department, 
Rikshospitalet -Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway, 4Department of Pathology, Rikshospitalet -Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway, 
5Department of Dermatology, Rikshospitalet -Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, 
Oslo, Norway, 6Bussedalen Legekontor, Kongsberg, Norway, 7Department of 
Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet/Karolinska University 
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 8Department of Pediatrics, Rikshospitalet -Radi -
umhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway.
Our patient is a 7 year old girl with blood karyotype 47,XYY. Her de -
velopment has been normal with the exception of growth retardation. 
On examination at age 5 years height was 5cm below the 2.5th centile, 
weight at the 50th centile for height and head circumference at the 10-
25th centile. Her neck was broad and her posterior hairline somewhat 
low. She had minimal cubitus valgus. A striking feature was a hyper -
trichosis which was congenital and had increased over time. She had 
long, coarse, fair, hairs along her entire spine, most pronounced in the 
lumbar region, as well as hypertrichosis of her forearms.
Her external genitalia were normal. A normal sized uterus, but no go -
nads, were identified on ultrasound. At laparoscopy she was found to 
have small gonads which were excised. Histological examination re -
vealed ovarian stromal cells and bilateral gonadoblastoma. No testicu -
lar differentiation was seen.
The karyotype of all 34 analysed lymphocytes was 47,XYY. The karyo -
type in cultured fibroblasts was 45,X in 7 and 47,XYY in 14 of 21 meta -
phases. FISH analysis of 199 interphases also revealed mosaicism: 
XYY in 68, X in 114, XY in 4 and XX in 13 cells. Gonadal mosiacism 
was present with 45,X in 37 and 47,XYY in 13 of 50 cell. Sequencing 
of the SRY gene revealed no mutation.
A 47,XYY karyotype in lymphocytes is usually associated with a male 
phenotype. The presence of cells without a Y chromosome in the go -
nads may explain the female phenotype in this patient.
P0279. Mutation screening of ARX gene in male patients with 
non-specific mental retardation from Russia
D. V. Islamgulov , A. S. Karunas, E. K. Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Mutations of the ARX gene, considered to be the second most com -
mon cause of X-linked mental retardation (XLMR), give rise to a wide 
variety of distinguishable syndromes (Partington syndrome, X-linked 
infantile spasm, etc.), and they are also an important cause of non-
syndromic XLMR. The striking finding concerning ARX is the pheno -
typic heterogeneity associated with the most frequent and recurrent 
mutation (identified in >5% of XLMR families): the in-frame 24-bp du -
plication (c.428_451dup24) expanding the 16 polyalanine tract to 23 
(amino acids 100-115). In order to evaluate the frequency of ARX mu -
tation in mentally retarded (MR) males from Volga-Ural region of Rus -
sia, we performed mutational analysis of ARX gene in 214 unrelated 
MR (diagnosis based on the ICD-10) male patients (Russians N=72, 
Tatars N=56 and Bashkirs N=34) with average age of 13.02±3.47 
years (range, 5-18 years) negative for mutations in the FMR1 and 
MECP2 genes. The recurrent c.428-451dup24 mutation was identi -
fied by sequencing in three (1.4%) MR males (Russians N=1, Tatars 
N=1 and Bashkirs N=1). The subsequent genotype-phenotype analy -
ses confirmed that polyalanine tract expansion can result in a highly 
variable disease phenotype, even with respect to mental retardation a 
great deal of variability, with intellectual impairment ranging from mild 
to severe, which mitigates against early clinical diagnosis. These data, 
together with those reported in the literature, imply that screening for 
c.428_451dup24 mutation should be recommended in males with non-
specific MR, especially in population Volga-Ural region of Russia. The 
work was supported by grant of RFH, project (No.05-06-06168a).Clinical genetics
Po02. Cytogenetics
P0280. Further delineation of the 13q deletion syndrome: clinical 
report and molecular characterization of an interstitial 13q31 
deletion.
H. Karmous-Benailly1, F. Giuliano1, E. Dor2, A. Angelozzi1, S. Perelman3, J. 
Lambert1;  
1Service de Génétique, Hôpital l’Archet 2, Nice, France, 2Service de Pédopsy -
chiatrie, Fondation Lenval, Nice, France, 3Service de Médecine Pédiatrique, 
Fondation lenval, Nice, France.
The 13q deletion syndrome usually comprises a wide variety of clinical 
manifestations including developmental delay, mental and growth re -
tardation, hypotonia, microcephaly, trigonocephaly, dysmorphy, ocular 
anomalies, and diverse malformations of limbs, brain, heart, and kid -
ney. This variability of clinical expression depends on the size and lo -
cation of the deleted segment. So a classification was proposed point -
ing band 13q32 as the ‘’minimal critical region’’ of the 13q- syndrome. 
Deletions involving this band are associated with major malformations, 
those limited to proximal bands q13-q31 share no major anomalies but 
mainly growth retardation and, distal deletions are rather complicated 
by severe retardation but minor abnormalities.Here, we report the case 
of an 11 years old boy who presented mental and growth retardation, 
dysmorphic features, hand and foot abnormalities, hyperactive behav -
iour and an atypical West syndrome. Chromosome analysis identified 
a de novo  interstitial deletion on the long arm of a chromosome 13. 
Further characterization of this deletion was conducted by FISH with 
use of BAC probes extending from 13q21.33 to 13q32.3. We found a 
deletion of 11 Mb long limited to band 13q31. The observed phenotype 
in the proband is supposed to be related to haplo-insufficiency of the 
genes contained in the deleted region. Interestingly, abnormal behav -
iour and west syndrome are two clinical entities never described in the 
13q- syndrome. This could be explained by the fact that deletions con -
cerning only band 13q31 have never been reported. This observation 
underlies the importance of an accurate characterization of deletions 
in order to better establish a karyotype/phenotype correlation.
P0281. Chromosme 18q paracentric inversion in a family: Report 
of a case
S. M. Brankovic Niksic , M. Milutinovic, G. Radivojevic Pilic, T. Mitrovic;  
Institute of Mental Health, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro.
Paracentic inversion is a rare cytogenetic abberation, especialy para -
centric inversion of chromosome 18q. We have found only a few case 
reports on that subject.
We report a married couple that was send to a Genetic laboratory 
because of a problem with infertility (3 missed abortions). Both, man 
and woman, are healthy normal people, with normal gynecological 
status. He has also normospermia. Cytogenetic analysis, G band, 
and additional YUNIS analysis confirmed the karyotype of the probant 
46,XY,inv18( q21q22.3). Analysis of the karyotype of the probants fam -
ily confirmed that the probants mother has the same chromosomal 
abberation.
The family of the probant has no mentaly retarded members or preg -
nancy losses. The probants sister has two normal children but she is 
not available for further investigation.
The paper will discuss different effect of the same chromosomal ab -
normality on fertility. Also our results will be compaired with the results 
of other authors.
P0282. A duplication of the distal segment of 22q in a patient 
with mental retardation, microcephaly and mild facial 
dysmorphism.
H. Peeters , J. Vermeesch, J. P. Fryns;  
Department of Human Genetics KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
We present a patient with a terminal 22q duplication due to an un -
balanced translocation 46, XX, der(22)(qter->q13.31::p11->qter). She 
presented at the age of 4.5 years with a mild to moderate mental re -
tardation, microcephaly and mild dysmorphic facial features including 
a large forehead, a broad nasal bridge, a thin upper lip and a large 
mouth. A high resolution karyotype was apparently normal. Because 
of nasal speech, FISH analysis for the DiGeorge/VCFS region was 
performed with a commercial probe mix containing TUPLE1 (22q11.2) 
and a control probe LSI ARSA (22q13). Normal signals were seen 
for TUPLE1 and LSI ARSA on both chromosomes 22q. A third sig -nal for LSI ARSA was present in all cells on the short arm of one of 
the chromosomes 22. Therefore the diagnosis of terminal duplica -
tion 22qter was made. By means of 1Mb array-CGH the duplication 
was confirmed and further characterized as a 5.5 Mb region: 46, XX, 
dup(22)(q13.31qter)(CTA-268H5->CTB-99K24)x3. FISH analysis for 
LSI ARSA was normal in both parents.
Duplications of the distal segment of 22q seem to be very rare. Twenty 
four patients have been described with only 3 of them carrying a very 
small duplication (22q13.3 to 22qter) like in our case. Two of these 
3 patients are a father and his son with very similar facial features 
compared to the patient we describe. They also have mild to moderate 
mental retardation and microcephaly. Terminal duplications of 22qter 
may be more common than generally assumed and may be detected 
more frequently by the application of array-CGH.
P0283. Screening of 22q11.2 Microdeletion and 
Microduplications in 110 Patients With Clinical Findings of 
Digeorge/Velocardiofacial Syndrome
G. Luleci1, Z. Cetin1, E. Mihci2, S. Yakut1, F. Kardelen3, S. Tacoy2, S. BERKER 
KARAUZUM1;  
1Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology and 
Genetics, ANTALYA, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine Depart -
ment of Pediatric Genetics, ANTALYA, Turkey, 3Akdeniz University Faculty of 
Medicine Department of Pediatric Cardiology, ANTALYA, Turkey.
22q11.2 microdeletion associated with Di-George Syndrome/ Velocar -
diofacial Syndrome (DG/VCFS) is the most common chromosomal de -
letion in humans affecting 1 in 4000 live births. Main clinical features of 
this syndrome includes conotruncal cardiac anomaly, velopharyngeal 
insufficiency, nonvisible/hypoplastic thymus, immunodeficiency, char -
acteristic facial dysmorphism, palatal anomalies, language impairment, 
developmental delay/ learning difficulties and immunologic anomalies. 
Recently microduplication 22q11.2 sydrome which presents overlap 
with DG/VCFS has been identified. In this study we screened 22q11.2 
microdeletions and microduplications in 110 patients (60 female and 
50 male) with clinical findings of DG/VCFS by Fluorescence in Situ Hy -
bridization (FISH) using dual color TUBLE1 and N25 probes and con -
ventional cytogenetics. We detected 22q11.2 microdeletion for both of 
the TUBLE1 and N25 region probes in 14 of 110 (13%) cases (5 male 
and 9 female). Clinical findings of our cases with 22q11.2 deletion will 
be discussed according to literature. We could not detect microdupli -
cation of the analysed region showing that microduplication is a rare 
event in patients with clinical findings of DG/VCFS.
P0284. Distal 22q11.2 deletion: a new microdeletion syndrome 
with predispostion to rhabdoid tumors.
N. Philip1, C. Missirian1, J. McGaughran2, C. Coze1, A. Moncla1;  
1Hopital d’Enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 2Royal Children Hospital, 
Herston, Australia.
Few cases of 22q11.23 deletions, distal to the 3Mb VCFS/DGS re -
gion have been reported. We report two new patients. Patient 1 was 
diagnosed at birth with a severe CHD. He was hypotonic with delayed 
motor skills. At 14 months, an atypical teratoid/rhabdoid intracranial 
tumour was diagnosed. Patient 2 was investigated at age 4 for devel -
opmental delay. He developed a rhabdoid tumour of the kidney at age 
7. Patient 1 had a cytogenetically visible inversion of chromosome 22. 
FISH studies, demonstrated inversion of genes proximal to 22q11.23, 
associated with a 0.9-1.8 Mb deletion encompassing BCR locus. Pa -
tient 2 had a pure deletion extending from clones RP11-379N11 and 
RP11-20P18 suggesting that the recombination event occurred be -
tween LCRs 4 and 7. We compared the phenotype of our patients with 
other patients reported in the literature. Most of the patients reported 
to date had CHD but none had velopharyngeal insufficiency, clefting 
or hypocalcemia. All these patients had a similar facial appearance, 
rather different from the gestalt of VCFS/DGS patients, including low-
set and posteriorly rotated ears, anteverted nares, thin lips and full 
cheeks. All patients with deletions encompassing the SMARCB1  gene, 
developed rhabdoid tumors. Since the 22q11.2 region contains sev -
eral LCR, different recombination events can give rise to non-over -
lapping deletions. Patients with a distal 22q11.2 deletion must not be 
considered as VCFS variants and require different clinical assessment 
and follow-up. It is important to determine precisely the status of the 
SMARCB1  locus, since patients hemizygous at this locus are at risk of 
developing rhabdoid tumors.Cytogenetics
P0285. Chromosome 22q13.3 deletion syndrome with a de novo  
interstitial 22q13.3 cryptic deletion retaining SHANK
A. Delahaye1, A. Toutain2, A. Aboura1, A. Tabet1, B. Benzacken1, A. Verloes1, 
S. Drunat1;  
1Genetics department, Robert Debré Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 2Genetics 
department, Bretonneau Hospital, CHRU, Tours, France.
The 22q13.3 deletion syndrome (MIM 606232) is characterized by 
developmental delay, absent or severely delayed speech, autistic 
behavior, normal to accelerated growth, and minor dysmorphic facial 
features. Among the three genes of the minimal critical region (from 
centromere to telomere: SHANK3 , ACR  and RABL2B ), SHANK3  is 
considered to be at the origin of the neurobehavioral symptoms.
We report a child with a de novo  interstitial 22q13.3 deletion detected 
by MLPA and confirmed by FISH.
She demonstrates mental retardation, severe speech delay, epicanthic 
fold, and protruding ears with normal growth. This non specific pheno -
type is concordant with the classical presentation of 22q13.3 deletion 
syndrome.
Subtelomeres analysis by MLPA showed a discrepancy between the 
P036B and P070 kits (MCR Holland): P070 MLPA probe (targeting 
ARSA  gene) showed a deletion but P036B (targeting RABL2B  gene) 
showed a normal result. FISH analysis using LSI TUPLE1 /LSI ARSA  
(Vysis) probes confirmed deletion of ARSA , whereas FISH with N25/
N85A3 (Cytocell) probes, targeting SHANK3  locus was normal. This 
was confirmed by quantitative real time PCR of exons 23 and 24 of 
SHANK3 . Supplemented FISH analysis using BAC clones were per -
formed to delineate both breakpoint regions of the interstitial deletion.
These data highlight the difficulty of performing an appropriate test in 
order to search for cryptic 22q13.3 deletion. Furthermore the molecu -
lar characterization of this interstitial 22q13.3 deletion contributes to 
clinical and genetic delineation of the 22q13.3 deletion syndrome.
P0286. Double trisomy involving chromosome 21 and the sex 
chromosome (48,XXX,+21) - a case report and literature review
R. Smigiel1, B. Halina1, M. Sasiadek1, N. Blin2;  
1Genetic Department Wroclaw Medical University, Poland, Wroclaw, Poland, 
2Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Human Genetics, University of 
Tuebingen, Germany.
Occurrence of double trisomy in the same individual is a relatively 
rare phenomenon. In most cases double nondisjunction leads to an 
inevitable prenatal lethality. Multiple aneuploidy, observed in live born 
children usually involves sex chromosomes together with trisomy 13, 
18 or 21. Multiple aneuploidy occurs as a consequence of a minimum 
of two errors during meiosis. The zygote carrying a double aneuploi -
dy usually results from a double nondisjunction in a single germ cell 
however the coincidence of a single nondisjunction occurring in both 
gametes was also observed. More than 90 cases of nonmosaic tri -
somy 21 and numerical sex chromosome aberrations were presented 
by Kovaleva and Mutton, but among them only 14 cases were diag -
nosed with 48,XXX,+21. We report a case of double trisomy involving 
chromosomes 21 and X in a female infant (karyotype 48,XXX,+21). 
The child presented dysmorphic features such as hypotrophy, micro -
cephaly with a flat occiput, midface hypoplasia, up-slanting palpebral 
fissures, epicanthic folds, low set ears, open mouth with macroglos -
sia and protruding tongue, short neck, small hands and feet, simian 
creases, wide space between first and second toes, a umbilical hernia, 
dislocated hips, congenital heart defect, a mild hearing loss and hypo -
thyroidism. The observed dysmorphic features as well as other defor -
mities are consistent with those characteristic for trisomy 21. However, 
genetic counselling in such cases is difficult. Neither data concerning 
the clinical outcome of the double trisomy children nor any information 
concerning the recurrence risk for their parents exist to date.
P0287. Delineation of the deletion breakpoints in two unrelated 
patients with 4q terminal deletion syndrome
S. S. Kaalund1, R. S. Møller1,2, A. Tészás3, M. Miranda2, H. H. Ropers4, R. 
Ullmann4, N. Tommerup1, Z. Tümer1;  
1Wilhelm Johanssen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department 
of Cellular and Molecular medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark, 2Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Denmark, 3Department of Medi -
cal Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, Hungary, 4Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
INTRODUCTION: Deletion of the terminal region of the long arm of 
chromosome 4 results in a series of clinic features including develop -
mental delay, cleft palate and limb defects. Due to the similarities of 
the clinical symptoms a 4q-deletion syndrome has been suggested. 
This study aims to find the critical region responsible for the 4q-dele -
tion syndrome through fine mapping the terminal 4q deletions in two 
unrelated patients.
METHODS: The patients were analysed using array CGH and FISH. 
Array CGH was carried out using a submegabase resolution whole 
genome tiling path BAC array and the results were verified by FISH 
analysis, using standard protocols.
RESULTS:
The 4q terminal deletions of two patients with cleft palate, limb de -
fects and developmental delay were fine mapped using array-CGH. 
Both deletions were positioned at 4q33-4qter. Furthermore, one of the 
patients displayed a cryptic unbalanced translocation between chro -
mosome 4 and chromosome 20, resulting in the loss of 4q33-4qter 
and trisomy of the 20p13-20pter region. The chromosomal aberrations 
were de novo  in both patients.
CONCLUSION: In the present study we investigated two patients with 
deletion of the terminal long arm of chromosome 4. Our data support 
that 4q33 may be the critical region for the 4q-syndrome. This study 
also underlines the power of array-CGH in identifying cryptic unbal -
anced translocations.
P0288. Clinical aspects of the deletion 9p syndrome - two new 
cases
E. Braha , M. Volosciuc, I. Ivanov, A. Sireteanu, M. Covic;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania.
Nearly 100 cases of deletion 9p has been published. Often, the dele -
tion occurs de novo. We reported two unrelated children who share 
particular clinical findings including trigonocephaly, microstoma, hypo -
telorism, broad nasal root, upslanted fissures, motor retardation. One 
patient has a congenital cardiac anomaly (VSD and PDA). Family his -
tory did not reveal any other family members with similar findings or 
different congenital anomalies.
The similar findings of these cases suggested a chromosomal disor -
der. Cytogenetic investigation demonstrated del(9)(p22->pter) in both 
cases. The chromosomal analysis for parents are in progress.
The first patient has a number of clinical findings invariably found in 
the 9p- syndrome. However, the other patient has a partial optic nerve 
atrophy which has not been reported before.
P0289. Cytogenetic, morphologic and immunophenotypic 
pattern in omani patients with de novo  acute myeloid leukemia
A. M. Udayakumar1, A. Pathare2, S. Alkindi1, H. Khan2, J. Ur Rehman2, F. Zia2, 
A. Al Ghazaly2, N. Nusrat2, I. Khan2, M. Zachariah2, Y. Wali1, D. Dennison2, J. 
Raeburn1;  
1College of Medicine & Health Sciences, Muscat, Oman, 2Sultan Qaboos Uni -
versity Hospital, Muscat, Oman.
Objective: To characterize the cytogenetic, morphologic and immuno -
phenotypic pattern in ethnic Omani patients with de novo  Acute My -
eloid Leukemia (AML). 
Material and Methods: Successful cytogenetic results were obtained 
from 63 de novo  AML patients. Forty-one were male and 22 female 
with a median age of 25 years. Chromosomes were obtained by short-
term cultures and interpreted after G-banding. The diagnosis of AML 
was based on French-American-British (FAB) cytomorphology criteria 
& the immunophenotyping of bone marrow. 
Results: Karyotypic abnormalities were present in 39 patients(61.9%) 
with 44.2% in adults and 17.7% in children. Karyotypes with sole ab -
normalities amounted to 31.7%(n=20). Chromosomal abnormalities 
were more common in patients with FAB-M2 subtype (n=22;68.2%). 
The most frequent subtype observed was M2 (n=22;34.9%). Among 
the normal karyotypes (n=24;38.1%) M2 -subtype was again the most 
frequent (n=7;29.2%) followed by M4(n=4;16.67%). Among balanced 
translocations t(8;21) and t(15;17) were observed in 11.1% and 9.5% 
respectively. Inv(16) was seen in 3.2%. Trisomy 8 was the most fre -
quent numerical anomaly found in 11.1%. Monosomy 7 was seen 4.7%. 
Discussion: This is the first systematic cytogenetic report from the eth -
nic Omani population [1.78 million] studied over the last 5 years from 
a single institution. We observed that findings in our study were similar Cytogenetics
to reports from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait but the frequency of abnor -
malities varied with a mixture of +8, t(8;21) & t(15;17). Morphologically 
our patients differed with M2 subtype as the commonest, whereas, 
their reports showed M4 and M3 subtypes as most frequently occur -
ring subtype in their patient population respectively.
P0290. Screening of subtle copy number changes in Aicardi 
Syndrome Patients with a high resolution X-chromosome array-
CGH
S. Yilmaz1, H. Fontaine1, K. Brochet1, M. Grégoire1, M. Devignes2, J. Schaff1, C. 
Philippe1, C. Nemos1, J. McGregor3, P. Jonveaux1;  
1University hospital of Nancy, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 2CNRS-UMR 
7503, LORIA, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, France, 3INSERM Unité 689, Paris, 
France.
Aicardi syndrome is a very uncommon neurodevelopmental disorder 
affecting almost exclusively females. Chief features include infantile 
spasms, corpus callosal agenesis, and chorioretinal abnormalities. 
Aicardi syndrome is a sporadic disorder and hypothesized to be caused 
by heterozygous mutations in an X linked-gene but up to now without 
any defined candidate region on the X chromosome. Array based com -
parative genomic hybridisation has become the method of choice for 
the detection of microdeletions and microduplications at high resolu -
tion. In this study, for the first time, 18 Aicardi syndrome patients were 
analyzed with a full-coverage X-chromosomal BAC arrays at a theoret -
ical resolution of 82 kb. Copy number changes were validated by real 
time quantitation. No disease-associated aberrations were identified. 
For such conditions as Aicardi syndrome, in which there are no familial 
cases, additional patients should be studied in order to identify rare 
cases with submicroscopic abnormalities, and to pursue a positional 
candidate gene approach.
P0291. The role of chromosomal abnormalities in primary 
amenorrhoea
B. O. Petrovic , A. Ljubic;  
Institute for gynecology and obstetrics, Belgrade, Serbia.
Amenorrhoea is absence or cessation of menses. If menstruation does 
not begin by the age of 16 years in the presence of female second -
ary sexual maturation, or does not begin by 14 years in the absence 
of secondary sexual maturation, the condition is classified as prima -
ry amenorrhoea. This paper deals with investigation of how primary 
amenorrhoea and chromosomal abnormalities are related. For the 
period of last ten years we have analyzed 62 patients with primary 
amenorrhoea. Karyotype from the peripheral blood lymphocytes and 
G banding were performed according to standard protocols. Chromo -
somal abnormalities were detected in 16 cases (25,8%). Male karyo -
type (46,XY) was found in seven cases. In three cases monosomy X 
(45,X) was found. In two cases isochromosome X (46,XiXq) was de -
tected, as well as a case of X chromosome trisomy (47,XXX). Mosaic 
karyotypes 45,X/46,XiXq, 46,XX/47,XXY and 45,X/46,XX were found 
in one case each. These findings suggest that a consistent number of 
cases with primary amenorrhoea (about 25%) can be associated with 
genetic anomalies.
P0292. Array-CGH analysis: new deletion syndromes and 
atypical phenotype in old deletion syndromes
R. Caselli , F. Mari, F. T. Papa, M. A. Mencarelli, V. Uliana, F. Ariani, I. Meloni, I. 
Longo, A. Renieri;  
Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
A group of 28 unrelated MCA/MR patients with normal karyotype, se -
lected from those attending the Medical Genetics Unit of the Univer -
sity of Siena has been analyzed by oligo array-CGH with an average 
resolution of 75Kb (Agilent Human Genome CGH Microarray Kit 44B). 
A new “de novo” deletion has been identified in 3 patients (table 1). 
During the screening, we have also identified, 3 known deletions in 
atypical patients, 1 duplication reciprocal of the deletion responsible 
for Smith-Magenis and 2 polymorphisms (table 2).
In conclusion, in this highly selected population we identified patho -
genic segmental deletions/duplications in 7 out of 28 patients (about 
25%). We compared the clinical features of patients with new deletions 
with other rare cases described in the literature in order to define clini -
cal diagnostic criteria useful in the clinical practice. In particular, for the 
6q25 deletion the emerging phenotype is characterized by short pal -
pebral fissures, smooth philtrum, thin upper lip, asymmetric dysplastic protruding ears, heart septal defect, and slightly delayed psychomotor 
development. These characteristics should be taken into account in 
order to identify other patients.
Table 1. New deletions
P.Clinical featuresChr. 
Deletion size  
BreakpointsReference
14y2m girl with postnatal growth retardation, 
microcephaly, ptosis, down-slanting palpebral 
fissures, long eyelashes and micrognathia. 
Halluces are long, broad and medially deviated, 
while the other toes are laterally deviated and 
remarkably short with hypoplastic phalanges. 
She shows developmental delay, seizures, lack 
of eye contact, hand stereotypies and sleep 
disturbances with breath holding2q24.3-31.1  
10.4 Mb  
165.580-175.871 MbPescucci et 
al, Eur J Med 
Genet, 2007, 
50:21-32
213y8m boy with severe mental retardation, 
absence of speech, sleep disturbances, behav -
ioural problems. He presents macrocephaly, high 
forehead, thick and coarse hair, thick eyebrows, 
synophris, increased inner and outer canthal dis -
tance, bifid nasal tip, high palate, micrognathia, 
dysmorphic, right ear, bilateral sandal gap and 
long and tapering fingers.2q31.2-32.3  
13 Mb  
180.13-192.88 MbMencarelli et al, 
in press, Am J 
Med Genet
37y6m female with neurodevelopmental delay, 
postnatal short stature and atrial septal defect. 
Patent ductus arteriosus and tricuspid insuf -
ficiency were also noted at birth. Medial flare 
eyebrows, dysmorphic helix of the right ear, 
cupshaped left ear, anteverted nares, long and 
smooth philtrum, thin upper lip, high vaulted 
palate are noted.6q24.3-25.1  
2,6 Mb  
148.785-151.289 MbCaselli et al, 
in press, Eur J 
Med Genet
Table 2. Other results.
Clinical featuresChr. 
Position  
(approximate 
size)Type of rear -
rangementConclusions
Case 1. Hypotonia, seizures, ataxia, sleep 
disturbances, gastroesophageal reflux, 
dolichocolon, hypospadia, monolateral 
inguinal hernia, bilateral 2-3 syndactyly 
of toes.15q11-13.1  
165.8-175.8  
(5 Mb)deletion
Known deletion 
in atypical patientCase 2. Bilateral corneal leukoma, iris and 
retinal coloboma, cleft lip and palate, VSD, 
postaxial polydactyly of hands and feet.22q11.21  
17.2-19.7  
2.5 Mbdeletion
Case 3. MURCS association , short stat -
ure, delayed bone age, long faces, tubular 
nose with bulbous tip, high palate and 
nasal speech, small and low-set ears, left 
carotid artery hypoplasia.22q11.21  
17.2-19.7  
2.5 Mb.deletion
Case 4. Psycomotor delay, obesity, round 
facies, macroglossia and macrostomia, 
prognathism, synophris, thick eyebrows, 
strabism, depressed nasal bridge, bulbous 
nasal tip, small feet.17p11.2  
16.5-20.1  
3.6 Mbdeletion
Case 5. Neonatal hypotonia, mild mental 
retardation, visuo-spatial deficit, sociable 
attitude, hoarse voice, strabismus, dysmor -
phic features such as telecantus, epican -
tus, down-slanting palpebral fessures, 
medial flared eyebrows.17p11.2  
16.5-20.1  
3.6 MbduplicationReciprocal of the 
Smith-Magenis 
syndrome dele -
tion
Case 6. Truncal obesity, tall stature, hypoa -
cusya, hypothyroidism.Xq25.1  
124.7-127.5  
2.8 Mbdeletion
PolymorphismCase 7. Mental retardation, obesity, thick 
lips, large prominent teeth, tapering fingers, 
wave shaped eyelids.2q37.3-qter  
242.4-ter  
0.5 Mbdeletion
P0293. Array-CGH screening in 100 patients with mental 
retardation
E. Landais1, A. Schneider1, N. Bednarek2, P. Sabouraud2, J. Motte2, J. 
Couchot3, M. Khoury4, R. Klink4, E. Lagonotte1, C. Leroy1, M. Mozelle1, D. Gail -
lard1, M. Doco-Fenzy1;  
1Service de Génétique, CHU Reims, UFR de Médecine, Reims, France, 2Ser-
vice de Pédiatrie, American Memorial Hospital, Reims, France, 3Service de 
Pédiatrie, CHG, Charleville, France, 4Service de Pédiatrie, CHG, Laon, France.
Mental retardation (MR) is a major problem affecting 3% of the popula -
tion. Chromosome imbalances larger than 5 Megabases are detected 
by 550 band resolution R or G band karyotype. The Array-CGH is able 
to detect interstitial smaller deletions or duplications.
We report on the results obtained by molecular karyotyping with 1Mb 
BAC and PAC array-CGH screening in a population of 100 patients 
affected by MR with or without multiple congenital anomaly (MCA). For Cytogenetics100
25 patients of this study, an abnormal karyotype had been previously 
identified.
We used the 1Mb BAC and PAC Array (VIB Leuven), six patients were 
analysed by experiment using a triangle testing. The data were anal -
ysed with the arrayCGHbase software provided by J.Vermeesch.
Results : Copy number variants (CNV) were found in 45% of patients : 
24 known and 7 not yet described.
Array-CGH confirmed and mapped the unbalanced karyotype rear -
rangements in all the 25 patients with known cytogenetic abnormal -
ity. For two of these patients, additional deletions and duplications 
improved the cytogenetic analysis and therefore modified the genetic 
counselling.
Among the 75 left MCA/MR patients : Two had large deletions and one 
had a large duplication involving homogeneously R-stained regions 
regarding 1p (3.2Mb), 10q (2.2Mb) and 11q (1.5Mb) loci. Nineteen pa -
tients had rearrangements involving a single BAC or PAC clone.
For three cases, the mother became pregnant during the study and a 
prenatal diagnosis could be proposed. These results will be reported 
and discussed with the clinical data.
Grant : AOL 2003-2005 - PHRC 2005 CHU Reims
P0294. Array-CGH characterization of familial and de novo  
“apparently balanced” translocations in patients with abnormal 
phenotype
C. Sismani1, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli2, M. Ioannides1, V. Anastasiadou3, G. Stylianidou3, 
E. Papadopoulou4, Z. Kosmaidou5, E. Kanavakis2, A. Kolialexi2, A. Mavrou2, P. 
C. Patsalis1;  
1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Department of Cytogenet -
ics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Aghia Sophia Childrens Hospital, University of Athens, 
Choremio Laboratory, Athens, Greece, 3Arch Makarios III Hospital, Department 
of Paediatrics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4University Hospital Of Heraklion, Department 
of Paediatrics, Heraklion, Greece, 5Alexandra Hospital, Department of Genet -
ics, Athens, Greece.
We have applied 1Mb resolution array-CGH to investigate 12 cases 
of “apparently balanced” translocations in patients with mental retar -
dation and congenital malformations. Six cases were de novo and 
six familial. In the familial cases the patients had an abnormal phe -
notype but their karyotype appeared identical to other phenotypically 
normal translocation carriers of the family. Chromosomal and various 
FISH analyses suggested that the rearrangements were “truly bal -
anced” in all patients. Array-CGH however, revealed cryptic genomic 
imbalances in three cases (25%), two de novo  and one familial. All 
array-CGH findings were confirmed by FISH. The nature and type of 
abnormalities differed among the three cases. In the first case a de 
novo  t(9;15)(q31;q26), a complex rearrangement was identified involv -
ing a ~6.1Mb duplication on chromosome 9, a ~10Mb deletion and an 
inversion on chromosome 15. These imbalances were near but not 
directly associated with the translocation breakpoints. In the second 
case  a de novo  t(4;9)(q26;p24), a ~6.6Mb deletion was identified on 
chromosome 7 which is unrelated to the translocation. In the third 
case (t(4;7)(q21;p15)-familial), a ~4.3Mb and a ~2.3Mb  deletions were 
found at the translocation breakpoints. In the remaining cases the 
translocations appeared balanced at 1Mb resolution. This study pro -
vides additional evidence that cryptic genomic imbalances are com -
mon in patients with abnormal phenotype and “apparently balanced” 
translocations not only in de novo  but also in familial cases. The use 
of microarrays with higher resolution such as high-density oligo-arrays 
may reveal that the frequency of cryptic genomic imbalances among 
these patients is even higher.
P0295. Effect of borax to human chromosome abnormalities
M. Pongsavee ;  
Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Patumthani, Thailand.
The effect of borax to human chromosome abnormalities was anal -
ysed in this study. Borax is a form of boron compound. The chemical 
name of borax is sodium borate. Borax is toxic for the somatic cells 
and may cause abnormal human genetic materials. Venous blood from 
30 male students in Thammasat University (age 18 - 25 years) were 
collected to do lymphocyte cell culture. This experiment was divided 
into two groups, the first group was the control group and the second 
group was the experimental group. The lymphocyte cells in the control 
group were cultured without borax. The experimental group was di -
vided into four sub-groups. The lymphocyte cells in each experimental sub-groups were cultured with different borax concentration (0.1 mg/
ml, 0.15 mg/ml, 0.2 mg/ml and 0.3 mg/ml respectively). Human chro -
mosomes were studied for abnormalities through Giemsa-staining and 
G-banding. The results show that the number of metaphase chromo -
somes are reduced when lymphocyte cells are cultured with 0.15 mg/
ml (57.22 %), 0.2 mg/ml (50.84%) and 0.3 mg/ml (42.27%) borax con -
centration. The results show statistically significant difference between 
control and experimental sub-groups (P<0.05). The sister chromatid 
separation is found in the 0.3 mg/ml borax concentration experimental 
subgroup. It shows that borax (0.15, 0.2 and 0.3 mg/ml) effect to cell 
and human chromosome abnormalities (both numerical and structural 
abnormalities). Borax may cause human chromosome abnormalities 
and lead to genetic defect.
P0296. Significance of Her-2/neu, c-myc amplification and p53 
inactivation detected by FISH in Egyptian patients with breast 
cancer
M. S. Aly1,2, M. F. Ismail3, H. M. Khaled4, H. M. Mohamed1;  
1Faculty of Science, Beni Suef University, Beni Suef, Egypt, 2Faculty of Sci -
ence, King Khaled University, Abha, Saudi Arabia, 3Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo 
University, Cairo, Egypt, 4National Cancer Institute, Cairo University, Cairo, 
Egypt.
Breast cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related deaths in women 
worldwide. The clinical course of this disease is highly variable and 
clinicians continuously search for prognostic parameters that can ac -
curately predict prognosis, and indicate a suitable adjuvant therapy 
for each patient. Amplification of the two oncogenes: Her-2/neu and c-
myc and inactivation of the tumor suppressor gene p53 are frequently 
encountered in breast carcinomas. The purpose of this study was to 
use the fluorescence in situ  hybridization (FISH) for the assessment 
of Her-2/neu and c-myc amplification and p53 inactivation and to re -
late these molecular markers with the clinicopathological factors. The 
study was conducted on 34 samples obtained from 33 females and 
1 male with breast carcinomas and 17 samples obtained from 16 fe -
males and 1 male with benign breast lesions. Results revealed that the 
level of her-2/neu, c-myc and p53 in the malignant group was signifi -
cantly increased as compared to the benign group. On relating to clini -
copathological factors, p53 was significantly associated with increased 
patient’s age. The sensitivity of the investigated markers significantly 
increased with larger tumor size. Her-2/neu and p53 showed a signifi -
cant increase in low-grade tumors whereas c-myc showed a highly sig -
nificant increase in high-grade tumors. Her-2/neu and c-myc showed 
significant increase at late stages of disease. p53 and her-2/neu were 
significantly associated with positive lymph nodal status. A significant 
correlation was obtained between the levels of the three biomarkers 
to each other. Conclusively, the combination of Her-2/neu, c-myc and 
p53 can stratify patients into different risk groups.
P0297. Mosaic Down syndrome with i(21q) associated with 
der(22)t(21;22)(q11.2;q11.2) derived from the carrier mother with 
mosaic duplication of cat eye critical region.
K. Kurosawa , K. Sameshima, H. Yoshihashi;  
Kanagawa Children’s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan.
Rearrangements of 22q11.2 region represent several genomic disor -
ders, including the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (VCFS/DGS), cat eye 
syndrome (CES) and der(22) syndrome. The rearrangements are 
thought to be caused by nonallelic homologous recombination be -
tween low-copy repeats (LCR22s). The 22q11 rearrangements disor -
ders have a wide variety of clinical features.
We report a boy with mosaic Down syndrome with 46,XY,i(21)(q10) 
and 46,XY,der(22)t(21;22)(q11.2q11.2), who has mild developmental 
delay and dysmorphic appearance. His mother, phenotypically normal 
female, also had the 46,XX,der(22)t(21;22)(q11.2;q11.2) clone with 
normal female karyotype with the ratio of 2:8. FISH analysis using 
BAC clones mapped 22q11 region (RP11-100K2, RP11-71J20, RP11-
357H16) showed that the breakpoint was proximal to the LCR-2. The 
duplicated region was correspondence with the CES type I region. The 
mechanism of mosaic i(21q) is likely to be associated with the rear -
rangements and division of chromosomes in mitosis with unbalanced 
translocation between the acrocentric chromosomes. This is the first 
case report of duplication of CES type I region with mosaic Down syn -
drome. We present phenotypic variation among the 22q11 rearrange -
ments disorders including the boy and his mother.Cytogenetics101
P0298. Female-specific instability of pericentromeric regions in 
human embryo development: the earliest clinically significant 
manifestation of difference between the sexes
N. V. Kovaleva ;  
St. Petersburg Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies under the Federal 
Agency of Health Care and Social Development, St. Petersburg, Russian Fed -
eration.
Recent studies on the sex ratio (SR, male to female ratio) among chro -
mosome mosaicism carriers suggested female-specific chromosome 
loss and centromere instability during early human development [1]. 
Mosaicism results from later gestation postzygotic formation, while for -
mation of a chromosome rearrangement in the first zygotic cleavage 
results in nonmosaics. Purpose: Nonmosaic homologous acrocentric 
rearrangements (Rea), both balanced (blRea) and unbalanced (un -
blRea) mostly result from post-fertilization events [2]. Therefore, the 
study on the SR in carriers of a de novo nonmosaic Rea might elucidate 
when sex-specific centromere instability becomes manifest. Method: 
Review of balanced and unbalanced homologous Rea cases of known 
sex and mode of ascertainment identified from the literature. Results: 
(1) Increased proportion of females in prenatally detected carriers of 
both blRea (5M/8F) and unblRea (10M/13F). (2) Female prevalence 
among postnatally ill-defined carriers of unblRea (25M/39F). (3) These 
data cannot be explained by a strong intrauterine selection against 
male carriers of unblRea since a female preponderance was found 
among miscarried fetuses (8M/13F). (4) Female prevalence among 
patients with PWS due to 45,der(15q;15q) (6M/14F). (5) Overall, there 
were 54 males and 87 females in the study group (SR=0.62), signifi -
cantly different from the expected ratio of 1.06 (p=0.0023). Conclu -
sion: These observations indicate sex-specific centromere instability 
at the earliest stage of human embryo development. It is suggested 
that reactivation of the paternal X chromosome occurring in the female 
zygote, might interfere with the chromatin remodeling process, thus 
contributing to the increased fragility of pericentromeric regions.
[1]Kovaleva NV. AJMG 136A:401-13
[2]Robinson et al. AJHG 54:290-302
P0299. High resolution oligo array CGH analysis of challenging 
samples.
S. Song , J. Collins;  
Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA, United States.
In recent years, array-based Comparative Genomic Hybridization 
(aCGH) has been refined to determine chromosomal changes at pro -
gressively higher resolutions. This evolving technology is, however, 
somewhat hampered by the large amounts of input DNA required 
- a minimum of 150,000 copies of a human genome, or 0.5 µg, are 
generally needed to process one aCGH microarray. The GenomePlex 
Whole Genome Amplification (WGA) kit provides a rapid method for 
processing biological samples of limited quantity, expanding the appli -
cation of aCGH technology to analysis of nanogram quantities of DNA. 
Furthermore, this global exponential amplification method enables re -
searchers to representatively amplify genomic DNA from samples that 
have been fragmented to an average size of less than 1 kb. This fea -
ture may enable CGH analysis of FFPE samples that were previously 
thought to be unusable due to their limited amounts of DNA and high 
level of degradation. The data presented in this poster demonstrate 
the high quality data that can be generated using Agilent’s high den -
sity oligo aCGH microarrays in combination with Sigma’s GenomePlex 
WGA kit. Firstly, WGA lowers the required minimum amount of starting 
DNA to as little as 10 ng. In addition, the ability to amplify low molecular 
weight DNA, less than 0.5-1 kb in size, is demonstrated. Finally, we 
compare the performance of the GenomePlex WGA method to that 
of a Phi29-based isothermal amplification method in generating high 
quality aCGH data on Agilent microarrays. All aCGH testing has shown 
GenomePlex amplified material to behave comparably to larger quan -
tities of purified genomic DNA.P0300. Comparison of subtelomeric FISH, Multi-FISH and CGH 
for the screening of chromosomal rearrangements in 90 patients 
with unexplained mental retardation and dysmorphic features
P. Callier , L. Faivre, N. Marle, C. Thauvin, J. Guy, A. Mosca, D. Assous, F. 
Huet, F. Mugneret;  
Département de Génétique, CHU le Bocage, DIJON, France.
Mental retardation affect 1-3% of the general population and the ae -
tiology remains unknown in many cases. Conventional cytogenetics 
detected rearrangements of more than 10 Mb in size. The develop -
ment of molecular cytogenetic techniques permits to identify cryptic 
rearrangements, but their frequency is uncertain in patients with un -
explained mental retardation. Only few studies have been performed 
to compare the potential of molecular cytogenetic techniques to detect 
chromosomal rearrangements. Here we present a study including 90 
patients with unexplained mental retardation and dysmorphic features 
with normal high-resolution karyotypes, investigated by subtelomeric 
FISH, CGH and Multi-FISH.
A total of 6/90 abnormalities were found (6.6%), including three de 
novo deletions (1pter, 4pter and 3q21.1-q21.3), two de novo unbal -
anced translocations [der(8)t(6;8)(p25;p23] and [der(22)t(10;22)(q26;q
13)], and one unbalanced translocation inherited from the father [der(2
)t(2;10)(q37;q26)pat]. Subtelomeric FISH evidenced 5/6 chromosomal 
unbalances but could not detect the interstitial 3q21.1-q21.3 deletion. 
CGH revealed 6/6 chromosomal rearrangements but did not detected 
the 10qter duplication of the de novo unbalanced [der(2)t(2;10)(q37;
q26)pat] translocation. Multi-FISH did not permit to detect any chro -
mosomal abnormalities. Molecular cytogenetics studies with specific 
BACs probes of the rearrangements are in progress to better define 
the size of the chromosomal abnormalities. We compared our results 
with previously published studies. This study confirmed the significant 
frequency of subtelomeric rearrangements in patient with unexplained 
mental retardation, dysmorphic features and demonstrates the impor -
tance of CGH technology to detect interstitial and subtelomeric rear -
rangements.
P0301. Identification of prognostic chromosomal aberrations in 
childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia
R. Lasan1, J. Konja2, L. Rajic2, R. Feminic2, D. Begovic1;  
1Genetics and Metabolism Division, Pediatrics Department, University Hospital 
Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Pediatrics Department, University Hospital 
Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
Cytogenetic abnormalities emerge as a very important characteristic 
of chilhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)  with major diagnostic 
and prognostic impact.
We report bone marrow cytogenetic analysis (CTG) at the time of 
diagnosis 85 children (36 females and 49 males) with de novo ALL 
aged from 2 months to 15 years old. Uninformative investigations were 
2.1%. Normal karyotype was detected in 40.0% (3 with constitutial 
+21) cases. The analysis was performed in the period of the last five 
years.
Clonal chromosomal abnormalities were present in 60% of the pa -
tients. Changes in ploidy were found in 65.3% of abnormal cases. 
The distribution of ploidy groups was: hyperdiploidy with >50 chromo -
somes in 34.7% (seven of them were associated with structural chro -
mosomal changes), hyperdiploidy (47-50 chromosomes) in 14.2%, 
pseudodiploidy in 4.1%, hypodiploidy (35-45 chromosomes) 12.2% 
of the patients. The most frequently acquired numerical abnormalities 
were: +4, +6, +8, +14, +17, +18, +21 and +X. Structural aberrations 
were found in 34.7% of the patients. The most frequent structural ab -
errations were: del(6q), del(9p), t(9;22), rearrangments of chromo -
some 14q, 5q and 12p (mostly like a part of complex karyotype), and 
t(12;21)(p13;q22.3).
The stuctural and numerical aberrations observed in 69.5% patients 
were correiated by FISH. Translocations were: t(12;21), t(9;22), t(1;12), 
and one marker chromosome was identified as der (21)t(21;?). For re -
sidual disease, interphase-FISH in combination with cell enrichment or 
RT-PCR is extremely useful.
Cytogenetic investigations at diagnosis and during follow up docu -
mented unique chromosomal aberrations which yielded diagnostic 
and/or prognostic significance for each relevant patient.Cytogenetics102
P0302. Cytogenetic analysis of the human genome reactivity to 
the potentially mutagen environment represented by ionizing 
radiation
D. Usurelu , D. Cimponeriu, P. Apostol, I. Radu, L. Gavrila;  
Institute of Genetics - University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania.
One of the most important mutagen agents in developing different 
types of cancer is the ionizing radiation. So, in this study, we are focus -
ing our analysis on persons who are working in a potentially mutagen 
environment (near an accelerator for ionizing radiation).
We’ve analyzed twelve persons (one control and ten workers) by clas -
sical cytogenetic technique and by FISH.
After the cytogenetic analysis we’ve determined that there were not 
any important chromosomal modifications, the only one present being 
PCDs (premature centromere division) with a frequency of 5 -11%. 
Counting on the fact that the PCDs was present even in the control in 
2 % frequency and in the field literature being considered normal to 
have 7-8% of PCDs, we have concluded that the percentage we’ve 
obtained for that subjects is normal and it is not due to the effect of the 
working environment.
The most important targets for ionizing radiation being the telomeres, 
we’ve tested from this point of view on our subjects the eventual ef -
fect of radiation, presumptive to be in the environment, by FISH tech -
nique.
Comparing the frequency of the telomeric signals obtained from the 
control (98%-100 %/metaphase) to those from that subjects (91%-
96%/metaphase), we found that the differences can not be considered 
significant.
Corroborating the obtained data, we can conclude that for our eleven 
analyzed subjects there are not obvious chromosomal modification de -
termined by fact that they are working with a radiation source.
P0303. Frequency of mosaic aneuploidy in children with 
idiopathic autism
Y. B. Yurov1,2, S. G. Vorsanova2,1, I. Y. Iourov1,2, I. A. Demidova2, A. K. Bere -
sheva2, V. S. Kravets2, V. V. Monakhov1, A. D. Kolotii2, V. Y. Voinova-Ulas2, N. L. 
Gorbachevskaya1;  
1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federa -
tion, 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Roszdrav, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
It has been repeatedly suggested that numerous human diseases in -
cluding major psychiatric disorders could be associated with mosaic 
aneuploidy. Here, we have attempted to test this hypothesis concern -
ing autism, a common childhood psychiatric disorder. About 5-10% of 
autism cases are known to be caused by chromosomal abnormalities 
or gene mutations. However, mosaic aneuploidy in autism has not ever 
been studied. We surveyed stochastic aneuploidy in children with/with -
out idiopathic autism by interphase multiprobe fluorescence in situ hy -
bridization (mFISH). The rate of chromosome loss and gain involving 
six arbitrarily selected autosomes (chromosomes 1, 9, 15, 16, 17, 18) 
and sex chromosomes was assessed in peripheral blood cells of 60 
unaffected male children and 116 male children with idiopathic autism. 
Studying over 420,000 cells, we have determined the mean frequency 
of stochastic aneuploidy in control and autism:
Control Chromosome loss Chromosome gain
Autosomes  
Sex chromosomes0.58% (95% CI 0.42-0.75%)  
_0.15% (95% CI 0.09-0.21%)  
1.11% (95% CI 0.90-1.31%)
Autism
Autosomes  
Sex chromosomes0.60% (95% CI 0.37-0.83%)  
_0.22% (95% CI 0.14-0.30%)  
1.01% (95% CI 0.85-1.17%)
CI - confidence interval
The difference of stochastic aneuploidy rate was insignificant. However, the frequency 
of mosaic aneuploidy over the background level was found in 19 (16%) of 116 children 
with idiopathic autism, while outlier values were not found in controls. These data 
identify mosaic aneuploidy as a new autism genetic risk factor. Therefore, molecular 
cytogenetic analysis of somatic mosaicism is warranted in children with idiopathic au -
tism. Supported by INTAS and RGNF (060600639a).P0304. Cytogenetic examination of healthy individuals for the 
assessment of their individual sensitivity to ionizing radiation
N. Ryabchenko , E. Dyomina;  
R.E. Kavetsky Institute of Experimental Pathology, Oncology and Radiobiology 
of National Academy, Kyiv, Ukraine.
The increased level of chromosomal abnormalities in somatic cells is 
proposed as the marker of increased cancer risk. Recent reports have 
suggested that elevated chromosome aberration yields observed fol -
lowing irradiation of peripheral lymphocytes in G2 phase of cell cycle 
caused by the impaired DNA repair and hereditary predisposition to 
cancer.
G2 assay is based on high chromosomal sensitivity of human periph -
eral blood lymphocytes to radiation. Examination of 103 relatively 
healthy individuals was carried out by means of the adopted G2-assay 
consisting in the analysis of radiation induced cytogenetic effects in 
peripheral blood lymphocytes in the most radiosensitive post-synthetic 
phase of cell cycle. The dose of test gamma-irradiation of cell cultures 
was 1,5 Gy.
The obtained cytogenetic parameters induced by the test irradiation 
in G2-phase of cell cycle revealed high interindividual variability: 0,18 - 
1,24 aberrations/metaphase, with mean value - 0,410,10; coefficient of 
variation (CV) - 24%. Chromatid breaks prevailed in aberration spectra 
up to 98% with mean 0,370,097, CV = 27%. Analysis of the character 
of chromatid aberrations distribution made it possible to reveal 12% 
(12/103) individuals with increased chromosomal radiosensitivity. Indi -
cations, which reflect the prime contingent for cytogenetic assessment 
of individual radiosensitivity, were carried out.
Taking into account connection between the radiation induced high 
levels of chromosomal aberrations, genome instability and the ten -
dency toward increased risk of cancer, individuals with high values of 
chromosomal radiosensitivity can be related to the group of potentially 
increased radiation and cancerogenic risk who require thorough medi -
cal and cytogenetical monitoring.
P0305. Clinical findings in a patient with interstitial deletion 1q31 
and two patients with terminal deletion 1q syndrome
E. Karaca, S. Başaran Yılmaz, U. Yanar, B. Bağlama, B. Tüysüz ;  
Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Medical Genetics, İstanbul, 
Turkey.
We report 3 cases of de novo 1q deletion. The first case is 3 years 6/12 
months old child that has a story of IUGR. His language and social 
developmant was delayed but gross motor skill was normal and he had 
microcephaly, fine and sparse hair, sparseness on medial parts of eye -
brows, flat-high forehead, broad nasal root, short nose, low-posterior 
set ears, simian crease on his left hand, clinodactyly and micropenis. 
His weight, height and head circumference were under 3. centile. An 
accessory spleen found in abdomen USG. Karyotype analysis showed 
46,XY, del (1)(q25.3-q31.3). Second and thirth cases are 3 years and 
4 years 7/12 months old of males. They both have a story of SGA 
and clinical features of hyperactivity, severe neuromotor and mental 
retardation, fine-sparse hair, microcephaly, epicanthus, hypertelorism, 
depressed nose root, hipospadias and seizures The second case also 
has prominent glabella, pseudostrabismus, big ears, cryptorchidism 
and his MRI shows agenesia of corpus callosum. The thirth case was 
referred us with the complaint of frequent pulmoner enfections with 
cellular immune deficiency and atypic face that consists of full cheek, 
microretrognathia apart from the second. These cases karyotype anal -
ysis revelaed 46,XY, del (1) (q42.2-qter). In conclusion; our first case 
has similar features with two other cases of 1q31 deletion reported in 
the literature, however, motor development was normal. Second and 
thirth cases each have the characteristic features of del 1(q42-qter) 
patients reported before as hipospadias, severe motor-mental retarda -
tion, seizures, depressed nose root, fine-sparse hair and agenesia of 
corpus callosum.Cytogenetics10
P0306. Lipoatrophic panniculitis and developmental delay 
associated with an interstitial deletion of chromosome 10q
S. A. McKee1, A. Beckett2, M. Rooney3;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, United King -
dom, 2Northern Ireland Regional Cytogenetics Laboratory, Belfast, United 
Kingdom, 3Rheumatology Department, Musgrave Park Hospital, Belfast, United 
Kingdom.
A three year-old girl presented with a history of an erythematous rash 
on the lower limbs that was followed by widespread atrophy of fat all 
over the body, but sparing the head. Skin biopsy revealed findings in 
keeping with Weber-Christian panniculitis (WCP), but no other signs 
or laboratory findings of autoimmune disease. She later developed a 
patch of morphoea in the epigastric region. She had had a history of an 
operation to remove an area of fibroepithelial hyperplasia on the hard 
palate as a baby, and she had a known diagnosis of mild pulmonary 
valve stenosis and a small ventricular septal defect (now closed). She 
had a broad face but was not strikingly dysmorphic. Speech develop -
ment was very significantly delayed, and other aspects of development 
were only mildly delayed. Chromosome analysis revealed an intersti -
tial deletion of chromosome 10q, ISCN: 46,XX,del(10)(q21.2q22.1). 
Further analysis to refine the breakpoints is ongoing. WCP is a rare 
autoimmune condition resulting in the inflammatory destruction of fat 
cells and localised or generalised lipoatrophy. Deletions of this region 
of chromosome 10q are rare, although WCP has been reported in a 
case of an unbalanced translocation of 10p material onto 10q26. We 
postulate that a gene (or genes) within our patient’s deleted region is 
involved in WCP (and potentially similar autoimmune disorders).
P0307. Prenatal diagnosis of a de novo  partial duplication of 
the long arm of chromosome 17 in a foetus with polydactyly, 
cardiopathy and hydrocephaly
D. J. Lederer1, C. Debauche2, J. Biard3, Y. Gillerot1, M. Ravoet1, C. Sibille1, W. 
Courtens1;  
1Center of Human Genetics, University Hospital St-Luc, 1200 Brussels, Bel -
gium, 2Department of Neonatology, University Hospital St-Luc, 1200 Brussels, 
Belgium, 3Department of Obstetrics, University Hospital St-Luc, 1200 Brussels, 
Belgium.
We report a female dysmorphic infant born at 37 weeks of gestation 
who presented polydactyly, hydrocephaly, short limbs, a VSD, and hy -
potonia. Fetal ultrasounds performed at 29 weeks of gestation showed 
IUGR, short limbs, cardiopathy, and hydrocephaly. The clinical diag -
nosis of Ellis-van Creveld syndrome was evoked. Amniocentesis was 
performed and revealed a partial duplication of chromosome 17, con -
firmed by FISH analyses. Parental karyotyping was normal, indicating 
a de novo anomaly in the child. Parents decided to continue the preg -
nancy. At birth, the baby had dysmorphic features, including small and 
low-set ears, long philtrum, micrognathia, midface hypoplasia, down-
turned corners of the mouth with thin lips, low-set and wide-spaced 
nipples, short neck, pre- and postaxial hexadactyly of upper and lower 
limbs, single palmar crease, rhizomelia, wide anterior fontanel, hyper -
laxity of knees, and hirsutism. She was hypotonic, had feeding dif -
ficulties, and died after ten days of life from a necrotizing enterocolitis. 
Postnatal karyotyping confirmed the partial duplication of chromosome 
17q. Microarray CGH confirmed the duplication of chromosome 17q 
for the region localized between q21.31 and q23.2. A pure partial du -
plication of the long arm of chromosome 17 for this region has only 
rarely been reported so far. Clinical findings present in our case are 
compared to those of other reported cases with dup(17q).
P0308. Phenotype-genotype correlation in Egyptian patients with 
chromosome 18 aberrations
S. A. Hammad , H. T. El Bassyouni, A. S. El-Gerzawy, M. I. Shehab;  
National Research centre, Cairo, Egypt.
The purpose of the present study was to provide an insight into the un -
derstanding of the relationships between the clinical phenotypes and 
chromosome 18 abnormalities.
Fifteen patients were recruited with chromosome 18 abnormalities (8 
males 7 females).
Their age ranged from 2 months to 28 years. Positive consanguinity 
was present in 9 patients. Similarly affected sibs in the family were 
found in 5 patients. There was delayed milestones and broad forehead 
in 9 patients (60%), ear abnormalities in 12 (80%), short stature was 
present in 3 patients (20%), epilepsy in 4 (26.7%), eye anomalies in 7 patients (46.7%) and recurrent abortion in 2 patients, brain demy -
elination was present in 9 patients accompanied with hypgenesis of 
corpus callosum in 3 patients and mental retardation was present in 7 
patients. Chromosomal studies showed 18 deletion in 7 patients (dele -
tion of 18p in 5 patients and 18q in 2 patients), translocation in 3, and 
duplication in 2 patients, inversion in 2 and ring in one patient. The 
collection of the cytogenetic and clinical data will help to delineate the 
phenotype associated with various chromosome 18 aberrations these 
findings will be informative for the families at risk in genetic counsel -
ing and prenatal diagnosis for subsequent pregnancies. In this study 
there was bilateral knee dislocation and hyperpigmentation in a case 
of 18(q11.2) duplication a finding to our knowledge has not been de -
scribed before, which indicate a possible relation ship between chro -
mosome 18 and knee dislocation.
P0309. Case report. A newborn with ring chromosome 21.
I. Vool1, R. Zordania1, I. Neupakojeva1, L. Süvari1, K. Joost1, T. Ilus2, P. Tam -
mur2;  
1Tallinn Children Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, 
Estonia.
A newborn boy with congenital heart and cleft palate malformations 
and with hypotrophy -2SD was hospitalized. The chromosome analy -
sis from cultured lymphocytes was performed using trypsine-Giemsa 
method. The chromosome abnormality was established: 46,XY,-
21,+mar. There was very little dark part from chromosome left.
The FISH analysis was performed and revealed a ring chromosome 
21:
46,XY,r(21)(::?-q22.13::q22.3->qter).
Usually such abnormalities originate de novo  .
The parents refused to give material for chromosome analysis.
Several abnormalities was founded in the clinical evaluation of the 
patient: large bilateral cleft palate, microrethrognathia, deep-set eyes, 
short palpebral fissures, big nouse, bicuspidal aortic valve, pulmonar 
stenosis.
The patient died about 12 month age.
P0310. Five cases with chromosome anomalies involving 
chromosome 5 - genotype-phenotype correlation
A. Sireteanu , C. Rusu, M. Voloşciuc, E. Braha, V. Gorduza, M. Gramescu, M. 
Covic;  
Medical Genetics Center, Iasi, Romania.
We present 5 cases with different abnormalities involving chromosome 
5 in order to illustrate suggestive features for the diagnosis, but also 
to discuss management directions (investigation protocol and follow-
up). The cases were diagnosed between 2002-2006 in Iasi Medical 
Genetics Center.
Patient 1: (3-year-old female): pregnancy- uneventful; birth- term, 
Apgar score 5, Wt 2,700 g; clinical features- failure to thrive, micro -
cephaly, typical cri-du-chat face and cry, stridor, hyperextensible joints, 
hypertrichosis, severe mental retardation; karyotype- 46,XX,del(5p). 
Normal echocardiography and ophtalmologic examination.
Patient 2 (3-year-old female): pregnancy- polyhydramnios; birth- term, 
intrauterine growth retardation, Apgar score 8; clinical findings- growth 
retardation and microcephaly, dysmorphic face, typical cry, bilateral 
clynodactyly 5, moderate mental retardation. Echocardiography- su -
baortic VSD, tricuspid insufficiency; karyotype- 46,XX,r(5)(p21;q35)/
45,XX,-5/47,XX,r(5)(p21;q35),r(5)(p21;q35). Normal parental karyo -
types. Detailed phenotypical analysis is presented.
Patient 3 (5-year-old male): pregnancy- uneventful; birth- term, Wt 
2,600 g; clinical findings- growth retardation, microcephaly, dysmor -
phic face, hypertrichosis, irregular toe insertion, severe mental retar -
dation. Echocardiography- incomplete atrioventricular canal. Karyo -
type: 46,XY,add(5)(p15).
Patient 4 (male, aged 3 years): pregnancy- uneventful; birth- preterm, 
Wt 1,900 g; clinical features- failure to thrive, microcephaly, seizures, 
mild dysmorphic face, moderate mental retardation; karyotype: 46,X
Y,ins(8;5)(p23;p11p13). Even if the chromosome formula looked bal -
anced, we appreciate that the phenotype is related to the breakage 
points.
Patient 5: young, unrelated, apparently normal couple with repeated 
miscarriages. Female karyotype: normal; male karyotype: 46,XY,ins(
5;4)(q31;q27q31).
Genotype-phenotype correlation and management protocol will be Cytogenetics10
provided for every case.
In conclusion, we present 5 different chromosomal abnormalities in -
volving chromosome 5 in order to discuss variability of clinical features 
and management protocol.
P0311. Structural chromosome abnormalities and male fertility
E. M. Grishina , L. F. Kurilo, T. M. Sorokina, L. V. Shileiko, V. B. Chernykh;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sci -
ences, Moscow, Russian Federation.
The aim of this study is to evaluate the prevalence of structural chro -
mosome abnormalities  in infertile men and to assess their effect on the 
spermatogenesis and male fertility.
The examined cohort consisted of 550 men from infertile couples. The 
semen analysis has been performed according to the WHO recom -
mendations (1999). According to the sperm tests all patients were 
subdivided into five groups: azoospermia (n=177), oligozoospermia 
(n=203), asthenozoospermia (n=81), teratozoospermia (n=39), and 
normozoospermia (n=50). Chromosome analysis has been carried out 
on peripheral lymphocytes using standard cytogenetic techniques with 
GTG- and C- staining.
In 3.1% examined men structural chromosome abnormalities have 
been found. The translocations have been found in 16 patients, and 
pericentric inversion of chromosome 5 - in one azoospermic patient. 
In 53% cases the chromosome rearrangements are Robertson trans -
locations. Most commonly chromosome translocations between chro -
mosomes 13 and 14 were found.
Chromosome aberrations have been found in 1.7% azoospermic, 
4.4% oligozoospermic, 2.6% teratozoospermic, 3.7% asthenozoosper -
mic, and 2.0% normozoospermic men. Between patients with revealed 
chromosome abnormalities the azoospermia has been diagnosed in 
17.6%, oligozoospermia - 52.9%, asthenozoospermia - 17.6%, terato -
zoospermia - 5.9%, and normozoospermia - in 5.9% cases.
Our results have demonstrated obvious polymorphism of status of 
sperm parameters in men with structural chromosome abnormalities. 
In most infertile men the chromosome translocations associated with 
oligozoospermia.
P0312. Molecular characterization of terminal Xp deletions by 
m-Banding and Array-CGH in four families
C. Leroy1, E. Landais1, V. Sulmont2, A. Hecart3, H. Grulet3, N. Michel1, N. Gru -
son1, S. Clomes1, M. Mozelle1, J. Motte2, D. Gaillard1, M. Doco-Fenzy1;  
1Service de Génétique, CHU Reims UFR Médecine IFR53, Reims, France, 
2Service de Pédiatrie, American Memorial Hospital, CHU Reims, Reims, 
France, 3Service d’Endocrinologie, CHU Reims, Reims, France.
Xp deletions are diagnosed in about 6% of Turner stigmata. The phe -
notype is probably associated with haploinsufficiency of genes within 
the deleted regions but the correlation between the length of the dele -
tion and the phenotype is still unknown.
We studied the length of the terminal Xp deletion through four fami -
lies. We report here the phenotypic and laboratory findings in 8 female 
members affected by the Xp deletion. The deletions were diagnosed 
cytogenetically using 400 band R and G-Banding, X specific mBand -
ing and were further delineated by array comparative genomic hybri -
disation (array-CGH). We used a 1 Mb BAC and PAC array (VIB Leu -
ven), DNAs were tested by experiment using a triangle testing with 
control DNAs. Data were analysed with the arrayCGHbase software 
(J.Vermeesch).
Results:
Cytogenetic studies showed the following breakpoints: del(X)(p22.2), 
del(X)(p21.3), del(X)(p11.4), der(X)(qter->p22.2::q22->qter) in families 
1,2,3 and 4 respectively.
Array-CGH established the length of the Xp deletions: 7.5 Mb, 20.3 
Mb, 24.2 Mb, 9.5 Mb in families 1,2,3 and 4 respectively.
None of the 8 female patients had mental retardation. Their common 
feature was short stature when present (height: 1.40m to 1.64m in 
adults). Interestingly SHOX region was deleted in all of them. Array-
CGH enabled a comparison of each genotype-phenotype association. 
An important interindividual and intrafamilial variability was observed, 
caused by parameters such as X inactivation bias, or specific gene de -
letion or disruption. Our data showed no correlation between the adult 
height and the deletion length and may contribute to the evaluation of 
GH treatment when proposed.
Grant: PHRC-2005-CHU-Reims.P0313. Molecular characterization of chromosome Y structural 
abnormalities in two cases of ambiguous genitalia
A. G. Lungeanu1, A. A. Arghir1, S. Arps2, G. M. Cardos1, N. Dumitriu3, A. Rode -
wald4;  
1”Victor Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2GeneteQ, Hamburg, 
Germany, 3Children Hospital “Marie Curie”, Bucharest, Romania, 4Institute for 
Human Biology, Hamburg, Germany.
Malformations of the external and/or internal genitalia may be caused 
by structural abnormalities of sex chromosomes.
With the aim to understand the underlying cause of ambiguous geni -
talia, and to contribute at management of the patients with abnormal 
phenotypic sex, we investigated two cases using GTG, CBG banding, 
accomplished by FISH and PCR techniques.
FISH included: DAPI stain, Y-specific painting probe XCP-Y ( Meta -
Systems), Ycen DYZ3, Yq12 DYZ1, Yp11.3 SRY, Xcen DXZ1 (Vysis), 
subtelomeric probes for X- and Y-chromosome, locus DXYS130 and 
DXYS224 (Q-Biogene). PCR method was performed with a short DNA 
sequence from Amelogenine gene on the short arm of both X and Y 
chromosomes (Xp22.31-p22.1, Yp11.2), plus DYS392 STR marker 
(Yq11.2).
GTG banding showed mosaic karyotypes in both patients: 45,X[84]/
46,X idic(Y)(qter--pter::pter--qter)
[16], and 45,X[65]/46,X idic?(Yp)[35], respectively. By CBG banding 
the provenience of idic(Y)(pter--qter) it was clear in the first case, but 
difficult in the second one. By FISH, the karyotype was:
1).46,X,psu idic(Y)(p11?.2).ish psuidic(Y)(qter--pter::pter--qter)(wcpY
+,DXYS130++,SRY++,DYZ3++.
DYZ1++,DYS224++). PCR revealed both Amelogenine gene se -
quence and DSY392 marker.
So, it was confirmed that abnormal Y is an isodicentric with breakpoint 
distal from subtelomeric locus DXY130 in Yp.
2). FISH karyotype was: 46,X,?idic(Y)(q11).ish idic(Y)(pter--q11::q11-
-pter)(SRY++). PCR revealed Amelogenine gene sequence, but not 
DSY392 marker so, the fusion point is in the long arm Yq11.
By our results we can conclude that, various shapes of structural ab -
normalities in Y chromosome may result in disorders of sex determina -
tion pathway which are poorly understood. Only the presence of SRY 
gene is not enough for male phenotypic normality.
P0314. Cytogenetic diagnosis of chromosomal pathology in 
various stages of pregnancy
G. J. Abildinova , G. S. Svaytova, K. A. Koshkarova, A. G. Baysbekova, N. Z. 
Musachanova;  
The centre of molecular medicine, Almaty, Kazakhstan.
The detection of chromosomal anomalies is one of the main tasks in 
prenatal diagnostics. It is known, that the majority chromsome abnor -
malities result fetal death or the birth of children with handicaps. We 
studied fetal karyotypes in a group of high-risk pregnancies.
Materials and methods of research. In total we analyzed chorion vil -
lus and fetal blood of 879 pregnant women in various terms of preg -
nancy.
The preparations of chromosomes were prepared from chorion villus 
by direct culture. For preparation of preparations from fetal blood used 
standard methods with addition PHA.
Results of research and discussion. The analysis cytogenetically of 
results has shown, that in among chromosomal abnormalities, numeri -
cal anomalies prevailed. In 53,3 % cases Down’s syndrome was diag -
nosed - 47, XY +21, both complete and mosaic forms. In 3,3 % cases 
we diagnosed Patau syndrome - (47, XY+13). In 25,9 % cases we de -
tected marker chromosomes. Besides numerical changes we detected 
structural changes in 10 % cases: Robertsonian translocation - 45, 
t(15;21), 46,isoX(q) and a reciprocal translocation - 45, t(3;Y).
P0315. Detection of mixed chimerism and minimal residual 
disease after bone marrow transplantation in chronic myeloid 
leukemia by conventional and molecular cytogenetics in 
tunisian patients
F. Talmoudi1, M. Ben Rekaya1, F. Boumaiza1, T. Ben Othman2, A. Amouri1;  
1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Tunis, Tunisia, 2CNGMO, Tunis, Tunisia.
Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) is an hematopoietic malignancy 
characterized by the proliferation of myeloid precursors. The hallmark 
of CML is the presence of Philadelphia (Ph1) chromosome that results 
from balanced reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9 and Cytogenetics10
22 leading to the formation of bcr/abl  fusion gene.
Disease relapse still represents the major cause of treatment failure in 
patients with CML, following bone marrow transplantation. Thus, the 
early detection of minimal residual disease (MRD) has relevant thera -
peutic implications.
Sequential cytogenetic analysis was done using standard methods in 
bone marrow samples from10 patients with CML. Further dual colour 
Fluorescence In Situ Hybridisation (FISH) analysis was done to assess 
molecular response using bcr/abl . The chimerism pattern and bcr-abl 
status were studied. The results of present study show that bone mar -
row transplantation induce both cytogenetic and molecular response 
in a significant proportion of CML thereby improving their prognosis 
and survival. The importance of using FISH analysis on interphase nu -
clei and poor-spread metaphases that cannot be analyzed using con -
ventional cytogenetics was also highlighted. Thus the present study 
stresses on the need for sequential cytogenetic and molecular analy -
sis in diagnosis and disease management of myeloid leukemias.
P0316. Molecular cytogenetic characterization of der (9) 
deletions in a case of Philadelphia-negative chronic myeloid 
leukemia
A. Bennour1, H. Sennana1, H. El Omri2, S. Mougou1, A. Khelif2, A. Saad1;  
1Service de cytogenetique et de biologie de la reproduction CHU Farhat Ha -
ched, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Service d’hématologie CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, 
Tunisia.
About 95% of the patients with chronic myeloid leukemia(CML) have 
a Philadelphia chromosome resulting from a reciprocal transloca -
tion between bands 9q34 and 22q11.2 that juxtaposes the 3’ ABL 
gene to the 5’ BCR  gene. Recent studies using fluorescence in situ 
hybridization(FISH) have reported deletions due to the loss of se -
quences proximal to chromosome 9 breakpoint or distal to chromo -
some 22 breakpoint. In this paper we report on a detailed molecular 
cytogenetic characterization carrying der(9) deletions in an apparently 
Philadelphia negative CML patient.
FISH experiments were carried out in bone marrow sample from CML 
patient at diagnosis. A detailed study using conventional cytogenetic 
and FISH analysis was done using ES-FISHprobes, Whole chromo -
somes painting and BAC in order to elucidate the mechanism of 9q 
deletion.
ES-FISH probes disclosed the BCR/ABL  fusion gene on 
der(22)chromosome and deletion of signal on der(9) chromosome.
Whole chromosomes painting revealed deletion of ABL/BCR  fusion 
gene on der(9).
Using FISH with an appropriate set of BAC probes located proximally 
to BCR and ABL genes we have characterized the deleted region on 
both chromosomes 9 and 22.
Our study shows that the location of the deleted sequences was down -
stream of the BCR  breakpoint and upstream of ABL gene and that ge -
nomic microdeletions were concomitant with t(9;22) rearrangements.
FISH analysis allowed not only the identification of chromosome re -
arrangements that could not otherwise be detected by conventional 
banding procedures, but also the recognition of 5’ ABL and 3’ BCR  de-
letions which could carry with it a poor prognosis that indicates rapid 
disease progression in CML.
P0317. Prenatal diagnosis of an unexpected de novo  complex 
chromosomal rearrangement.
S. Jaillard1, C. Henry1, C. Dubourg2,3, M. Durou2, L. Loeuillet4, J. Milon5, E. 
Bauville6, J. Mosser3, V. David2,3, L. Pasquier7, J. Lucas1;  
1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU Rennes, France, 2Laboratoire de Géné -
tique Moléculaire, CHU Rennes, France, 3UMR 6061 CNRS, Rennes, France, 
4Département d’Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, CHU Rennes, France, 
5Département de Radiologie et Imagerie Médicale, CHU Rennes, France, 6Dé-
partement d’Obstétrique, Gynécologie et Médecine de la Reproduction, CHU 
Rennes, France, 7Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Rennes, France.
We report a prenatal diagnosis of de novo apparently balanced recip -
rocal translocation t(2;10)(q?24;p?15.1) which turned out to be a com -
plex event after molecular cytogenetic analysis. Fetal conventional 
R-banded karyotype was performed on amniocytes at 32 weeks ges -
tation because of sonographic findings: IUGR, single umbilical artery 
and arachnoid cyst of the posterior fossa. To precise the breakpoint on 
chromosome 10, molecular cytogenetic analysis by FISH was used 
with a 10p14 band-specific probe: unexpectedly, the signal wasn’t localized on the derivative chromosome 2 but on a chromosome 5. 
Then, hybridization of whole chromosome painting probes WCP 2, 5 
and 10 showed an increasing complexity of the rearrangement leading 
to complex derivative chromosomes: der(2) and der(10) were found 
to have segments from the three chromosomes as a consequence of 
terminal exchanges and insertions. Subtelomeric probes of chromo -
somes 2, 5 and 10 revealed a terminal deletion of the long arm of chro -
mosome 2 (2qter). Finally, this complex chromosomal rearrangement 
seemed to involve 3 chromosomes and 5 breakpoints. The pregnancy 
was terminated and the fetopathological examination confirmed pre -
natal ultrasound report and showed additional congenital anomalies: 
facial dysmorphism, heart defects, corpus callosum and cerebellum 
abnormalities. 2qter deletions are associated with variable clinical fea -
tures and in our case, the 2qter microdeletion should be responsible 
for the phenotype. Array-CGH will be performed in order to precise the 
size of the 2qter deletion and to screen for additional cryptic genomic 
imbalances near the breakpoints or elsewhere.
P0318. Cytogenetic and Molecular studies in Egyptian patients 
with congenital heart defects, A pilot study.
I. M. R. Hussein1, N. Helmy1, M. El-Rubi1, H. A. Hussein1, A. El-Gerzawy1, A. 
Ahmad1, A. Fayez1, N. Abdel-Rahman2;  
1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
Objective: To analyze the frequency of chromosomal anomalies and 
molecular defects in Egyptian patients with congenital heart defects 
(CHD). Patients and Methods: The study included 34 patients with 
congenital heart defects; confirmation of the heart defect was ac -
complished by echocardiography and/ or cardiac catheterization. 
Chromosomal analysis was done using GTG-banding and FISH tech -
niques. Mutation detection in transcription factor GATA4 and NKX2.5 
was done using PCR/ SSCP and DNA sequencing. Results: Patients 
were classified into isolated heart defects (n=21) and CHD associated 
with other congenital malformations (n-13). Associated malformations 
were: (Down syndrome (2), Aarskog Scott S. (1), velocardiofacial S. 
(2 sibs), Russel Silver (1), hand anomaly (2), trisomy 18 (1); and dys -
morphic (4). Chromosomal anomalies were found in 9/30 patients (30 
%). They were: Trisomy 21 [47, XY,+21 (1); 46, XX, t(21;21) (1)]; 47, 
XX+13 (1); 47,XX,+18 (1); 46, XY, t (14; 18) (q11.2; p11.2) (1); 47, XY + 
mar (mat.) (1); 46, XX del 11q 23.3- qter (2 sibs); 46, XX, dup13q33-34 
(1). DNA sequencing of NKX2.5 gene in 15 patients with isolated ASD 
revealed normal sequence in all cases. Sequencing of GATA4 gene 
in 12 patients with Fallot’s tetralogy has shown polymorphism in exon 
6 at nucleotide 53423 (A-G) in 2 patients. Conclusion: Chromosomal 
analysis of patients with heart defects and other congenital anomalies 
has a great impact on diagnosis, prognosis and genetic counseling of 
patients. The mutations in isolated defects might be mainly of somatic 
origin that could not be observed in peripheral blood lymphocytes.
P0319. A case with Prader-Willi phenotype and a de novo 
t(2;15)(q31;p11)
T. Cora1, H. Acar1, A. Kalaycı1, E. Atabek2;  
1Dept. of Medical Genetics,Meram Medical Faculty, Selcuk Unıversıty, Konya, 
Turkey, 2Dept. of Pediatics, Meram Medical Faculty, Selcuk Unıversıty, Konya, 
Turkey.
In recent years, the spectrum of available methods for the characteriza -
tion of chromosomal rearrangement has dramatically increased. Thus, 
the correlation between phenotype and genotype has been done ac -
curately. In the present report, we describe the clinical and cytogenetic 
findings of a patient with 46,XX,t(2;15)(q31;p11). A 2-year-old girl with a 
clinical feature show Prader-Willi phenotype. The patient and her fam -
ily were studied by the conventional (GTG, NOR and C-bandings) and 
molecular cytogenetic (for PW region) techniques. The results showed 
the proband with a balanced de novo  karyotype 46,XX,t(2;15)(q31;p11) 
by using GTG-banding. Clinical and genetic findings were compared to 
the other patients published in the literature.Cytogenetics10
P0320. Balanced (9;11) translocation in a patient with mental 
retardation and dysmorphic features disrupts the protein 
tyrosine phosphatase delta (PTPRD) gene
L. Nazaryan1, S. Midyan1, G. Shakhsuvaryan1, V. Kalscheuer2;  
1Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, 2Max 
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
Here we report on an 11-year-old girl presenting with mental retardation 
and various dysmorphic features such as hypertelorism, depressed 
nasal bridge, short nose and wide mouth with plump leaps. The patient 
is friendly and able to smile but does not reply to any questions and 
demonstrates severe speech delay. She cannot write or do elementary 
mathematical calculations. Computed tomography revealed commis -
sural alterations in the cerebellum and cerebral hemispheres as well 
as a subarachnoid spacand liquor cistern substantial narrowing.
G-banding of patient metaphase chromosomes prepared from pe -
ripheral blood leukocytes revealed a de novo balanced translocation 
t(9;11)(p24;q12). We have mapped the breakpoints on both derivative 
chromosomes by FISH with selected YAC and BAC clones. On chro -
mosome 11 the breakpoint region contains several genes including 
the brain-expressed reticulon 4 receptor-like 2 (RTN4RL2) gene. The 
much better candidate disease gene is on chromosome 9. This break -
point disrupts the receptor type protein tyrosine phosphatase delta (PT -
PRD) gene. PTPRD is highly expressed in the developing mammalian 
nervous system and Ptprd-deficient mice showed impaired learning 
with enhanced hippocampal long-term potentiation. The present case 
reveals novel autosomal candidate genes for mental retardation.
P0321. Idiopatic mental retardation - importance of clinical 
diagnostic scores for case selection
L. Caba1, C. Rusu2, M. Volosciuc2, L. Butnariu2, E. Braha2, M. Gramescu2, C. 
Bujoran3, V. Gorduza2, M. Covic2;  
1Children’s Hospital Iasi-Medical Genetics Center, Iasi, Romania, 2University of 
Medicine , Department of Medical Genetics, Iasi, Romania, 3Children’s Hospi -
tal, Iasi, Romania.
We present a retrospective study aimed to identify the correlation be -
tween de Vries clinical score and the detection of chromosomal abnor -
malities in mentally retarded (MR) children. We have used the score to 
identify patients who should be tested by karyotiping and subsequently 
MLPA for subtelomeric rearrangements.
Our group is formed of 36 children (21 females and 15 males) with 
variable MR associated with other anomalies. 18 children had chro -
mosomal defects, whereas 18 had normal karyotypes. In the group 
with abnormal karyotype, total scores varied between 3 and 7. Chro -
mosomal anomalies identified were: numerical (4) and structural 
(14). Chromosomes involved were: 1,4,5,7,8,9,17,X. Deletions were 
the most common and correlate with a greater score (>/=4). Com -
mon items were: short stature (66.7%), microcephaly (72.3%), nasal 
(72.3%), ear (66.7%) and hand anomalies (83.4%). In the group with 
normal karyotype, 44.4% of cases had a low score, whereas 55.6% 
had a high score. Most frequent item is hand anomalies (61.2%). The 
detailed analysis of the cases will be provided. The score proved very 
useful for the identification of major chromosomal abnormalities. In the 
second group, cases with a high score have to be further tested (e.g. 
using MLPA) in order to identify minor defects. In our opinion a high 
score indicates the karyotype and then a MLPA testing.In conclusion, 
we present a retrospective study that proves the use of de Vries diag -
nostic score in the identification of chromosomal abnormalities in MR 
children.
P0322. Prader-Willi Syndrome due to paternal deletion of 
chromosome 15q11-q13 in a girl with (14;22) Robertsonian 
translocation
O. G. Ievseienkova , T. E. Zerova, L. P. Sheiko, N. G. Gorovenko;  
National Medical Academy of Post-Graduate Education named after 
P.L.Shupyk, Kyiv, Ukraine.
We report a case presenting a combination of deletion (15)(q11-q13) 
and der(14;22), both of the paternal origin. The proposita was a sec -
ond child of unrelated, healthy and young parents. Prenatal history 
was complicated by threatened abortion. The girl was born at 39 weeks 
of gestation through vaginal delivery. She had severe hypotonia and 
feeding difficulties in early infancy, increased appetite and rapid weight 
gain after 12 months. Clinical examination at the age of 25 months 
showed short stature (< 3rd centile), overweight (90-97th centile), facial dysmorphism (bitemporal narrowing, small mouth with down-turned 
corners, prominent chin), fair hair, small hands with tapering fingers 
and small feets. Clinical impression was that the patient had features 
consistent with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). The karyotype of the 
patient was 45,XX,der(14;22)pat. The karyotype of the mother and 
proband’s sister was normal. Methylation analysis showed abnormal 
methylation pattern. Paternal deletion (15)(q11-q13) was identified 
confirming the diagnosis of PWS (molecular investigations were per -
formed in the Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich). The 
derivate chromosome was found to be inherited from the phenotypi -
cally normal father [45,XY,der(14;22)].
We present a new case of PWS with additional cytogenetic aberration. 
Our report confirms a statement about an increased risk for the par -
ents with Robertsonian translocations to have a child with unbalanced 
karyotype.
P0323. Phenotypic characteristics of 9p deletion syndrome: a 
case report
B. Aleksiūnienė1,2, R. Janavičius1,2, L. Cimbalistienė1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2;  
1Medical Genetics Center, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department Human and Medical 
Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Background  Deletion 9p syndrome is a rare congenital syndrome, 
originally described in 1973. Approximately 100 reported cases have 
been published worldwide. We present the first case of deletion 9p 
syndrome diagnosed in Lithuania.
Case report  Our presented patient is a 3 years old girl, the second 
child of healthy non consanguineous parents, born on time with com -
plicated delivery due to craniostenosis. Major complains were irritabil -
ity, psychomotor retardation, hypersalivation, unstable gait. Charac -
teristic findings included trigonocephaly, upslanted palpebral fissures, 
epicanthal folds, arched eyebrows, depressed nasal bridge, poorly 
formed ears with hypoplastic helix, an extra flexion creases on 3-4 
phalanges, excess whorls on the fingers with short nails, corrected 
bilateral inguinal hernias and moderate mental retardation. Typical 
phenotype characteristics lead to the suspection of 9p deletion what 
was confirmed cytogeneticaly. Chromosome analysis of peripheral 
blood lymphocytes revealed 46,XX,del(9)(p22) karyotype. Cytogenetic 
analysis was performed from GTG banded metaphases. The resolu -
tion level was 400-500 bands.
Conclusion  Karyotyping of both parents and detailed molecular as -
sessment of genes flanking the breakage site would be desirable.
Key words:  deletion 9p syndrome, trigonocephaly, hypersalivation.
P0324. DNA fragmentation and meiotic segregation in 
spermatozoa of male carriers of a chromosomal structural 
rearrangement.
F. Morel1, E. Caer1, A. Perrin1, N. Douet-Guilbert1, M. J. Le Bris2, J. Amice1, V. 
Amice2, M. De Braekeleer1;  
1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Cytologie et Biologie de la Reproduction, Fa -
culté de Médecine & CHU, Brest, France, 2Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Cyto -
logie et Biologie de la Reproduction, CHU, Brest, France.
Frequency of somatic chromosomal abnormalities, mostly balanced 
reciprocal or robertsonian translocations and pericentric inversions, is 
increased in infertile males. Different hypotheses, such as an increase 
of spermatozoa with DNA fragmentation and / or with unbalanced 
chromosomal equipment, could explain their infertility. This study in -
vestigated the relationship between DNA fragmentation and meiotic 
segregation in the spermatozoa among carriers of a structural chro -
mosomal abnormality.
DNA fragmentation of ejaculated spermatozoa from 23 carriers (12 
reciprocal and 5 robertsonian translocations and 6 pericentric inver -
sions) and 24 fertile men were analyzed using TUNEL (terminal deoxy -
nucleotidyl transferase mediated dUTP nick end label). The frequency 
of unbalanced chromosomal spermatozoa among carriers was esti -
mated using FISH with appropriate probes.
A higher sperm DNA fragmentation rate was found among carriers of 
a structural chromosomal abnormality (6.64% ± 5.59) compared to the 
controls (1.20% ± 0.95) (p<0.001).
The frequencies of unbalanced spermatozoa were estimated between 
45.32% and 65.60% among reciprocal translocation patients, between 
8.78% and 21.62% among roberstonian translocation carriers and be -
tween 0.33% and 39.06% among pericentric inversion patients. No 
correlation was found between the frequency of unbalanced chromo -Cytogenetics10
somal sperm and that of apoptotic sperm (p>0.05), suggesting that 
there is no relationship between the apoptotic and meiotic mecha -
nisms in spermatozoa from these patients.
In conclusion, based on the increase in DNA fragmentation and the el -
evated rate of unbalanced chromosomal spermatozoa, this study indi -
cates that these exams should be integrated in the genetic exploration 
of male carriers of a structural chromosomal abnormality and used to 
predict the outcome of ICSI.
P0325. DNA methylation patterns in human adult and embryonic 
metaphase chromosomes: similarities and differences
O. A. Efimova1, A. A. Pendina2, P. V. Kruglyakov3, J. A. Shalygina1, T. V. 
Kuznetsova2, V. S. Baranov2;  
1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2D.O.Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecololgy RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Rus -
sian Federation, 3Transtechnologies Ltd, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
DNA methylation plays key role in gene silencing and maintenance of 
chromatin structure. In our previous study we have shown band-spe -
cific distribution of 5-methylcytosine-rich DNA in human metaphase 
chromosomes from adult and fetal lymphocytes by immunofluores -
cence with anti-5-methylcytosine antibodies(Eurogentec). This raised 
question about reproducibility of 5-methylcytosine-rich DNA distribu -
tion along chromosomes from other tissues at different developmental 
stages. The present research was focused on study of 5-methylcytosine 
distribution in metaphase chromosomes from cells of different human 
embryonic tissues: liver, lung, brain and cytotrophoblast at 5-12weeks 
of gestation, as well as from adult mesenchymal stem cells. Pattern of 
5-methylcytosine-rich DNA distribution was similar in all analyzed cell 
types: 5-methylcytosine-rich sites corresponded to all T-, majority of 
R-bands, to short arms of acrocentrics and heterochromatin of chro -
mosomes 1,9,16. Specificity of signal distribution along chromosomes 
allowed identification of specific landmarks for each chromosome pair. 
These landmarks could be easily detected in any metaphase. In spite 
of overall DNA methylation pattern similarity, local tissue-specific pecu -
liarities were detected. Heterochromatin of chromosomes 1,9,16 was 
hypomethylated in cytotrophoblast, as well as number of other bands, 
resulting in decreased overall methylation level, if compared to lym -
phocyte chromosomes. Overall decrease in methylation is also typical 
for mesenchymal stem cells, whereas chromosomes from embryonic 
tissues demonstrated either decreased or increased methylation level 
in number of bands. Thus, due to high reproducibility, clearly distin -
guishable landmarks and minor tissue-specific differences, we sug -
gested that distribution of 5-methylcytosine-rich DNA can be consid -
ered as specific banding pattern of human metaphase chromosomes 
- MeC-banding. Supported by CRDF&RFBR.
P0326. An unusual transmission of a supernumerary marker 
chromosome from a mother to a baby presenting congenital 
malformation
H. Akin1, A. Alpman2, A. Aykut2, O. Cogulu2, F. Ozkinay2;  
1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, İzmir , 
Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, İzmir , 
Turkey.
In humans, the presence of supernumerary chromosomes is an un -
usual phenomenon, which is often associated with developmental ab -
normalities and malformations. Among supernumerary chromosomes 
double minute (dms) are extensively associated with cancer cells. 
There are few reports of their presence in the peripheral cells of normal 
individuals. Double minutes (dmin) are small chromatin particles that 
represent a form of extrachromosomal gene amplification.
We describe a 5-month-old boy who had dysmorphological features 
with a karyotype presenting supernumerary marker chromosomes as 
minutes and double minutes in a mosaic pattern. There was no history 
of any teratogen exposure during the pregnancy. His developmental 
milestones were delayed. He was brought to hospital for the first time 
at 2 months of age because of dysmorphological features and hypo -
tonia. He was noted to have depressed nasal root, blue sclera, hyper -
telorism, epicanthus, micrognathia, retrognathia, high arched palate, 
dysmorphic ears, hypopigmented skin lesion on thoracic wall, umblical 
hernia and hypoplastic nails. Laboratory tests including complete blood 
count, urinalysis, thyroid function tests were normal. Cranial magnetic 
resonance imaging and skeletal X-ray survey were normal. Abdomi -
nal ultrasonography revealed hepatomegaly. Visual Evoked Potentials and Brainstem Auditory Evoked Potentials revealed delayed laten -
cies. His karyotype revealed 47,XY,dmin+[7]/47,XY,min[2]/46,XY[16]. 
47,XX,+min[2]/46,XX[18] was detected in his mother’s cytogenetic 
analysis. To the best of our knowledge this unusual transmission and 
presence of minute and double minute chromosomes have not been 
reported in the literature. This unusual existence may contribute to the 
literature regarding the possible association between extrachromo -
somal gene amplification and congenital abnormalities.
P0327. Xp duplication in two brothers: phenotypic and molecular 
cytogenetic characterization
C. A. L. Ruivenkamp1, K. B. Hansson1, D. A. C. Linders1, J. Knijnenburg2, K. 
Szuhai2, P. Helderman1;  
1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands, 2Dept. of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Cen -
ter, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Duplications within the short arm of the X-chromosome are rare in 
males. Surviving males with Xp duplications are nearly all invariable 
mentally retarded. Here we report a detailed characterization of a par -
tial Xp duplication in two brothers with severe mental impairment.
Conventional chromosome analysis illustrated a structurally abnormal 
X chromosome in both brothers. The phenotypically normal mother 
carried the same abnormal X chromosome, which is preferentially 
inactivated. The sister of the brothers had a normal karyotype. Fur -
ther characterization of the aberrant X chromosome by ±1 Mb spaced 
large clone insert array-CGH revealed a duplication of approximate -
ly 13 Mb with the proximal and distal breakpoints located to Xp21.3 
and Xp22.2. The exact karyotype of the brothers was defined as 
46,Y,dup(X)(p21.3p22.2).
P0328. Molecular cytogenetic analysis of a de novo  interstitial 
duplication at 1p36 in a female patient.
M. J. V. Hoffer1, C. A. L. Ruivenkamp1, M. Kriek1, K. B. Hansson1, J. M. van de 
Kamp1,2, A. van Haeringen1;  
1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands, 2Dept. of Clinical Genetics and Anthropogenetics, VU University 
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Chromosomal imbalances are a frequent cause of mental retardation 
and congenital malformations. Although aneuploidy accounts for the 
majority of imbalances, structural aberrations contribute to a significant 
fraction of recognized chromosomal anomalies.
The female patient reported here was the first child of non-consan -
guineous parents. She had a healthy younger brother. The family 
history was unremarkable. The patient had congenital bilateral ptosis 
and swallowing difficulties, necessitating tube feeding during some 
months. Examination at the age of 7 months showed severe ptosis, 
epicanthus, telecanthus, strabismus convergens, short upturned nose 
and open mouth appearance. Examination at the age of 11,5 years 
showed in addition a very narrow palate, bifid uvula, narrow entrance 
to the pharynx, dental crowding with braces and micrognatia. She has 
a delayed development and mild mental retardation.
Conventional karyotyping based on G-banding revealed a duplication 
at the terminal end of the short arm of chromosome 1. Analysis of 
parental chromosomes revealed normal karyotypes suggesting a de 
novo  duplication in our patient. The duplicated region was further char -
acterized using a 250 k SNP array (Affimetrix). The duplication was 3.3 
Mb in size with the breakpoints in band 1p36.33 and 1p36.32. There -
fore, the karyotype was defined as 46,XX,dup(1)(p36.33p36.32).
Although monosomy 1p36 is very common, duplications of 1p36 are 
extremely rare. The genotype-phenotype correlation of this case will 
contribute to a better understanding of the effect of copy number varia -
tion of genes within the 1p36 region.
P0329. Epigenetic background of chromosomal mosaicism in 
human miscarriages
E. N. Tolmacheva , A. A. Kashevarova, I. N. Lebedev;  
Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Chromosomal mosaicism is a feature of abnormal embryo develop -
ment. It results from mitotic non-disjunction in aneuploid or in primary 
euploid cells. However, the ratio of both mechanisms as well as induc -
ing factors of mitotic instability are poorly investigated. It is interesting 
that increasing of mosaicism frequency is coincided with the wave of 
epigenetic reprogramming. We have suggested that alterations in the Cytogenetics10
methylation status of the cell-cycle checkpoints genes may be one of 
the factors leading to genomic instability and mosaicism. To test this 
hypothesis methylation analysis of the RB1 and P14ARF  genes in 50 
miscarriages with different pattern of chromosomal mosaicism was 
performed. A model of tissue-specific cell lines compartmentalization 
was developed after meta-analysis of available literature data about 
mosaicism in human embryos. According to this model miscarriages 
with chromosomal mosaicism confirmed by interphase FISH-analysis 
in our study were classified into 3 groups. Mitotic origin of aneuploidy 
was suggested for 19% of embryos. Meiotic or mitotic errors were re -
lated with aneuploidy in 27% of mosaics. Meiotic non-disjunction was 
suggested for 54% of miscarriages. For the first time aberrant meth -
ylation of the promoters of the cell-cycle genes was observed. More -
over, the total frequency of epimutations was significantly reduced 
from 32.5×10-2 per allele in the group1 to 7.0×10-2 and 2.6×10-2 in the 
groups 2 and 3, respectively. Our finding indicates that accumulation 
of epimutations may increase genomic instability and mosaicism in the 
embryos with primary normal karyotype in the zygote. This study was 
supported by RFBR (N 05-04-48129) and FASI (N 02.512.11.2055).
P0330. Investigation of cytogenetic changes in late stage 
endometriosis by fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) 
technique
F. Teksen1, S. Keles2, H. Satıroglu3;  
1Faculty of Health Sciences, Biotechnology Institution, Ankara, Turkey, 2Bio-
technology Institution, Ankara, Turkey, 3Faculty of Medicine, Obstetrics and 
Gynecology Department, Ankara, Turkey.
In the present study, the incidence of somatic chromosomal numeri -
cal alterations in chromosomes 11 and 18 in late stage endometriosis 
cases were investigated in comparison with the endometrium and pe -
ripheral blood samples of the same patients and the same tissues of 
normal healty women.
The study group was composed of six endometriosis samples (n:6). 
Control group included; normal endometrium samples (n:6, control I) 
and peripheral blood lymphocytes (n:6, control II) of the same patients 
with normal endometrium samples (n:5, control III) and peripheral 
blood lymphocytes (n:5, control IV) of the healty women.
Multicolor Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) technique was 
used in the study and the results were statisitically analysed by Khi 
squared test.
For chromosome 11; the frequencies of trisomy and monosomy were 
3.6 % and 0.4 % respectively the endometriosis samples and control 
group I the frequency of trisomy was 1.3 %. These values were statisti -
cally higher when compared with the other control groups.
For chromosome 18; in the endometriosis samples, the frequency of 
monosomy was 1.3 % while, in the first control group the frequencies 
of monosomy and trisomy were 2.7 % and 1.0 % respectively and the 
frquency of trisomy of the Control group II was 0.9 %. These values 
were statistically significant in comparison with the other groups.
Finally, the genetic alterations in chromosomes 11 and 18 were found 
to be significantly different (p<0.0001) in the endometriosis specimens 
than in normal endometrial cells and peripheral blood lymphocytes of 
the same patients and healty control group.
P0331. Whole genome array CGH (Comparative Genome 
Hybridization) of epilepsy patients with congenital abnormalities
R. Møller1,2, Z. Tümer1, C. Hansen2, H. Ropers3, N. Tommerup1, R. Ullmann3;  
1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Copenhagen, 
Denmark, 2Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Denmark, 3The Max-Planck 
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
INTRODUCION: The search for chromosomal abnormalities in pa -
tients with severe epilepsy and congenital abnormalities plays an im -
portant role in neurology and neuropediatrics. Disclosure of the etiol -
ogy of the seizures may be of psychological value for the family, and it 
is essential for proper genetic counselling. The aim of this study was to 
estimate the significance of whole genome array CGH for patients with 
epilepsy and congenital abnormalities.
METHODS: We recruited 75 epilepsy patients with different congenital 
abnormalities from The Danish Epilepsy Centre. All patients, except for 
three, had been reported to have normal G-banded karyotypes. Array 
CGH was carried out using a submegabase whole genome tiling path 
BAC array.
RESULTS: In total 39 DNA copy number changes were detected, which did not coincide with a known variant and also were not repeat -
edly identified in a reference set of more than 700 samples analysed 
on the same platform. Up to now, the hereditary basis has been inves -
tigated for 23 of the aberrations. Eight were de novo , two segregate 
with epilepsy in the family and 13 were inherited from an apparently 
normal parent.
CONCLUSION: In the present study we investigated 75 patients with 
epilepsy and congenital abnormalities. We identified copy number 
variations that were likely to be pathogenic in 38% of the patients. This 
study suggests 25 new loci to the current list of candidate loci involved 
in epilepsy. In conclusion, array CGH is the method of choice in iden -
tifying genetic changes in epilepsy patients with congenital abnormali -
ties of unknown cause.
P0332. Cytogenetic contribution in diagnosis of Bloom 
Syndrome and Fanconi Anemia in Tunisian patients
A. Amouri1, M. Ben Rekaya1,2, F. Talmoudi1,2, T. Ben Othman3, S. Ladab3, A. 
Ben Abdeladhim3,4;  
1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Tunis, Tunisia, 2(3) Molecular investigation of genetic 
orphelin desease: MIGOD, Pasteur Institute, Tunis, Tunisia, 3CNGMO, Tunis, 
Tunisia, 4Pasteur Institute, Tunis, Tunisia.
Fanconi Anemia (FA) and Bloom’s syndrome (BS) are rare autosomal 
genetic diseases that predispose to cancer and are associated with 
genomic instability. Cytogenetic diagnosis can, in the most cases, con -
firm the clinical diagnosis.
In this study we report the cytogenetic data of 4 BS patients and 147 
patients suspected with FA.
Spontaneous and induced chromosome damage was analyzed in cul -
tures of PBLs from patients with FA, with BS and healthy controls.
The results show that the spontaneous frequency of chromosomal 
breakage was significantly higher in lymphocytes from all the patients 
than in the control cells.
Sensitivity of FA cells to alkylating agents such MMC is much more 
increased than controls cells, but sensitivity of BS cells to the action of 
MMC did not differ from that of control cells.
Cells from patients with BS cultured in the presence of BudR exhibited 
a striking increase in the number of sister chromatid exchanges (SCEs) 
in comparison to that in cells of a healthy patient. Thus, it appears that 
an increased incidence of SCE in BS constitutes the syndrome’s most 
characteristic cytogenetic feature.
In conclusion, although, the genetic instability syndromes of FA, XP, 
AT, are associated, respectively, with hypersensitivity to DNA cross-
linking agents, UV and ionizing irradiation, the sensitivity of BS cells 
to DNA-damaging agents has been controversial.The basis of their 
instability is totally different.
P0333. Going deep into Fanconi Anemia chromosomal instability
V. Altieri, P. Bassano, A. De Cicco, E. Montone, R. Calzone, A. Zatterale ;  
ASL Napoli 1, Napoli, Italy.
We studied a cohort of 136 Fanconi Anemia (FA) patients, diagnosed 
by DEB test in our laboratory. The chromosomal instability (CI) has 
been scored, the tests having been performed by the same cytogeneti -
cist and all revised in blind by two others. The CI rates were subjected 
to statistical routine analyses in Statistica© 5.1 software (level of sig -
nificance α = 0.05) revealing a significant gender difference.
This result increases the knowledge of the cellular mechanisms under -
lying the FA CI, seeming show that the CI can be an epiphenomenon 
also depending on factors different from the specific genetic defect. 
This evidence lead a strong implication on clinical management of FA 
patients which must change if the patient is a “mosaic”, but “mosa -
icism” is now diagnosed only based on FA patient’s CI, rated indepen -
dently from the gender.
Moreover, we studied chromosomal rearrangements by the molecu -
lar cytogenetic technique named “Spectral Karyotyping” (SKY - ASI 
- Israel) obtaining evidence of a random chromosome involvement in 
rearrangements, while some chromosomes seem to be preferentially 
involved in breakages.
P0334. Radiosensitivity of Fanconi anemia lymphocytes in vitro  
measured by CBMN assay
G. Joksic1, M. Guc-Scekic2, D. Vujic3, S. Petrovic1, A. Leskovac1, D. Jevtic4, D. 
Micic4;  
1Vinca Institute of Nuclear Sciences, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Faculty of Biology, Cytogenetics10
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia, 
Belgrade, Serbia.
Fanconi anemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive disorder character -
ized by bone-marrow failure and cancer susceptibility. Early studies 
pointed to the specific sensitivity of FA cells to MMC and DEB which 
became the tools for the current diagnostic tests for FA. Although 
there is the long-standing clinical impression of radiosensitivity, in vitro 
studies have yielded conflicting results. We exposed peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells of FA patients (10 subjects) and carriers (20 sub -
jects) to γ-rays (60Co), dose of 2 Gy in vitro  with aim to determine their 
radiosensitivity using CB micronucleus (MN) test. Incidence of spon -
taneous occurring chromosomal aberrations and MN in unirradiated-
control samples also was examined. Mean incidence of chromosomal 
aberrations in FA patients was 0.088±0.08; which is 3.5 fold higher 
than in carriers, baseline level of MN was 11.66±6.7 whereas average 
incidence of radiation-induced micronuclei was 122.63±95.6. Baseline 
level of micronuclei find in parents lymphocytes was 16.29±8.4 (fa -
thers); 14.04±11.17 (mothers), which is 2.3 fold higher compared to 
common population. Radioresponse of FA lymphocyte in vitro in most 
cases corresponds to resistant in vitro response, (with exception of 
one case where radiosensitive in vitro response was observed). In -
cidence of spontaneously occurring chromosomal aberration highly 
correlates with baseline incidence of MN, number of cell carrying aber -
rations and radiosensitivity (r=0.81, p<0.05) Mild radioresistant in vitro 
response was observed in mothers lymphocytes, whereas fathers re -
sponse could be described normal-as in the common population. The 
authors will discuss the possible explanations for resistant response of 
FA lymphocytes in vitro .
P0335. Conventional and FISH analysis of deletion and three-
way complex bcr-abl rearrangement in chronic myeloid leukemia
B. B. Ganguly , N. N. Kadam;  
MGM Centre for Genetic Resrarch and Diagnosis, Mahatma Gandhi Mission’s 
New Bombay Hospital, Navi Mumbai, India.
Chromosomal analysis was carried out in bone marrow sample of an 
11years old girl suspected myeloproliferative disorder. Conventional 
G-banding study detected a complex three-way translocation involving 
7, 9 and 22, which has resulted in the formation of a variant Philadel -
phia chromosome causing rearrangement of abl and bcr genes in 87% 
cells. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) confirmed the fusion of 
bcr-abl  oncogene. Thus the bone marrow karyotype was observed as 
46,XX (13%) / 46,XX,t(7;9;22)(q11;q34;q11) (87%). Metaphase paint -
ing with whole chromosome probes (WCP) for 9 and 22 didn’t show 
transfer of chromosomal material from 9 to 22, due possibly to a cryptic 
deletion of derivative 9. Hyperdiploidy was present in two cells. In this 
study, both conventional cytogenetic and FISH diagnosis proved to be 
significant to identify the variant nature of the Philadelphia chromo -
some, cryptic deletion in derivative 9 and hyperdiploid condition for 
introduction of a suitable treatment regimen and estimation of life ex -
pectancy of the young girl.
P0336. Molecular cytogenetic analyses in 142 patients with brain 
gliomas.
Z. Zemanova1, K. Michalova1,2, L. Babicka3, S. Ransdorfova2, F. Kramar4, P. 
Hrabal5, P. Kozler4;  
1Center of Oncocytogenetics, General Faculty Hospital and 1st Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Hematology 
and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Center of Oncocytogenet -
ics, General Faculty Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, 
Prague 2, Czech Republic, 4Department of Neurosurgery, Central Military Hos -
pital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 
5Department of Pathology, Central Military Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
Diffuse gliomas form a heterogeneous group of primary tumours which 
represent approximately 25% of all brain tumours in adults. New diag -
nostic and prognostic indicators must be sought to enable stratification 
of treatment. One possibility is subclassification of patients according 
to specific chromosomal aberrations in tumour cells.
For detection of deletions of tumour-suppressor genes TP53 , CDK -
N2A and RB1, deletion of 1p36 and/or 19q13.3, amplification of EGFR  
gene, trisomy 7 and monosomy 10 we used I-FISH with locus-specific 
and/or α-satellite DNA probes (Abbott Vysis). We examined fresh non-
fixed tissue specimens in 142 patients with different types of gliomas (25x low-grade astrocytoma, 17x anaplastic astrocytoma, 75x glio -
blastoma, 25x oligodendroglioma/oligoastrocytoma). Results of I-FISH 
were correlated with morphological and clinical findings. Molecular cy -
togenetic analyses were successful in 137 patients (96.5%) and due 
to non-adequate tissue specimen were not informative in five patients 
only. I-FISH in the most cases corresponded well with histological find -
ings, in 58 patients I-FISH contributed to more precise diagnosis and/
or prognosis. The most significant was finding of combined deletion 
1p36/19q13.3 in patients with oligodendroglial tumours, which is con -
sidered to be a predictor of better prognosis. Deletion 1p36/19q13.3 
was proved in 17 patients, in 12 cases as sole abnormality (progres -
sion in 33.3% of them) and in five cases in combination with other 
aberrations typical for high-grade astrocytomas (progression and/or 
exitus in 80% of them). A systematic molecular cytogenetic analyses 
by means of I-FISH showed in our cohort advancement of diagnosis, 
grading and classification of brain tumours.
Supported by VZ064165 and MSMLC535.
P0337. Conventional and molecular-cytogenetic diagnosis of 
patients with sex chromosome abnormalities
O. Kilani1, O. Kacem1, I. El Kamel1, F. Talmoudi1, F. Zhioua2, A. Amouri1;  
1Cytogenetics laboratory, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Service de Gynécologie, Hopital Aziza 
Othomana, Tunis, Tunisia.
We report on 5 male cases who presented with male infertility and sex 
chromosome abnormalities and 5 females referresd for suspicion of 
Turner syndrome who have a mosaic karyotype.
We performed RHG banding, FISH using whole chromosome painting 
probe (WCP) of X chromosome, specific locus identifier (LSI) for SRY 
gene, and X and Y cocktail centromeric probe.
The main problem with conventional karyotyping is that routinely 20 
metaphases are analyzed and counted, this may miss low-grade mo -
saicism.
The obtained results demonstrate the importance of FISH for the im -
provement of conventional cytogenetic diagnosis and further correct 
and timely medical care for the patients with sex chromosome abnor -
malities.
P0338. Evaluation of fragile X syndrome in moderate mental 
retardations in Rafsanjan city
M. Mirzaei ;  
School of medicine, Rafsanjan, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background: Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common cause of 
inherited mental retardation. Patients with this syndrome show vari -
able mental disabilities, long and narrow facial appearance with large 
ears and prominent fontanelle and frequent macro-orchidism. It is gen -
erally associated with a fragile site at Xq27.3, which can be observed 
in the metaphase chromosome following selective condition. Preva -
lence rates of FXS have been estimated in different ethnic groups one 
per 1500 in male individuals and one per 2500 in females the aim of 
this study was to determine of FXS prevalence in moderate mental 
retarded individuals of Zohreh Shamsaei in Rafsangan city.
Materials and Methods:52 moderate mental retardations (IQ=55-75) 
with clinical suspicion of FXS were screened for fragile X chromosome 
by cytogenetic methods. Blood samples were collected and cultured 
in selective condition. G-Banding method were used for karyotype 
preparation.
Results: Patients include, 37 males (71.2%) and 15 females (28.8%) 
with mean age 12.7 (7-17) years and mean IQ 65.3 (55-74). From 
males 8.1% and from females, 6.6% were found to have fragile X site 
at Xq27.3 (total 7.7%). The frequencies of fragile X-positive cells in 
males and female were between 8-52% and 12-27%, respectively.
Conclusion: The frequency of fragile X positive cases found in this 
study is similar to other reports of fragile X syndrome in preselected 
patients.
P0339. Determination of Heterozygosity at the FMR1 gene by an 
Enhanced Polymerase Chain Reaction Assay
M. S. Khaniani1,2, P. Kalitsis1, D. Z. Loesch2, R. J. Mitchell2, A. Choo1, H. Slater1;  
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2Tabriz Univer -
sity of Medical Science, Tabriz, Iran
The fragile X syndrome (FXS) is a common cause of X-linked mental 
retardation. It is caused by a dynamic expansion mutation and subse -
quent hypermethylation of CGG repeats in the 5‘-untranslated region Cytogenetics110
of FMR1  gene. Population screening is highly justifiable but no cost-
effective technical approach has been developed. Normal individuals 
show a range of allele sizes from 8 to 40 repeats with 20-22 and 29-
31 being the most common allele lengths. Accurate measurement of 
allele size is crucial for diagnostic purposes and uses a combination 
of Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and Southern Blot (SB) tech -
niques. The latter is required to identify large alleles but it is expensive, 
time-consuming and requires a large quantity of DNA. One particu -
lar use of SB is distinction of normal homozygous alleles in females, 
which are found in approximately 30% of cases, from pre-mutation 
and full mutations. We developed a more sensitive PCR assay, which 
distinguishes alleles differing by only one repeat. Reanalysis of female 
DNA samples alleletyped as homozygous using a previous PCR assay 
has shown that 50% are actually heterozygous and therefore do not 
need to be verified using SB. This method has considerable advantag -
es compared with other diagnostic tests and greatly facilitates testing 
of large numbers of samples.
P0340. Loss of methylation in imprinting control region 
KVLQT1OT  in first-trimester human spontaneous abortions
I. N. Lebedev , E. A. Sazhenova;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Genomic imprinting plays a significant role in regulation of early embryo 
development. The search of imprinted genes mutations in human mis -
carriages is a way to determine its effects. However, there are little evi -
dences about high level of imprinting alterations in spontaneous abor -
tions, except of hydatidiform mole and single instances of uniparental 
disomy. We have suggested that expected negative effect of imprint -
ing disruption could be realized through epimutations of imprinted loci 
rather than rare events of uniparental inheritance. The global changes 
in genome methylation during preimplantation development as well as 
a growing number of reports about association of assisted reproduc -
tive technologies and imprinting disorders reinforce our suggestion. 
In the present study we have performed methylation analysis of three 
imprinting control regions ( SNURF-SNRPN, H19, KVLQT1OT ) and im -
printed gene  CDKN1C in 84 first-trimester spontaneous abortions by 
methyl-specific or methyl-sensitive PCR. Two tissues (extraembryonic 
mesoderm and cytotrophoblast) with different patterns of epigenetic 
reprogramming were investigated. Twenty four induced abortions were 
studied as a control group. Differential DNA methylation of SNURF-
SNRPN, H19 and CDKN1C  was registered in all cases. As to KVLQ -
T1OT , loss of methylation (LOM) in maternal allele was found in 8 mis -
carriages (9.5%). Surprisingly, LOM was confined by extraembryonic 
mesoderm or cytotrophoblast in 5 and 4 embryos, respectively. To our 
knowledge this is a first report about epimutations of imprinting control 
region in human miscarriages. Moreover, tissue-specific restriction of 
LOM allows suggesting independent sporadic epigenetic aberrations 
in different embryonic germ layers. This study was supported by RFBR 
(N 05-04-48129) and FASI (N 02.512.11.2055).
P0341. CGH-array study of 40 holoprosencephaly patients
C. Bendavid1, C. Dubourg1,2, I. Gicquel1, J. Seguin1, L. Pasquier3, C. Henry4, S. 
Odent1,3, V. David1,2;  
1UMR6061 CNRS, Rennes, France, 2Génétique Moléculaire, CHU, Rennes, 
France, 3Génétique Médicale, CHU, Rennes, France, 4Cytogénétique, CHU, 
Rennes, France.
Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common developmental brain 
anomaly in humans, usually associated with facial features. Our group 
focuses on patients with HPE and normal karyotype. We previously 
reported our results for point mutations screening and gene dosage in 
HPE genes (SHH, SIX3, ZIC2 and TGIF), describing genomic defects 
in up to 27% fetuses and 30% newborns. Recently, we screened sub -
telomeres by MLPA and found alterations in known HPE candidate loci 
but also in new regions, including many unbalanced translocations. 
Therefore, we decided to screen HPE patients using CGHarray to as -
sess the frequency, location and size of such disorders.
We used Agilent CGH-array 44K technology. Out of 40 patients, we 
screened 10 DNA samples with known quantitative anomalies and 30 
samples with no alterations identified to date. First we localized the 
breakpoints of the 10 DNA with known alterations (loss and/or gain in 
specific loci) and showed no correlation between the size and severity 
of the defect. Out of the 30 DNA with no genetic aetiology, we found 
5 new rearrangements involving new potential HPE loci located on chromosomes 21q, 20p, 15q, 6q, 5q, 17q and 18q. We observed both 
isolated or associated genomic loss and gain, the latter suggesting 
an unbalanced translocation from parental origin. Detected alterations 
ranged from less than 1Mb to 16 Mb. Our data strongly reinforce the 
multigenic and multihit origin in HPE and participate in the explana -
tion for the wide phenotypic spectrum described in this developmental 
disorder.
P0342. High Resolution CGH (HR-CGH) in the diagnosis of 
patients with mental retardation, dysmorphic features and 
normal karyotype
S. Psoni1, G. Leventopoulos1, G. Bardi2, D. Iakovaki2, V. Papassava2, S. 
Kitsiou-Tzeli1, A. Mavrou1, E. Kanavakis1, H. Fryssira1;  
1Medical Genetics/Choremio Research Laboratory/Univ. of Athens/St Sophia’s 
Children Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2BIOANALYTIKI-GENOTYPE Research and 
Applied Molecular Cytogenetics Center, Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece.
Introduction: Mental retardation (MR) is a common disorder, but etio -
logic factors are not revealed in about half of the cases. CGH (Com -
parative Genomic Hybridisation) techniques have been proved useful 
not only in cancer genetics, but also in the diagnosis of MR . HR-CGH 
is a whole-genome screening technique which detects cryptic subtelo -
meric or interstitial chromosomal aberrations, not visible by conven -
tional cytogenetic studies.
Subjects-Methods: Five patients, (3 boys-2 girls, aged 3 months-4 
years) were evaluated for MR. Although they presented multiple dys -
morphic features and two of them had congenital anomalies (heart-
renal), they could not be connected to any known genetic syndrome 
in all cases. Karyotype by G-banding was normal. HR-CGH was then 
performed in DNA samples labelled with FITC dUTPs (nick transla -
tion). Normal DNA, labelled with Texas Red, was used as reference 
DNA. The results were analysed with the Applied Imaging software.
Results: Four of the five patients had redundant chromosomal mate -
rial: 1) 46,XX, ish enh (1)(p31p34), enh(13)(q22), 2) 46,XX, ish enh 
(12p13.3), 3) 46,XX, ish cgh enh (1)(q24) and 4) 46,XX, rev ish enh 
(16p12p13.1) and 5) the fifth patient had a subtelomeric deletion [ish 
cgh 46,XX, del (18)(q21.1qter)]. For the confirmation of the results, the 
patients’ parents were analysed with the same technique and were 
found normal.
Conclusions: HR-CGH contributes to the detection of chromosomal 
aberrations along with conventional karyotype, FISH analyses and 
quantative molecular methods are a useful adjunct and are well suited 
in the diagnosis of mentally retarded and dysmorphic patients.
P0343. Stage-by-stage study of genome-wide DNA methylation 
patterns in metaphase chromosomes of human preimplantation 
embryos
A. A. Pendina1, O. A. Efimova2, O. A. Leont’eva1, I. D. Fedorova1,2, T. V. 
Kuznetsova1, V. S. Baranov1;  
1D.O.Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecololgy RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Rus -
sian Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
We aimed to study DNA methylation patterns of metaphase chromo -
somes in human preimplantation embryos, which allows establishment 
of differences between parental genomes and DNA remethylation tim -
ing for individual chromosome loci. 83 metaphases from 54 IVF trip -
loid and abnormal diploid human embryos from zygote to blastocyst 
stage have been analyzed by immunofluorescence with monoclonal 
anti-5-methylcytosine antibodies(Eurogentec). At the first cleavage 
one homologue was more or less methylated than another one(s), in -
dicating different degree of methylation of parental genomes. In two-
cell embryos all chromosomes were hemimethylated - one chromatid 
was more methylated than another one. Homologues differed only in 
methylation degree of old chromatids. Newly synthesized chroma -
tids were hypomethylated in all homologues, showing that differential 
DNA methylation of parental genomes is not maintained any more. 
Hypomethylation affected all regions along chromosome arms with 
no band-specificity. Hemimethylated chromosomes were typical up to 
blastocyst stage, but their number decreased during subsequent divi -
sions. Chromosomes with both hypomethylated chromatids appeared 
at four-cell stage and increased in number up to morula stage. Sur -
prisingly, since four-cell stage proportion of hemimethylated and hypo -
methylated chromosomes varied from blastomere to blastomere, with 
no preference of certain chromosome being hemi- or hypomethylated. Cytogenetics111
Within the same metaphase hemimethylated and hypomethylated 
homologues were represented in different combinations, which may 
result from random segregation of hypomethylated, undermethylated 
and methylated chromatids in daughter blastomeres. Band-specific 
DNA methylation pattern, typical for fetal tissues and adult lympho -
cytes, was obvious in all metaphases since blastocyst stage. This is 
a pioneer study in human preimplantation metaphase cytogenetics. 
Supported by CRDF&RFBR.
P0344. Late cytogenetic effects of radiation expressed in human 
cells following Chernobyl accident
M. A. Pilinskaya , S. S. Dibskiy, O. V. Shemetun, Y. B. Dibskaya, O. A. Talan, 
L. R. Pedan;  
Research Centre of Radiation Medicine, Kijiv, Ukraine.
We performed an evaluation of late cytogenetic consequences follow -
ing the Chernobyl accident of human radiation exposure. These in -
clude hidden, delayed, and transmissible chromosome instability and 
“bystander effect”. For the investigation of radiation-induced chromo -
some instability two methods had been applied - provocative muta -
genesis assay (G1-dimatyph or G2-bleomycin tests used for persons 
differed on absorbed radiation doses ) and two-termed (during 48 and 
144 hours) cultivation of peripheral blood lymphocytes received from 
children born to irradiated parents. In children that lived in a region 
contaminated by 137Cs as well as in clean-up workers with low radia -
tion doses «adaptive response» had been detected; in high-doses pa -
tients recovered from acute radiation sickness increased chromosome 
sensitivity (hidden chromosome instability?) to additional mutagenic 
exposure was revealed. In progeny of irradiated parents an increased 
frequency of chromosome aberrations (single fragments and abnor -
mal monocentrics) was established especially in long-termed cultures. 
Induction of chromatid breaks confirmed possibility of expression of 
delayed chromosome instability in subsequent mitosis; appearance of 
stable aberrations can be considered as a biomarker of transmissible 
chromosome instability. In the model system proposed by us - “mixed 
human lymphocytes culture” consisted of cells differed by cytogenetic 
sex markers - interaction between X-irradiated in vitro  (in doses 250 
and 1000 mGy) and intact cells was discovered. A difference between 
the spectrum of aberrations in exposed and intact cells was estab -
lished - in targeted cells specific cytogenetic markers of irradiation 
dominated, in “bystander” cells chromatid types of aberrations (chro -
matid breaks and terminal chromosome deletions - cytogenetic indica -
tors of chromosome instability) were mainly induced.
P0345. An apparently balanced complex chromosome 
rearrangement involving chromosomes 1, 10, and 14 in a man 
with infertility
B. Bajelan1, F. Mahjoub2, S. Karymee1, M. Khaleghian1, S. Tootain1, T. Tava -
kol1, Z. Saltanatpour1, M. Akbari3;  
1Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 2Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran&nrcgeb, Tehran, Is -
lamic Republic of Iran, 3Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran &De -
partment of Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Tarbiat Modaress University, Tehran, 
Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
In study investigation was on Congenital complex chromosomal re -
arrangement compatible (CCR) with life is rare in man. We describe 
a complex and unique apparently balanced translocation involving 
chromosomes 1, 10, and 14 with 3 breakpoints, in a patient who was 
referred to our clinic because of infertility. Conventional karyotyping 
identified a complex rearrangement involving 3 breakpoints: chromo -
some 1q21.2, 10q21.1, 14q22.
The relationship between this apparently balanced and complex rear -
rangements and possibly produced unbalanced gametes responsible 
for high reproductive failure is discussed. The relationship between 
this apparently balanced and complex rearrangements and possibly 
produced unbalanced gametes responsible for high reproductive fail -
ure is discussed.P0346. The shape, length and banded structure of chromosome 
5 in interphase of HeLa cells
U. Claussen1, K. Sperling2, J. Claussen2;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, 
Berlin, Germany.
In contrast to metaphase chromosomes, little is known about the 
shape, length and the banding pattern of human interphase chromo -
somes mainly due to technical problems in visualizing interphase chro -
mosomes. We analyzed the structure of chromosome 5 in interphase 
nuclei using high-resolution multicolor banding (MCB), which paints the 
total shape of chromosomes and creates a DNA-mediated, chromo -
some region-specific, pseudo-colored banding pattern and allows the 
identification of telomeres and the measurement of the length of chro -
mosomes. The investigations were performed on HeLa cells arrested 
at different phases of the cell cycle. The results show that the shape, 
length and banding pattern of interphase chromosomes of HeLa cells 
are similar to those of the corresponding metaphase chromosomes at 
all stages of the cell cycle. The length of the chromosome axis of flat -
tened interphase chromosomes is 13.9µm (+/- 4.1) and comparable to 
that of a metaphase chromosomes. The MCB pattern also allows the 
detection and characterization of chromosome aberrations which may 
be of fundamental importance in establishing chromosome analyses in 
non-dividing cells. Consequently, we strongly recommend to reassess 
the concept of chromosome condensation during mitosis and to re -
place it by the new concept of a hierarchically organized chromosome 
region specific protein swelling based on protonation and hydration 
thereafter.
P0347. Cytogenetic, molecular and clinical characterization on 
an interstitial deletion of chromosome region 18q21 - a case 
report
N. M. P. O. Teles , M. Rocha, M. Martins, S. Pires, M. M. Freitas, J. Ribeiro, M. 
L. Rodrigues, P. Jorge, R. Santos, M. Pinto;  
Instituto de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, Porto, Portugal.
The 18q- syndrome (MIM 601808) originally described in 1984 is a 
relatively frequent chromosomal cytogenetic event normally resulting 
from a terminal deletion that may include bands from 18q21.1→qter 
and has a characteristic phenotype (midfacial hypoplasia, prominent 
antihelix and whorl digital pattern). Interstitial deletions involving the 
same region are rare events and include variable phenotypes, from 
moderate development delay and craniofacial asymmetry (Engelen et. 
al , 2003) to profound mental retardation but no life-threatening, un -
specific malformations (Wilson et al.,  1979).
The authors present the clinical description, cytogenetic studies and 
molecular findings of a male patient age 34 with severe mental re -
tardation and marked dysmorphic features: plagiocephaly; asymetric 
face, with midfacial hypoplasia and prominent antihelix. High resolu -
tion GTG banding karyotypes of the proband and parents revealed a 
“de novo” del(18q21.2→18q21.3) in the proband. Cytogenetic molecu -
lar techniques (FISH) excluded the involvement of any other chromo -
some and MLPA probes within bands 18q21 and 18q23 (kit P095 An -
euploidy) allowed us to redefine the bands involved and will hopefully 
be useful to improve the phenotype/genotype correlation in patients 
with interstitial 18q deletions.
The authors compare the present case with the ones previously de -
scribed in the literature and emphasize the importance of high resolu -
tion GTG banding in the characterization of dysmorphic/psychomotor 
delay syndromes and of making accurate clinical descriptions of the 
patients to contribute to syndrome clarifications.
P0348. A patient with Williams Beuren syndrome and inv dup(15)
V. Petix1, E. Bevilacqua1, A. Fabretto1, D. Gambel Benussi1, E. Lenzini2, V. 
Pecile1;  
1S.C. Genetica Medica, I.R.C.C.S. Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy, 2Dipartimento 
di Pediatria, Università degli Studi di Padova, Padova, Italy.
In the literature, very few reports describe the concomitant presence of 
2 anomalies leading to 2 different genetic syndromes. The contribution 
of each anomaly to the phenotype is still unclear. This report describes 
a case presenting contemporarily a Williams-Beuren Syndrome (WBS) 
and an inv dup(15) syndrome.
WBS is a microdeletion syndrome characterized by typical cardiovas -
cular defects, facial dysmorphisms, connective tissue abnormalities, 
mild mental retardation, specific cognitive profile, endocrine abnor -Cytogenetics112
malities and feeding difficulties. Hypotonia and hyperextensible joints 
can result in delayed attainment of motor milestones. Inv dup(15) syn -
drome presents peculiar physical findings (muscle hypotonia, minor 
facial dysmorphisms), mental retardation, seizure, autism.
An 11 years old boy with mild mental retardation showing some of these 
anomalies was referred to our examination. He was born at term with 
eutocic delivery with normal auxologic parameters. Phisycal exami -
nation: talus valgus pronate feet, gastroesophageal reflux, hypotonia 
and feeding difficulties. Later, he manifested systemic hypertension, 
growth (weight/height < 3rdcentile) and psychomotor delay. Echocar -
diography showed a mild supravalvular aortic stenosis, hypothyroidism 
was excluded. Calcium blood profile was normal. Cytogenetic analysis 
revealed this karyotype: 47,XY,+inv dup(15)(q12)de novo.
Although some features of the patient such as cortex anomalies, short 
and stubby hands and feet were specific of the iso dic(15), the peculiar 
facies and cardiac defect suggested a WBS.
Molecular cytogenetic analysis (FISH) was performed with WBSCR-
specific probe, the presence of specific microdeletion in 7q11.2 was 
confirmed. In this work, we compare the phenotype of patient with both 
syndromes to evaluate the different contribution of concomitant chro -
mosomal anomalies.
P0349. Clinical findings in pericentric inversion of chromosome 
9 - three years experience
M. Volosciuc , E. Braha, M. Gramescu, C. Rusu, M. Covic;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania.
Pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 is one of the most frequent 
structural balanced chromosomal aberrations. Commonly it is consid -
ered as a normal variant of karyotype.
We reported 6 cases analyses over a three years period. Age of di -
agnosis was under 18 years (2 cases) and over 18 years (4 cases). 
The motivation for genetic consultation was repeated miscarriage (3 
cases), multiple malformations in a new-born who died in the neonatal 
period (1 case) and mental retardation, dysmorphic face (2 cases). 
The karyotype showed pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 in all 
cases. In a single case we detected a complex anomaly - 45,X,inv(9)/ 
46,XX,inv(9) - Turner syndrome.
It is difficult to assess the correlation between clinical signs and peri -
centric inversion of chromosome 9. Genetic counselling and prenatal 
diagnosis is helpful for most families.
P0350. Breakpoint cloning and haplotype analysis of a 
novel cytogenetic variant consisting of a 12 Mb inversion on 
chromosome 10, inv(10)(q11.22;q21.1)
M. Entesarian1, B. Carlsson1, E. Stattin2, E. Holmberg3, I. Golovleva2, M. R. 
Mansouri1, N. Dahl1;  
1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Umea University Hospital, Umea, Swe -
den, 3Sahlgrenska University Hospital/East, Gothenburg, Sweden.
We have identified an inherited paracentric inversion of chromosome 1
0[inv(10)(q11.22;q21.1)] revealed by high resolution karyotyping. A de -
tailed mapping of the inversion was done through fluorescence in situ  
hybridization (FISH) and Southern blot hybridization in three non-re -
lated Swedish individuals. Cloning and sequencing of the breakpoints 
revealed that the inversion was identical in the three individuals. The 
inversion spans 12 Mb and it is almost perfectly balanced at the nucle -
otide level. No predicted transcripts or known genes are disrupted by 
the inversion breakpoints. The 10q11.22 breakpoint is located within a 
long terminal repeat (LTR) and the 10q21.1 breakpoint is 900 bp away 
from a short interspersed nuclear element (SINE). Haplotype analysis 
of the three individuals and their parents indicated that a shared hap -
lotype was inherited with the chromosome 10 inversion which favours 
a single event for the inversion. A retrospective study of amniocente -
ses and blood analyses performed in Sweden showed presence of the 
inversion in 7 out of 8,896 amniocenteses and in 3 out of 2362 blood 
analyses. In all cases the inversion was inherited from one of the par -
ents. From our results, we suggest that the inv(10)(q11.22;q21.1) is a 
rare variant and that it is identical by descent.
P0351. Molecular and cytogenetic analysis in IVF failure cases
M. B. Shamsi1, R. Kumar1, R. Dada1, M. Tanwar1, G. Idris1, R. K. Sharma2, R. 
Kumar1;  
1AIIMS, New Delhi, India, 2Army Research and Referral Hospital, New Delhi, India.
Chromosomal abnormalities in infertile couples results in spermato -
genic arrest, premature ovarian failure, implantation failure and conse -
quently failure of InVitro fertilization (IVF). The aim of the study was to 
determine genetic basis for recurrent ART/IVF failure.  Thirty eight in -
fertile couples with IVF failure having poor blastocyst development and 
implantation were analyzed cytogenetically and for molecular analysis 
of AZF loci in the men. Two females with recurrent IVF failure showed 
partial deletion of Xq and the other female had 10% cell line show -
ing deletion of pericenteromeric region of long arm of chromosome 
number 1. Of these couples microdeletion analysis of 30 cytogeneti -
cally normal infertile men, only two cases showed deletion; one with 
AZFc loci and the other case had deletion of AZFb loci. The couples 
where female partner had deletion of long arm of X chromosome(Xq-) 
resulted in repeated failure of blastocyt development, in 4 IVF cycles. 
The case with AZFb microdeletion had maturation arrest and case 
with AZFc deletion had hypospermatogenesis. In these cases sperms 
could be retrieved from the testis and to be used for IVF or Intracyto -
plasmic sperm injection. (ICSI). In cases with sex chromosomal and 
autosomal aberrations there is probability of poor embryo develop -
ment and consequently poor implantation, which may be a result of 
high segregation abnormalities and may negatively affect the outcome 
of assisted reproductive techniques. ART is a very expensive tech -
nique and recurrent ART/IVF failure results in severe financial stress 
coupled with emotional stress, thus all couples opting for ART must 
undergo genetic analysis.
P0352. An unusual 11q deletion derived from a complex maternal 
karyotype in a Jacobsen-like patient
L. J. C. M. van Zutven , Y. van Bever, C. van Nieuwland, D. van Opstal, L. J. A. 
Corel, C. H. Wouters, P. J. Poddighe;  
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
We present a family with multiple cytogenetic abnormalities, identi -
fied through a newborn girl with several dysmorphic features and 
cardiac problems, suspected for Jacobsen syndrome. Cytogenetic 
analysis showed a 46,XX,del(11)(qter) karyotype, which was con -
firmed by fluorescence in situ  hybridization (FISH). Cytogenetic in -
vestigation of the parents showed a chromosome aberration in both: 
the father presented a t(11;12)(p13;q22) and the mother was car -
rier of an ins(4;11)(p14;q24q25). Additional FISH analysis with BAC 
probes from chromosome 11q23.3-q25 showed that the maternal 
ins(4;11)(p14;q24q25) was in fact the result of two subsequent events: 
first, a small inversion in the long arm of one chromosome 11, and 
second, an insertion of a small distal part of the long arm of the invert -
ed chromosome 11 into the short arm of one chromosome 4. There -
fore, the maternal karyotype was revised into 46,XX,der(4)(4pter→
4p14::11qter::11q24.1→11q25::4p14→4qter),der(11)(pter→q23.3::
q25→q25:). The karyotype of the newborn girl was accordingly rewrit -
ten as 46,XX,der(11)(pter→q23.3::q25→q25:)mat.
The aberrant karyotypes in both parents implicated an increased risk 
of unbalanced fetal chromosome composition, and thus a high risk 
for a child with multiple congenital abnormalities. Therefore, during 
the next pregnancy, the couple opted for invasive prenatal diagnosis 
by amniocentesis. To obtain an early indication of the expected fetal 
karyotype, an interphase FISH strategy for uncultured amniotic fluid 
cells was designed. Karyotyping of cultured amniotic cells confirmed 
one of the two predicted cytogenetic options, demonstrating the im -
portance of an interphase strategy for couples with both parents being 
carrier of a chromosomal abnormality.
P0353. Jumping translocation and Prader-Willi syndrome: about 
one case
F. Girard1, B. Doray2, S. Soskin3, V. Biancalana4, M. Fradin1, N. Carelle1, C. 
Joumard1, E. Flori1;  
1Service de cytogénétique, CHRU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Service 
de génétique médicale, CHRU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Service de 
pédiatrie 1, CHRU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 4Laboratoire de diagnos -
tic génétique, CHRU de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
Jumping translocations are rare chromosomal events and are defined 
as chromosome rearrangements involving a donor chromosome seg -
ment which is translocated to various receptor chromosomes.
The majority of jumping translocations have been observed in haema -
tological malignancies.Cytogenetics11
Less than 10 cases of Prader-Willi syndrome associated with a jump -
ing translocation have been reported in the litterature.
Cytogenetic analysis performed on a 13 year old boy suspected of 
Prader-Willi syndrome showed a constitutionnal mosaicism with dif -
ferent cell lines :
45,X,der(Y)t(15;Y)(Ypter→Yqter::15q13→15qter),-15 [27] / 
45,X,der(Y)t(15;Y)(Yqter→Ypter::15q13→15qter),-15 [9] /
45,XY,der(15)t(15;15)(15pter→15qter::15q13→15qter),-15 [1] /
45,XY,der(13)t(13;15)(13pter→13qter::15q13→15qter),-15 [1] /
45,XY,der(17)t(15;17)(17qter→17pter::15q13→15qter),-15 [1] /
45,XY,der(22)t(15;22)(22pter→22qter::15q13→15qter),-15 [1].
In all cases, the majority of the long arm of one chromosome 15 is 
translocated on different receptor chromosomes and the centromere 
of the derived chromosome seems to belong to the receptor chromo -
some.
FISH studies show deletion of the region 15p11.2, the centromere and 
the region 15q11-q13.
The deletion of the region 15q11-q13 confirms Prader-Willi syndrome.
Hypothesis of the mechanism leading to this jumping translocation is 
discussed.
P0354. A report of a case with partial trisomy 13q with 
46,XY,der(14)t(13;14) (q13;p11.1),+13q13 Karyotype
M. Rahnama1, F. Mahjoubi2, S. Soleimani3, F. Mortezapour3, F. Razazian3, M. 
Zamanian3, F. Manouchehri3, M. Nourozinia3, M. Akbari3, M. Akbari4, F. Nasiri3;  
1IBTOy, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2IBTO & NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 3IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Akbari Medical Ge -
netics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
This has been shown that the trisomy of the distal part of chromosome 
13 is related to different clinic findings than cases with classic trisomy 
13. The different trisomic segments of the long arm of chromosome 13 
have been reported which might be either translocated or inserted in 
different chromosomes.
Our case was a baby boy and the first child of an unrelated family. 
He was born at term following a normal pregnancy. He referred to our 
clinic at the age of 4 months. He had postaxial polydactyly and syndac -
tyly of the left hand. He was deaf and legally blind.
He was generally presented with developmental delay, microcephaly, 
trinogocephaly, hypotelorism, and with feeding problem.
Cytogenetic analysis carried out using Tripsin Giemsa G banding 
(GTG), the karyotype 46,XY,der(14)t(13;14) (q13p11.1)+13q13 was 
determined in our patient . His mother and father were investigated 
and found to have normal karyotypes. To our best knowledge, this is 
the first report of a case where the trisomic segment of chromosome 
13 is translocated on to chromosome 14.
P0355. Is routine karyotyping necessary in the evaluation of 
hypospadias cryptorchidism and micropenis?
M. Ben Rekaya1, S. Makni2, F. Talmoudi1, O. Kilani1, N. Abdelmoula3, A. 
Amouri1;  
1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Hopital d’enfants, Tunis, Tunisia, Tu -
nis, Tunisia, 3Faculté de Médecine de Sfax, Tunisia, SFAX, Tunisia.
The incidence of intersex states has been reported to be 27% to 100% 
in patients with hypospadias and cryptorchidism, and routinely deter -
mining karyotypes has been recommended. This incidence seems 
much higher than in our experience. We reviewed the records of pa -
tients with hypospadias, cryptorchidism and/or micropenis as well as 
those referred with ambiguous genitalia to determine whether these 
findings were associated with a high incidence of chromosomal ab -
normalities and whether they warrant routine karyotype screening. 
We reviewed the records of patients with undescended testis, hypo -
spadias and/or micropenis, and those with ambiguous genitalia who 
presented between 2004 and 2006. Patients without karyotype deter -
mination, and those with iatrogenic cryptorchidism, retractile testes, 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia or female-appearing external genitalia 
were excluded from study. Of the 32 patients whose records matched 
study inclusion criteria, two patients (6,25%) had chromosomal abnor -
malities.Ambiguous genitalia was associated with sex chromosomal 
abnormalities in the 2 children and no case with autosomal chromo -
somal abnormalities. Most patients who present for the evaluation of 
hypospadias, micrpenis and undescended testis have a normal karyo -
type. Routine karyotype investigation of all patients with hypospadias, 
cryptorchidism and micropenis does not seem warranted. If karyotypic intersex abnormalities are identified, those patients are more likely to 
have ambiguous genitalia, especially those with perineal hypospadias 
and cryptorchidism.
P0356. Sex chromosome abnormalities in asoospermic males
L. Letica , R. Lasan, M. Burek, H. Ljubic, D. Begovic;  
Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University 
Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia.
Cytogenetical analysis has been carried out on 32 patiens diagnosed 
with azoospermia or hypogonadism. Conventional cytogenetical G - 
banding method and Flurescent in situ hybridization technique were 
considered in cultured peripheral blood.
22 cases showed karyotypes pure 47,XXY - Klinefelter syndrome, 2 
cases 47,XXY/46,XY - mosaic Klinefelter sy., 1 case 47,XXY/48,XXXY, 
2 cases 48,XXY,+ mar, 3 cases 46,XX male, 1 case 47,XYY, 1 case 
45,X,psu dic(Y,13).
FISH identified two marker chromosomes, detected SRY gene trans -
location on X chromosome in cases with karyotyp 46,XX male, also in 
karyotyp 45,X,psu dic Y,13. Cytogenetical research is very important to 
detect the cause of male infertility.
P0357. Cytogenetic Investigation in 945 Iranian Leukaemic 
Patients
M. Khaleghian1, F. Mahjoubi2, Z. Beheshty1, G. Togeh3, H. Jalalyfar4, M. Key -
hani3, M. Akbari5;  
1Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 2Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran& Clinical Genetic Dept, 
National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran, teh -
ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Dept of Hematology, Imam Hospital, Tehran, Iran, 
tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Dept of Hematology, Tehran, Iran, tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran & 
Department of Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Tarbiat Modaress University, Teh -
ran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
We analyzed bone marrow and peripheral blood samples of more 
than 550 Iranian Patients referred from Major hematology-oncology 
centers at Tehran and provincial capitals. They were either suspected 
of leukemia at presentation or being monitored for their response to 
medication. Bone marrow or/and blood cells were cultured, harvest -
ed and G-banded according to the standard protocols. Chromosome 
analysis was performed following ISCN guidelines. The patients were 
divided into six major groupings as far as the leukemia subtypes were 
concerned: CML, AML, ALL, MIDS, Lymphoma and others. They were 
more male patients than female (1.32: 1 ratio). In terms of sample type 
most cases had bone marrow aspiration whereas peripheral blood was 
utilized only in fraction of cases. The common typical chromosomal 
abnormalities as well as rare and complex forms were observed. The 
overall chromosomal abnormality rate obtained was around 50%. The 
breakdown figures for different categories were roughly as follows: 
80% in CML, 40% in AML, 25% in ALL, 30% in MDS and 50% in other 
types. Compared to published data, the observed chromosomal ab -
normality rate in the present study is considered average
P0358. Cytogenetic characterization of a diffuse large B-
cell lymphoma case using multi-color fluorescence in situ 
hybridization
E. Arranz1, A. Sanz1, F. Sanz1, J. Argerich1, J. Cannata2, J. Steegmann2, A. 
Figuera2, A. Alegre2;  
1Genetics Dpt. Hospital La Princesa, MADRID, Spain, 2Hematology Dpt. Hospi -
tal La Princesa, MADRID, Spain.
The diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is an aggressive malig -
nancy of mature B-lymphocytes, and accounts for approximately 40% 
of all NHL cases. This entity shows great clinical and genetic hetero -
geneity. Conventional cytogenetic techniques (CCT) has provided a 
useful, but incomplete analysis of the chromosomal changes observed 
in this disease due to the complexity and poor morphology of chromo -
somes that characterize the karyotypes obtained in this malignancy. 
This results in partially characterized karyotypes containing many 
chromosomal alterations unresolved in a large number of cases. The 
multi-color fluorescence in situ hybridization (M-FISH) analysis has 
helped to identify and characterize previously unidentified chromo -
somal abnormalities.
M-FISH was performed on lymph node from one DLBCL case in order 
to deliniate the complex chromosomal alterations that remained unre -Cytogenetics11
solved after CCT analysis.
M-FISH analysis resolved 100% chromosomal aberrations that had 
been misclassified by CCT analysis and masked as additional mate -
rial (adds) on unbalanced derivate chromosomes and marker chro -
mosomes.
Chromosomes preferentially involved in karyotipic aberrations were 
4, 8, 3, 5, 6 and 7 (in decreasing order). Breakpoints included 4q11, 
4q31, 8q12~q13, 3q27, 5q23, 6q14 and 7q31.
In conclusion, M-FISH represent an essential tool for clarifying karyo -
types with abnormalities that are not completely defined by CCT. In 
this sense, accurate cytogenetic characterization using a combination 
of M-FISH and CCT in DLBCL cases will facilitate comprehensive cor -
relation with clinical features.
P0359. Three patients with primary macroglobulinamia, strongly 
seropositive to Hp infection and t(11;18)(q21;q21)
S. N. Kokkinou , K. Tzanidakis, A. Lindou, K. Pavlou, H. Alafaki, G. Floropou -
lou, R. Hatzikyriakou, A. Haralabopoulou, G. Drosos;  
Cytogenetic Unit, Halandri Athens, Greece.
Introduction: Primary macroglobulinemia (PMG) is a proliferative dis -
order of an IgM producing B-cell clone with bone marrow infiltration 
by small lymphoid cells, plasma cells, anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, 
and hyperviscocity syndrome. On the other side Hp chronic infec -
tion can produce a MALT type lymphoma of the stomach, B-cell ori -
gin in which commonly the MALT1 gene(18q21) is fused to the AP12 
gene(11q21).
Aim of the study: We report 3 cases of PMG with t(11;18)(q21;q21) 
who were strongly seropositive to Hp. Our report demonstrates that 
part of PMG is the result of chronic Hp infection.
Patients: 1st patient: A man 47y with diplopia.
2nd patient: A man78y with mild anemia.
3rd patient: A woman 80ywith severe bone pain.
By immunoelectrophoresis all had IgMk paraproteinemia.
Their bone marrow was infiltrated by 10% abmormal lymphoid cells 
CD5- and CD10-.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with biopsy showed small 
Bcells[L26+,CD3-] and Tcells[CD3+,L26-]
Serum anti Hp IgG and IgA titers were increased.
Methods: Bone marrow specimens and PB lymphocytes were cultured 
using standard techniques.Thirty GTG banded metaphases were ana -
lyzed (ISCN1995).
FISH was performed using the LSIAP12/MALT1 t(11;18)(q21;q21) 
dual color, dual fusion translocation probe (VYSIS).
Results: The karyotypes looked normal.With FISH we evaluated as a 
translocation a one orange(MALT),one green(AP12) and two fusion 
(AP12/MALT) signal pattern.
Two hundrend interphase nuclei were counted.Up to 15% of the cells 
carryied the translocation.
Conclusions: 1) PMG cases with t(11;18)(q21;q21) are clinically dis -
tinct from other B-cell origin cases with this translocation. 2) Since 
PMG and MALT lymphomas are of B-cell type and share the same 
t(11;18)(q21;q21) it is suggestive that the chronic Hp infection can 
result to an abnormal proliferation of lymphoplasmacytic cells and to 
participate in the machanism of lymphomagenesis.
P0360. Cytogenetic abnormalities in male infertility
D. Ercal1, Z. O. Dogan2, M. Akgul3, C. Gunduz2, O. Cogulu4, C. Ozkinay3, F. 
Ozkinay4;  
1Dokuz Eylul University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, 
Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, 
Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 
Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of 
Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey.
Infertility is the inability to get pregnant after trying for at least one 
year without using birth control methods. About 25 percent of couples 
experience infertility at some point in their lifes. The incidence of infer -
tility increases with age. The male partner contributes to about 40 per -
cent of cases with infertility. This is a serious problem which concerns 
families in respect of economical and spiritual aspects. Recently the 
medical developments in the diagnostic procedure of those cases with 
infertility provided opportunities for the families. There are several rea -
sons that cause male infertility. The most common reason is varicosele 
in male infertility which is followed by sex chromosome abnormalities. In this study we aimed to evaluate the postnatally screened karyotype 
results in the individuals who were referred to our department due to 
primary infertility between 2000-2006 years in Izmir. A total of 179 cas -
es with infertility were evaluated retrospectively in our study. The mean 
age was 35.00±6.06 years. Twenty out of 179 (11.17%) cases showed 
chromosomal abnormality. Thirteen (7.3 %) were 47,XXY, 3 (1.68%) 
were 46,XY,inv(9) (p11;q13), one (0.56%) 46,XY/45,XO, one (0.56%) 
46,XY/47,XXY/48,XXXY, one (0,56%) 46,XY,t(X;1) and one (0,56%) 
46,XX. In conclusion we point out the importance of cytogenetic evalu -
ation in those cases with infertility.
P0361. Y chromosome abnormalities and male infertility
S. K. Murthy1, A. K. Malhotra1, P. S. Jacob1, S. Naveed1, E. E. M. Al-Row -
aished1, S. Mani1, S. Padariyakam1, A. Ridha2, M. T. Al-Ali1;  
1Genetics Department, Al Wasl Hospital, DOHMS, Dubai, United Arab Emir -
ates, 2Pathology Department, Dubai Hospital, DOHMS, Dubai, United Arab 
Emirates.
Genetic component is responsible for about 15% of male infertility. 
Among them, constitutional chromosomal abnormalities are found 
in about 5% of oligozoospermic men and 15% of azoospermic men. 
Males attending the infertility clinic and seeking for assisted reproduc -
tive techniques (ART) are routinely referred to our center for genetic 
testing. During the year 2006, 7/33 males (21.2%) with infertility were 
found to have chromosome abnormalities; four with 47,XXY, three with 
structural abnormalities of the Y chromosome and none with Y micro -
deletion for SRY, AZF and DAZ regions by PCR. Routine G-banding 
and appropriate FISH tests were carried out, and the karyotypes of the 
three cases with Y chromosome abnormalities were confirmed as :
Case 1 : 45,X,der(18)t(Y;18)(pter-p10::q10-qter).ish der(18)idic t(Y;18
)(p10;q10)(SRY+,DYZ3+;D18Z1+)[80]/ 46,XY,i(18)(q10).ish Y(SRY+),
i(18)(D18Z1+)[20]
Case 2 : 46,X,idic(Y)(qter-p11.32::p11.32-qter).ish idic(Y)(CEP 
Y++,SRY++)
Case 3 : 47,XYY[10]/46,XY[40]
Dicentric Y is the most common rearrangement of the Y chromosome, 
with varying break point regions, and is mostly present as part of a 
mosaic karyotype. However, Only 5 cases of isodicentric Y with break -
point at Yp11.32 are reported so far. We found a similar karyotype in 
an azoospermic male (case 2) but surprisingly non-mosaic. This could 
possibly be a germinal or a very early mitotic event. Since the entire 
Y chromosomes are present in this rearrangement, it is genetically 
similar to the XYY individuals. Case 1 was predominantly monosomic 
for 18p and loss of Yq, and presented with mild dysmorphic features 
and rudimentary gonads. The genetic findings, genotype-phenotype 
correlation and possible reproductive options in the three cases are 
discussed.
P0362. Supernumerary marker chromosomes derived from 
chromosome 15
I. Marco1, E. Arranz1, O. González1, S. Ramiro1, C. Blas1, M. Calderón1, A. 
Fernández-Jaén2, M. Renedo1;  
1Gemolab, Madrid, Spain, 2Servicio de Neurología.Hospital de la Zarzuela, 
Madrid, Spain.
Supernumerary chromosomes markers (SMCs) of chromosome 15 
are the most common SMCs in human accounting for 60% of all those 
observed. Molecular cytogenetics methods are necessary to identify 
these additional chromosomal markers. Conventional cytogenetics 
techniques are limited in terms of providing the necessary information 
about their origin. We present two cases, initially studied with standard 
GTG banding technique followed by complementary C-banding and 
NOR-staining.
Case 1: 47, XY, +mar Clinical features: Infertility
The marker is dicentric and with the application of M-FISH we identify 
that the marker was der (14) or der(15). Using specific centromeric 
FISH probes we were able to identify that it was derived from chromo -
some 15.
The patient is infertile.
Case 2:  47, XY, +mar Clinical features: autism
The marker is dicentric and using PW/AS FISH probe we have de -
tected that the marker was duplicated for this region, then the patient 
presents parcial tetrasomy for chromosome 15. Microsatellite analysis 
of the 15q11-q13 region is undertaken.
The comparison of the clinical data of our patients with those with simi -Cytogenetics11
lar markers taken from the literature allowed us to establish pheno -
type-karyotype correlations.
P0363. Chromosomal findings in 8727 Iranian patients with 
mental retardation
F. Nasiri1, F. Mahjoubi1,2, S. Soleimani1, M. Rahnama1, F. Mortezapour1, F. Ma -
nouchehri1, F. Razazian1, M. Zamanian1;  
1IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran.
The identification of a de novo chromosomal imbalance in a patient 
with mental retardation (MR) is usually considered causal for the phe -
notype. Most of imbalances in patients with MR are inherited from a 
healthy parent.
Here we review our cytogenetic investigations on 8727 Iranian patients 
referred to IBTO due to MR. Among these MR patients, 31 cases diag -
nosed with Fragile X and 112 with Down syndrome.
In 721 patients the following chromosomal abnormalities could be de -
tected:
46,XY, rec(10)dup(10p),inv(10)(p11.2q26.3)mat
46,XX,del5p
46,XY,del22q(11.2)
46,XX,add 15p ?
46,XX,del18 (21.3)[18]/46,XX[33]
49XXXXY/48,XXXX
46,XY,t(16 ;17)(q22 ;p13)
46, XXadd(22)(p13),
mos47,XY,+ mar[8]/46,XY[12]
4 7 , X X , d e l ( 2 ) ( q 2 2 q 3 2 . 2 ) + r ( 2 ) ( q 2 2 q 3 2 . 2 ) [ 8 1 ] /
46,XX,del(2)(q22q32.20[9]
46,XX,del(6)(p25)[7]/46,XX46]
46,XY,del(18)(q23)
47,XX,+der(22),t(11,22)(q23;q11.2)
45,Xx,t(7,22)(q36.2;q11.1~11.21)
45,X
46,XXinv6(p23q21)
47,XY,+ 21, dic(21;21)(q22.1;q22.3)
$5,XXder(13,14)(q10;q10)
48,XXYY
46, XX,inv6(q22.1;q25.1)
47,XXY
45,XY,der (13,14))q10;q10)
46,XX,del5(p15.2)
46,XX,t(2,3)(q23;25)
45,X
47,XY,+21,invY
48,XXYY
46,XXr(18)(q21.2qter)
46,XY,del(4)(p15.31)
46,XX,del(11)(q23.2
46,XY,add15p
48,XXX,+mar[2]/ 47,XXX[22]/46,X,+mar[8]/45,X[2]
47,XX,+13
46,Xy,del50p15.2)
In the remaining 45 MR patients no chromosomal abnormalities could 
be identifies. Our findings support the view that screening for chromo -
somal rearrangements has a great positive role. If cost and resources 
permit, conventional karyotyping should be the next diagnostic test of 
choice in a child with unexplained MR.
P0364. XYY in mentally retarded boy with tall stature, 
prognathism, hypoplastic toe nails and malformations of the 
hands
S. Tootian1, M. Khalegian1, S. Karymee1, M. Akbari2, F. Mahjoubi3;  
1Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 2Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran & ) Department of 
Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Tarbiat Modaress University, Tehran, Iran, tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Akbari Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Iran 
&National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran, 
tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Here we report a 25-year-old man referred to our laboratory for evalu -
ation of possible Fragile X syndrome on the basis of mild mental 
retardation. He was tall (194cm). His face was mildly dysmorphic. 
Prognatism was detected. He often showed excess negative mood and aggressiveness. He could finish his primary school. He worked 
as a mechanic. He suffered from spasm and muscle cramp. He had 
hypoplastic toe nails and short hands. Although he had a hydrocoele 
repaired, his genitalia were otherwise normal. The patients found to 
be negative for Fragile X. However, He was found to be 47 XYY from 
chromosomal examinations.Our case is the second reported case of 
a XYY boy with malformations of the hands. We could find just one 
previous article concerning XYY males with hands malformation. This 
combination of XYY male and nails and hands deformities may be co -
incidental. However, we think it is important to report the patient.
In summary, it is apparent that the mental and physical characteristics 
of the average XYY boy are yet to be determined. This is very impor -
tant to help the parents who are seeking prenatal diagnosis and whom 
found to have a fetus with XYY karyotype to make the right decision.
P0365. Chromosomal aetiology of congenital conotruncal heart 
malformations
I. Trabelsi1, B. Gargouri2, A. Amouri3, M. Cherif4, T. Rebai5, N. B. Abdelmoula5;  
1Hopital Hedi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Faculy of Science, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Pasteur 
Institute, Tunis, Tunisia, 4Private Sector, Tunis, Tunisia, 5Faculty of Medicine, 
Sfax, Tunisia.
Important advances in the diagnosis and treatment of congenital heart 
malformations have been made in the past 50 years. Nowadays while 
echocardiogram plays an important role in the diagnosis, etiologic as -
sessment at the genetic level becomes mandatory. In order to identify 
the frequency of chromosomal rearrangements and 22q11 microdele -
tions in patients with conotruncal heart defects, we studied by karyo -
typing and FISH procedures 44 patients. Each patient was investi -
gated by echocardiography. Anamnestic and clinical informations with 
regard to developmental milestones and dysmorphic features were 
recorded. Conotruncal heart defects, included tetralogy of Fallot (TF; 
n = 27), pulmonary atresia/ventricular septal defect (APSO; n = 7), 
double-outlet right ventricle (VDDI; n = 4), transposition of the great ar -
teries (TGV; n = 1 ), truncus arteriosus (TA; n = 1), subaortic ventricular 
septal defect (SACIV; n = 3), and interrupted aortic arch (IAAo; n = 
3). Phenotypic features and associated abnormalities were examined 
in these patients. One patient (2.27%) who had a TF had a de novo 
cytogenetic chromosomal abnormalities: 46,XY,der(16)t(16;?)(q24;?) 
and four (9.09%) had 22q11 microdeletions, including 33.33% of IAAo, 
16.67% of APSO and 7.40% of TF.
In patients with chromosomal abnormalities or 22q11 microdeletions, 
abnormal phenotypic features and associated abnormalities were ob -
served.
We conclude that children with congenital conotruncal heart malfor -
mations, should undergo karyotyping and microdeletion testing mainly 
when heart defects are associated with other congenital anomalies. 
Detection of chromosomal anomalies has a significant impact on prog -
nosis and follow-up of patients, as well as on genetic counseling of 
families.
P0366. Whole genome amplification from microdissected 
chromosomes
M. Höckner , M. Erdel, G. Utermann, D. Kotzot;  
Division of Clinical Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria.
The uniform whole genome amplification (WGA) of smallest amounts of 
DNA is a great challenge not only for single cell analysis in preimplan -
tation diagnostics or oncogenetic research but also for investigation of 
the parental origin of de novo balanced chromosome aberrations. In 
the latter it is not possible to differentiate marker alleles of the deriva -
tive chromosomes from alleles of their normal homolog by analysis of 
genomic DNA. For such investigations the derivative chromosomes 
and their normal homolog must be separated. For this purpose single 
chromosomes from lymphocyte metaphase spreads were dissected 
with a glass needle, and collected in a glass capillary filled with col -
lection buffer. Then, the DNA of the microdissected chromosomes 
was amplified by different types of WGA strategies. I-PEP (improved 
primer extension preamplification), a PCR based WGA using random 
priming, Genomiphi® and Repli-g® which are based on multiple dis -
placement amplification, and GenomePlex® single cell kit, which is 
based on library preparation and amplification using adaptor primers 
were compared according to their efficiency and practical application 
for subsequent microsatellite analysis. First preliminary data show a 
more efficient WGA by the Genomiphi®/Repli-g® kit and the Genome -Cytogenetics11
Plex® single cell kit than by the I-PEP approach. Further comparative 
investigations are in process and will be presented on the meeting. 
Practical applicability will be demonstrated in some cases with rare 
chromosomal rearrangements. In conclusion, WGA of single microdis -
sected chromosomes will be a new and powerful tool to improve our 
knowledge on meiotic and mitotic chromosomal behaviour.
P0367. Microdeletion in 17p13.3 telomeric to LIS1 and 
monosomy 21petr 21q21 in a man presenting azoospermia
S. Mougou , H. Hannechi, R. Bhouri, H. Elghezal, A. Saad;  
hopital farhat hached, sousse, Tunisia.
Monosomy for the segment 17(p13.3 pter) was first associated with 
the Miller-Dieker syndrome: recognized as a contiguous gene-deletion 
syndrome (MDS). It includes lissencephaly, significant facial dysmor -
phism and occasionally other congenital anomalies. These disorders 
result from a deletion of a common critical region including gene LIS1. 
However some MDS cases have been previously described to been 
associated with more distal deletions to LIS1 suggesting the implica -
tions of others genes in the brain development and neuronal migra -
tion. Here we describe a 24 years man consulting for azoospermia. 
Clinical findings associate moderate mental retardation and non spe -
cific dysmorphic features. R banded chromosome analysis revealed 
17p13.3 monosomy associated to a 21(pter,q21) monosomy as a re -
sult of an unbalanced segregation of a reciprocal maternal translo -
cation (45,XY,der17t(17;21)mat,-der21). Fluorescent in situ hybridisa -
tion studies on the mother and the proposita  confirmed the reciprocal 
translocation in the mother and a terminal deletion in the patient, which 
resulted in the retention of LIS1 and a deletion of the 17p telomere . 
The study show also that the proximal breakpoint in chromosome 21 
is proximal to the gene APP: the proximal boundary of the “monosomy 
21” critical region implicated in the “monosomy 21” phenotype: arthro -
griposis-like syndrome.Interstingly, telomeric 17p deletions without 
LIS1 deletions have been previously described frequently with severe 
mental retardation, hypotonia and abnormal brain imaging. However 
in our case the discrete clinical features contributes to illustrate the 
relationship between 17p13.3 genes deletions, the spectrum of the as -
sociated phenotypes and their implications in the brain development 
and the neuronal migration.
P0368. High recombination density and low interference in the 
domestic cat
P. Borodin , T. Karamysheva, N. Rubtsov;  
Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
During meiotic prophase hundreds of double-strand DNA breaks 
(DSB) are generated. Majority of them are repaired in non-crossover 
way, while the minority are resulted in crossovers. In most organisms, 
neighbouring crossover sites interfere with each other. The strength of 
the interference is estimated by the distance between adjacent cross -
over sites and by the shape parameter of gamma distribution. This 
parameter estimates a ratio of DSB randomly placed along the bivalent 
to the number of them resolved in crossover way. We analyzed the 
chromosome-wide patterns of meiotic recombination and interference 
in the domestic cat ( Felis domesticus  L.). We prepared synaptone -
mal complex (SC) spreads of meiotic chromosomes from the testes of 
three male cats and mapped 2633 sites of recombination along 1098 
individual autosomes, using immunolocalization of MLH1, a mismatch 
repair protein marking recombination sites. We estimated a total re -
combination length of the male cat genome as 2175.5 centimorgans. 
The cats showed the highest recombination density per unit of SC and 
lowest interference among mammals so far studied. Many recombina -
tion sites were located in close vicinity to each other and to the cen -
tromeres. Average distance between neighbouring sites was 22% SC 
length, while in humans and other mammals studied it usually exceeds 
50-60%. For the chromosomes of comparable size the shape param -
eter in the cats was equal to 4.1 while in mice and shrews was about 
14-18, , i.e. as much as one quarter of the precursors were converted 
into crossover sites in the cats against only 5-7% in other mammals.P0369. MLPA in detailed characterisation of chromosomal 
rearrangements: experience gathered from cases with 
psychomotoric retaradation, dysmorphic features and 
congenital anomalies
J. Camajova , M. Balascakova, Z. Vlckova, E. Kočárek, D. Novotna, T. Mariko -
va, E. Rausova, M. Simandlova, J. Vejvalka, M. Krhounek, M. Macek Jr., M. 
Macek;  
Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
Exact characterisation of chromosomal rearrangements is important 
for the identification of genes involved in different instances of psy -
chomotoric retardation (PMR), in patients with dysmorphic features 
and/or congenital anomalies. Commercial MLPA SALSA kits (MRC-
Holland; P036B, P070, P019, P020) were used in 26 cases that in 
parallel underwent cytogenetic and/or FISH examinations. MLPA da -
tasets were analyzed by our ,,in house“ software and subtelomeric 
rearrangements (del./dupl., or their combinations) were found in 5 / 
26 probands (19.2%): 1/ del. 3q29, ΔT 745kb (distance from the telo -
mere) was associated with a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, 
psychomotoric retardation, including disintegration of white / gray brain 
matter. However, this rearrangement was also revealed in the unaf -
fected mother and maternal grandmother, who also bears a duplica -
tion at 21q22.3, ΔT 80kb, thus causal relationship was excluded; 2/ in 
the case of Caudal regression syndrome with bilateral optical optical 
atrophy FISH revealed del./dupl. at 4p16.3. MLPA revealed the del. 
with ΔT 346-874kb; 3/ subtelomeric dupl. 15q26.3 ΔT 334-337kb was 
associated with microcephaly and PMR; 4/ del. 9q34.3, ΔT 706 kb and 
dupl. 12p24.33 ΔT 176-316kb was detected in a patient with PMR and 
dysmorphic features and 5/ del. 18q23, ΔT 220-539 and dupl. 4q35, 
ΔT 3872kb was associated with PMR, mutliple congenital anomalies 
and axial hypotony. In conclusion, MLPA supplements the FISH ex -
amination by more exact localization and characterisation of the range 
of del./dupl. in heterogeneous clinical cases. Differentiation between 
causal rearragements and variants is only possible via family analysis. 
Supported by VZFNM 000064203.
P0370. Molecular neurocytogenetic survey of intercellular 
genomic variations manifesting as aneuploidy in the human 
brain
I. Y. Iourov1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2, T. Liehr3, I. A. Demidova2, A. K. Beresheva2, 
A. D. Kolotii2, V. S. Kravets2, V. M. Vostrikov1, V. V. Monakhov1, N. A. Uranova1, 
I. V. Soloviev1, F. Pellestor4, Y. B. Yurov1,2;  
1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federa -
tion, 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Roszdrav, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 3Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Grenada, 
4Institute of Human Genetics, Montpellier, France.
Classical genetic views suggest all the cells forming the human brain 
to possess identical genomes. However, recent molecular cytogenetic 
studies of the brain have refute these experimentally unproven as -
sumptions and proposed a new biomedical direction, molecular neuro -
cytogenetics. Regardless previous molecular neurocytogenetic stud -
ies showing the brain populated by aneuploid cells, we are still far from 
knowing in what extent aneuploid cells affect the human brain. Using 
state-of-art interphase molecular cytogenetic techniques (multiprobe 
FISH with quantitative FISH, multicolor banding (MCB), PRINS, and 
PNA) and scoring about 1 million nuclei, we were able to establish the 
rate of mosaic aneuploidy of chromosomes 1, 7, 9, 14, 16, 18, 21, X, 
and Y in the unaffected, schizophrenia, and ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) 
brain (cerebral cortex):Cytogenetics11
BrainAutosomes  
(mean per autosome pair)Sex chromosomes
UnaffectedLosses  
Range: 0.1-0.7%  
Mean: 0.57%  
Gains  
Range: 0.1-0.2%  
Mean: 0.12%Chromosome X loss (females): 2%  
Chromosome X gain (males): 0.4%  
Chromosome Y gain: 0.1%
SchizophreniaLosses  
Range: 0.8-1.7%  
Mean:1.2%  
Gains  
Range: 0.2-0.6  
Mean:0.43%Chromosome X loss (females): 
2.2%  
Chromosome X gain (males): 0.6%  
Chromosome Y gain: 0.2%
ATLosses  
Range:1.3-3%  
Mean: 2%  
Gains  
Range:0.5%  
Mean:0.4%Chromosome X loss (females): 
3.5%  
Chromosome X gain (males): 2.8%  
Chromosome Y gain: 0.6%
Thus, the data show that aneuploidy do present in the human brain. However, the rate 
of stochastic aneuploidy differs between unaffected individuals and those affected by 
psychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases. We observed the schizophrenia brain to 
demonstrate significantly increased aneuploidy rate as to control. Furthermore, in AT 
(neurodegenerative disease featured by chromosome instability), the brain exhibited 
even more significant increase of aneuploidy as to both control and schizophrenia. 
We conclude that aneuploidy in the human brain possesses the potential not only to 
produce neuronal diversity but also to be a mechanism for neuropsychiatric disorders. 
Supported by INTAS, AT Children’s project, and DFG.
P0371. A direct comparison between whole genome 
oligonucleotide microarrays and whole genome BAC 
microarrays and an evaluation of the use of whole genome 
oligonucleotide microarrays in a prenatal diagnosis setting.
L. Xanthopoulou1, R. Wang2, R. Palmer2, B. Gibbons2, J. C. Harper1;  
1UCL, London, United Kingdom, 2North-East London Regional Cytogenetics 
Laboratory, London, United Kingdom.
Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) allows a high resolu -
tion whole genome analysis of copy number changes and can reveal 
submicroscopic duplications and deletions in individuals with normal 
G-band karyotypes.
Two genomic DNA samples from patients with known chromosome 
abnormalities were tested using both BAC and 60mer oligonucleotide 
array-CGH platforms.
The dye swap experiment using BAC arrays produced the clearest 
results, whereas the oligonucleotide arrays picked up more regions of 
possible copy number change for the same samples. Two of the de -
tected regions of copy number change were followed up by FISH: one 
of was confirmed, and one was found to be a genomic variant.
The Oligonucleotide array platform was also used to test two samples 
with low DNA concentrations (a clump of 3-5 normal female buccal 
cells and fibroblast DNA that had trisomy 21) by amplifying their DNA 
using multiple displacement amplification (MDA). The results of these 
experiments showed that biased whole genome amplification resulted 
in some regions being over- or under-represented in the final mix. The 
large amount of copy number variation in the human genome com -
plicates the distinction between normal variant and pathogenic copy 
number changes, and in addition background noise from experimental 
artefacts such as those found with the MDA amplified samples can 
further complicate data interpretation.
There is a need to standardize this technology and the methods of 
data analysis as well as a need to take into account variant regions in 
order to ensure proper data interpretation.
P0372. Monosomy 7q3 in a patient with karyotype 
47,XXX,del(7)(q3436)/46,XXdel(7)(q3436)
A. Laku1, V. Mokin1, M. Cikuli1, A. Mitre1, C. Pangalos2;  
1Medical Genetic Service, Tirana, Albania, 2Diagnostic Genetic Center, Athens, 
Greece.
Structural anomalies associated with a mosaic form of aneuploidy are 
rare events.
Partial monosomy 7q is a rare chromosomal disorder, which results in 
multiple congenital anomalies syndrome with severe mental retarda -
tion and growth failure.
We report a case of two month old female infant with a deletion of 7q3 chromosome region. The infant presented hypotonia and poor 
growth of prenatal onset, microcephaly, cranial asymmetry with broad 
forehead, upslanted palpebral fissures, strabismus, bulbous nose with 
anteverted nares, short wide philtrum, short neck, enlarged and low 
- set malformed auricles, broad and short fingers, sacral dimple. CT 
scan was normal, but cardiac ultrasonography showed congenital 
heart defect.
Traditional R banding revealed a 7q terminal deletion involving segment 
between cytogenetic bands 7q34 and 7q36 and mosaic form of 47,XXX 
syndrome. The girl’s karyotype was 47,XXX,del(7)(q34q36)(16%)/
46,XX,del(7)(q3436)(84%).
Two important genes have been described to the 7q3 region: the ho -
meobox HLXB9, for dominantly inherited sacral agenesis, and Sonic 
hedgehog, the major gene causing holoprosencephaly. Interestingly 
our patient had sacral dimple but not clinical features or CNS malfor -
mations of holoprosencephaly suggesting that the holoprosencephaly 
spectrum with 7qter deletion is extremely variable.
For the prevention the genetic counselling was indicated. The cytoge -
netic examination of the parents was recommended. Parental karyo -
types were normal. The deletion has occurred de novo. The risk of 
recurrence of monosomy 7q3 for patient’s sib was not increased.
The 47,XXX chromosome constitution is not associated with an obvi -
ously abnormal phenotype, and females with this karyotype cannot be 
distinguished from normal 46,XX females.
P0373. Molecular and cytogenetic analysis on multiple 
displacement amplification (MDA) products from single cells for 
Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD).
S. Glentis1, R. Wang2, S. SenGupta1, I. Craft3, A. Thornhill3, R. Palmer2, B. 
Gibbons2, J. C. Harper1;  
1University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2North-East London 
Regional Cytogenetics Laboratory, London, United Kingdom, 3London Fertility 
Centre, London, United Kingdom.
Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) is a technique where only 
a single cell is available for diagnosis. This limitation of the technique 
may be overcome with the use of MDA which amplifies the entire ge -
nome in few hours.
Buccal cells, lymphocytes and fibroblasts were used as a source of 
single cell DNA. Three cell lysis methods were used (Proteinase K, 
alkaline lysis, and modified alkaline lysis). DTT was excluded in the 
modified lysis. DNA from single cells was amplified either by MDA 
or by DOP. Two multiplex fluorescent PCR reactions were applied to 
the MDA products to test for MDA accuracy. MDA and DOP products 
were also used for metaphase-CGH and array-CGH analysis to check 
whether known aneuploidies could be detected.
Molecular analysis showed that the modified lysis protocol provided 
more accurate results. Different accuracy rates were obtained from dif -
ferent cell types for the loci tested (buccal cells: 44.3%, lymphocytes: 
74.3% fibroblasts: 73.4%). Allele dropout (ADO) ranged 18.8-24.5% 
in MDA products. In metaphase-CGH, DOP products from single cells 
produced clearer results compared to MDA products from the same 
starting material. 50% of MDA products from single cells could not be 
interpreted because of high background noise. In array-CGH, two con -
stitutional slides were tested with gDNA and MDA products with the 
latter giving unreliable results with high background noise.
In molecular analysis results seem promising for wider use of MDA for 
PGD. Further optimisation is needed for cytogenetic analysis espe -
cially in reducing the background noise.
P0374. Cytogenetic and Fluorescence in situ  Hybridization 
Analysis of 229 Chinese Myelodysplastic Syndrome Patients 
Diagnosed Using the WHO Classification
L. Bao1, X. Wang2, J. Ryder3, H. Fu4, G. Lin2, R. Irons3;  
1Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 
2Huashan Hospital, Shanghai, China, 3University of Colorado Health Sciences 
Center, Denver, CO, United States, 4Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
Two hundred and twenty-nine Chinese myelodysplastic syndrome 
(MDS) patients were diagnosed prospectively according to the WHO 
classification. There were 151 (66%) RCMD, 60 (26.2%) RAEB, 11 
(4.8%) RA, 4 (1.7%) MDS-u, 2 (0.9%) RARS, and 1 (0.4%) 5q- syn -
drome. Conventional banded chromosome analysis revealed 37.4% 
of the cases with clonal aberrations while FISH using the probes for 
+8, 20q-, -7/7q-, -5/5q- and 11q23- showed the abnormalities in 33.3% Cytogenetics11
of the cases. The common chromosomal aberrations were +8 (15%), 
20q- (10.1%), -7/7q- (5.8%), and -5/5q- (4.3%). The majority of WHO 
MDS cases had karyotypic features that are considered as either low 
or intermediate risk according to the International Prognosis Scoring 
System. Relatively higher percentages of poor risk karyotypes were 
observed among MDS subtypes RCMD and RAEB. Our study also 
demonstrated that banded chromosome analysis is the method of 
choice for MDS cytogenetic study and FISH is a useful adjunctive 
tool.
P0375. The cytogenetic analysis of 79 prenatally detected neural 
tube defects among 8370 prenatal samples
O. Cogulu1, S. Yilmaz2, A. Alpman1, C. Gunduz2, A. Ekmekci1, D. Ercal3, F. 
Ozkinay1, C. Ozkinay4;  
1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, 
2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, 
Turkey, 3Dokuz Eylul University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Ge -
netics, Izmir, Turkey.
Open neural tube defects (NTD) with an incidence of 0.1-0.15 % in 
West Europe and USA, are among the most common congenital anom -
alies. Prenatal detection of these birth defects has been increased by 
improved ultrasound techniques and maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein 
screening. It has been reported that 2-10 % of fetuses with neural tube 
defects have chromosomal abnormalities; however, there is no con -
sensus on whether to offer karyotype analysis to patients with isolated 
neural tube defects detected by ultrasound examination. The aim of 
this study is to evaluate the chromosomal results of 79 prenatally diag -
nosed fetuses with NTD in 8370 (0.94 %) prenatal samples during the 
7-year period from 2000 to 2007. Among those cases, open spina bi -
fida was detected in 37 fetuses (46.8 %), anencephaly in 24 (30.3 %), 
encephalocele in 7 (8.9 %), meningomyelocele in 5 (6.3 %), holopro -
cencephaly in 4 (5.0 %), and acrania in 3 (3.8 %). Cytogenetic analysis 
was performed in all fetuses with NTD detected by USG examination. 
Of the 75 fetuses who were successfully karyotyped, 69 were found to 
have normal karyotype, whereas one had 69,XXX, 2 inv(9)(p11;q13), 
one 46,XX,t(5;7) and one 46,XX,-13,+der13. The overall rate of con -
sanguinity between the couples who had prenatally detected fetuses 
with NTD was 21.5 % (17/79). We point out the importance of prenatal 
cytogenetic analysis in the patients with NTD
P0376. DNA secondary structure-forming propensity dictates 
translocation frequency
T. Kato1, H. Inagaki1, H. Kogo1, T. Ohye1, K. Yamada1, B. S. Emanuel2, H. Kura -
hashi1,3;  
1Division of Molecular Genetics, Fujita Health Univ, Toyoake, Japan, 2Division 
of Human Genetics, Children’s Hosp Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United 
States, 3Development Center for Targeted and Minimally Invasive Diagnosis 
and Treatment, Fujita Health Univ, Toyoake, Japan.
There is evidence accumulating to suggest that non-B DNA structures 
have a potential for genomic instability that induces genomic rear -
rangements including translocations and deletions. One of the best 
studied examples in humans is the recurrent t(11;22)(q23;q11) con -
stitutional translocation. The t(11;22) translocations have breakpoints 
on both chromosomes within specific sequences named palindromic 
AT-rich repeats (PATRRs). We suggest that the PATRRs form adopt a 
cruciform structure that is the source of genomic instability. Previously, 
we demonstrated that the existence of de novo t(11;22)s in sperm 
samples from normal healthy males using translocation-specific PCR. 
In this study, we show that polymorphism of the PATRRs affects the 
frequency of de novo translocation events. Symmetrical and longer 
alleles preferentially generate translocations, while asymmetrical and 
shorter alleles produce them at lower frequency. Further, we have vali -
dated the secondary structure-forming propensity of various PATRRs 
using in silico, in vitro, and in vivo analyses. As a result, symmetrical 
and longer alleles were more likely to form cruciform configuration. 
The secondary structure-forming propensity correlated well with the 
translocation frequency. Our results provide indirect but strong support 
to the hypothesis that the PATRR adopts a cruciform conformation in 
living cells that induces genomic instability leading to the transloca -
tion.P0377. Orientation of tri- and polysomic Chromosomes reflect 
Intranuclear Order
J. P. Chaudhuri , L. Song, L. Scott, S. Karamanov, J. R. McGill;  
Genzyme Genetics, Phoenix, AZ, United States.
Ordered arrangement of chromosomes has been reported from many 
plants and animals including murine and human specimens [1, 2]. Ge -
netic observations also indicated similar order [3, 4]. We see many 
indications exhibiting the order, e.g., in deviations in copy number of 
chromosomes. Tri- or polysomy is generated by mitotic nondysjunc -
tion and by asynchronous replication of a chromosome. One of the 
two chromosomes of a homologue is generally involved in polysomy. 
Orientation of these chromosomes conform to the basic order of ho -
mologues, which lie opposite each other. Here we shall present evi -
dences of intranuclear order from human cells at meta- and interphase 
following GTG banding and fluorescence in situ hybridization.
P0378. Pericentric inversion in chromosome 9 in Indian 
population
B. B. Ganguly ;  
MGM Centre for Genetic Research and Diagnosis, Mahatma Gandhi Mission’s 
New Bombay Hospital, Navi Mumbai, India.
Pericentric inversion in chromosome 9 (p 11q 13) has been detected in 
150 Indian individuals who had some clinical complications. Conven -
tional peripheral blood lymphocyte culture and G-banding employed 
for individuals suspected carrying some chromosomal abnormalities 
where other investigational parameters were inconclusive. Unstimu -
lated bone marrow culture and G-banding study was carried out in 
ten (10) teenage patients suffering from hematological malignancy. 
Individuals carrying inversion in chromosome 9 detected in peripheral 
blood had some kind of clinical problems related to either delayed pu -
berty or infertility. Adults had the primary or secondary infertility as the 
major clinical expression. Pericentric inversion in 9 has earlier been 
reported to cause infertility, however its association with adolescent 
development has been found in teenage girls who have not attained 
menarche. Since pubertal delay in girls is a serious concern among 
parents, they have been found predominant. However, at adult stage 
mostly male carriers are the contributors to infertility. Apparently there 
is no phenotypic anomaly among the carriers. In another group of teen -
age whose bone marrow was tested for cytogenetic diagnosis pericen -
tric inversion was additional abnormality, which was subsequently con -
firmed as constitutive through peripheral blood culture. In this subset 
of population, the inversion the inversion could be responsible for early 
onset of malignancy. Though human genome project (HGP) mapped 
the genes located in chromosome 9 and there is no phenotypic abnor -
mality in carriers, clinical correlation of expression of this intra-chro -
mosomal alteration needs to be investigated and establish to bring in 
some solution to its infertility related problem.
P0379. Pallister-Killian syndrome in a child with rare karyotype 
- a diagnostic problem
R. Smigiel1,2, J. Pilch3, I. Makowska1, R. Slezak1, M. M. Sasiadek1;  
1Genetic Department Wroclaw Medical University, Poland, Wroclaw, Poland, 
2Genetics Department, Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 3Department of 
Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
Pallister-Killian syndrome (PKS) is a rare disorder characterised by 
a specific combination of anatomic anomalies, mental retardation 
and dysmorphic features. PKS results from a mosaic tetrasomy 12p 
and was first described, independently by two groups. PKS is one of 
the chromosome aberration syndrome in which clinical diagnosis is 
an important starting point in the cytogenetic diagnosis involving into 
the analysis not only lymphocytes, but also fibroblasts. An additional 
12p in PKS patients are usually observed in only 2% of analysed lym -
phocytes, in 50-100% of analysed fibroblasts while in 100% of am -
niocytes and bone marrow cells. We report a case of PKS presenting 
an unusual karyotype: mosaicism 12p - tetrasomy/trisomy/disomy in 
fibroblasts and trisomy/disomy in lymphocytes. Marker chromosomes 
were investigated with conventional cytogenetic techniques followed 
by FISH. Only several reports of PKS presenting similar mosaic karyo -
type to this observed in our case were published. At the beginning of 
diagnostic process we considered the diagnosis of 12p trisomy. Thus, 
in combination with clinical manifestations and the fibroblasts karyo -
type, the Pallister-Killian syndrome was diagnosed. In our proband we 
observed a characteristic facial dysmorphism, severe intellectual dis -Cytogenetics11
ability with no speech ability, but we detected neither severe structural 
anomalies nor skin pigment abnormalities. Luebe et al. speculated that 
PKS patients with rare, mosaic tetrasomy/trisomy/disomy have milder 
phenotype and better prognosis than patients with the classic i(12p) 
mosaic in fibroblasts. However, our case does not confirm this specu -
lation. Each additional case of PKS presented in literature will contrib -
ute to better understanding of this rare disorder.
P0380. Male with delusional disorder, minor anomalies 
and apparently balanced chromosomal rearrangement 
46,Y,inv(X)(p11.23q23)
A. Zagorac1, M. Faganelj But1, N. Radosav Lartey2, A. Erjavec Skerget1, A. 
Prosnik1, B. Zagradisnik1, B. Kores Plesnicar1, N. Kokalj Vokac1;  
1Maribor Teaching Hospital, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia, 2Primary Health Center 
Ptuj, Ptuj, Slovenia.
We report on a 35 years old male patient with pericentric inversion of 
the X chromosome: 46,Y,inv(X)(p11.23q23) who was referred for cyto -
genetic analysis because of delusional disorder and minor anomalies.
At his first visit he denied the presence of any psychiatric symptoms, 
and complained only about the somatic difficulties. He was convinced 
of having a uterus, ovaries and enlarged breasts and he wanted a 
confirmation of being a female. During the psychiatric interview he was 
calm, very talkative, with good eye contact, spontaneous and he pre -
sented his life experiences in an interesting way. He stressed that he 
had a menstrual bleeding once in the past. Somatic delusions, delu -
sions about bodily functions were bizarre in the content and unargu -
able for the patient. They were central to his concern and his life. He 
was in paranoid position towards family and his social circle. Psycho 
diagnostic tests revealed a borderline intelligence and no cognitive 
dysfunctions.
In somatic examination pectus excavatum, kyphoscolyosis thoraco -
lumbalis, gothic palate, convergent strabismus and the right eye am -
blyopia were found.
Cytogenetic investigations revealed an inverted X chromosome. Fluo -
rescent in situ hybridization (FISH) using subtelomeric DNA probes 
for Xp and Xq confirm the pericentric inversion of the X chromosome. 
Further FISH analysis using a panel of BAC clones, allowed the identi -
fication of BAC’s spanning both the Xp11.23 and Xq23 breakpoints.
No microdeletions or microduplications were found but array CGH of X 
chromosome should be performed in the future.
Regarding genotype-phenotype correlations no such a case was de -
scribed in the literature.
P0381. Possible implication of NPAS  gene in a boy with 
psychiatric disorder and interstitial deletion of chromosome 14 
revealed by microarray analysis.
J. Puechberty1, A. Schneider1, G. Lefort1, J. Majorel2, J. De Vos3, P. Sarda1, A. 
Baghdadli2;  
1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU, Montpellier, France, 2Centre de Res -
sources Autisme, CHU, Montpellier, France, 3Institut de Recherche en Biothéra -
pie, CHU, Montpellier, France.
We report the case of a 19-year-old boy, second born of three children, 
who presents psychomotor delay, moderate mental deficiency, selec -
tive progressively worsening mutism and increasingly variable perfor -
mances. Clinical evaluation did not fit a specific psychiatric disorder 
and the suggested diagnosis was pervasive developmental disorder 
not otherwise specified. Chromosome studies on blood lymphocytes 
showed proximal chromosome 16p duplication inherited through a 
phenotypically normal mother. DNA microarray studies (Affymetrix) 
showed a 1.68 Mb deletion in the chromosome 14q12-q13.1 region 
which was subsequently confirmed by FISH and molecular biology. 
Database analysis of the deleted region revealed at least 5 genes. 
Among these genes, Neuronal PAS domain-containing protein 3 
gene is ubiquitously expressed in the adult brain and seems to play a 
role in neurogenesis. A previous study has shown its implication in a 
translocation found in a mother and daughter, with schizophrenia and 
schizophrenia associated with mild learning disability, respectively. An 
anomaly of the NPAS3  gene could lead to psychiatric disorders such 
as those reported.P0382. A new case of cryptic unbalanced t(1:12)(q44;p13.3) 
translocation with polymicrogyria
R. Genesio1, A. Conti1, F. Fabbrini1, P. Tedeschi1, M. Ferrara1, D. Melis1, G. 
Sebastio1, R. Ciccone2, O. Zuffardi2, L. Nitsch1;  
1University Federico II, Napoli, Italy, 2University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
Neurological disorders and seizures have been reported for most of 
the patients with del(1q) syndrome, but polymicrogyria (PMG) has 
been described only in two patients affected by a familial unbalanced 
translocation with 1q44qter monosomy and 12p13.3pter trisomy. PMG 
is a malformation in which the brain surface is irregular and the normal 
pattern is replaced by multiple small gyri separated by shallow sulci, 
and it is possibly due to a defect in neuronal migration.
Here we describe a new case of an unbalanced t(1;12) translocation 
with PMG in a five-year-old child presenting with facial dysmorphisms, 
mental retardation, microcephaly, corpus callosum and cerebellar hy -
poplasia, abnormal feet, hypospadia and seizures.
No chromosomal anomalies were detected by standard cytogenetic 
analysis. Array CGH analysis, by Agilent 44K chip, unraveled a termi -
nal 12Mb deletion of the q arm of chromosome 1 and a 3Mb duplica -
tion of the distal segment of chromosome 12p. Features of the pro -
band were consistent with both the terminal del(1q) and the dup(12p) 
syndromes, except for PMG that has never been described in either 
rearrangement.
As PMG seems to occur in t(1;12) translocations, we speculate that 
this defect might be caused by concomitant haploinsufficiency of 1q44 
genes and trisomy of 12p distal genes. Candidate genes mapping in 
these chromosomal regions and related pathways involved in neuronal 
migration will be discussed.
P0383. Radiprotective effects of medicinal plants’ polyphenols 
on human lymphocytes  in vitro
A. Leskovac , G. Joksic, S. Petrovic;  
Vinca Institute of Nuclear Sciences, Belgrade, Serbia.
The objective of the present study is to evaluate radioprotective prop -
erties of Crataegus monogyna  fruits, Cornus mas  leaves and Gen-
tianella austriaca  exctracts in cultured human peripheral blood lym -
phocytes in vitro , after irradiation with 2 Gy of 60Co γ-rays. Plants were 
collected at the mountain Maljen in Serbia; air-dried, powdered and 
total phenolic content was analyzed. In C. mas  leaves ellagic and gal -
lic acid as dominant compounds were found, whereas C. monogyna  
fruit was rich in procyanidins and flavonoids. Main constituents of G. 
austriaca  were ϒ-pyrones and secoiridoids. Significant radiorecovery 
potentials of C. mas  and C. monogyna  were observed, seen as re -
duced incidence of radiation induced micronuclei, reduced level of 
lipid peroxidation products and enhanced apoptosis. Enhancing the 
apoptosis of irradiated cells enables removal of damaged cells from 
irradiated tissue emphasizing physiological mechanism of cell death 
with no inflammation. Both extracts gently slow down the cell prolifera -
tion enabling more time for repair. Simultaneously, prolonged time for 
the DNA repair and elimination of heavily damaged cells via apopto -
sis will enable faster homeostasis among cells in irradiated tissue. G. 
austiaca polyphenols  acts as strong antioxidant: significantly reduces 
lipid peroxidation, incidence of micronuclei, enhances apoptosis with 
no perturbation in cell cycle. G. austriaca  posses remarkable protec -
tive properties, and should be examined further in detail. Investigation 
of its biological activity could be important for many other diseases 
where lipid peroxidation products have been reported. This study may 
contribute in the search for novel radioprotective agents.
P0384. Over 60 cases of PGD-FISH during years 1999-2007
N. Horelli-Kuitunen1, T. Tuuri2, S. Mäkinen2, C. Hyden-Granskog3, I. Reima4, A. 
Nordström5, A. Salumets6;  
1Medix Laboratories Ltd, Espoo, Finland, 2Family Federation of Finland, Infertil -
ity Clinic, Helsinki, Finland, 3Women’s Hospital, IVF-Unit, Helsinki, Finland, 
4Fertinova Clinic, Helsinki, Finland, 5Felicitas Clinic, Helsinki, Finland, 6AS Nova 
Vita Kliinik, Tallinn, Estonia.
Over 60 preimplantation genetic diagnostic cases have been per -
formed during years 1999-2007 using fluorescence in situ  hybridiza -
tion (FISH) method in collaboration between IVF-clinics in Helsinki 
area (both private and public) and Medix Laboratories. The indications 
for the IVF-PGD procedures were an advanced risk for an abnormal 
chromosome number/material. The advanced risks were due to either 
one the parents being a translocation carrier, advanced maternal age Cytogenetics120
or repeated failure in IVF treatments. The procedures included 9 AS- 
(aneuploidy screening), 13 sexing, 19 robertsonian translocation and 
20 resiprocal translocation cases. The probes were chosen depend -
ing of the detectable abnormality and all of them were commercially 
available. The probes were tested either on the carrier’s lymphocyte 
preparates in the cases of balanced translocation or on both spouse’s 
lymphocyte preparates. Altogether over 361 embryos and 533 blasto -
meres were studied. In these the success rate was 68-82 % depending 
from the class of study (AS, sexing, reciprocal or robertsonian trans -
location). From the studied embryos the rate of normal embryos were 
40 % in As-cases, 58 % (desired=girl) in sexing, 22 % in reciprocal and 
41 % in robertsonian translocations. As a result of the IVF-PGD proce -
dures 9 healthy babies have been born. Altogether clinical pregnancy 
rate/ET was for AS 37,5%, sexing 30%, robT 21% and balT 21% and 
take home baby rate/ET was 12,5%, 30%, 16% and 7%, respectively. 
To conclude PGD using FISH is a good option for couples having an 
advanced risk for abnormal chromosome content to have a chromo -
somally normal child.
P0385. FISH study of 45,X/46,XX mosaicism in patients with 
idiopathic premature ovarian failure
b. lakhal, r. braham, h. elghezal , s. mougou, s. hidar, m. chaieb, a. saad;  
hopital farhat hached, sousse, Tunisia.
Premature ovarian failure (POF) (OMIM 311360 and 300511) is a dis -
order characterized by amenorrhea and elevated serum gonadotro -
phin level before 40 years of age that accounts for about 10% of all 
female sterility.
Objective: to investigate the implication of low level 45,X/46,XX mosa -
icism in the development of idiopathic premature ovarian failure.
Patients: 81 cases of POF-affected women with normal karyotype: 37 
with primary amenorrhoea and 44 with secondary amenorrhoea of me -
dian age 25 years (range14 - 41) were analysed.
29 women with normal reproductive histories, having at least one child 
were selected as controls. The subjects in this group were approxi -
mately the same age as the patients with POF.
Methods: Interphasic FISH was performed in peripheral blood lympho -
cytes using centromeric probe of X chromosome associated with cen -
tromeric probe of chromosome 18 as a control. 
Only nuclei with two signals for chromosome 18 were analysed for the 
signal pattern of the X chromosome in order to exclude hybridization 
artifacts. For each woman, 500 cells were analysed.
Results: In the control group, X chromosome monosomy was detected 
in 0.95 to 3.5 % of cells (mean ± 2 SD, 2,33 ± 1,34).
Among patients, 15 (18,5 %) presented a significantly higher percent -
age of monosomic cells (>2,33 ± 1,34).
Conclusion: this study indicated that POF in some patients may be 
attributed to low-level 45,X/46,XX mosaicism. FISH is more sensitive 
than routine chromosome analysis in the detection of low-level X chro -
mosome monosomy and could be recommended for all POF patients 
with normal karyotype.
P0386. An unusual supernumerary marker chromosome 
diagnosed following amniocentesis for advanced maternal age: 
cytogenetic characterization and phenotype.
A. Schneider1, C. Abadie1, A. Chaze1, G. Lefort1, P. Blanchet1, P. Sarda1, P. 
Vago2, J. Puechberty1;  
1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU, Montpellier, France, 2Service de Cyto -
génétique Médicale, CHU, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
A 40-year-old woman was referred for amniocentesis at 16 WG. Am -
niotic fluid chromosome studies diagnosed mosaicism for a “de novo” 
small supernumerary marker chromosome (SMC) in a male foetus: 
47,XY,+mar [13] / 46,XY [8].
The marker was characterized using several molecular cytogenetic 
techniques. M-FISH studies indicated that the SMC contained euchro -
matic chromosome 1 material and this result was confirmed by positive 
whole chromosome 1 painting. FISH with probes for centromeric chro -
mosome 1 and subtelomeric 1p and 1q regions was negative. Micro -
dissection followed by reverse chromosome 1 painting suggested that 
the marker contained pericentromeric 1p and 1q material. In the light of 
these results, the parents elected to terminate pregnancy.
Autopsy of the 25 WG foetus showed slight craniofacial dysmorphism, 
bilateral camptodactylia and rocker bottom feet, but no organ malfor -
mation. Variable degrees of mosaicism was confirmed by cytogenetic analysis on amniotic fluid at termination and on tissues at autopsy 
(skin, lung, heart, kidney).The cytogenetic characteristics and partial 
trisomy 1 phenotype are discussed.
P0387. Trabecular meshwork structure in Primary congenital 
glaucoma and Sturge-Weber syndrome
M. Tanwar1, J. Kaur2, T. Dada3, R. Dada1;  
1Department of Anatomy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New delhi, 
India, 2Ocular Biochemistry, R.P. Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences, New delhi, India, 3Dr. R.P. Centre for Ophthalmic 
Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New delhi, India.
Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is a genetic disease which mani -
fests at birth or in infancy. PCG characterized by buphthalmos, high 
intraocular pressure, corneal edema and photophobia. We had done 
electrone-microscopy of seven trabeculectomy samples. In which 
one case was PCG with Sturge-Weber syndrome. Sturge-Weber syn -
drome is defined as facial port-wine stain in association with ipsilateral 
pial,vascular anomalies and inconstant ipsilateral choroidal vascular 
lesions with glaucoma. Materials: Seven cases of PCG were enroled in 
this study. One case was PCG with Sturge-Weber syndrome Method. 
To look for any cytogenetic abnormality, lymphocyte culture was set 
and chromosomes were analysed with GTG banding. After informed 
consent trabecular tissue were collected to look for any structural 
changes in trabecular meshwork. Surgical trabeculectomy tissues 
were sent for scanning electrone micropy. For EM study specimens 
were fixed in glutraldehyde fixative for 12 hrs and then post fixed in 
the osmium tetra oxide at 1% for 2 hrs. Tissue was dehydrated and 
mounted and gold plated. Scanning electrone microscopy was done. 
Results: Cytogenetically all patients were normal. EM pictures of tra -
becular meshwork in all patients showed trabeculardysgenesis and 
some unidentified spherical structures of varying size were seen in 
case with Sturge-Weber syndrome Conclusion: Due to trabeculardys -
genesis IOP rises in the anterior chamber leading to glaucoma in PCG 
cases. In Sturge-Weber syndrome, spherical structures of varying 
sizes were seen, may obstructing the normal aqueous outflow. These 
structures are occupying the vital space and damaging structure of 
trabecular meshwork leading to blockages causing rise in IOP leading 
to glaucoma.
P0388. Array-CGH analysis of products of conception with high 
density oligonucleotide arrays
G. A. Toruner , D. Streck, J. J. Dermody, M. N. Schwalb;  
UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, United States.
Fifty percent of miscarriages are due to chromosomal abnormalities. 
Cytogenetic analysis of products of conception (POC) provides infor -
mation about the cause of miscarriage and recurrence risk. This analy -
sis depends on success in culturing of fetal tissue and preparation of 
metaphase cells. Tissue culture failures and suboptimal chromosomal 
preparations render the cytogenetic analysis unsuccessful in 10-40% 
cases. In addition, selective growth of maternal cells may lead to er -
roneous normal findings Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) is 
a laboratory technique that enables assessment of relative DNA copy 
number changes between fluorescently labeled patient and control 
genomic DNA. Tissue culturing is not necessary for this assay and 
it has more resolution than karyotyping. There are some reports of 
CGH studies on POC specimens. These studies are either classical 
CGH studies or array-CGH studies on BAC arrays. So far no oligo -
nucleotide array CGH study on POC specimens has been published. 
That is the reason we decided to perform a validation array-CGH study 
using custom oligonucleotide arrays from Agilent technologies. In this 
study, we analyzed 24 POC (fetal tissue and chorionic villi) specimens 
with known karyotype results and 6 tissue cultures failures. We were 
able to generate array CGH results from all samples. Cytogenetic re -
sults and CGH results were 100% concordant. In addition, previously 
undetected deletions were observed in two specimens (16p21 and 
22q11.22) were after oligonucleotide array-CGH. These results indi -
cate that oligonucleotide array-CGH can be used as a rapid diagnostic 
tool for analysis of POC.Cytogenetics121
P0389. An age based cytogenetic analysis in prostate cancer 
patients in Southern India
B. Vellingiri , B. Lakshman Kumar, K. Sasikala;
Prostate cancer is a malignant tumor that arises in the prostate gland. 
It is located near the bladder and rectum, which creates and stores 
components of semen.Prostate cancer is the second most leading 
cause of death in men due to any cancer type in India. Human pros -
tate cancer is characterized by multiple gross chromosome alterations. 
However the specific genes involved in the development of prostate 
tumors are still largely unknown. The chromosomal region largely af -
fected in prostate cancer patients are 1, 6, 7, 8, 10, 13, 16, 17, 18, X 
and Y.
Since chromosomal abnormalities are involved in tumorigenesis, we 
selected karyotypic analysis in Prostate cancer patients in Southern 
India patients.. Prostate size in the patients is increased proportional 
to their age, so we performed an age based cytogenetic analysis. In 
the present study blood samples were collected from various hospitals 
in and around Tamilnadu.
Out of the 40 blood samples (Prostate cancer samples) 36% of the 
slides showed chromosomal aberrations such as deletions, transloca -
tions, mosaics and inversion. Among three groups Group II and Group 
III showed majority of chromosomal abnormalities when compared to 
Group I. In Group II ,46 XY,del (1q-),46, XY inv (16), 46,XY,t(6q;16q+), 
46 XY,del(5p-), 46,XY,inv(9), 46XY,del(8q-) chromosomal aberrations 
were observed. In Group III ,46,XY,t(6q;16q+), 46,XY,/46,XY del (5p-
), 46 XY,del (Yq-), 46 XY, del (1q-) are identified. The chromosomes 
mainly affected in the present study include 1, 6, 5, 8 and 16. Iden -
tification of chromosome alterations may be helpful on arising better 
therapeutic strategies in future.
P0390. Report of a patient with duplication of proximal 20q: 
clinical and cytogenetic characterization
N. Marle1, L. Faivre2, P. Callier1, C. Thauvin2, A. Mosca1, F. Mugneret1;  
1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU Le Bocage, Dijon, France, 2Centre de 
Génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants, Dijon, France.
Partial trisomies of the long arm of chromosome 20 are rare. Most 
cases reported in the literature are the result of malsegregation of a 
parental translocation and are complicated by additional partial mono -
somy or trisomy of another chromosome region. Here we report the 
first child of healthy non consanguineous parents with pure 20q11.2 
trisomy. He was first referred at age 2 months for facial dysmorphism 
(prominent metopic suture, epicanthic folds, peripalpebral oedema, 
small and thick ears, prominent cheeks) and standard karyotype ap -
peared normal. He walked independently at age 25 months and speech 
delay was noted. At 3 years of age, measurements were within normal 
limits. Cytogenetic analysis of cultured peripheral blood lymphocytes 
with high resolution banding revealed a male karyotype with an appar -
ent interstitial duplication in the long arm of chromosome 20 of band 
20q11.2. FISH studies with a whole chromosome paint probe (WCP) 
specific for chromosome 20 confirmed that the additional material was 
originated from chromosome 20. FISH studies with M-BAND and BAC 
probes specific for the long arm of chromosome 20 confirmed that the 
duplicated band was restricted to band 20q11.2. The full karyotype 
was therefore 46,XY,dup(20)(q11.1q12).ish dup(20)(WCP20+,RP5-
1184F4++,RP11-382A12++). Both parents had a normal karyotype, in 
favour of a de novo duplication. To the best of our knowledge, only 
four cases of pure 20q trisomy resulting from duplication have been 
reported. We compare clinical features and cytogenetic findings of our 
case with the previously reported observations.
P0391. Array CGH delineation of de novo pure partial trisomy 
17q24.3-qter due to a terminal duplication in one-year-old girl
M. Stefanova1, K. Kovacheva2, M. Simeonova2, H. Rose3, M. Kirchhoff3;  
1Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 2Medical University, Pleven, Bulgaria, 
3Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
Pure partial trisomy 17q24.3-qter is only described in a few cases, 
but it is an increasingly recognized clinical entity (Bridge et al., 1985; 
Orye and van Bever, 1985; Schwanitz et al., 1988; Ohado et al., 1989; 
Ghaffari et al., 1998). The characteristic features of this chromosome 
aberration include varying degrees of mental retardation, short stat -
ure, narrow forehead, macrostomia, a simple and long philtrum, low 
posterior hairline, and genital anomalies (Schinzel, 2001). Here we 
report a detailed clinical and molecular investigation of a one-year-old girl with a de novo dup(17)(q24.3-qter). She presented with severe 
developmental and growth delay, microcephaly, hypotonia and the fol -
lowing dysmorphic features: narrow forehead, upslanting palpebral fis -
sures, hypertelorism, low-set posteriorly rotated ears with pronounced 
antihelix, large mouth, a simple and long philtrum, micrognatia, low 
posterior hairline, thenar hypoplasia, cutis marmorata, hypoplastic la -
bia and prominent clitoris. No brain or inner organ anomalies were 
found. Conventional cytogenetics revealed an additional material on 
17qter identified by 244k Agilent oligoarrays CGH analysis as a dupli -
cation of chromosome region 17q24.3-qter with a breakpoint between 
66,580,674 and 66,678,854bp. Our case is the first pure duplication 
of chromosome region 17(q24.3-qter) confined by array CGH studies 
and it shows the usefulness of recently developed array CGH technol -
ogy to accurately characterize chromosome abnormalities, especially 
when they are de novo.
P0392. A novel reciprocal translocation t(l ;17) detected in a 
woman with recurrent abortion
F. Manoochehri , S. Tootian, M. Rahnama, F. Razazian., F. Mortezapour barfi, 
M. Zamanian, F. Nasiri, S. Soleymani., F. Mahjoubi;  
Iran blood Transfusion Organization, 2 National Research Institute for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
In the present study, we present a novel reciprocal translocation  t(l;17) 
(17pter.17p36.2::1p13 1pter)(1pter.1p13::17p36.2 17qter).  A couple 
was referred to us for chromosomal analysis because of the history of 
two spontaneous abortions. Both husband and wife had a phynotypi -
cally normal child from their previous marriage. There had been no his -
tory of repeated spontaneous abortions in their families. Chromosomal 
study was performed on peripheral blood lymphocytes. A balanced re -
ciprocal translocation between chromosomes 1 and 17 was observed 
in the wife. Therefore, the karytotype was assecced as 46,XX,t(l;17) 
(17pter.17p36.2::1p13 1pter)(1pter.1p13::17p36.2 17qter). The hus -
band had normal karyotype. To the best of our knowledge these break -
points have not been reported previously. Thus, we can assume that 
this is the first report of a translocation between chromosome 1 and 17, 
with such breakpoints
P0393. Importance of the correct designation of breakpoints for 
structural chromosomal aberrations in preimplantation genetic 
diagnosis strategies
S. A. Tashkandi1, A. Mantzouratou1, A. Mania1, E. Fragoul1, A. Doshi2, S. Nut -
tall2, K. Fordham1, P. Serhal2, J. D. A. Delhanty1, J. C. Harper1;  
1University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2University College Lon -
don Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Three couples were referred to our PGD centre where the 
male partner was a carrier of a balanced reciprocal translocation. PGD 
protocols were designed according to the provided karyotypes. During 
the workup it was found that the breakpoints reported in the karyotypes 
were incorrect.
Methods: 
Case 1:  46,XY,t(14;16)(q13;q11.1) and oligospermia
Case 2 : 46,XY,t(1;4)(q12;q33) and poor sperm parameters
Case 3:  46,XY,t(1;21)(q21.3;q22.1) and primary infertility
FISH protocols were designed using probes for the chromosomes in -
volved in each translocation. Protocols were optimised on metaphase 
spreads from both partners.
Results: Using the individual FISH protocols determined from the 
karyotype, it was found that in all three cases the incorrect break points 
had been reporeted.
Case 1:  Breakpoint on 16q11.1 was incorrect as the breakpoint was 
below this region. The derivative chromosome 14 would be missed in 
the balanced embryo.
Case 2:  Breakpoint on 1q12 was incorrect as the breakpoint was at the 
centromere. This could have led to an extra signal for the centromere 
of chromosome 1 in a balanced embryo.
Case 3:  Breakpoint on 1q21.3 was incorrect as the correct breakpoint 
was 1q12. This could have led to an extra signal for the centromere of 
chromosome 1 in a balanced embryo.
New protocols were designed and the patients underwent PGD.
Conclusions: This study highlights the need to test PGD FISH proto -
cols on metaphase spreads from the patient to confirm the karyotype. 
Incorrect designation of breakpoints could lead to the use of an unin -
formative protocol which could result in a misdiagnosisCytogenetics122
P0394. Evaluation of the recurrent miscarriage by chromosome’s 
analysis in the Cytogenetic Laboratory of the Clinic Obstetric-
Gynecology Hospital “Dr. Dumitru Popescu” Timisoara
M. Mihaescu1,2, D. Navolan3,4, E. Taurescu3,4, C. Citu3,4, I. Sas5, D. Chiriac5, D. 
Citu3,4;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, TIMISOARA, Romania, 
2Cl. Hosp. Ob-Gyn”dr. Dumitru Popescu”- Cytogenetic Laboratory, Timisoara, 
Romania, 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy, TIMISOARA, Romania, 4Cl 
Hosp Ob-Gyn”dr. Dumitru Popescu”, Timisoara, Romania, 5Cl. Hosp Ob-Gyn, 
TIMISOARA, Romania.
Due to the age of the future parents, the consensus on the moment 
of evaluation of a recurrent miscarriage has changed from after third 
or fourth to after second miscarriages. Chromosomal anomalies are 
known as one of the common causes of the spontaneous abortion. 
The problem identification and the diagnostic procedures include a 
large sample of practices: cytogenetic studies, studies regarding the 
anatomic integrity of the genital organs, studies concerning the diag -
nosis of the endocrine abnormalities, and the assessment of the blood 
coagulation protein/platelet defects.
In the Cytogenetic Laboratory of the Clinic Obstetric-Gynecology Hos -
pital “Dr. Dumitru Popescu”, founded in March, 2006, the chromosome 
imbalance can be diagnosed by cytogenetic investigations of virtually 
any tissue type. The cytogenetic studies of abortuses (7 cases), were 
carried on using entire abortus (2 cases), placental villi (2 cases), am -
nion (2 cases), and, for the first time in our country, fetal biopsy (3 
cases). For advanced gestation, the fetus’ blood in a sodium heparin 
was also utilized (2 cases). The culture success rate was increased 
by using more sample types for the same case (4 cases). The used 
culture techniques - fibroblast cultures, amnion cultures, placental villi 
cultures, blood cultures - were standardized and their processing was 
done according to the standard protocols. The chromosomes analysis 
was carried on (Ikaros-Metasystem) after the GTG banding. We also 
analyzed, during the same period, blood samples of 10 couples with 2 
or more spontaneous abortions.
Results: aneuploidies (2 cases 45, X, and loss of various chromo -
somes), 2 cases of normal karyotype and 3 cases of culture failure. 
Among the couples we found 1 balanced translocation t(4;15), 1 case 
inv 9 (p12;q13) and normal karyotype for the rest.
P0395. Chromosome Abnormalities (ChrA) detected by 
conventional and high resolution (HR) cytogenetic assessment 
in tumor cells (TuC) and blood lymphocytes (BLy) from 18 
patients with renal cell carcinoma (RCC)
A. B. Falcón de Vargas1,2, R. E. Vargas Arenas1, H. Dávila1, M. Uribe1, M. 
Seemann1;  
1HCC-Institute of Inmunology, Caracas, Venezuela, 2Genetics Unit, Vargas 
Medical School. Faculty of Medicine, UCV., Caracas, Venezuela.
In 18 patients with diagnosis of RCC, 10 males and 8 females, mean 
age 59.9+/-11.2 years (range: 17 to 74), conventional and HR studies 
were carried out in Chr from TuC and BLy. A total of 322 metaphases 
in TuC and 534 in BLy of patients and 534 in BLy of 18 healthy controls 
matched by age and sex were studied. Results showed numerical and 
structural changes of Chr in patients with RCC (p<0.001).
Chr breakages were found in 60% of TuC and 10% of BLy of 15 and 
7 patients.
In patients with RCC, CrA were found in TuC/BLy: acrocentric segrega -
tion in 6/0, polyploidies (4/0), poly> 60 (12/1), endoreduplications (6/2), 
double minute (6/2), dicentrics (3/0), triradios (3/0), quadriradios (3/0). 
Numerical clonal changes: +7 in 4/1, +7+7 (2/0), +7+8 (1/0), +8 (7/0), 
+10 (5/2), +11 (1/0), +13 (1/0), -3 (1/0) , -8 in 1/0, -10 (2/0), -X (2/0), -Y 
(4/3). A translocation t(3;8) (3p14.2-8q24) was found in TUC of one pa -
tient; deletion del 3p14 and a complex reorganization were also found 
in one patient in each case.
We conclude that ChrA are present in a high proportion of TuC and in 
a lower proportion in BLy of patients with RCC. These ChrA should be 
considered inespecific since could be seen in other conditions such as 
different types of cancer, hematooncological disorders and virus infec -
tions, and also induced by mutagenic agents.
Further studies are required to determined the clinical value of these 
changes from the prognosis and therapeutic viewpoint in RCC.P0396. Subtelomere rearrangements in couples with repeated 
miscarriages
E. Morizio1, C. Nuzzi2, P. Guanciali-Franchi1,2, D. Romagno1, G. Calabrese1,2,3, 
G. Palka1,2,3;  
1Genetica Medica, Pescara Hospital, Pescara, Italy, 2Genetica Medica, Univer -
sity of Chieti, Chieti Scalo, Italy, 3G. D’Annunzio Foundation, Chieti Scalo, Italy.
Subtelomeric rearrangements, currently detected by FISH, STR, MLPA 
or Array-CGH approaches, are known to be associated with mental 
retardation and congenital malformations. Few reports describe sub -
telomere rearrangements in women with repeated miscarriages. By 
FISH analysis with a complete panel of subtelomere probes (Cytocell, 
UK; Vysis, USA; MP, France) we investigated 60 couples suffering 
for recurrent abortions (>2 aborted foetuses). All couples had normal 
karyotype and no clinical or genetic anomalies. In 2 couples (3%) we 
identified a subtelomeric rearrangement. In a couple referred for four 
consecutive 1st trimester spontaneous abortions, the spouse, nul -
lipara, had a reciprocal translocation t(9;16)(q34;p13.3) de novo. In 
another couple with three 1st trimester spontaneus miscarriages and 
a healthy son, FISH using Multi-T probe device disclosed a 9q sub -
telomere duplication as an insertion onto chromosome 7p close to the 
apparently normal 7p subtelomeric region. The same rearrangement 
was also present in her son, in her brother and her mother who was 
reported as having experienced repeated abortions. FISH probes from 
other commercial sources were not able to confirm duplication of 9q 
subtelomeric region onto 7p. Fiber-FISH experiments revealed that the 
different commercially available 9q subtelomeric probes actually span 
different 9q regions being only the most distal one able to display the 
9q duplication.
Further studies on large series of patients will allow to establish re -
peated miscarriages as an indication for subtelomeric analysis. The 
finding that various FISH probes reported as specific for the same sub -
telomeric region map at different chromosomal sites could be relevant 
for subtelomere analysis.
P0397. Case report: Patient with ring chromosome 4
J. Huber1, E. S. Ramos1, D. G. Melo2, L. R. Martelli1;  
1University of São Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil, 2Federal University of São 
Carlos, São Carlos, Brazil.
Ring chromosome formations are rare structural chromosome aberra -
tion. Most of them are sporadic cases. Patients with ring chromosome 
4 are rarely observed. They associate concomitant loss of the telomeric 
4p and 4q regions and lead to variable clinical manifestations depend -
ing on the size of the deleted chromosomal material. The authors re -
port a 2 years old male patient with a near normal psychomotor devel -
opment, some minor dysmorphism and with cytogenetic analysis from 
lymphocytes showing a mosaic karyotype 46,XY,r(4)[86]/46,XY[14]. 
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) study was also performed. 
We compare the phenotypic appearance of our patient with the previ -
ously reported cases of ring chromosome 4 in the medical literature.
P0398. Clinical features of a case with ring chromosome 18
M. Zamanian1, F. Mahjoubi1,2, S. Soleimani1, M. Rahnama1, F. Mortezapour1, F. 
Razazian1, F. Manouchehri1, F. Nasiri1;  
1IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2NRCGEB, Tehran, Indonesia.
Rings of chromosome 18[r(18)] are frequent among ring chromo -
somes: depending on the size of the deleted regions in 18p and 18q, 
the clinical symptoms of r(18) correspond more or less to the typical 
signs of the 18p and 18q deletion syndromes. Ring chromosome 18 
[r(18)] syndrome is characterized by mild to moderate learning disabil -
ity, behavioural disorders, and various dysmorphic features.
Here we report an additional case of a 14 months girl with r (18). The 
girl was born at term after an uncomplicated pregnanacy and delivery. 
Birth weight was about 1.5 kg, length 48cm, and head circumference 
36cm. The girls presented hypertelorism, hypotonia, epicanthal folds, 
abnormal fingers, low set ears, and abnormally growth teeth. Echocar -
diography indicated dilation of the aorta.
Karyotyping after lymphocyte culture at the age of 14 months revealed 
46,XX,r(18)(q21.2qter). The parent had normal karyotype.
The clinical feature of our case is mostly compatible with the other re -
ported cases of r(18) except the presence of abnormal teeth and heart 
problem. This report further contribute to to the clinical of the r(18).Cytogenetics12
P0399. Molecular Characterization of a case of ring chromosome 9
O. González1, I. Marco1, S. Ramiro1, C. Fernández-R.1, A. Fernández-Jaén2, E. 
Arranz1, M. Renedo1;  
1Gemolab, Madrid, Spain, 2Servicio de Neurología.Hospital de la Zarzuela, 
Madrid, Spain.
Ring chromosomes are rare and are typically de novo;the syndrome 
associated to the 9 ring is not commonly observed and is character -
ized by constant signs, such as microcephaly, psychomotor retarda -
tion of varying entity and facial dysmorphism.
We report a boy, born of non-consanguineous parents in 2005, and 
referred to the genetics laboratory because of microcephaly. Cytoge -
netics study showed a karyotype interpreted as 46, XY, r(9). Parental 
studies showed the ring was de novo in origin.
C-banding showed the ring chromosome was monocentric. Using a 
painting chromosome 9 fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) probe 
we confirmed no other chromosome involved. To define the breakpoint 
on the 9p and 9q arms, FISH was performed with Telvysion 9p and 
Telvysion 9q probes covering both regions. We detected at least a 
95Kb deletion in 9q but no deletion was detected with the telomeric 
9p FISH probe.
To define the chromosomal breakpoints more closely, FISH-mapping 
with the RCPI-11 Human Male BAC Library using clones spanning 
chromosome 9 telomeres is undertaken.
Using FISH we have defined the loss of material more precisely and 
have shown that the subsequent monosomies are responsibles of the 
clinical evolution of the patient.
P0400. Inverted duplications associated with terminal deletions 
in six different ring chromosomes
E. Rossi1, J. Messa1, S. Gimelli1, P. Maraschio1, S. Perrotta2, T. Mattina2, P. 
Riva3, A. Schinzel4, O. Zuffardi1;  
1Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Pavia, Italy, 2Genetica Medica, Catania, 
Italy, 3Biologia e Genetica Medica, Milano, Italy, 4Genetica Medica, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
Inverted duplications associated with a distal deletion (inv dup del) 
have been reported for several chromosomes, but hardly ever in ring 
chromosomes. Characterizing, by array-CGH (Kit Agilent, 75 Kb and 
6,5 Kb) and FISH, 25 different ring chromosomes in patients with phe -
notypic abnormalities, we identified in six of them inverted duplications 
associated with a terminal deletion at one end. At the opposite end no 
deletion was present in four cases, whereas a second deletion was 
present in two cases. Moreover, in one case with an inv dup del(13q), 
a further duplication of (13)(q12.21-3.1) was present in mosaic state.
Peripheral chromosomes analysis of the patients showed the following 
karyoptypes:
Case 1: 46,XX,r(13)(p11q34); case 2: 46,XX,r(15)(p11q26); case 3: 
46,XX,r(18)(p11q23);
Case 4: 46,XX,r(13)(p11q34); case 5: 46,XX,r(22)(p11q26); case 6: 
46,XX,r(18)(p11q23)
Mental retardation and dysmorphic features are common findings in 
the six patients.
Our results suggest that a more complex mechanism may be involved 
in the formation of some ring chromosomes and that ring formation 
may represent a new mechanism involved in the stabilization of broken 
chromosomes.
This new mechanism of ring formation has important phenotype/geno -
type implications since it implies that phenotypic correlations cannot 
be done assuming a simple deletion before having excluded this type 
of rearrangement.
P0401. Characterization of ring X chromosome by FISH: Role of 
X inactivation
A. M. Mohamed , A. K. Kamel, H. F. Kayed, N. M. A. Meguid, H. A. Hussein, H. 
A. Atteia;  
National Research cetre, Cairo, Egypt.
Some ring X [r(X)], have been described with MR. This is the result 
of functional disomy of the genes in the r(X) secondary to loss of the 
X-inactivation locus (XIST). We aimed to study the effect of r(X) on the 
clinical features, to correlate the presence of XIST and the pattern of 
X replications to the IQ level. The subject of this study was 54 cases 
with TS. Patients were subjected to clinical examination, estimation of 
I.Q. and cytogenetic analysis. Cases with atypical TS were further sub -
jected to FISH using WCP for X , locus specific for XIST. , differential replication studies with BrDU for r(X).
13 cases had ring (X). By FISH, the origin of these rings was derived 
entirely from the X chromosome. XIST was found in all the rings. Ten 
cases had small rings, 3 had large rings. MR was found in 90% of 
cases with small r(X), the large r(X) had normal mentality. A significant 
relation was detected between the presence of r(X) and the lower I.Q.. 
Replication pattern showed the I.Q. level decreased with the presence 
of active r(X).
We conclude that abnormal stigmata different from the typical T.S. may 
suggest the presence of the r(X). The mechanism of the presence of 
active r(X) in our cases was not due to deletion of XIST gene and may 
be due to silencing of the gene due to interruption or mutation. Failure 
of inactivation does not necessarily lead to MR. We recommend more 
extensive studies on XIST.
P0402. Translocation Down syndrome; report of four de novo 
cases from Iran
C. Azimi , M. Khaleghian, F. Farzanfar, M. Safavi;  
Cancer Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Re -
public of Iran.
Down syndrome occurs in about one of 750 live births and is asso -
ciated with a variety of karyotypes. Nearly 92.5% have simple triso -
my-21, which is related to the maternal age. In about 4.8% the extra 
chromosome 21 material is present in the form of an unbalanced Rob -
ertsonian translocation or as an isochromosome of the long arm of 
chromosome 21, and does not vary with age. The remaining 2.7% are 
heterogeneous and include mosaicism, double trisomies and recipro -
cal translocations. In about three-fourths of translocation Down syn -
drome, neither parent is a carrier, and a mutation in the germ cells of 
one parent has caused the translocation. No one knows what causes 
these mutations.
We report four infants (three boys and one girl) from the four different 
families, all showed typical clinical features of the Down syndrome.
The parental age of the four cases were between 20-30 years old. 
Chromosomal analysis were made, using the standard banding tech -
niques, for the cases and their parents. The karyotypes of the three 
cases were 46,XY,der(21;21)(q10;q10),+21 and for the fourth one was 
46,XX,der(14;21)(q10;q10),+21. The karyotypes of the parents of the 
four infants were normal.
P0403. Segregation and pathogenesis of balanaced/unbalanced 
homologous Robertsonian translocations, t(13;13), t(14;14); 
t(15;15), t(21;21) and t(22;22) - Case reports and review
D. S. Krishna Murthy , F. M. M. Al-Kandari, M. A. Redha, K. K. Naguib, L. A. 
Bastaki, S. A. Al-Awadi;  
Kuwait Medical Genetics Center, Sulaibikat, Kuwait.
One in 900 humans is born with a Robertsonian translocation. The 
most frequent forms of Robertsonian translocations are between 
chromosomes 13 and 14, 13 and 21, and 21 and 22. Robertsonian 
translocations (balanced or unbalanced) involving acrocentric chro -
mosomes, 13,14,15 and 21, 22 are well known chromosomal abnor -
malities leading to multiple congenital anomalies, infertility, repeated 
fetal loss, dysmorphism and mental retardation. However, homologous 
Robertsonaian translocations, t(13;13q),t(14;14),t(15;15) and t(22;22) 
are relatively rare. Carriers of balanced ROBs are at an increased 
risk of having chromosomally unbalanced, phenotypically abnormal 
offspring. These individuals are trisomic for one of the chromosomes 
involved in the translocation, with three copies instead of the normal 
complement of two. Carriers of ROBs are also at an increased risk of 
uniparental disomy (UPD), the inheritance of both chromosome copies 
from a single parent. Uniparental inheritance of some chromosomes 
has been shown to be deleterious due to the effects of imprinting (the 
differential expression of genes depending on the parent of origin).
Risk estimates vary depending on the type of rearrangement. Carri -
ers of homologous acrocentric rearrangements are at very high risk of 
having multiple spontaneous abortions and chromosomally abnormal 
offspring. Parents of fetuses and children with unbalanced homolo -
gous acrocentric rearrangements are rarely found to be carriers or mo -
saic for the same rearrangement.Cytogenetics12
P0404. High frequency of robertsonian translocation in 
idiopathic infertile men of North Indian population.
M. Singhal , Z. Arora, R. Kumar, R. Dada;  
AIIMS, New Delhi, India.
Robertsonian translocation (RT) is the most common structural rear -
ragement of human chromosomes occurring at a rate of 1 /1000 live 
births. Of these, 60% inherit the rearrangement from one of their par -
ents and 40% occur denovo. This proportion rises to 1% in infertile 
men & has been associated with infertility. This study was planned with 
the aim to determine the incidence of RT in men with spermatogenic 
arrest and to correlate if cases with such structural aberrations lead to 
recurrent ART failure. Our finding of chromosomal aberrations (3.7%) 
in the infertile males are in good agreement with literature of 3.3%. In 
this study on men with non-obstructive azoospermia and oligozoosper -
mia, three men had 13q14q fusion. Thus the frequency of robertsonian 
translocation in our study was nearly 30 fold higher than in general 
population (0.1%). Although robertsonian translocation is likely to be 
found in chromosomes investigation of infertile men, their role in oli -
gospermia is not clear. The testicular histology of the men carrying 
such a rearrangement shows a variable picture, ranging from severe 
impairment to near normality. Individuals carrying each of the ten pos -
sible nonhomologous robertsonian translocations of the five humans 
acrocentric chromosomes (13,14,15,21, & 22) have been reported, but 
two combinations, rob(13;14) & rob (14;21) are observed at a greater 
frequency than the rest (73% & 10)%,respectively. Since there is a 
high frequency of robertsonian translocations in infertile men draw -
ing a genotype and phenotype correlation in these studies will help to 
asses the severity of spermatogenic arrest in these cases.
P0405. Incidence of satellite associations in lymphocytes of 
breast cancer patients
F. Mirfakhraie1, A. R. Kamyab2, R. Mirfakhraie2;  
1Shahid Beheshti university of medical sciences, Iran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
2Islamic Azad University of Tehran, Science & Research Campus, Tehran, Is -
lamic Republic of Iran.
Satellite association (SA) was studied in lymphocyte cultures from nor -
mal individuals and patients with primary breast carcinoma, totally 40 
individuals and 1049 metaphases. The degree of satellite association 
was estimated by the frequency of cells exhibiting associations, by the 
number of associations per cell, and by the number of chromosomes in 
an association. The degree of SA was found to be significantly higher 
in patients than from those of control individuals (p=0.0001). Also there 
was a significant difference in the number of associations per cell be -
tween the two groups (p=0.0001). In the control group DD and DG 
associations were most frequent (41% for both) but in the patients DG 
was the most (58%). Scince satellite association is considered as a 
phenomenon which often causes nondisjunction, it may lead to chro -
mosomal abnormalities in tumor cells.
P0406. Identification of Sex reversal syndrome using 
conventional cytogenetic technique
F. Razazian , S. Tootian, M. Rahnama, F. Mortezapour., F. Manouchehri, M. 
Zamanian, F. Nasiri., S. Soleimani., L. Seyedmortaz, F. Mahjoubi;  
IBTO, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Advance in experimental endocrinology, biochemistry, genetics, and 
molecular biology have all contributed to our understanding of the pro -
cess of human sex differentiation in the decades.
Based on the recognition of the underlying anomaly in the process of 
sexual differentiation intersex disorders may be divided into abnormal 
gonadal determination and abnormal genital differentiation males with 
ambiguous genitalia but two differentiated testis are called MPH. 
Females with ambiguous external genitalia but normal ovaries and 
normal internal genitalia are called FPH.
Abnormal gonadal determination is mainly dependent on sex chromo -
somal defects that can be detected by cytogentic analysis or by the 
DNA probes for genes located on the Y chromosome.
The XX males may be divided in to 3 subgroups:
46,XX males with the SRY gene(46,XX males without the SRYgene 
)and XX/XY mosaics.
DAX1 lies on the X chromosome. When it duplicates it causes an indi -
vidual who is genetically male to develop physically as a female.
During the 8 years (from 1997 to 2006) we have reported 32 patients 
referred for sex reversal abnormality which was more common in the female group (n=16 , %0.7) compare to male population (n=10 , 
%0.4).
We conclude in here, that simple conventional cytogenetic methods 
are very helpful to identify male or female with sex reversal in addition 
molecular cytogenetic technology such as fish and molecular method 
to investigate the presence or absent of some critical genes such as 
SRY would be very useful to explain phenotype heterogeneity among 
sex reversal group male or female.
P0407. The MLPA method in diagnostic of SHOX  gene and PAR1 
deletions
K. Zidkova1, A. Baxova1, J. Stekrova1, R. Mihalova1, E. Kantorova2, M. Kohou -
tova1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine and General 
Teaching Hospital, Charles University in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 
2Department of Medical Genetics, České Budějovice Hospital plc, České 
Budějovice, Czech Republic.
The short stature homeobox-containing gene ( SHOX ; GeneID:6473) 
is located in the major pseudoautosomal region (PAR1) of the human 
sex chromosomes. Extensive deletions encompassing the SHOX  
gene area or sequence changes that alter the gene product level or 
its functional properties were identified as the molecular basis of Léri-
Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD), Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD), 
and idiopathic short stature (ISS). In particular, approximately 60-80% 
of cases of LWD are due to such mutations. The rearrangement of sex 
chromosomes is the frequent cause of PAR1 deletions.
The presence and extent of SHOX  gene and PAR1 deletions was de -
tected using multiplex ligand-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) 
analysis in a group of patients with dyschondrosteosis phenotype. In 
two female probands previous cytogenetic studies had revealed the 
most frequent X;Y translocation, t(X;Y) (p22.3;q11). All other probands 
displayed normal karyotypes.
The MLPA analysis fully confirmed the cytogenetic results in both fe -
male probands with translocation. Moreover, the MLPA method was 
able to refine the extent of the Xp deletion and to specify the clinical 
prognosis in case of bearing a male foetus. We further observed a 
PAR1 deletion, including SHOX gene and its regulatory sequences, 
that does not exceed the pseudoautosomal region in a proband with a 
normal karyotype. A small deletion was detected covering the potential 
regulatory region of the SHOX  gene in several subjects. However, its 
relevance to LWD phenotype has yet to be confirmed.
Our study proved the MLPA method as a rapid, sensitive, and suitable 
for detecting the SHOX  gene and PAR1 deletions.
P0408. Analysis of immature germ cells in sperm from men with 
normal and impaired spermatogenesis
I. Fedorova1,2, T. Kuznetzova1;  
1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion, 2St-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
The first step for looking at male infertility is usually confined to semen 
analysis. Such analysis gives valuable information about mature germ 
cells: their concentration, motility and morphology. However, semen 
is also useful souse of immature germ cell. More detailed information 
about spermatogenesis might be obtained by analysis of ejaculated 
immature germ cells using the method called Quantitative Karyological 
Analysis of Immature Sex Cells (QKAISC) (Kurilo, 1993). This method 
is used to determine the relative portion of germ cells at different stag -
es of spermatogenesis and the stage of spermatogenesis block.
The samples of semen from 4 control subject (46,XY) and 24 patients 
with impaired spermatogenesis (46,XY) were analysed by means of 
QKAISC technique. In a control group the rate of immature germ cell 
in ejaculate was about 1,5%. Frequencies of spermatogenetic cells be -
fore and after MI division, and degenerated cell were 1,98%, 77,54% 
and 20,48% respectively. No difference between control subjects and 
patients with normal and slow abnormal semen parameters (8 sub -
jects). In 6 patients with severe oligoastenoteratospermia and oligoa -
stenosermia and 10 patients with azoospermia the increased number 
of degenerative spermatogenic cells and decrease number of sper -
matocytes II and spermatides were detected. The moderate correla -
tion between concentration of spermatozoa in ejaculate and rates of 
spermatogenetic cells after MI division (+0,55; P<0,0058) and rate of 
degenerating spermatogenetic cells (-0,53; P<0076) was found. These 
results demonstrate the significance of QKAISC technique in perform -Cytogenetics12
ing of complex examination of ejaculate from patients with infertility. 
Supported by CRDF&RFBR.
Kurilo et al. Probl. Repr.(rus) 1995.v.3.p.33
P0409. Unusual small supernumerary marker chromosome 
(sSMC) in a woman with Triple X syndrome
S. Soleimani1, F. Razazian2, F. Nasiri.1, S. Tootian.1, M. Zamanian.1, M. Rahna -
ma1, F. Mortezapoor1, F. Mahjobi3;  
11) The Blood Transfusion Organization research center, Tehran, Iran, tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2 The Blood Transfusion Organization research center, 
Tehran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3NRCGEB &The Blood Transfu -
sion Organization research center, Tehran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran.
Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC) are small ad -
ditional chromosomes. sSMC have been reported previously in four 
types of syndromes associated with chromosomal imbalances: in ap -
proximately 150 cases with Turner syndrome, 26 cases with Down 
syndrome and only one case each with Klinefelter syndrome and 
“Triple-X”-syndrome. Here we report the second case with an sSMC 
detected in addition to a Triple X karyotype.
The reported patient was referred to our clinic because of mild men -
tal retardation, developmental delay, dysmorphic face. Three cell lines 
was detected, one with 47, XXX, one with 46, X, +mar, and one with 
46, XX. The presence of a marker chromosome in this case generally 
implicates a sex chromosome origin. It may also originate from a non-
sex chromosome.
P0410. Sex chromosome aberrations associated with 
reproductive failure problems
M. D. Miskovic1, M. Guc-Scekic1,2, S. Cirkovic1, N. Lakic1, A. D. Krstic1, D. 
Radivojevic1, T. Lalic1, M. Djurisic1;  
1Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia “Dr Vukan Cupic”, Belgrade, 
Serbia, 2Faculty of Biology, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
Patients with sterility, primary amenorrhea, azoospermia or other re -
productive failure have indication for cytogenetic analysis. The aim of 
this study was to evaluate the contribution of sex chromosomal abnor -
malities in such cases. We report here results of 22 patients, who vis -
ited Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia “Dr Vukan Cupic” 
from 1996-2006.
Cytogenetic analysis was performed on 72-hour peripheral blood 
culture lymphocytes. Metaphases were karyotyped using G and C 
banding technique for chromosome identification. Molecular-genetic 
methods are used for solving cytogenetic dilemmas - FISH with X cen -
tromeric region specific probes (DXZ1) and PCR with primers for SRY 
gene and heterochromatin region of Y chromosome (HRY).
In 3 males with azoospermia karyotype: 47,XXY was found. At 6 cases of 
male sterility following sex chromosome aberrations were seen: 47,XXY; 
46,i(X)(q10)Y; 46,XY[33]/47,XYY[4]; 46,XY[28]/47,XYY[8]; 46,X,der
(Y)t(Y;Y)(p11.3;q11.1) and 46,X,r(Y)(p11.3;q12),inv(9)(p12q13)[22]/
45,X,inv(9)(p12q13)[3]. In last two cases we provided presence of 
SRY gene and HRY using PCR method.
Following karyotypes: 46,X,i(X)(q10); 46,X,i(X)(q10)[30]/45,X[3]; 
47,XXX[3]/48,XXXX[1]/46,XX[96] were associated with female steril -
ity. Primary amenorrhea diagnosed in 11 female was combined with 
karyotypes:
45,X; 46,X,del(X)(q13); 45,X[34]/46,Xder(X?)[30] and 46,XY(8 cases). 
To determine numerical aberration of X chromosome and define mo -
saic karyotype FISH with X - centromeric region probe was used. The 
presence of Y chromosome was confirmed with PCR.
Cytogenetic and molecular genetic approach is very important step to 
establish the genetic etiology in reproductive failure abnormalities. Our 
study shows that sex chromosomes aberrations are often associated 
with these disorders, which is crucial for genetic counseling and future 
possible preimplantation management.
P0411. Application of FISH to identification of subtelomeric 
rearrangement in cases of intellectual disability and in a couples 
with reproduction problem
J. Bogdanowicz , A. Ilnicka, B. Pawlowska, A. Tomankiewicz-Zawadzka, B. 
Sobiczewska, E. Zdzienicka, J. Kubalska, S. Gawlik-Zawiślak, A. Górna, J. 
Zaremba;  Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland.
FISH technique with subtelomeric probes was applied for cytogenetic 
examination of 96 patients with normal karyotype obtained with routine 
banding methods. Patients were divided into two groups. Group I com -
posed of 76 patients with intellectual disability, dysmorphic features; 
group II composed of 10 couples (20 individuals with history of several 
miscarriages and offspring with abnormal phenotype. In group I in 4 
(5%) cases subtelomeric aberrations were found: 3 cases of subtelo -
meric deletion 1p36 ( 2 de novo and one due to inherited 1;12 translo -
cation (with resulting monosomy of subtelomeric region1p and trisomy 
of subtelomeric region of 12q). In all 3 cases phenotypic features were 
characteristic of 1p deletion syndrome.
In the case No 4 balanced de novo translocation 19;22 was found. 
In the other 3 cases of group I subtelomeric polymorphic variants of 
chromosome 2q (inherited deletion) and 7q (inherited duplication) 
were found.
In group II three families with subtelomeric translocations were di -
agnosed: (7;14), (4;7) and (9;18): in two families chromosome 7q 
subtelomeric deletion was diagnosed ( one of them prenatally); ho -
loprosencephaly and associated abnormalities (cleft lip and palate, 
microcephaly) were observed in these cases (most probably sonic 
hedgehog gene being involved).
P0412. Molecular characterization of a mosaicism with a 
complex chromosome rearrangement: Evidence for coincident  
chromosome healing by telomere capture and neo- telomere 
formation
E. Chabchoub1, L. Rodríguez2, E. Galán3, E. Mansilla2, M. L. Martínez-Fernan -
dez2, M. L. Martínez-Frías2, J. P. Fryns1, J. R. Vermeesch1;  
1Centre for Human Genetics - University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Bel -
gium, 2Estudio Colaborativo Español de Malformaciones Congénitas (ECEMC) 
del Centro de Investigación sobre Anomalías Congénitas (CIAC), Instituto de 
Salud Carlos III, Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo, Madrid, Spain, 3Servicio de 
Pediatría. Hospital Materno Infantil de la seguridad Social de Badajoz, Badajoz, 
Spain.
Broken chromosomes, such as terminal deletions, must acquire new 
telomeric “caps” to be structurally stable. Chromosome rescue could 
be mediated either by telomerase through neo-telomere synthesis or 
by telomere capture. The first process is the main mechanism healing 
broken chromosomes in germline cells, the latter in somatic cells. Here, 
we describe a clinical and molecular study of a 14 year-old girl present -
ing with mental retardation, facial dysmorphism, urogenital malforma -
tions and limbs anomalies. High resolution G banding shows a de novo  
complex chromosome rearrangement in mosaic with two different cell 
lines, one cell line with a deletion 9pter and one cell line carrying an 
inverted duplication 9p and a non-reciprocal translocation 5pter frag -
ment. Using array comparative genomic hybridization (a CGH), fluo -
rescence in-situ  hybridization (FISH) and polymorphic markers we de -
duced the most likely sequence of events that generated this complex 
mosaic. Surprisingly, we show evidence for simultaneous stabilization 
of rearranged chromosomes by telomere capture and neo-telomere 
synthesis. During embryogenesis, a double-strand break occurred 
on the paternal chromosome 9. Following mitotic separation of both 
broken sister chromatids, one acquired a telomere via neo- telomere 
formation, while the other generated a dicentric chromosome which 
underwent breakage during anaphase, giving rise to the del inv dup(9) 
that was subsequently healed by chromosome 5 telomere capture.
P0413. Breakpoints analysis of a balanced de novo translocation 
t(3;18)(q13.13;q12.1) in a patient with Opitz C trigonocephaly 
syndrome
T. Kaname1,2, K. Yanagi1, Y. Chinen3, K. Yoshiura4,2, N. Niikawa4,2, K. Naritomi1,2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-cho, Ja -
pan, 2SORST, JST, Kawaguchi, Japan, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of 
the Ryukyus, Nishihara-cho, Japan, 4Department of Human Genetics, Nagasaki 
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.
We present molecular characterization for a balanced translocation 
t(3;18)(q13.13;q12.1) in a male patient. He had clinical manifestations 
of the Opitz C trigonocephaly syndrome (OCTS) including trigono -
cephaly, a prominent metopic ridge, upslanting palpebral fissure, epi -
canthal folds, high-arched palate, thick and irregular alveolar ridge, 
long philtrum, redundant nuchal skin, a genesis of the corpus callosum, 
and hypotonia, who had been recently reported [Am. J. Med. Genet. Cytogenetics12
140A:1655-1657 (2006)]. Since responsible genes for the OCTS have 
not been isolated, though it is thought to be a heterogeneous condi -
tion, it would be important to investigate the precise structure for the 
breakpoints.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis identified a break -
point spanning BAC clones on the chromosome 3q containing a gene 
encoding a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily (IgSF). Fol -
lowing FISH analysis by cosmids subcloned from the BAC clone plus 
Southern blot analysis demonstrated the breakpoint was in the gene. 
Inverse PCR and sequencing revealed the breakpoint was in exon 5 
of the gene. Sequence analysis for the other breakpoint at 18q12.1 
indicated that the translocation was occurred with 10-bp deletion in the 
exon 5. We could not find any genes around the other breakpoint ac -
cording to the Genome Browser web site. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR 
analysis showed that the IgSF gene expression in B cells of the patient 
was reduced approximately 50% of the normal level.
P0414. Translocation (2;5) (p21-p15): Clinical findigs in a female 
case
G. Hernandez-Zaragoza1, V. C. Ledezma-Rodriguez1, L. M. Aguirre-Salas2, M. 
Maya-Castillo3, R. E´Vega-Hernandez1, I. J. Garcia-Gonzalez1, V. M. Anguiano-
Alvarez1, M. P. Casillas-Avila1, J. Armendariz-Borunda4, N. O. Davalos5;  
1Instituto de Genetica Humana, Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico, 2HRVGF, 
ISSSTE. Departamento Endocrino-Pediatria, Zapopan, Jalisco, Mexico, 3Tele-
ton, Guanajuato, Mexico, 4Departamento de Biologia Molecular y Genomica, 
CUCS, U de G., Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico, 5Instituto de Genetica Humana, 
CUCS, U de G. HRVGF, ISSSTE. Departamento de Genetica, Guadalajara, 
Jalisco, Mexico.
INTRODUCTION: The concurrence of this translocation involving a 
t(2;5) (p21-p15) has not been previously reported. We report a female 
case with this translocation.
CASE REPORT: The propositus a 5 years-old female, was the prod -
uct of the second pregnancy from non-consanguineous parents. The 
mother presents an obstetric history of gravida: 2, abortion 1, caesar -
ean 1. The pregnancy was interrupted by caesarea at 7 months of ges -
tation by a premature rupture of membranes. At birth the weight was 
2 kg, and multiple dysmorphic features were characterized by marked 
hypotonia, developmental delay and poor growth. She presented py -
loric hypertrophic confirmed by barium studies. Surgical repair was 
performed at 4 months old without complications. The physical ex -
amination at this time showed height 15,500 gr (10-20 centile) weight 
96.5 cm (3rd centile) and OFC 48 cm (10-20centile). Facial dismorfism 
characterized by strait biparietal diameter, prominent metopic suture, 
sparse eyebrows, hipertelorism, internal epicanthal folds, downslating 
palpebral fissures, high nasal bridge, broad nose, downturned corners 
of the mouth, thin superior lip and high palate; in hands: clinodactyly 
and camptodactyly of 5th fingers bilateraly was observed.
Hipoacusia was diagnosed by audimetry and craneal CT shown co -
chlear bilateral agenesia. Laboratory studies were normal. Standard 
chromosome studies on blood with 550-banded resolution revealed a 
karyotype of 46,XX, t(2;5)(p21-p15).
DISCUSSION: Few chromosomal translocation that involve chromo -
some 2 and 5 were reported, but all are related with other breakpoints 
(Kimberley 1999, Gilliam 2000). The molecular cytogenetic studies 
should be made in the patient to identify the genes involve in the trans -
location breakpoints.
P0415. Chromosomal Rearrangements in Patients with 
Reproductive Problem
S. Midyan , L. Nazaryan, G. Shakhsuvaryan, L. Khachatryan, T. Sarkisyan;  
Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia.
Pregnancy loss, particularly early miscarriage is a common problem 
that affects many women and their partners. Most spontaneous mis -
carriages are caused by an abnormal karyotype of the embryo. Bal -
anced reciprocal translocations are present in 2-5% of couples who 
experience recurrent pregnancy loss. Structural chromosome rear -
rangements may result in unbalanced chromosome errors in pregnan -
cies. We carried out cytogenetic investigations in 262 couples referred 
for recurrent spontaneous abortions (RSA). Chromosome analysis 
was performed on peripheral blood lymphocytes and GTG banding 
analyses at 550-600 band level. FISH technique was applied using 
WCP probes for 1 and 2 chromosomes.
We identified six cases of reciprocal translocations. Robertsonian translocations were detected in six cases (all carriers were female|) 
and pericentric inversion was found in one case. Sex chromosome 
abnormality was defined in one case with mosaic Turner syndrome. 
All cases of structural chromosome abnormalities caused the miscar -
riages, except one where a child with different clinical manifestation 
was born. As result of unbalanced gamete formation the translocation 
46,XYt(4;9)(q26;p23) lead to partial trisomy of 4q26 region.
In our study the overall frequency of balanced chromosomal rear -
rangement as the main group of chromosomal aberrations was found 
to be 3,1%.
In conclusion we insist on the advantage of systematically performing 
a karyotype in case of RSA consisting on the detection of chromo -
somal abnormalities. The central concept in genetic counseling is the 
estimation of the probability of unbalanced progeny at birth and other 
unfavorable pregnancy outcomes as well the prognosis of success of 
assisted reproductive technologies.
P0416. Two cases of unbalanced offspring due to rare adjacent-2 
segragation in non-relative translocation 4;15 carriers
R. Mihalova1, K. Vesela1, A. Baxova1, M. Zapadlo2, B. Zlatohlavkova2;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine of Charles 
University and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Depart -
ment of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, 1st Faculty of Medicine of Charles Uni -
versity and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
We report on two patients with partial trisomy of chromosome 4 and 
partial monosomy of chromosome 15 resulting from parental translo -
cation 4;15. Translocation carriers were non-relative, other unbalanced 
offspring in these families have not been described although miscar -
riages and stillbirths have as well as liveborns been reported in family 
histories of both carriers. Further investigation with FISH has revealed 
different breakpoints on chromosome 15, proximal from Prader-Willi/
Angelman specific region and distal, respectively. Obvious phenotypic 
difference was probably due to 15q11-13 loss of one of our patients.
Because of different segregation during meiosis I, various unbalanced 
karyotypes can arise in balanced translocation carriers. The frequency 
of unbalanced gametes varies from one translocation to another. Ad -
jacent-2 segregation mode, in which each daughter cell gets chromo -
somes with homologous centromeres, is quite rare - on an average 
5-10%. The type of unbalanced segregation depends on the nature 
of the chromosome involved and the breakpoints. Considering the 
pachytene diagram determined by breakpoints, the balanced translo -
cation t(4;15)(q21;q11.2) and t(4;15)(q21;q13.1), respectively seems 
predisposed to chromosome imbalance through adjacent-2 segrega -
tion. Genetic counseling focused on prediction of the mode of imbal -
anced segregation will be discused.
P0417. Identification of a novel deletion in 3q23-25 in Treacher 
Collins Syndrome
M. Kumar1, R. Kumar2, M. Tanwar2, R. Dada2, S. Ghose3, J. Kaur1;  
1Ocular Biochemistry, Dr Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All 
India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Department of Anatomy, 
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 3Dr Rajendra Prasad 
Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.
Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS) is a rare genetic disorder character -
ized by craniofacial deformities. TCS occurs in an approximate rate of 
1:50,000 of live births. The disorder is inherited in an autosomal-domi -
nant pattern. The typical clinical features include downward slanting 
eyes, sparse eyelash, micrognathia, cleft palate, microtia and notch in 
the lower eyelid called coloboma. More than 129 different mutations 
have been reported in patients with TCS. Patients with TCS were re -
ported to be heterozygous for mutations in the TCOF1 gene, which is 
located in 5q32-q33.1. This gene codes for a protein of at least 1411 
amino acids, treacle, which is a nucleolar phosphoprotein. The protein 
coded by this gene assists in protein sorting during particular stages in 
embryonic development, particularly that of the structures of the facial 
bones. There are reports with a small interstitial deletion of 3p,46,XY,
del(3)(p23p24.12) and pericentric inversion inv(2) (p11.2q21) associ -
ated with TCS. We have done the cytogenetic analysis of a family with 
typical physical features of TCS. The high-resolution G-banding analy -
sis has shown a small novel deletion in 3q23-25. This novel deletion in 
3q23-25 has been found in two members of the family. Linkage of TCS 
to the 5q31.3q33.3 region has been established. We also confirm a de -Cytogenetics12
letion in 5q33 in all members of the family. This finding may represent 
a more severe manifestation of the mandibulofacial dysostosis. TCS 
is a heterogeneous entity, and evaluation and counseling of affected 
individuals should be undertaken with caution.
P0418. Partial trisomy 12p and deletion 5p: an overlap of 
dysmorphic features
L. Morozin Pohovski , I. Barišić, I. Sansović, I. Petković;  
Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
We describe a 2-year and 11 month-old girl who presented with dys -
morphic facial features, short neck, supernumerary nipples, short 
wide hands, clinodactyly of the fifth finger, postnatal growth retarda -
tion, generalized hypotonia and developmental delay. Detailed clini -
cal examination did not reveal associated congenital malformations. 
Cytogenetic evaluation on high resolution G banding showed aberrant 
chromosome 5 in all metaphases. The karyotype was designated as 4
6,XX,der(5),t(5;12)(5p15.3;12p12.2)mat. Molecular analysis confirmed 
deletion of subtelomere 5p and trisomy of subtelomere 12p.
A comparison of the clinical findings in our patient with previously de -
scribed cases of pure 12p trisomies is presented. Pure trisomy 12p 
has a well delineated dysmorphic features and is often associated with 
different major malformations. Our patient did not display these typi -
cal features, phenotypic manifestations being more compatible with 
monosomy 5p. Rare structural rearrangements may lead to complex 
clinical presentations. Detailed clinical description of patients is need -
ed in order to delineate the phenotype and improve genotype-pheno -
type correlation.
P0419. Newborn with partial trisomy 11q resulting from mother′s 
t (11; 21) balanced translocation
S. Teofilova1, O. Miljanovic1,2;  
1Center for Medical Genetics and Immunology - Clinical Center of Montenegro, 
Podgorica, Montenegro, 2Institute for Children’s Diseases - Clinical Center of 
Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro.
There is small number of reported cases with partial trusomy 11q, 
which do not result from the most frequently observed translocation in 
humans: t (11; 22).
We report a female newborn, the first child in family, with phenotype 
characteristic for partial 11q trisomy, present at birth: microcephaly, 
hypertelorismus, short, broad nose, long, prominent philtrum, high-
arched plate, retraction of the lower lip, microretrognatia, low set, 
malformed ears, short neck, poor positioning of feet, wrinkled palm 
and feet skin and muscular hypotonia. Peripheral blood chromosomal 
analysis of index case and her family revealed partial trisomy 11q in 
newborn, resulting from rare mother′s t (11; 21) balanced transloca -
tion. Further investigation of mother′s family has shown that t (11; 21) 
was not present at her parents.
The cytogenetic and clinical finding of index case and her family will 
be presented.
P0420. DOWN SYNDROME IN A PATIENT WITH PARTIAL 
TRISOMY 21 RESULTING FROM A RARE MATERNAL SHIFT
V. Malan1, M. Rio2, M. Pic1, S. Chevallier1, M. Vekemans1, O. Raoul1;  
1Service de Cytogenetique, CH Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Ser-
vice de Génétique Médicale, CH Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
Down syndrome results generally from the presence of an extra copy 
of chromosome 21. Unbalanced translocations or abnormal recom -
binant chromosomes resulting from a pericentric inversion have also 
been observed. Here, we report on a child with a Down syndrome 
phenotype carrying a partial trisomy 21q22 resulting from “aneusomie 
de recombinaison” in a maternal shift. During pregnancy, the mother 
underwent amniocentesis because of pyelectasy detected by ultra -
sound examination. The fetal karyotype was considered as normal, 
46,XY.  At 5 years of age, due to a developmental delay, chromosomes 
studies were performed. The karyotype revealed an unusual short 
arm of one chromosome 21 suggesting the presence of extra genetic 
material. Because of the Down syndrome phenotype, FISH studies 
were performed using probes specific for the DSCR (Down Syndrome 
Critical Region). A third signal was observed on one chromosome 21p. 
Karyotypes of the parents as well as FISH studies were performed. 
The mother was found to be a carrier of a DSCR insertion onto the 
short arm of one chromosome 21. Shift or intrachromosomal insertion 
results from a three-break event leading to transposition of a chromo -somal segment to another position in the same chromosome. Here the 
proband inherited an unbalanced recombinant chromosome following 
a crossing over in the maternal shift chromosome. Shifts occurring in 
the short arm of an acrocentric chromosome are rare. If the length of 
the segment is small, rearrangement mimics a short arm heteromor -
phism (pstk+). The present observation illustrates the importance of 
investigating an unusual short arm of acrocentric chromosomes.
P0421. Refinement of unbalanced aberrations of chromosome 7 
in two severely affected children by multicolor banding (MCB)
S. G. Vorsanova1,2, I. Y. Iourov2,1, T. Liehr3, V. V. Monakhov2, O. S. Kurinnaya1, 
Y. B. Yurov2,1;  
1Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Roszdrav, Moscow, Russian Fed -
eration, 2National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian 
Federation, 3Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany.
Although conventional cytogenetic analysis permits the diagnosis of 
the majority of chromosome aberrations, almost all of them require 
precision by molecular cytogenetic techniques. Here, we report on the 
application of MCB technique (FISH-based high-resolution multicolor 
chromosome banding) to refine two chromosome abnormalities involv -
ing chromosome 7 in two female children with severe mental retarda -
tion and congenital malformations. Initial standard karyotyping by GTG 
banding showed the first case to be a monosomy of chromosome 21 
(45,XX,-21) and the second case to be a deletion of the chromosome 
7 short arm, 46,XX,del(7)(p21p15). After the application of FISH with 
a set of site-specific probes for chromosome 21 following by use of 
whole-chromosome painting probes, the first case turned out to be an 
unbalanced translocation between chromosomes 7 and 21, but the 
breakpoints still were under question. To refine chromosomal aberra -
tions in these cases, an MCB approach with microdissection-derived 
DNA probes for chromosomes 7 and 21 allowing painting of chromo -
somes at 550-band-resolution was applied. Thus, the first case was 
defined as partial monosomy 7q34-qter and 21pter-q22.13 due to an 
unbalanced translocation t(7;21) or 45,XX,der(7)t(7;21)(q34;q22.13),-
21 and the second case was defined as 46,XX,del(7)(p21.2p15.2). 
Hence, we concluded that MCB technique was efficient enough for 
breakpoint precision in aforementioned cases. When seen in this 
perspective, one can further suggest MCB approach to represent an 
efficient tool for clinical molecular cytogenetics in addition to well-es -
tablished FISH protocols with site-specific probes or newly introduced 
array CGH-based techniques. Supported in parts by INTAS.
P0422. Three unrelated cases with cryptic unbalanced 
subtelomere translocations
R. Stoeva1, M. Kirchhoff2, I. Ivanov1, P. Ganchevska1, I. Popova1, I. Stoev1, M. 
Stefanova1;  
1Medical University, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 2Rigshospitalet, University of Copenha -
gen, Denmark.
Unbalanced subtelomere chromosome rearrangements are a signifi -
cant cause of both isolated and familial mental retardation/multiple 
congenital anomalies syndromes with approximately 5 to 10% of over 
3000 affected individuals tested worldwide. Here we report three un -
related cases with cryptic unbalanced translocations, t(1;11)(pter,qter), 
t(4:11)(pter;qter) and t(8;20)(pter;pter). Disballances were found by 
MLPA analyses. A combination of partial monosomy 1pter/trisomy 
11qter was found in a one-month-old girl. She had a low birth weight, 
microcephaly, telecanthus, long eye lashes, blue sclera, broad na -
sal bridge, fleshy nose, smooth philtrum, down-turned corners of the 
mouth, thin lips, high palate, posteriorly rotated dysplastic ears, short 
neck, wide spaced nipples, abnormal dermatoglyphic patterns, long 
overlapping toes, generalized hirsutism, caudal appendage and patent 
ductus arteriosus. The second case, a two-month-old girl, presented 
with partial trisomy 4pter/monosomy 11qter. She had pyloric steno -
sis, thrombocytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly and following dysmorphic 
features: face/body asymmetry, pronounced hypertelorism, strabis -
mus, wide nasal bridge, anteverted nostrils, high palate, midline cleft 
tongue, low set-up ears, clinodactyly. This clinical presentation over -
laps previously described Paris-Trousseau type thrombocytopenia 
(#188025) due to partial monosomy 11q. The third case, a five-year-old 
girl, revealed partial monosomy 8pter/trisomy 20pter. She had mental 
retardation, obesity, hydrocephaly and following dysmorphic features: 
arched eyebrows, synophrys, tapering fingers, patchy skin depigmen -
tation. Genealogical follow-up revealed in two of the cases additional Cytogenetics12
affected family members. The study included genotype-phenotype cor -
relations and thus, contributed to clinical and molecular characteriza -
tion of subtelomere aberrations. We showed the usefulness of recently 
developed technology for accurate diagnosis of submicroscopic chro -
mosome abnormalities and their application in genetic counselling.
P0423. The 4P-syndrome. A Case description and literature 
review
F. Mortezapour1, F. Mahjoubi2, S. Soleimani1, M. Rahnama1, F. Razazian1, M. 
Zamanian1, F. Manouchehri1, F. Nasiri1;  
1IBTO, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2IBTO & NRCGEB, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a rare developmental disorder 
associated with deletion of short arm of chromosome 4. Well-known 
genetic condition of WHS are typical facial anomalies, midline defects, 
skeletal anomalies, prenatal and postnatal growth retardation, hypoto -
nia, mental retardation, and seizures.
Here we report a new case of WHS who referred to our clinic for cy -
togenetic investigation. The patient was a 9 month old baby boy with 
developmental delay, hypotonia, respiratory and heart problem, promi -
nent eyes and forehead and delayed bone age. GTG banded karyo -
type reveald a deletion on segment of 4p (p15.31 pter). Due to a broad 
spectrum of possible morphologic abnormalities followed by mental 
retardation, prenatal diagnosis is very important. Postnatal recognition 
of the syndrome requires genetic counseling of parents and supportive 
multidisciplinary treatment.
P0424. Olfactory receptors gene clusters on 4p are not 
involved in the origin of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome-associated 
chromosome rearrangements.
G. Marangi , M. Murdolo, R. Lecce, D. Orteschi, M. E. Grimaldi, G. Neri, M. 
Zollino;  
Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy.
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) is a multiple congenital anoma -
lies/mental retardation (MCA/MR) syndrome caused by partial 4p 
monosomy. By analysing a total of 72 families, we found that 65 of 
72 rearrangements (90 %) occurred de novo . Of these, 49 were fur -
ther analysed by all telomeres (46) or by other locus-specific FISH 
(3). An isolated 4p deletion was detected in 36 (74 %), an unbalanced 
translocation in 9 (18 %), a dup/del 4p in 3 (6 %), and a der(4)(4qter→
q32::4p15.3→qter) in one patient (2 %). With the purpose to investi -
gate if hotspots for rearrangements exist, we performed FISH analy -
sis with a total of 80 molecular probes, properly selected in individual 
patients, spanning the 4p15pter chromosome region. In particular, 
probes RP11-423D16 and RP11-751L19, delimiting the proximal OR 
on 4p, and probes 228a7 and RP11-324I10, delimiting the distal OR, 
were tested.
Looking at unbalanced translocations (n=16), both familial (n= 7) and 
de novo (n= 9), different pattern chromosomes were diagnosed, all au -
tosomal. No hotspots were observed on 4p, with the exception of the 
t(4p;8p) translocations, that recurred within the proximal or the distal 
OR in 6 of 7 cases. Only one different de novo translocation, t(4p;7p), 
did occur within the distal OR. Of the remaining 56 rearrangements, 
consisting more often of isolated terminal deletions, only three were 
OR-mediated. A strong relationship was observed between parental 
origin and type of the de novo  rearrangement. We conclude that ORs 
are not usually involved in the WHS-associated rearrangements, with 
the exception of t(4p;8p) translocations.
P0425. Molecular cytogenetic characterisation of an Xp 
duplication in a phenotypically abnormal girl with random X 
inactivation
C. Massol1, S. Monnot1, F. Giuliano1, C. Fossoud2, M. Cossée3, J. C. Lambert1, 
H. Karmous-Benailly1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Nice, France, 2Department of Pediatrics, 
Nice, France, 3Genetic Laboratory, Strasbourg, France.
Partial duplications of the short arm of the X chromosome are rela -
tively rare and have been described in males and females. We report 
the case of a 4 years and 10 months old girl presenting developmen -
tal delay, severe language retardation and dysmorphic features with 
macrocephaly (+1,8 SD), prominent forehead, wide palpebral fissures 
and anteverted nares. No pigmentary dysplasia of the skin was pres -
ent. The external genitalia were normal. The karyotype completed by cytogenetic analysis with the Whole Chromosome Painting probe of 
chromosome X revealed a de novo  partial duplication of the short arm 
of an X chromosome.
In order to further characterize the duplicated segment, we used a 
series of BAC probes extending from band Xp11.22 to Xp22.1. 
BACs from Xp11.23 to Xp11.4 were duplicated. The karyotype was 
finally 46,X,dup(X)(p11p11).ish dup(X)(p11.23p11.4)(WCPX+,RP11-
416I6++,RP11-386N14++,RP11-466C12++). X inactivation status was 
studied using HpaII digestion of the AR and FMR1 genes. Unexpect -
edly, the two X chromosomes were found to be randomly inactivated, 
in the proband. Indeed, usually, in women with structurally abnormal 
X chromosome, the abnormal X chromosome is preferentially inacti -
vated and those patients share an apparent normal phenotype. So, we 
speculate that in the present case, the phenotype of the patient could 
be explained by a functional disomy of the genes present in the dupli -
cated region. We’ll discuss the possible implication of these genes on 
the observed phenotype.
P0426. Familial pericentric Y chromosome inversion in Russian 
patient with trisomy 21
T. G. Tsvetkova , V. B. Chernykh, L. F. Kurilo, E. V. Il’ina, E. V. Zaklyazmins -
kaya, A. V. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sci -
ences, Moscow, Russian Federation.
We reported a patient with trisomy 21 and pericentric Y inversion. The 
proband, a Russian male newborn with a typical Down syndrome phe -
notype, was born to a 21-y.o. G1P1 mother and an unrelated 23-y.o. 
father. No genital abnormalities were mentioned in this patient.
We have examined the proband and his father, mother and grand -
father. Chromosome analysis had been carried out on peripheral 
lymphocytes by standard techniques with GTG- and CBG- staining. 
Genomic DNA had been extracted from peripherical leukocytes us -
ing by standard protocol. Parents’ origin of aneuploidy had been de -
termined by analysis for four following polimorphic markers: D21S11, 
D21S1888, D21S1890, and D21S1895. Y microdeletion analysis had 
been performed using PCR amplifications for SRY, AMG/AMGL, ZFY/
ZFX loci and 21 Y-specific STSs.
The proband’s karyotype was 47,X,inv(Y)(p11.2q11.23),+21. Patient’s 
father and patient’s grandfather posses the same inverted Y chromo -
somes, mother had normal female karyotype. The extra chromosome 
was maternal origin is to determined by molecular analysis. PCR am -
plifications have shown an absence of sY1192 marker in proband and 
his father and grandfather. It is typically for b2/b3 deletions, partial de -
letions within AZFc region.
Remarkable, that deleted sY1192 locus falls in inverted repeat IR1 lo -
calization near or within Yq breakpoint of pericentric Y chromosome 
inversion. We suppose that revealed partial AZFc deletion may be due 
to pericentric inversion in ancestor Y chromosome. The transmission 
of this rearranged Y chromosome through three generations demon -
strated, that at least some partial deletions (b2/b3 deletions) even in 
association with inv(Y) polymorphism not impair the male fertility .
P0427. Unbalanced translocation (Y;3) leading to 3p deletion in a 
dyslexic boy and his normal mother
C. Schluth1,2, M. Till1, V. Des Portes3, P. Gosset4, V. Malan5, P. Edery1,2, D. 
Sanlaville1,2;  
1Service de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle - Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, 
France, 2Faculté de Médecine Lyon Nord - Université Claude Bernard, Lyon, 
France, 3Service de Neuropédiatrie - Hôpital Debrousse, Lyon, France, 4La-
boratoire de Biologie de la Reproduction - CHU Strasbourg - SIHCUS-CMCO, 
Schiltigheim, France, 5Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Histologie et Embryologie 
- Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
A 10-year-old boy was assessed for learning disability, language delay, 
dyslexia and hyperactivity. He was born at 32 weeks’gestation and 
required resuscitation. He walked at 19 months, suffered from frequent 
otitis media and was surgically treated for hypospadias. Standard 
karyotype displayed an abnormal chromosome 3 : add(3)(p25). The 
same abnormality was identified on the karyotype of his phenotypically 
normal mother.
FISH analyses showed that the additional material on chromosome 
3p consisted of Y heterochromatin and Yq telomere. 3p subtelomer -
ic probe ( Cytocell , 230kb from telomere) was deleted whereas the 
CRELD1  locus at 10 Mb from telomere was retained. So, both mother Cytogenetics12
and his son carried the same derivative der(3)t(Y;3)(q12;p25.3) lead -
ing to a 3pter deletion of less than 10 Mb.
Familial cases of Y translocation usually concern Y heterochromatin 
on acrocentric short arm. Involvement of a non-acrocentric partner has 
only been reported once to date.
3p deletion syndrome consists of growth retardation, microcephaly, 
facial dysmorphism (ptosis, broad nasal tip, micrognathia), mental 
retardation and occasional cardiac malformation, deafness and poly -
dactyly. Size of deletion and phenotype are variable. Only two familial 
cases have been reported. In the present observation, 3p telomeric 
region is deleted in both mother and her child while only the child ex -
press clinical features that are not typical for 3p deletion syndrome. 
Therefore, it can be questioned whether this deletion really accounts 
for the patient’s phenotype. Familial study and precise characterization 
of the deletion’s size are in progress to shed light on this issue.
P0428. ZFX gene deletion in mosaic 45,X/46,XY female
V. B. Chernykh , L. F. Kurilo, T. G. Tsvetkova, E. V. Il’ina, A. V. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sci -
ences, Moscow, Russian Federation.
X/XY mosaicism is associated with a wide spectrum of clinical phe -
notypes varied from females with Ullrich-Turner syndrome (UTS), un -
dervirilized males with mixed gonadal dysgenesis to normal virilized 
infertile males with azoospermia. At this the phenotype effects mainly 
depend on a presence of intact SRY gene and correlate with gonadal 
X/XY mosaicism.
We have examined patient with UTS. The proband was nine-year fe -
male referred to cytogenetic examination because of virilization. Be -
side short stature and clitoral hypertrophy, marked skin dryness was 
mentioned in this patient.
Chromosome analysis was performed using standard cytogenetic 
techniques with GTG- and CBG- staining. Molecular analysis was car -
ried out on DNA extracted from peripheral leukocytes. PCR amplifica -
tions for SRY, AMG/AMGL, ZFY/ZFX loci and 21 Y-specific STSs have 
been performed.
Cytogenetic examination has found a presence of X/XY mosaicism. 
In 4 of 50 analyzed metaphases chromosome analysis has demon -
strated a 45,X karyotype. PCR reactions have revealed a presence of 
SRY, AMG, AMGL, ZFY loci, and an absence of ZFX locus. Apparently 
patient had an Xp21 microdeletion included the ZFX gene. No Y chro -
mosome microdeletions were found.To our knowledge we have reported the first case of ZFX mutation. 
This gene encodes zinc finger protein lies within the critical region for 
ovarian failure and escapes X inactivation. Although we have found 
that in reported patient the XY cells were prevalent in blood lympho -
cytes, gonadal mosaicism may be essentially different. Furthermore, it 
is not excluded that ZFX gene loss may dismiss the SRY gene effect 
on the gonad differentiation.
P0428a. Novel matUPD15 identification by cytogenetic testing
V. Adir , H. Bar-El, M. Zif, A. Shalaata, Z. U. Borochowitz;  
The Simon Winter Institute for Human Genetics, Bnai-Zion Medical Center, 
Technion-Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, Israel.
Prader-Willi Syndrome (PWS) is a multisystemic genetic disorder 
characterized by infantile hypotonia, feeding difficulties, distinct dys -
morphic features, hypogonadism, psychomotor retardation and morbid 
obesity, with an estimated prevalence of 1 in 15,000 individuals. PWS 
is caused by the loss of function of paternal expressed genes within 
chromosome 15q11-q13, of which an interstitial deletion is observed 
in approximately 75% of the patients while a matUPD15 is noted in 
about 20%. The remaining 5% are due to a mutation or a translocation 
involving the 15q11-13 region.
Here we report on a newborn male with low-birth weight, severe hypo -
tonia and poor sucking. Decreased fetal movements were noted dur -
ing the 3rd trimester of pregnancy.
Chromosome analysis revealed normal male karyotype, with 2 iden -
tical marked chromosome 15P+S++. Parents’ karyotypes were 46XX 
15P+S++ and 46XY, suggestive of a matUPD mechanism, with partial 
isodisomy. The newborn’s FISH analysis (Q-Biogene probe), SNRPN 
region/ PML control, was normal. Molecular testing of polymorphic 
markers along chromosome 15 revealed a matUPD15, with heter -
oUPD15 from band q11.2 (D15S128) to band q21.1 (D15S659) and 
isoUPD at band q26.1 (D15S652). The cytogenetic results suggest 
isoUPD of the 15p arm, formed at the 2nd meiosis nondisjunction, and 
the molecular testing shows a double crossing over event in the 15q 
arm. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of detection 
of UPD15 using standard cytogenetic testing. We suspect that due to 
these unique findings, further clinical follow-up of this child may yield 
a better understanding of the genotype-phenotype correlation among 
PWS cases.Cytogenetics10
Po03. Prenatal diagnosis
P0429. Reporting Three Cases Of PND For Alpha thalassemia In 
Iran.
V. Lotfi1,2, M. Sajedifar1,2, P. Fouladi1,2, A. Abdolhosseini1, F. Shirazi1, Z. Sha -
hab1, S. Zeinali1,3;  
1Medical Genetics Lab of Dr Zeinali, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Young 
Researchers Club of research and science branch of Islamic Azad University, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Human Genetics Unit, Dept of Biotech ,Pas -
teur Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Each normal person has 4α genes which are shown as αα /αα. Usually 
α2 is more expressed than α1 therefore deletion of α2 or mutation on α2 
has more severe effect.
Being carrier alpha thalasemias are usually caused by deletion of one 
or two α-globins genes.
Alpha thal genotyped are usally shown like -α/αα (αthal 2); -α /-α or 
--/αα (α thal 1 or classical type). --/αα type is seen most in South East 
Asia. H-disease is caused by
--/-α form either by deletions or point mutations (e.g. --/αT α ).
Complete absence of 4α genes causes hydrops fetal is which requiring 
prenatal diagnose. We have performed three cases of PND for α-thal 
so far. In these cases the fetuses were diagnosed carriers (--/αα). In 
one case both parents were carrier of Med deletion (--med /αα). The 
Hematological data of parents were:
Father: MCV=62/8 MCH=20/2 Hb=14/1 A2= Normal
Mother:MCV=67/9 MCH=20/6 Hb=10/3 A2=Normal
At the present time we think only need to perform PND for hydrops 
fealties.
Yet we need more strong evidence to do PND since most cases of 
Hdisease seen in adults by us were mild enough to exclude PND for 
similar cases.
Key words: Alpha thalassemia, Prenatal Diagnosis, H Disease
P0430. Whole-genome expression analysis of amniocytes
G. R. Nagy1, B. Győrffy2, O. Galamb3, B. Nagy1, L. Lázár1, Z. Bán1, B. Molnár3, 
Z. Papp1;  
1Semmelweis University, I. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Bu -
dapest, Hungary, 2Semmelweis University, Szentágothai János Knowledge 
Center, Budapest, Hungary, 3Semmelweis University, II. Department of Internal 
Medicine, Cell Analysis Laboratory, Clinical Research Unit of the Hungarian 
Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.
Aims:  The objective of our study was to investigate the ability of global 
gene expression array analysis from routinely collected amount of am -
niotic fluid. We also wanted to search for the differential gene expres -
sion profile of a polygenic disorder, the neural tube defect, which is the 
second most common birth defect in the world.
Material and methodology: We analyzed 6-17 mL of amniotic fluid. 
Samples were taken from seven pregnant women carrying fetuses with 
neural tube defect, diagnosed during ultrasound examination. Control 
samples were obtained from pregnant women who underwent rou -
tine genetic amniocentesis because of advanced maternal age (>35 
years). Fetal mRNA from amniocytes was successfully isolated, ampli -
fied, labeled, and hybridized to whole-genome transcript arrays. Since 
the most significant epidemiological finding with respect to neural tube 
defects is the protective effect of maternal periconceptional folic acid 
supplementation, we also investigated specific folate-related genes.
Results:  The detected differential gene expression profiles between 
cases and controls highlighted genes, like SLA, LST1  and BENE  
genes, these might be important in the development of neural tube 
defects. None of the specific folate-related genes were in the top 100 
associated transcripts.
Conclusions: This study demonstrates the ability of global gene ex -
pression array analysis from as small as 6 ml amniotic fluid, allowing 
the examination from routinely collected amniotic fluid samples so in -
dividual fetuses can be studied. The analysis of fetal gene expression 
differences might get us closer to decipher the complex genetic back -
ground of polygenic disorders.
P0431. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for autosomal 
recessive polycystic kidney disease
N. Gigarel1, N. Frydman2, P. Burlet1, E. Feyereisen2, V. Kerbrat2, R. Frydman2, 
J. Bonnefont1, A. Munnich1, J. Steffann1;  
1Département de génétique, Necker, Paris, France, 2Biologie de la reproduc -tion, Béclère, Clamart, France.
Autosomal Recessive Polycystic Kidney disease (ARPKD) is one 
of the most common hereditary renal cystic disease, and is caused 
by mutations in the PKHD1 gene. The diagnosis is often made late 
in pregnancy and sometimes at birth. Owing to the poor prognosis, 
there is a strong demand for prenatal diagnosis. Preimplantation ge -
netic diagnosis (PGD) represents an alternative because it is done on 
cells taken from in vitro  fertilized embryos at the third-day stage. Only 
healthy embryos are transferred, avoiding the physical and psychic 
traumatism of the termination of pregnancy in the case of an affected 
fetus detected later by prenatal diagnosis. We developed a single-cell 
diagnostic approach based on haplotype analysis in order to propose 
PGD to most couples, whatever the mutations may be.
Six linked markers within (D6S1714 and D6S243), or in close proxim -
ity to (D6S272,D6S436, KIAA0057, D6S1662), the PKHD1  gene are 
tested in multiplex nested-PCR, using QIAGEN multiplex PCR kit, al -
lowing identification of embryos carrying the high-risk haplotypes.
PCR analysis was first carried out on 50 single-lymphocytes. Amplifi -
cation rate was excellent (100%), with an allele drop-out (ADO) rate 
ranging from 0 to 8%. Using this test, 4 PGD cycles were performed 
resulting in 18 biopsied embryos. Transferable embryos were obtained 
for three cycles, resulting in a pregnancy, and the birth of a healthy boy. 
The co-amplification of several loci increases the assay accuracy by 
allowing the detection of ADO, recombination and contamination. This 
simple diagnostic procedure can be applied to most patients at risk to 
transmit ARPKD.
P0432. Non Invasive Prenatal Diagnosis (NIPD): the suitability 
of locked nucleic acid (LNA)-modified allele-specific primers for 
detection of paternally inherited beta globin gene alleles
G. Dimisianos , J. Traeger-Synodinos, C. Vrettou, E. Kanavakis, A. Mavrou;  
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
Prenatal diagnosis (PND) with CVS sampling and amniocentesis in -
volves a small risk of pregnancy complications. This may be avoided by 
NIPD, which for monogenic diseases is potentially based on detection 
of distinct paternally-inherited alleles of cell-free fetal DNA in the ma -
ternal circulation. However, methods for NIPD must address the prob -
lem that fetal alleles exist within an excess of maternal alleles (~5% 
versus ~95%) with low total-DNA concentration (~10-100pg/μl). This 
study investigates specificity and sensitivity of allele-specific PCR us -
ing LNA-modifed oligonucleotides for the most common Mediterranean 
beta-thalassaemia mutation (IVS-I-110G->A, HBB c.93+21G>A) when 
present in minority quantities relative to wild-type alleles (20%:80%). 
Design of PCR primers included an allele-specific primer (IVS1-110 
G>A), LNA-modified at the 3’ nucleotide (mutant base). Inclusion of a 
pBR322 RsaI-fragment and pBR322-specific primers monitored PCR 
conditions whilst overcoming the problem of co-amplifying genomic re -
gions present in excess from the maternal genome. Reverse primers 
were labelled (Cy5.5), facilitating analysis on an automatic sequencer. 
PCR reactions analysed 200 diluted genomic-DNA mixtures with 80% 
normal and 20% mutant alleles (M/N), and 100 mutation-free (N/N) 
DNA samples (8-80pg DNA /reactions). 32 M/N and 32 N/N DNA sam -
ples were also analysed with non-LNA allele-specific primers under 
identical conditions. LNA-modified primers gave 2% false positives 
and no false negatives; non-modified primers gave false positive and 
negative rates >40%. The pBR322-specific band confirmed correct 
PCR conditions in all cases. These results indicate that LNA-modified 
allele-specific primers increase specificity and sensitivity.
P0433. Prenatal diagnosis of Carpenter Syndrome
D. F. Albu , A. C. Crenguta, E. Severin;  
“Carol Davila” Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania.
Background: Carpenter syndrome (CS) is a rare genetic disorder also 
called acrocephalopolysyndactily. The main features of Carpenter syn -
drome are craniosynostosis, congenital heart disease, obesity, extra 
fingers and/or toes (polydactyly), genital abnormalities, and short stat -
ure. Carpenter syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder, for which 
the gene has not yet been identified. Objectives: To identify and char -
acterize both craniofacial and limbs malformations associated with CS. 
Patients and Methods: A 28-year-old pregnant Caucasian female was 
referred at 21 weeks’ gestation for a routine prenatal ultrasound. Fetal 
monitoring was made by ultrasound scans for fetal growth, congenital 
malformations, and amniotic fluid volume. We also collected informa -Prenatal diagnosis11
tion about family medical history. Amniotic fluid samples were taken to 
perform prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis. Results: Ultrasound examina -
tion revealed a single fetus with an abnormal fetal craniofacial and 
limbs development: and oligohydramnios. Craniofacial abnormalities 
as a sonographic marker suggested the possibility of a chromosomal 
anomaly. More associated fetal anomalies were detected. Karyotype 
indicated a normal cytogenetic female: 46, xx. There was no family 
history of congenital anomalies. The couple chose to terminate the 
pregnancy. The family accepted autopsy. Autopsy findings confirmed 
the ultrasound diagnosis. Conclusions: The case was sporadic. The 
complex pattern of fetal anomalies identified and described suggested 
the possibility of CS. As the gene defect for Carpenter syndrome is 
unknown, the diagnosis of this condition remains a clinical one. The 
discovery of single or multiple fetal malformations requires not only 
complete echo graphic assessment, but also detailed post-abortum 
examination to allow optimal use of diagnostic aid programmes.
P0434. Our first steps in non-invasive detection of fetal Rh(D) 
using real-time PCR method
L. Lazar , B. Nagy, Z. Bán, R. Nagy, Z. Szigeti, Z. Papp;  
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
Introduction: In the last ten years the detection of fetal origin cells and 
cell free fetal DNA in maternal circulation opened new horizonts in non 
ivasive prenatal diagnosis. The Rh(D) incompatibility is the most fre -
quent blood group incompatibilities in the clinical practice, which can 
cause fetal anemia, hydrops and even fetal death. Aims: The aim of 
this study was to detect the fetal DNA in maternal circulation, to de -
termine the Rh(D) status of the fetus. Methods: Blood samples and 
amnionic fluid samples were collected from 30 pregnant women, with 
Rh negative status, between 11-22 week of gestation presented for 
genetic amniocentesis at the 1st. Department of Obstetrics and Gy -
necology, Semmelweis University. After DNA isolation real-time PCR 
was performed in order to detect the exon 7 of the RhD gene located 
on the first chromosome (1p36.11.). Results: In 24 cases the PCR re -
action gave same result in case of the DNA isolated from plasma and 
amniotic fluid, but in six cases the there was no PCR product of plasma 
samples and the product was detectable in amniotic fluid samples. 
The exon 7 was detectable in 25 cases, and there was no product in 5 
cases. Conclusions: The real-time PCR method seems to be an easy 
and reliable method to determine the fetal Rh blood group. The sensi -
tivity and specificity of the method in this study is in concordance with 
international data. The use of more than one probe could increase the 
sensitivity of the method.
P0435. Refined fluorescent STR quantification in cell free fetal 
DNA during pregnancy in physiological and Down syndrome 
fetuses.
R. Vodicka1, R. Vrtel1, L. Dusek2, M. Prochazka1, E. Schneiderova1, I. Dhai -
falah1, A. Santava1, E. Krejcirikova1, J. Santavy1;  
1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Repub -
lic, 2CBA Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
Real-time PCR is the most common approach to quantify cell free fetal 
(cff) DNA in maternal plasma. Analysis by the short tandem repeats 
(STR) has advantage to better recognize of different genotypes. But 
the quantity examination by Quantitative Fluorescent (QF) PCR of 
(STR) is limited to the only rough approximation.
This project, supported by IGA MZ CR NR7817-3, focused on more 
precise calculation of relative cff DNA amount tested by the STRs loci 
refined quantification directed to 21st chromosome.
The cff DNA was analysed on 475 samples from pregnant women with 
physiological fetuses in different stage of pregnancy (from 4gw- to 
37gw) separately in three STRs systems (D21S1435, D21S1446 and 
pD) and also by gonosomal sequences (AMELX/Y). Thirteen samples 
with Down syndrome (DS) fetuses cff DNA were compared.
We optimized and assessed the Refined (R)QF PCR for STRs in par -
ticular locus. We modified calculations with respect to preferably am -
plificated short DNA molecules and to stutters. The cff DNA detection 
rate was 73.8% in minimally one of STRs if successful PCR ampli -
fication (88.4 %) is considered. The efficiency was decreasing from 
shorter to longer PCR fragments.
All three STR and gonosomal systems proved increasing of cff DNA 
during pregnancy. The stutter variability rate tended from shorter to longer STR system. Work manifested that DS samples had signifi -
cantly higher amount of cff DNA. Our findings could contribute to the 
improvement of non-invasive prenatal diagnostics.
P0436. Cell-free fetal DNA quantification in maternal plasma at 
16° and 17° week of gestation: the experience of I.R.C.C.S. Burlo 
Garofolo of Trieste
E. Bevilacqua, V. Petix, M. Monticolo, D. Gambel Benussi, V. Pecile ;  
S.C. Genetica Medica, I.R.C.C.S. Burlo Garofolo, Trieste, Italy.
During pregnancy, cell-free fetal DNA is present in maternal blood. Its 
quantity increases throughout gestation and with increasing maternal 
age. It represents an alternative source of fetal genetic material for 
non-invasive prenatal diagnosis. 
It has been demonstrated that cell-free fetal DNA is significantly more 
present in women carrying fetuses with trisomy 21 and 13, bu not in 
trisomy 18.
Aim of this study was to quantify cell-free fetal DNA levels in plasma of 
pregnant women undergoing amniocentesis in the 2005-2006 period, 
in order to define its range and distribution at 16° and 17° week of ges -
tation, and to correlate its concentration to fetal conditions.
Patients were recruited with informed consent and samples were col -
lected before amniocentesis.
Fetal DNA quantification in maternal plasma was performed by real-
time PCR on the SRY gene in male-bearing pregnancies. Fetal gender 
was ascertained by amniocentesis.
At all, we collected 260 samples, 125 of these carrying male fetuses. 
From cytogenetic analysis, all male fetuses were 46,XY, but one of 
these displayed a second level mosaicism; regarding fetal conditions, 
there were four cases with cardiac malformation, one case with renal 
malformation and diaphragmatic hernia, one case with corpus callo -
sum agenesis, and one case with IUGR.
Preliminar data of fetal DNA analysis showed that the range of cell-
free fetal DNA concentration in maternal plasma at 16 and 17 week of 
gestation was in line with literature. In cases of fetuses with malforma -
tions, range of fetal DNA concentration in maternal plasma was similar 
to that of normal fetuses.
P0437. Mechanisms of transport of the extracellular nucleic 
acids : study of choriocarcinoma cell line
N. Bonello, J. Gabert, A. Levy-Mozziconacci ;  
Laboratoire de Biologie Moleculaire, CHU Nord, Marseille, France.
Extracellular DNA and RNA are present in normal and diseased hu -
man plasma.
They allow a novel approach to non-invasive diagnosis in the cancer -
ology and antenatal fields but very little is known about their physio -
pathological mechanisms.
Our study was carried out on an in vitro human epithelial choriocar -
cinoma cell line : JEG-3. The cell line was first characterised, then 
a protocol was established for the separation of microparticles and 
exosomes in the supernatant fluid of a common culture. The protocol 
was validated using two techniques; electronic microscopy and flow 
cytometry.
The extracellular nucleic acids associated with the vesicles were then 
quantified. We were also interested in the localisation of the extracel -
lular nucleic acids associated with the vesicles.
Study of culture supernatant showed the presence of extracellular DNA 
and RNA, quantifiable using real time quantitative PCR specific to the 
genes and transcripts analysed ( β-globin, SRY  for DNA and GAPDH, 
HLA-G  for RNA).
We showed the presence of DNA and RNA associated with two types 
of vesicles . The analysis of specific and ubiquitous genes allowed us 
to demonstrate the different distribution of the genes and transcripts 
associated with the vesicles. Vesicular fractions were analysed follow -
ing treatment with DNase and after permeabilisation. The percentage 
of the internal and external fraction for both genes associated with 
vesicules supported our hypothesis that the two genes have different 
modes of transport.
This work will be performed in order to evaluate the role of these ex -
tracellular nucleic acids in the intercellular communication through dif -
ferent vesicles. .Prenatal diagnosis12
P0438. Is fetal DNA detectable in maternal urine?
S. Majer , M. Bauer, I. Oreskovic, A. Strele, E. Giegerl, M. Eder, U. Lang, B. 
Pertl;  
Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
Objectives: The aim of this study was the detection, quantification, and 
correlation of cell-free fetal (cff) DNA in maternal urine and plasma in 
normal and complicated pregnancies during the third trimester. 
Methods: 151 urine and plasma samples obtained from 96 women 
pregnant with male and 55 pregnant with female fetuses were col -
lected and analyzed for cff-DNA using fluorescent PCR and quantita -
tive real-time PCR. The concentrations of cff and total DNA in maternal 
plasma were correlated with maternal and obstetric parameters using 
appropriate correlation analyses.
Results: Y-chromosome specific sequences were detected in 31/96 
(32.3%) urine samples collected from women pregnant with male fe -
tuses using the DYS14-assay and in 6/96 (6.3%) urine samples using 
the SRY-assay for real-time PCR analysis. DNA was extracted from 
1 ml maternal urine using the QIAamp®MinElute Virus Spin Kit (QIA -
GEN). No cff-DNA was detected in all 55 urine samples obtained from 
women pregnant with female fetuses. All 96 plasma samples obtained 
from women pregnant with male fetuses were tested positive for cff-
DNA using real-time PCR. Cff-DNA exhibited a correlation with ges -
tational age (R=0.244; P=0.018) and an inverse correlation with the 
latency between blood collection and birth (R=-0.218; P=0.036). Total 
DNA showed a correlation with placental weight (R=0.182; P=0.034) 
and pregnancies associated complications (R=0.280; P<0.001).
Conclusion: Our data confirm that cff-DNA is cleared by the kidneys 
in detectable amounts. Total DNA was found to be elevated in compli -
cated pregnancies during the third trimester.
P0439. The association between choroid plexus cysts and 
cytogenetic abnormalities
C. Gunduz1, C. Biray Avci1, A. Vahabi2, H. Onay2, O. Cogulu2, D. Ercal3, F. 
Ozkinay4, C. Ozkinay2;  
1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, 
Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genet -
ics, Izmir, Turkey, 3Dokuz Eylul University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of 
Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of 
Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey.
The choroid plexus is the area on the ventricles of the brain where 
cerebrospinal fluid is produced by modified ependymal cells. When a 
cystic form occurs inside the choroid plexus it is called a choroid plexus 
cyst (CPC). Cysts can be found in unilateral or bilateral form with dif -
ferent sizes. The choroid plexus cyst is a common variant and can be 
detected in utero incidentally by ultrasonographic examination during 
the second trimester. However it may be associated with an abnormal 
karyotype in approximately 3 % of fetuses. We aimed to evaluate the 
files of prenatally detected choroid plexus cysts between 2000-2006 
years retrospectively. Among all referrals, CPC was found in 95 fetus -
es of which, 40 of them had bilateral and 55 had unilateral localization. 
All fetuses were in the second trimester and the mean gestation week 
was 18.83±1.77 (range 17-25 weeks). The mean maternal age was 
27.90±3.82; 5 of them had an advanced maternal age (>35-year-old) 
and 4 of them had an increased maternal serum screening test result. 
Of 95 cases, 86 had isolated CPC. Nine of them had secondary ultra -
sonographic abnormality such as intracardiac ecogenic focus, cardiac 
hypertrophy, clinodactyly, renal pelvis dilatation, hydronephrosis, hy -
perecogenic kidney, ventriculomegaly and overlapping fingers. While 
cytogenetic investigation revealed karyotypic abnormality in 8 fetuses 
(8.42%), 88 were normal (41 fetuses were 46,XX and 47 were 46,XY). 
Among the abnormal karyotypes, 3 fetuses (3.16%) presented Triso -
my 18. The other abnormal karyotypes were 46,XY[144]/47,XY+21[6], 
46,XY,inv(9)(p11;q13) (2 fetuses) and 46,XY,15p+.
P0440. Fluorescence in situ Hybridization in prenatal diagnosis
H. Ljubic , R. Lasan, L. Letica, M. Burek, D. Muzinic, D. Begovic;  
Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University 
Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia.
Samples of amniotic fluid from 49 patients were analyzed using Fluo -
rescence in situ Hybridization (FISH) technique, applied on cultured 
and uncultured amniotic cells. Indications for FISH analysis on un -
cultured amniotic cells were: late weeks of gestation, abnormal ultra -sound markers, abnormal serum-screening test, chromosome recip -
rocal translocation in parents and sex-chromosome related diseases. 
Analyses on 17 samples of uncultured amniocytes revealed two path -
ological karyotypes (11,8 %). FISH analysis on 32 cultured samples 
was used as adjunct technique after classical cytogenetical analysis. 
Indications for 24 samples were suspected chromosomal structural de 
novo and numerical aberrations, 5 were investigated for population 
variants of acrocentric chromosomes and 3 for parents carriers of re -
ciprocal translocation.
From total number of 32 samples, 14 karyotypes were pathological 
(43,8 %) and 18 karyotypes were normal (56,2 %).
Following analyses on cultured amniocytes, 4 medically indicated 
abortions were recommended as well as 1 medically indicated abor -
tion after uncultured amniocytes analysis.
FISH is a fast, powerful molecular cytogenetic technique used as an 
supplement to conventional chromosomal analysis.
P0441. Prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities in 
Lithuania
N. Krasovskaja1, E. Benusiene1,2, E. Butkeviciene1, V. Kucinskas1,2;  
1Center for Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department of Human and 
Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Objective. To ascertain the effectiveness of non-invasive prenatal test -
ing of chromosomal abnormalities.
Methods. The risk for chromosomal defect was calculated by taking 
in account maternal age and gestation, first and/or second trimester 
serum biochemistry and first and/or second trimester ultrasound. The 
vast majority of women were tested in the second trimester. Cut-off 
for invasive testing was risk 1 in 250. For diagnosis karyotype analy -
sis from cultured amniocytes and quantitative fluorescent polymerase 
chain reaction was performed.
Results. 827 amniocenteses were performed during the period of 4,5 
years . Abnormal karyotypes were ascertained in 5.56% of cases. The 
structure of abnormalities was: trisomy 21-47.8%, trisomy 18-26%, 
mosaic karyotypes-8.7%, Robertsonian translocations-6.5%, recipro -
cal translocations-2.17%. In the group of women after non-invasive 
testing was born 5 babies with trisomy 21. The fetal loss after invasive 
procedures was 0.96%.
Conclusions. The effectiveness of non-invasive prenatal diagnostics of 
trisomy 21 was 81.5%. The vast majority of non-invasive and invasive 
tests should be performed in the first versus the second trimester of 
pregnancy.
P0442. Prenatal molecular diagnosis of Cockayne Syndrome
C. Conte , M. D’Apice, F. Sangiuolo, A. Botta, G. Novelli;  
Dpt Biopathology, Rome, Italy.
Cockayne Syndrome (OMIM 216400) is a rare and multi-systemic re -
cessive disease characterized by postnatal growth failure and progres -
sive multiorgan dysfunction. Growth and developmental abnormalities 
become fully manifest in the second year of life. Progressive impair -
ment of clinical features leads to severe disability, and death occurs 
within the first or second decade of life. CSA is caused by mutations in 
the 12 exons of ERCC8 gene, encoding a protein involved in the group 
of excision-repair cross-complementing process. Upnow 6 mutations 
has been characterised in the CSA gene. In our laboratory we exam -
ined a family with an affected son, died at the age of twelve, presenting 
typical clinical features. At the age of seven he weighed 9.360 gr and 
he was 48 cm high. The proband resulted compound heterozygote 
for two new mutations: a deletion del1436-586  (segregating from the 
mother) detectable by RNA analysis and a missense mutation C336G 
located in exon 4 (from the father). Southern analysis was performed 
to characterised the extension of the deletion. Successively the mother 
undergoes prenatal diagnosis by transabdominal chorionic villus sam -
pling (CVS) at week XII of pregnancy. Direct analysis on DNA and RNA 
was performed. A linkage analysis was also developed to study the 
segregation of the haplotypes, using markers located within an interval 
of 2.5cM comprising ERCC8 gene. This study allowed us to identify a 
foetus with a wild genotype confirmed at the birth by analysis on bio -
logical material isolated from placenta. This study documents the first 
molecular prenatal diagnosis of Cockayne syndrome.Prenatal diagnosis1
P0443. The risk of cystic fibrosis with prenatally detected 
hyperechogenic bowel in Belarus population
N. Mosse , L. Savenko, E. Shepelevich, K. Mosse;  
Scientific-Practical Center “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus.
Hyperechogenic fetal bowel is prenatally detected by ultrasound dur -
ing the second trimester of pregnancy in 0.1-1.8% of fetuses. It has 
been described to be associated with severe diseases, notably cys -
tic fibrosis (CF). The incidence of CF in Belarus is 1:8000 newborns, 
much less than in West Europe. The aim of our study was to deter -
mine the risk of CF in a prospective study of 70 fetuses with hyper -
echogenic fetal bowel detected during the 2005-2006 years period 
in our Center. Fetal cells and parental DNA were screened for CFTR 
mutations. Two steps screening protocol was used. In the first step 
the most frequent mutations in Belarus CF patients - dF508 (61.6%); 
CFTRdele2,3(21kb) (6.8%) and 2184delA (4.1%), were analyzed in 
one multiplex PCR reaction. When one mutation had been detected, a 
direct sequencing strategy was applied. We found 6 affected fetuses, 
which gave us an 8.6% risk of CF when a digestive tract anomaly 
is observed at routine ultrasound examination. Mutations, associated 
with pancreatic insufficient CF, were the most frequent. In 6 CF cases 
5 dF508 and 3 CFTRdele2,3(21kb) mutations were identified. The high 
incidence of CFTRdele2,3(21kb) can be explained by the more severe 
gastrointestinal expression of the disease in compound deletion car -
riers. Our results confirm that fetal bowel anomalies indicate a risk of 
severe cystic fibrosis and justify careful CFTR gene analysis.
P0444. Newborn screening for cystic fibrosis in the Czech 
Republic: observation of lower incidence of the disease
M. Balascakova1, A. Holubova1, V. Skalicka2, V. Vavrova2, D. Zemkova2, P. 
Kracmar3, T. Piskackova1, F. Votava3, M. Macek Jr.1;  
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - Faculty 
Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Pediatrics, Charles 
University - Faculty Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department 
of Pediatrics, Charles University - Faculty Hospital Kral. Vinohrady, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
An early diagnosis of cystic fibrois (CF) is considered as a favourable 
prognostic factor. Unless meconium ileus is present at birth, CF is could 
be often misdiagnosed. Increase of the age at diagnosis (ADG) in our 
country due to devolution of health care (prior to 1998 /median 0.58 
years/; 1999-2005 /1.2 years/; p = 0.036) led us to initiate a pilot CF 
newborn screening project (NBS; two tier IRT/DNA; II/2005-XI/2006) 
covering ~62% of all newborns. Concentration of IRT was measured in 
76,438 Guthrie cards and its level above the arbitrary cut off (75ng/ml) 
was found in 799 cases (1.05%). Positive cases were examined using 
a population specific CFTR  mutation panel (~ 84% detection rate). In 
total, 12 CF patients were identified and the median ADG was 37 days 
(range 26-54). Interestingly, we also diagnosed previously unrecog -
nised CF in 3 older sibs. 53 ,,IRT positive“ newborns, that had only 
1 CFTR  allele, were subjected to follow-up sweat testing. Thus far, 
45 cases were negative (ie. unaffected heterozygotes), while in one 
instance a borderline result indicated long-term monitoring. When us -
ing NBS data alone the incidence of CF was 1: 6,369, compared to the 
previously epidemiologically established value of 1:2,700. However, 
when respective prenatal diagnosis (PND) data from within study pe -
riod were taken into account incidence increased to 1:3,900. Overall, 
our study proved that NBS is an efficacious tool for uniform diagnosis 
of CF and that its incidence could be lower due to systematic PND dur -
ing the last decade. Supported by VZFNM00064203
P0445. Results of cytogenetical analysis of 1194 chordocenteses
M. Burek , L. Letica, R. Lasan, H. Ljubic, D. Muzinic, D. Begovic;  
Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University 
Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia.
1194 chordocenteses were analyzed cytogenetically in a period of 22 
years, using cytogenetical GTG-banding method. Indications for chor -
docenteses were late weeks of pregnancy (ultrasound markers, par -
ents carrieres of reciprocal translocation, age, …) and amniocenteses 
confirming.
From total number of 1194 chordocenteses, 88 (7,37 %) were karyo -
typically determined as pathologic: 63 (71,5 %) numerical aberrations 
and 25 (28,4 %) structural aberrations. The most frequent numerical 
aberrations were trisomie of chromosome 21 (21/63; 33.3 %) and tri -
somie of chromosome 18 (20/63; 31.7 %).Pathology in amniocenteses were confirmed with almost 100 % ac -
curacy with chordocenteses. Considering other indications for chor -
docentesis, most pathologic karyotypes were confirmed at ultrasound 
markers indication (45/60; 75%).
P0446. Towards noninvasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) of 
trisomy 21 Down syndrome
R. W. Old , F. Crea, W. M. Puszyk, M. A. Hulten;  
University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom.
The development of non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) of trisomy 
21 Down Syndrome based on a maternal blood sample rather than the 
invasive procedures chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis, is a 
long-term goal in reproductive care. Copy number counting of cell-free 
fetal DNA (cffDNA) sequences in maternal plasma presents a greater 
challenge than NIPD based upon detecting paternal sequences in 
cffDNA, already clinically feasible for X-linked disorders and RhD ge -
notyping. One approach for identification of fetal DNA exploits differ -
ences in DNA methylation between maternal and cffDNA (the majority 
of which originates from placental syncytiotrophoblasts).
We describe the first identification and characterisation of a panel of 
chromosome 21-specific sequences (and reference sequences on 
other autosomes) that are differentially methylated between peripheral 
blood and placental tissue, DNA sequences which thus constitute can -
didate biomarkers for NIPD of trisomy 21 Down Syndrome.
To select DNA sequences to be screened for differential methylation 
between these tissues, we adopted three strategies (1) searching pub -
lic databases for highly differentially expressed genes, (2) choosing 
‘random’ promoter regions, and (3) choosing ‘random’ non-promoter 
regions. We screened these regions by methylation-specific restric -
tion enzymatic and bisulfite-conversion assays, and hence identified 
a number of differentially methylated sequences located at 21q22.3 
(AIRE, CLDN14, and ERG genes), at 1q32.1 (CD48 gene and FAIM3 
gene), at 2p14 (ARHGAP25 gene) and at 12.24 (SELPLG gene). Clini -
cal evaluation of the sensitivity and specificity for NIPD of trsiomy 21 
Down syndrome is underway.
This work has been supported by the EC NoE SAFE no LSHB-CT-
2004-503243.
P0447. Detection of median values of PAPP-A protein and free 
beta hCG in serum samples of pregnant women in north-west of 
Iran.
S. Mohaddes ;  
Medical Genetics Unit, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Pregnancy-associated plasma protein A and the beta subunit of hu -
man chorionic gonadotrophin are well established markers used in 
combination with nuchal translucency to screen the pregnancies for 
Down syndrome and trisomy 18 in first trimester. However their me -
dian values are different according to the ethnic origin. In the pres -
ent study the median values of free beta hCG and PAPP-A protein 
were obtained in the population of pregnant women of North-West of 
Iran, using serum samples prepared from 846 pregnancies at 11th-13th 
weeks of gestation. The results were also compared to those of similar 
findings on other ethnic origins. A significant difference was observed 
between the median values calculated in the present study and those 
reported for Asian and Caucasian ethinics. Our results indicate that 
employing the median values, present in available risk calculation soft 
wares for screening purposes, will result in underestimation of Down 
syndrome and trisomy 18.
P0448. Evaluation of indications of prenatally diagnosed Down 
syndrome cases between 2000-2006 years
F. Ozkinay1, S. Numanoglu2, A. Aykut1, S. Unlubay1, C. Gunduz2, O. Cogulu1, 
A. Vahabi3, D. Ercal4, C. Ozkinay3;  
1Department of Pediatrics, Subdivision of Genetics and Teratology, Ege Uni -
versity, Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, 
Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University, Faculty of Medi -
cine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 4Dokuz Eylul University, 
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey.
Down syndrome (DS) is the most commonly recognized genetic cause 
of mental retardation. The risk of trisomy 21 is mostly related to ad -
vanced maternal age. Our study aimed to determine the correlation Prenatal diagnosis1
between prenatally diagnosed trisomy 21 incidences with the indica -
tions throughout 7 years.
The indications of the women who underwent cytogenetic prenatal 
analysis including amniocentesis (9737), chorionic villus sampling (95) 
and fetal blood sampling (229) were evaluated. The mean maternal 
age was 34.70±6.02 years and the mean gestation week was 17±3.85. 
Advanced maternal age was the most common indication (48.6%) in 
all prenatally diagnosed DS cases which is followed by abnormal ul -
trasound findings (18.6%) and increased maternal serum screening 
in triple test results (18.6%). Trisomy 21 was detected in a total of 70 
cases. Chromosome analysis revealed 33 cases with 47,XY,+21; 32 
cases with 47,XX,+21; 2 cases with 47,XX,+21,inv(9)(p11;q13), one 
with mosaic DS 47,XY,+21/48,XY,+3,+21, one with 46,XY,t(13;15)(q12
;p11),+21 and one 46,XX,t(14;21).The distribution of the number of DS 
cases according to the advancing years were: 3/515 (0.003%) in 2000, 
5/717 (0,697%) in 2001, 7/836 (0.837%) in 2002, 8/1285 (0.622%) in 
2003, 21/1474 (1.424%) in 2004, 13/1316 (0.987%) in 2005, 13/1315 
(0.988%) in 2006.
The mothers less than 35 years old who had a fetus with DS covered 
47.8% of the cases, nevertheless, when the age lowered to 30 years, 
the ratio became 80.6%. The risk of having a child with DS increased 
in a gradual, linear fashion until 30 years old and showed a significant 
increase thereafter.
P0449. Down’s syndrome screening in Saint-Petersburg. Ten 
years experience (1997-2006).
T. K. Kascheeva1, Y. A. Nikolaeva1, N. V. Vokhmyanina2, T. V. Kuznetzova1, O. 
P. Romanenko2, V. S. Baranov1;  
1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2City Medical Genetic Center, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion.
Trisomy 21 or Down’s syndrome is one of the most common genetic 
abnormalities with its risk progressively increase with maternal age. 
In many countries biochemical screening programs have been imple -
mented, and the risk of Down’s syndrome is calculated for each preg -
nancy. Total biochemical screening for Down’s syndrome in Saint-Pe -
tersburg has been carried out in the second trimester of pregnancy 
since 1997. Assessment of risk relies maternal age and serum mark -
ers (AFP and HCG) concentrations. Also all pregnant women were 
subjected to ultrasound examinations on the 10-14 & 20-22 weeks of 
gestation and also for cytogenetic screening for chromosomal abnor -
malities. Basic results of screening programs for Down’s syndrome 
since 1997 up to 2006 and some urgent problems in this area are out -
lined. Since 1997 36,9% DS fetuses (198/536) could be attributed to 
the women of 35 ages and more. Most of these cases - 61 % (102/166) 
were detected prenatally. Efficiency of DS detection in this group in -
creased from 28.9% in 1997-98 up to 68% in 2004-06. About 18,7% of 
elder women rejected invasive PD for different reasons. Detection rate 
in 2-d trimester was 74,6% (cut off 1/360, FPR 6,8%). Since 2004 com -
bined biochemical & US screening in the first trimester was initiated. 
Detection rate was 93.8% (30/32) (cut off 1/250, FPR 12.8%, average 
age 32.4+/-4.7). Pilot study of UE3 and inhibin A concentrations were 
performed for establishing of medians. Introducing of quadrotest will 
be useful for reducing of false positive results for the patients tested in 
the 2-d trimester.
P0450. Further results evaluation for the women with increased 
risk for congenital anomalies of fetus after biochemical prenatal 
diagnostic (PRISCA)
R. Sereikiene , D. Serapinas, V. Asmoniene;  
Kaunas Medical University Hospital, Kaunas, Lithuania.
PURPOSE: to evaluate real outcomes of pregnancy of women with 
increased risk of fetal chromosomal abnormalities after I or II trimester 
biochemical examination more than age risk.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Analyzing of medical documentation, con -
tacts with women after birthing. The 371 women were examined by the 
PRISCA program during 2005.10.01-2006.10.01 year period. The risk 
factors were older age, not favorable anamnesis of pregnancy (con -
genital anomalies, miscarriages, sterilities and others), not favorable 
anamnesis of family or relatives. First trimester “double” test (PAPP-A 
+ β-hCG) was done for 103 women, second trimester “triple” test was 
done for 268 and all two tests - for 24 women.
The increase risk for Downy and Edwards syndromes was got in 91 (24,5%) cases, according first trimester test - for 26, second - 63, two 
this - 12 women. The amniocentesis was offered in case when risk 
was higher 1:100 for women younger 40 years old and 1: 50 older 40 
years old. This procedure was done for 15 women and 3 trisomies of 
chromosome 21(3,3% of all women with increased risk) were found 
using FISH method in combination with full cariotype of fetus. In other 
74 cases of increased risk the further ultrasound examination was of -
fered.
CONCLUSION: The greet importance is to evaluate the health sta -
tus of newborns after birth and all outcomes of pregnancy in cases of 
increased risk according biochemical examination. These dates will 
show in full text of this work.
P0451. Prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21 mosaicism with true 
chimerism
C. Gug , G. Budau;  
University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania.
The 32 year old female (gesta 1, para 0) had amniocentesis at 21 
weeks gestation due to: increased nuchal translucency at ultrasound 
scan (6 mm at 13 weeks of pregnancy), abnormal alpha-feto-protein 
in maternal serum (0,44 MoM) and chromosomal abnormality in fam -
ily history (an uncle with Down Syndrome). Chromosome analysis of 
amniotic fluid cultures showed a mosaic karyotype: 47,XX+21/46,XY. 
The couple was counseled for prenatal diagnosis of the mosaicism: we 
explained the possibility that the anomalous cell line could involve fetal 
tissues. To exclude the possibility of contamination with maternal cells 
(having suspected that a mosaicism with a very low line with no phe -
notypical modifications existed), we performed maternal karyotype, 
which turned out to be normal. After such investigations, the couple 
elected to terminate the pregnancy. Cord blood cultures showed two 
cell-lines: a normal cell-line of 46,XY and a 47,XX+21 cell line. We 
propose that this case represents an example of true chimerism. The 
most plausible mechanism underlyind this phenomenon is that two 
embryos (1 normal, male, and one trisomic, female) have performed a 
fusion in early pregnancy.
P0452. Introducing first trimester screening for chromosomal 
abnormalities in Estonia
K. Muru1,2, T. Reimand1, M. Sitska1;  
1Medical Genetics Center, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute of 
General and Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
Prenatal diagnosis of genetic disorders in Estonia has been offered 
since 1990. Second trimester maternal serum screening was started in 
1998. In 2001 first trimester ultrasound screening (NT) was introduced 
in some centers. Since February 2005 the combined first trimester 
screening (serum screening+NT) is offered in Tartu University Clinics.
Our study included 1275 women at the first trimester of pregnancy. 
In 10+1 - 13+6 week of pregnancy PAPP-A and free ß-HCG were mea -
sured. Eighty-five percent of women underwent the combined 1st tri-
mester screening (NT + PAPP-A and free ß-HCG). For individual risk 
calculation we used Prisca 4.0 software (distributed by Siemens Medi -
cal Solutions Diagnostics). All women had also 2nd trimester routine 
ultrasound screening in 19-20 week of pregnancy.
First 500 women underwent also routine 2nd trimester serum screen -
ing. From the beginning of 2006 stepwise sequential screening was 
developed for 1st and 2nd trimester screening. Screening positive (risk 
for trisomy 21 of ≥1: 270 at term) were 10,2% of tests based only 
on biochemical markers and 4,6% of combined screening tests. Eight 
women fulfilled criteria (risk for DS >1:50 and NT >2,5 mm or NT >3,0 
mm) for early invasive diagnostics test (CVS). Chromosomal analysis 
(via CVS or AC) revealed 4 Down syndrome, 1 Edwards syndrome and 
1 triploidy (69,XXX). During study period were found 2 “false negative” 
Down syndrome cases. The essential criteria for using 1st trimester 
screening wider in Estonia is the feasibility to measure NT during 12-
13. week of pregnancy, which is now possible only in few centers.
P0453. Assessment of the Fragile X PCR assay in routine 
diagnostic practice
Z. Musova , S. Bendova, K. Pavlikova, P. Hedvicakova, A. Krepelova;  
Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - Faculty Hos -
pital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
Here we present our initial assessment of the Fragile X PCR kit (Ab -
bott) in diagnostic practice. Sample genotype was determined using an Prenatal diagnosis1
in house PCR protocol (BI 2720) and Southern blot analysis, while the 
assay was utilised in subsequent prenatal- and postnatal diagnoses. In 
14 male-, 7 premutations and 7 full mutations and 18 female samples, 
10 premutations and 8 full mutations, were detected. All expansions 
were independently confirmed and detection of PCR products within 
the premutation range was robust. However, 6 out of 15 full mutation 
samples were not visible on the agarose gel and two of them were 
even not conclusive on ABI 3100. In order to assess reliability of the 
TR/X ratio we have analyzed the homozygous or heterozygous status 
in a set of 23 females with known genotypes. Discrepancy was found 
in 6 out of 23 cases (26 %), which is in general agreement with previ -
ous reports. Subsequently, these results were taken into account in 3 
different prenatal diagnostic cases. In two instances the results were 
negative, while in one case the expansion was exactly at the premuta -
tion / full mutation threshold (199 cgg+/-3cgg). There is a necessity 
to examine its methylation status in order to distinguish affected from 
the healthy carrier. In summary, this assay is promising product which 
allows rapid, albeit incomplete Fra X diagnostics. However, in house 
diagnostic validation is necessary for its optimalisation and manufac -
turer instructions should be strictly adhered to in order to assure con -
sistent results. Supported by VZFNM 00064203.
P0454. Rapid diagnosis of hydatidiform moles by QF-PCR
D. Diego-Alvarez1, R. C. Narvaiza1, A. Avila-Fernandez1, C. Ramos1, R. 
Cardero-Merlo1, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1, J. Diaz-Recasens2, J. Aneiros3, I. Lorda-
Sanchez1;  
1Genetics Service Fundación Jiménez Díaz-Capio-CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 
2Obstetrics and Gynaecology Service Fundación Jiménez Díaz-Capio, Madrid, 
Spain, 3Anatomopathologic Service Fundación Jiménez Díaz-Capio, Madrid, 
Spain.
One possible cause of first trimester miscarriage is hydatidiform molar 
pregnancy, which is associated with a significantly increased risk of 
subsequent development of persistent gestational trophoblastic dis -
ease (GTD). Differentiating between partial (triploid, usually paternally 
derived) and complete (diploid, whether mono or dispermic, androge -
netic in origin) mole is important because of their different prognosis 
and appropriate treatment therefore. However, the widespread use of 
ultrasound in the clinical managment of pregnancies has resulted in 
earlier detection and evacuation of moles, which makes the histopath -
ologic clinical diagnosis that is based on subtle morphologic criteria 
more difficult to achieve. Nevertheless, other approaches seem to be 
reliable diagnostic methods. Hence, karyotyping or FISH may result 
useful in order to determine ploidy in hydatidiform moles as previously 
described. Moreover, genetic origin and classification of moles can be 
assesed by PCR-based methods.
Here, we present the molecular genetic diagnosis of complete and 
partial hydatidiform moles studied by multiplex QF-PCR with different 
specific chromosome polymorphic STR markers. From late 2005 on, 
all the first trimester curettage samples were provided by the gynae -
cological service of the hospital (whether suspicion of mole existed 
or not) in order to asess its chromosomal constitution and then were 
derived for anatomopathological studies. Correlation between genetic 
and histopathologic results was found in all of the cases except for one 
complete mole, whose anatomopathologic diagnosis failed.
Then, we propose the genetic molecular study as a rapid (24-48h), 
low-cost, less time-consuming, sensitive and reliable complementary 
diagnostic method of hydatidiform moles.
P0455. Intracardiac echogenic focus and cytogenetic 
abnormalities
H. Akin1, C. Biray Avci2, B. Durmaz3, C. Gunduz2, O. Cogulu3, D. Ercal4, F. 
Ozkinay3, C. Ozkinay1;  
1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, 
Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, 
Izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Izmir, Turkey, 4Dokuz Eylul University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pedi -
atrics, Izmir, Turkey.
Intracardiac echogenic focus (ICEF) is defined as a discrete structure 
within the cavity of the heart that probably represents microcalcifica -
tions of the papillary muscles. ICEFs are usually observed during the 
routine fetal ultrasound examinations. It is commonly seen as a single 
focus in the left ventricule and the incidence of ICEF is given as 3-8 
%. In most of the cases it is found as a normal variant however the association between echogenic foci and chromosomal abnormalities, 
particularly trisomy 21, has been reported in the literature. Our study 
aims to compare the association between echogenic foci and chro -
mosomal abnormalities. Retrospective evaluation of clinical files of 27 
cases whose referral reason was ICEF in their routine ultrasonograph -
ic screenings during the last four years was evaluated. The mean ma -
ternal age and the gestational age were 27.87±4.22 and 18.17±3.07, 
respectively. ICEF was the only ultrasonographic finding in 26 cases, 
while it was associated with other anomalies in one case. Chromo -
somal abnormality was found in only one case and had a karyotype 
of 46,XX,del(13)(q22),inv(9)(p11;q13). Fetal anomaly screening by ul -
trasonographic examination revealed nuchal translucency, nasal bone 
hypoplasia, hyperecogenic bowel, absence of the middle phalanx of 5th 
digit. Among the other karyotypes, 14 were 46,XX and 12 were 46,XY. 
There was no association between isolated ICEF and chromosomal 
abnormalities.
P0456. Characterization of the mitochondrial respiratory chain 
during human foetal development
L. Minai1, D. Chretien1, A. Munnich1, F. Encha-Razavi2, J. Martinovic-Bourriel2, 
H. Etchevers1, C. Esculpavit2, T. Attie-Bitach1, A. Rötig1;  
1INSERM U781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, Paris, France, 2Service 
d’embryologie/Foetal pathologie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, Paris, 
France.
Mitochondrial disorders can have an early antenatal expression or un -
dergo a symptom-free period. The aim of the present study is tracing 
the time point during pregnancy at which the foetal respiratory chain 
(RC) is being assembled and functions fully. The study was carried out 
on human foetuses aged from 9 to17 weeks of gestation, that were 
aborted because of genetic diseases that do not affect mitochondrial 
function. For each foetus, various tissues (brain, heart, liver, kidney 
and muscle) were examined. The research has focused on 3 main 
angles of the foetal respiratory chain.
Firstly, the assembly state of the foetal RC complexes was observed 
using Blue Native gels. Then, the protein profile of the RC complexes 
was examined using a cocktail of antibodies that allows tracing one 
subunit of each complex on SDS-PAGE. Finally, the enzymatic activity 
of the different RC complexes was measured.
The results show that as from 9 weeks of gestation all five complexes 
of the foetal RC are fully assembled (as compared with post-natal com -
plexes) in all five tissues examined. Their protein composition for the 
subunits that were tested is similar; the ratio between them is constant 
and resembles that of the post-natal one. Finally, the enzymatic activ -
ity of these complexes is 2.5 times lower than that found for post-natal 
samples; however, the relative activity of each complex has the same 
pattern as observed in post-natal tissues.
Altogether, these results suggest that the respiratory chain is fully func -
tional at early stages of human foetal development.
P0457. Rapid detection of chromosomal aneuploidies by MLPA 
in prenatal diagnosis
B. L. Carvalho1, R. P. Leite1, E. Ribeiro1, F. Carvalho2;  
1Dept. Genetics, Centro Hospitalar de Vila Real-Peso da Régua, E.P.E, Vila 
Real, Portugal, 2Dept. Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto., Porto, 
Portugal.
Chromosomes aneuploidies of 13, 18, 21, X and Y account for the ma -
jority of abnormal fetal karyotypes in prenatal diagnosis. Conventional 
cytogenetic requires in vitro  cell culture to obtain a karyotype with re -
sults available only after 10 to 15 days. Multiplex Ligation-dependent 
Probe Amplification (MLPA) is a novel method for detection of aneu -
ploidies of chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y by relative quantification 
of about 40 different DNA sequences in a single PCR reaction. On the 
basis of a retrospective clinical study, 204 uncultured amniotic fluid 
samples from women between 17 and 45 year’s old and gestacional 
age between 12 to 31 weeks were analysed. The most frequent indica -
tions for fetal sampling were advanced maternal age, followed by posi -
tive biochemical screening for Down’s syndrome and ultrasound ab -
normalities. The MLPA probe mix contain 8 probes for chromosomes 
13, 18, 21 and X chromosomes and 4 probes for Y chromosome. Prod -
ucts were analysed by capillary electrophoresis and quantitative data 
were extracted from ABI Prism GeneScan Analysis Software.
No aneuploidies for chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y were detect -
ed in 197/204 cases. Three cases showed trisomy 18 and 4 cases Prenatal diagnosis1
showed trisomy 21. All the results were confirmed by conventional cy -
togenetic. No aneuploidies for chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y were 
missed by MLPA. The efficiency of the method was not influenced by 
the gestational age.
MLPA is valid, simple, sensitive and cheap method of prenatal diagno -
sis of common aneuploidies within 24 hours, until the complete analy -
sis of conventional karyotype.
P0458. A monosomy 8 cell line detected by FISH in a fetus with 
multiple abnormalities and mosaic trisomy 8 in chorionic villi
D. Turchetti1, E. Pompilii1, E. Magrini2, A. Pession2, M. C. Pittalis3, D. Santini4, 
P. Bonasoni4, M. Segata3, G. Pilu3, G. Romeo1, M. Seri1;  
1Unit of Medical Genetics, University of Bologna-Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, 
Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Oncology-Section of Pathology, University of 
Bologna-Ospedale Bellaria, Bologna, Italy, 3Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, University of Bologna-Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, 
Italy, 4Unit of Pathology, University of Bologna-Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, 
Bologna, Italy.
Trisomy 8 mosaicism is associated with a variable phenotype, with 
neurodevelopmental delay, dysmorphic facial features, skeletal, renal 
and cardiovascular abnormalities being common features. Neverthe -
less, individuals with minor abnormalities and normal intelligence have 
been described.
Increased nuchal translucency thickness was detected at 13 weeks 
in the male fetus of a 27-year-old woman. At CVS, direct preparation 
showed a normal karyotype (46,XY), while in cultured cells mosaic tri -
somy 8 (47,XY,+8[11]/46,XY[53]) was found. At 15+6 weeks, ultrasound 
scan revealed bilateral cleft lip and palate with flat face and absence 
of the nose; no other abnormalities were evidenced. Pregnancy was 
terminated at 16+6 weeks.
Mosaic trisomy 8 was confirmed by standard karyotyping in placenta 
(47,XY,+8[13]/46,XY[87]) and amnion (47,XY,+8[16]/46,XY[68]), but 
not in umbilical cord (46,XY[100]). Pathological examination of the fe -
tus confirmed cleft lip and palate with maxillary hypoplasia and showed 
gastrointestinal abnormalities, dysplastic kidneys and focal portal fi -
brosis in the liver. To confirm the presence of the trisomic cell line in 
fetal tissues, FISH was performed in liver and kidney samples using 
a chromosome-8 specific probe. In liver, two fluorescent signals were 
detected in 64% of nuclei, three signals in 13%, one signal in 23%; in 
kidney, 57% of nuclei showed two signals, 43% one signal. In control 
tissues, the presence of one signal was found in 3-10% of nuclei, sug -
gesting that our finding reflected true mosaic monosomy 8.
In the case here described, multiple fetal anomalies were associated 
with a complex chromosomal mosaicism (trisomy/monosomy 8) with 
only trisomy 8 mosaicism detected at CVS.
P0459. Maternal MTHFR genotype, blood homocysteine levels 
and incidence of NTDs and Down syndrome
S. Andonova1,2, V. Dimitrova3, R. Vazharova4, R. Tincheva5, A. Tzoncheva6, I. 
Kremensky1,2;  
1Molecular Medicine Center, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2National 
Genetics Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sofia, 
Bulgaria, 3High-Risk Pregnancy Department, University Hospital of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Sofia 
Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Section of Clinical Genetics, Department 
of Pediatrics, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Department of Clinical 
Laboratory and Clinical Immunology, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Neural Tube defects (NTDs) and Down syndrome (DS) are common 
reason for malformations among newborns. Despite of the high fre -
quencies, the etiology is still unclear. Some anomalies in the homocys -
teine metabolism and elevated blood homocysteine levels in mothers 
in combination with folate deficiency could be associated with NTD 
and DS appearance. The C677T and A1298C polymorphisms in Meth -
ylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene were described as an 
NTD risk factor and could cause elevated homocysteine concentra -
tions. The frequency of C677T and A1298C substitutions were detect -
ed after restriction of the PCR products with HinfI and MboII, respec -
tively. We have investigated 54 DNA samples from NTD mothers, 35 - 
from DS mothers and 60 - from control mothers. Plasma homocysteine 
levels were measured by chemiluminescence immuno assay. There 
was no statistical difference in allele frequencies according C677T. 
The observed frequencies of 1298C allele were 37.0%, 26.9% and 
28.8% respectively. The frequency of AC genotype was statistically dif -ferent between DS mothers and control and NTD mothers. Statistical 
differences were registered also between DS mothers and NTD moth -
ers, regarding AA genotype. The measured mean total homocysteine 
level in the group of 49 pregnant control females was 3,14 umol/L, in 
comparison with the group of 11 women with NTD pregnancy (mean 
10,2 umol/L). The data presented in this study failed to support the 
relation between MTHFR 677C>T and 1298A>C polymorphisms and 
risk of having a child with NTD and DS. Raised plasma homocysteine 
levels could be explained by folic acid deficiency, mutations in MTHFR 
genes or both.
P0460. Identification and characterization of DNA methylation 
sensitive markers for non invasive diagnosis of X linked 
aneuploidies.
F. Della Ragione , L. Speranza, M. D’Esposito;  
Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, Naples, Italy.
We are interested to the development of NIPD methodogies of X 
linked aneuploidies based on DNA methylation. We identified three 
new markers by “ in silico ” strategies. Among these markers, two are 
genes escaping X inactivation, and predicted to be expressed only in 
placenta; a third gene is X inactivated and expressed only in placenta 
as well. We next analyzed their expression by RT-PCR in placenta and 
blood: on this basis, the first, escaping gene was eliminated, given its 
expression in both tissues. The remaining analysis has been focused 
on the remaining two genes.
We confirmed their inactivation status, by somatic hybrids analysis: 
as predicted one gene is escaping, the other is subject to X inactiva -
tion. By bisulfite analsysis we demonstrated that the escaping gene is 
differentially methylated between blood and placenta, whereas the X 
inactivated gene, being not regulated by differential DNA methylation 
has been rejected.
Additional efforts will be necessary to complete the characterization of 
the marker we identified, and we will continue the search for additional 
markers. We plan to develop an MSP assay to check the differential 
methylation of these regulatory regions in blood and in placenta: later 
on, a Real Time PCR assay to determine the number of X and Y chro -
mosomes of a certain sample. Our final goal is to adopt this strategy on 
plasma of donors for non invasive diagnosis of X linked aneuploidies.
This research is sponsored by CEE: SAFE: Special Non-Invasive Ad -
vances in Foetal and Neonatal Evaluation Network, contract LSHB-
CT-2004-503243.
P0461. Foetal sex assessment in maternal plasma in the first 
trimester of gestation: large scale validation of the technique for 
clinical purposes.
A. Bustamante-Aragones1, M. Rodriguez de Alba1, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1, J. 
Plaza2, R. Cardero-Merlo1, F. Infantes1, C. Gonzalez-Gonzalez1, M. L. Perez2, 
C. Ayuso1, C. Ramos1;  
1Department of Genetics. Fundacion Jimenez Diaz-Capio-CIBER-ER(ISCIII), 
Madrid, Spain, 2Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology. Fundacion Jimenez 
Diaz-Capio, Madrid, Spain.
The knowledge of the foetal gender is an indispensable data for those 
couples at risk of an X-linked disorder. The possibility to determine the 
foetal sex from a maternal plasma sample collected in the early first tri -
mester of gestation would avoid invasive prenatal procedures in some 
cases. For this reason, we have analyzed a large number of maternal 
plasma samples collected in the first trimester of gestation in order to 
know the earliest accurate gestational age to perform the study. The 
next step will be the application of this technique for clinical purposes.
Up to date, 185 voluntary pregnant women from the 5th to 12th week of 
gestation have participated in this study, having collected a total of 278 
samples. Three replicas of each sample were analyzed by RealTime-
PCR and the foetal gender assessment was established based on the 
presence/absence of the SRY gene. Three ways to validate results are 
being used: 1) By the analysis of a second blood sample within the first 
trimester. 2) By comparing with the prenatal tests results (CVS, am -
niocentesis or 20th week ecography). 3)By comparing both a second 
sample + prenatal tests.
At the present moment, results from 138 out of 185 pregnant women 
have been confirmed obtaining a 100% of accuracy and specificity in 
samples collected from the 6th to the 12th week of gestation. Although 
the study has not finished yet, these results indicate the possible imme -
diate application of the technique for clinical diagnosis in our hospital.Prenatal diagnosis1
P0462. Increased Nuchal Translucency as a Prenatal Marker in 
Wolf-Hirshhorn Syndrome.
A. Singer1, S. Josefsberg2, C. Vinkler3;  
1Genetic Institute, Ashkelon, Israel, 2Institute of Clinical Genetics, Kaplan Medi -
cal center Rehovot, Israel, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, Wolfson Medical 
Center Holon, Israel.
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome is characterized by multiple congenital 
anomalies.
The syndrome is caused by partial aneupleoidy of the short arm of 
chromosome 4.
Patients are characterized by microcephaly, hypotonia, mental retar -
dation, cardiac anomalies, club feet and characteristic dysmorphic fa -
cial features with cleft lip and palate, micrognathia, hypertelorism and 
midline defects.
Routine ultrasound imaging during second and third trimester preg -
nancy detects IUGR as well as most of the anomalies associated with 
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome. However, increased nuchal translucency 
(NT) has not been frequently described previously in this syndrome.
We present two young women who were referred to the genetic unit 
between 12 and 13 weeks gestation due to increased NT. Chromo -
somal analysis in both cases,
revealed deletion of the short arm of chromosome 4. In the first case 
hydrops developed and the women decided to terminate the pregnan -
cy. In the second case early ultrasound screening at 15 weeks gesta -
tion, demonstrated multiple anomalies
and later there was fetal demise.
Increased nuchal translucency as a presenting symptom, has been 
previously described in relation with common chromosomal aneu -
ploidies. Only rarely is it associated with other types of chromosome 
abnormalities. Our cases provide further evidence of a possible rela -
tionship between increased nuchal translucency and a chromosomal 
deletion syndrome.
P0463. Two prenatal cases of Pallister-Killian syndrome
V. Krutilkova1, E. Hlavova1, M. Trkova1, M. Louckova1, J. Sehnalova1, N. Jen -
cikova1, Z. Zemanova2, K. Michalova2;  
1Institute of Medical Genetics, Praque 7, Czech Republic, 2Center of Oncocyto -
genetics UKBLD, General Faculty Hospital, Praque 2, Czech Republic.
Pallister-Killian syndrome (PKS) is a rare sporadic syndrome. PKS is 
caused by a tissue-specific mosaicism distribution of supernumery iso -
chromosome 12p.
Clinical findings in PKS include congenital defects (diafragmatic her -
nia, micromelia, hydramnios), mental retardation, seisures, streaks 
hypo or hyperpigmantation, facial dysmorphism.
We report two prenatal cases which illustrate the great variability of 
the tissue-specific mosaicism distribution. Both mothers were over 35 
years old.
Case 1: Sonographic investigation showed nuchal translucency (NT) 
2,6mm, ventricular dilatation, flat faces, micromelia. The section de -
scribed diafragmatic hernia, low-set ears, hydrocephalus too. Tetra -
somy 12p was found in 67% amniotic fluid cells and in 6% fetal blood 
cells.
Case 2: The socond trimestral screening test was positive, sonograph -
ic examination showed diafragmatic hernia. Tetrasomy 12p was found 
in 13% amniotic fluid cells, in 48% fetal blood cells and in 45% skin 
fibroblasts.
The cytogenetic investigation performed the diagnosis of PKS in both 
our cases by amniocentesis. M-FISH and mBAND analysis confirmed 
identification of isochromosome 12p, resp. i(12)(p10).
We discuss the difficulties of prenatal diagnosis due the variability of 
the tissue-specific distribution mosaicism and due the variability of the 
fetal phenotype.
The false negative results of PKS were reported on amniocentesis, on 
CVS but most often on fetal blood sample.
P0464. Verification of an improved strategy for combined first 
trimester screening and of commercial PAPP-A/proMBP complex 
examination for early detection of acute coronary disease
M. Macek Sr.1, P. Hajek2, P. Ostadal3, A. Lashkevich1, D. Chudoba1, H. Klucko -
va1, M. Simandlova1, R. Vlk4, I. Spalova4, M. Turnovec1, J. Diblík1, M. Havlov -
icova1, M. Macek Jr.1;  
1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - Faculty 
Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Internal Medicine, Charles University - Faculty Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 33rd De -
partment of Internal Medicine, Charles University - Faculty Hospital Kral. Vino -
hrady, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Charles University - Faculty Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
Here we report verification of screening efficacy, complemented by 
aneuploidy risk evaluation, based on the degree of PAPP-A/proMBP 
and β-hCG deviations, including assessment of PAPP-A/proMBP 
complex as a biomarker of acute coronary disease (ACD). Analytes 
were examined in 2702 sera by Kryptor system/assays (Brahms), with 
trisomy 21/18 ascertainment by Lifecycle/Elipse software (Perkin-El -
mer). Aneuploidy risk was evaluated according to analyte MoMs and 
NT deviations in 4 categories: I.: 0.6-1.9, II.: 0.5-0.59 and 1.91-2.0, 
III.: 1 analyte <0.5 or >2.0, IV.: both analytes <0.5 or >2.0. PAPP-A/
proMBP Kryptor kit was used for sera examination in 51 controls, 110 
stable coronary disease and 258 unstable angina pectoris (UAP) and 
STEMI and NSTEMI myocardial infarction cases. No autosomal or het -
erochromosomal aneuploidies were found in cat. I. Frequency of auto -
somal aneuploidies gradually increased from II. to IV. with the highest 
prevalence in cat. IV. Heterochromosomal aneuploidies were higher in 
cat. II. versus III./IV. These were detectable by analyte deviations only, 
whereas autosomal aneuploidies by increased NT, analyte deviation 
and software risk determination. Thus far, no case of fetal aneuploidy 
was missed by this strategy. Data from screening questionnaires en -
abled indication of counselling in 25% woman in cat. I. for improve -
ment prenatal care because of other genetic, obstetric or exogenic 
risk factors. PAPP-A/proMBP examination proved, that serum levels 
were significantly increased only in UAP and myocardial infarctions 
(p<0.004 and p<0.0005, respectively). In ACD patients within <7 hours 
after the onset of chest pain increased PAPP-A/proMBP levels were an 
earlier marker than cTnI positivity. Supported by VZFNM00064203.
P0465. Experiences from FISH and PCR based preimplantation 
genetic diagnoses performed for 29 families
N. Sirkkanen1, K. Piippo1, T. Salonen1, C. Hyden-Granskog2, H. von Koskull1, 
T. Alitalo1,3;  
1Helsinki University Central Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, 
Finland, 2Helsinki University Central Hospital, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, IVF laboratory, Helsinki, Finland, 3Helsinki University Central Hos -
pital, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Helsinki, Finland.
We have employed both fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) and 
PCR / fragment analysis techniques, to screen blastomeres for chro -
mosomal aneuploidies or genetic mutations before transfer of embry -
os. Presently, we have performed 29 FISH- PGDs for 15 translocation 
families and three families with an X-linked disorder. In four cases, a 
second FISH round was done to screen for the most common triso -
mies. A total of 240 blastomeres from 215 embryos were analysed. 
Normal results were obtained for 71 embryos (33%). The success rate 
of the analysis was 71% (50/70) for reciprocal translocations, 90% 
(94/105) for Robertsonian translocations, and 88% (35/40) for sexing. 
Four pregnancies have been carried to term and five healthy babies 
have been born. One pregnancy is still pending.
We have performed PCR-based PGD analysis for seven Dystrophia 
myotonica (DM)) and three Fragile X syndrome (FRAXA) families. The 
CTG repeat region of the DMPK gene was successfully amplified in 
70% (73/104) of the blastomeres. A total of 14 PGDs have been per -
formed and two babies with normal DMPK alleles have been born. 
The CGG repeat region of the FRAXA locus has successfully been 
amplified in 17 out of 33 (52%) blastomeres. The method still relies on 
identifying the normal maternal allele in the blastomere. We have per -
formed FRAXA PGD five times and one normal child has been born. 
The ongoing studies include the application of whole genome ampli -
fication, followed by routine mutation screening, for PGD. So far, we 
have used this method for one family with CNF.
P0466. Preimplantation Genetic Haplotyping (PGH) for 
monogenic disease.
C. Ogilvie , J. Trussler, C. Black, A. Lashwood, P. Braude, P. Renwick;  
Guy’s & St Thomas’ Centre for PGD, London, United Kingdom.
Amplification by Multiple Displacement Amplification (MDA) of DNA 
from a single cell provides sufficient material for genotyping at mul -
tiple loci. This has led to the development of Preimplantation Genetic 
Haplotyping (PGH), a generic approach to embryo testing that can be 
applied to any mapped inherited disease, regardless of the mutation; Prenatal diagnosis1
misdiagnosis is reduced to the risk of a double recombination event.
Fourteen couples undertook 16 PGH cycles (10 cycles-cystic fibrosis 
(CF), 5-Duchenne and 1-Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD)), 
with a total of 79 embryos reaching biopsy, from which results were 
obtained in 71 embryos (89.9%). For CF, 5 couples were F508del het -
erozygotes, 1 couple were heterozygous for F508del and an unknown 
mutation (a previous child had CF), and two couples comprised an 
affected partner (F508del/R345H and homozygous F508del) and a 
F508del carrier, thus having a prior risk of 50% of an affected child. 
Results for diagnosed embryos were: 4 normal, 13 carrier, 6 normal/
carrier, 12 affected, 3 affected/carrier and 4 ?aneuploid. Amplification 
of markers on one side of the gene only meant that for 6 embryos there 
was a residual risk (1-4%) of recombination between the gene and 
the marker amplified. For DMD/BMD, 7 embryos were normal female, 
2 normal/carrier female, 4 carrier female, 5 normal male, 3 affected 
male, 2 ?aneuploid. Overall pregnancy rate was 53.8% per embryo 
transfer.
Further PGH marker panels for Fragile X syndrome, myotonic dys -
trophy, Huntington disease, spinal muscular atrophy, Alport syndrome 
and variants of globin (sickle disease and β-thalassaemia) have been 
developed for clinical use.
P0467. The single cell as a tool for genetic testing: credibility 
and precision
L. Peleg , B. Goldman, B. Feldman, K. Dotan;  
Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat 
Gan, Israel.
Specimen for prenatal testing: chorionic villus sampling or amniocen -
tesis are obtained during pregnancy thus the diagnosis of an affected 
embryo usually leads to pregnancy termination. Pre-implantation ge -
netic diagnosis (PGD) is a procedure which involves the biopsy and 
testing of one cell following in-vitro fertilization and the implantation of 
unaffected embryos. The process minimizes pregnancy terminations 
in case of at risk couples.
The minute initial amount of DNA (single genome) generates technical 
difficulties such as amplification failure and allele dropout (ADO). Our 
objective was to measure and quantify those aspects of the single cells 
analysis. The study was carried out in single peripheral lymphocytes 
and embryonic culture cells. A set of nested PCR protocols was de -
signed for five mutations of three genes: HEXA (Tay Sachs Disease): 
1278+TATC, IVS12+1G>C and 805G>A. IKBKAP (Familial Dysauto -
nomia): IVS20+6T and in the ASPA gene (Canavan Disease): 854A>C. 
In a total of 650 cells derived from heterozygotes to those mutations 
there was no significant difference in PCR efficiency between cell 
types although more failures were obtained in larger PCR products. 
ADO rate however was significantly lower in embryonic single cells 
compared to lymphocytes (average of 4.5 fold). We hypothesize that 
dividing cells demonstrate lower ADO rate due to their less compact 
nucleus structure. To test the hypothesis, lymphocytes were induced 
to divide by PHA and single cells were tested for ADO rate. The results 
showed a 1.8 fold lower ADO rate in the dividing compared to the non 
dividing cells.
P0468. Does the number of cells biopsied affect the implantation 
of embryos in preimplantation genetic diagnosis?
S. Dhanjal1, G. Kakourou1, T. Mamas1, A. Doshi2, S. Gotts2, S. Laver2, J. C. 
Harper1, S. B. SenGupta1;  
1University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2University College Lon -
don Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
Preimplantation Genetic diagnosis (PGD) offers couples with a known 
monogenic disorder a means of screening embryos for their inherited 
mutation with a view to transfer an unaffected embryo to establish a 
pregnancy. Analysis of single blastomeres biopsied from the embryo is 
fundamental to the technique. Contamination and allele dropout, the 
major problems of single cell PCR can be overcome and the efficiency 
and accuracy of the diagnosis can be improved by analysis of more 
than one cell from each embryo .
Between September 2003 and December 2006, 33 cycles of PGD 
were carried out for 6 disorders in 25 couples. Two cells were taken 
from every embryo that had 6 or more cells. If the biopsied cell had 
lysed before tubing or a nucleus was not seen, additional cells were 
taken. A total of 496 cells were biopsied from 243 embryos. A diagnosis 
was made in 163 (67%) embryos resulting in 44 embryos being trans -ferred in 24 procedures. Out of the 44 transferred embryos, two (4.5%) 
had one, 33 (75%) had two, seven (16%) had three and one (2%) had 
four cells biopsied. From prenatal or postnatal analysis six out of 13 of 
the embryos that implanted could be identified. In four embryos 2 cells 
had been removed and in the remaining embryos it was three. This 
indicates that biopsing more than one cell improves diagnosis and can 
lead to implantation.
P0469. Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis of myotonic 
dystrophy type 1
G. Kakourou1, S. Dhanjal1, T. Mamas1, S. Gotts2, P. Serhal2, D. M. Ranieri2, J. 
D. A. Delhanty1, J. C. Harper1, S. B. SenGupta1;  
1University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2University College Lon -
don Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
Introduction: Myotonic dystrophy (DM1) is an autosomal dominant 
genetic disorder characterised by muscle weakness, myotonia, multi -
systemic lesions and hypogonadism, with an estimated prevalence of 
1/8000 worldwide. The disease shows anticipation due to an expan -
sion of a CTG repeat in the 3’ untranslated region of the DMPK gene. 
Our centre is the only diagnostic centre routinely offering PGD for DM1 
in the UK.
Methods: Embryos derived from IVF were biopsied on day 3 of devel -
opment to allow collection and analysis of single blastomeres. Three 
different optimized fluorescent PCR protocols were applied in 22 clini -
cal PGD cycles.
Results: Four out of the 22 cases were cancelled before oocyte re -
trieval due to either poor response to the IVF treatment or hyperstimu -
lation. In another couple only two embryos were available for biopsy 
and PGD was cancelled. From the remaining 17 cycles, 217 oocytes 
were collected, 198 of them were inseminated of which 126 fertilized 
and 122 embryos were of sufficient quality for biopsy on day 3. A diag -
nosis was achieved for 82 embryos (26 normal, 56 affected). Twenty-
two normal embryos were transferred in 12 cycles. Five pregnancies 
were established that have led to the birth of six healthy infants. The 
pregnancy rate per embryo transfer was 41.7 %.
Conclusion: PGD for DM1 is a practical and effective option for cou -
ples who wish to avoid termination of an affected pregnancy following 
prenatal diagnosis.
P0470. Activities of the ESHRE PGD Consortium (1997-2007)
A. R. Thornhill1, K. Sermon2, J. C. Harper3;  
1The London Bridge Fertility, Gynaecology and Genetics Centre, London, Unit -
ed Kingdom, 2Research Centre Reproduction and Genetics, Vrije Universiteit 
Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium, 3UCL Centre for PGD, Department of Ob -
stetrics and Gynaecology, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
The European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology Pre -
implantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) Consortium formed in 1997 to 
collect technical and outcome data, provide referral networks, survey 
and promote best practice. Data including fresh and frozen-thawed 
cycle details, pregnancies and babies were collected using a bespoke 
FileMaker Pro 5 database. Membership has increased steadily with a 
concomitant increase in number of centres reporting (16-50) and total 
number of cycles reported (392-2984) between reports 1 and 6. Cycle 
numbers for constitutional chromosome abnormalities and monogenic 
disorders have increased but a disproportionately large increase in 
preimplantation genetic screening (PGS) cycles reflects the increasing 
tendency for IVF laboratories to select the ‘best’ embryo for transfer 
by eliminating chromosomally abnormal embryos. Methodologies for 
technical aspects of the PGD process (including embryo biopsy and 
single cell diagnostics) are becoming more sophisticated, accurate 
and reliable ensuring extremely low misdiagnosis rates. PGD and IVF 
with sperm injection (ICSI)are comparable with respect to pregnancy 
complications and congenital malformation. The main complication, as 
with routine IVF, remains the risk of multiple pregnancy with concomi -
tant higher morbidity and mortality. Aside from data collection, the Con -
sortium has published best practice guidelines for PGD and PGS and 
recently, a joint report with the European Society for Human Genetics 
broadly examining the interface between genetics and assisted repro -
ductive technology. To further improve preimplantation testing, stud -
ies are ongoing to investigate appropriate external quality assessment 
(multicentric evaluation of captured FISH images from single embry -
onic nuclei) and follow-up of children born following PGD.Prenatal diagnosis1
P0471. Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis for a Y-autosome 
translocation t(Y;8)(p11;q11).
P. Gosset1, M. Schillinger1, C. Schluth1, Y. Menezo2, B. De Fréminville3, S. 
Viville1;  
1Laboratoire de Biologie de la Reproduction, CHU Strasbourg, SIHCUS-CMCO, 
Schiltigheim, France, 2Assistance Médicale à la Procréation, Laboratoire Marcel 
Mérieux, Lyon, France, 3Service de Génétique Clinique, Chromosomique et 
Moléculaire, CHU Nord, Saint Etienne, France.
Reciprocal Y-autosome translocations are rarely observed, because 
implication of the Y chromosome in a translocation produces, most of 
the time, a meiosis blockage, which results in azoospermia.
However, when some spermatozoa are observed, assisted reproduc -
tive techniques (ART), particularly intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection 
(ICSI), can be proposed.
Because of the translocation, some of the spermatozoa may carry an 
abnormal chromosomal complement, involving a risk to obtain em -
bryos with unbalanced karyotype. Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis 
(PGD) can prevent this by selecting balanced embryos before transfer 
to the mother’s uterus.
We present here a patient, carrying a t(Y;8)(p11;q11) translocation, 
who was referred to us for a PGD.
Because of the lack of data about segregation in Y-autosome transloca -
tions, analysis of patient’s spermatozoa was performed by Fluorescent 
in situ Hybridisation (FISH) to estimate the risk of missegregation.
Simultaneously, to prepare for PGD, the FISH diagnosis method on 
single cell was improved by using a set of 4 probes: X centromere 
and Y heterochromatin labelled with Tetramethyl-Rhodamine, 8qtel la -
belled with dGreen, 8 centromere labelled with Spectrum Aqua.
Over 500 spermatozoa scored, 41.6% were found to be balanced. A 
PGD cycle was started, but diagnosis was not performed because of 
embryos development arrest at day 2.
Prior to any PGD attempt in such difficult cases, study of the chromo -
somal segregation establishes the proportion of balanced gametes, 
allowing to estimate chances of a successful ART. If too low, patients 
must be offered alternative options such as sperm donation.
P0472. A one year experience on PGD at Ege University in Izmir/
Turkey
E. Karaca1, C. Gunduz2, G. Altin3, T. Cankaya1, B. Durmaz1, E. Tavmergen3, E. 
Tavmergen Goker3, H. Akin1, O. Cogulu1, F. Ozkinay1;  
1Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetic, Izmir, Tur -
key, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, 
Turkey, 3Ege University Faculty of Medicine Department of Family Planning and 
Infertility Research and Treatment Center, Izmir, Turkey.
We would like to present our preliminary report of 1 year experience. 
Couples applied to the Family Planning and Infertility Research and 
Treatment Center for assisted reproductive technologies (ART) were 
referred to Medical Genetics Department for PGD and aneuploidy 
screening due to advanced maternal age, recurrent miscarriage, re -
current ART failure and balanced translocation carriers between the 
period of January 2006 and January 2007.
One or two blastomeres were aspirated on day 3 and analyzed us -
ing the fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) technique. Probes for 
chromosomes 13,16,18,21 and 22 were used for aneuploidy screening 
and individual specific probes were chosen for chromosomal translo -
cations. Unaffected embryos were transferred on day 4 or 5.
There were 20 cycles for aneuploid screening (group 1) and 2 cycles 
for chromosomal translocation (group 2). In group 1, 118 embryos 
were biopsied successfully with a diagnosis rate of 84% and 39 unaf -
fected embryos were transferred in 20 cycles, achieving 10 singleton 
pregnancies (implantation rate: 50%). In group 2, 8 embryos were bi -
opsied with a diagnosis rate of 84% in 2 cycles and 1 balanced embryo 
transferred achieving pregnancy. Unfortunately we could not find any 
balanced embryo in the other cycle of our translocation group and can -
celled the transfer. All antenatal amniocentesis confirmed the diagno -
sis. Post-natal physical examination showed no evidence of major ab -
normalities. PGD is an alternative method for having healthy children 
in selected couples with chromosomal abnormalities. In addition, PGD 
may increase the implantation rate in infertile couples and balanced 
translocation carreers seeking ART assistance.P0473. Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) for Genetic 
and Metabolic Disorders in Saudi Arabia
A. I. Al-Aqeel1, S. Coskun2;  
1Riyadh Military Hospital/ King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Saudi Arabian culture is highly consanguineous, with cousin marriages 
accounting for 60-70%. Given the difficulties in management of ge -
netic disorders, preventive measures for the suffering families by doing 
pre-implantation genetic diagnosis is undertaken. Over 30 cases are 
successfully prevented by PGD. The first of these disorders is San -
jad-Sakati Syndrome (SSS) OMIM# 24140, which is characterized 
by hypoparathyroidism, growth and mental retardation with a unique 
12bp deletion. The second is Niemann Pick Disease type B (NPD-B) 
OMIM# 257200,) (acid sphingomylinase (ASM) deficiency) with more 
than 70 mutations reported in (SMPD1) gene, which presents with se -
vere phenotype in Saudi Arabia. Four unique mutations are found in 
our Saudi families. A family with (W533R) mutation in the (SPMDI) 
gene suffering from a severe phenotype underwent PGD. The third 
disorder is Morquio’s disease (MPSIV) OMIM # 253000, with severe 
classic phenotype with N-acetyl galactosamine-6-sulftase deficiency 
(MPSIV-A). More than 20 different mutations in (GALNS) gene re -
ported in (MPSIV-A). A family with three affected siblings with severe 
classic (MPIV-A) with detected W195C mutation in the (GALNS) gene 
underwent PGD. In all these families PGD was undertaken using fluo -
rescent PCR(F-PCR) and/or nested PCR with sequencing on a single 
cell, or Multiple Displacement Modification (MDA) to amplify the whole 
genome from a single cell. A singleton pregnancy ensure after transfer 
of one heterozygous and one/or normal embryo and prenatal diagno -
sis by CVS confirmed a normal pregnancy. This is the first report of 
successful PGD in different genetic disorders in Saudi Arabia, and the 
Muslim world.
P0474. QF-PCR: reliable and accurate for the rapid detection of 
the most common fetal chromosomal abnormalities in the first 
trimester
G. Christopoulou , A. Hatzaki, S. Christopoulou, A. Hatzipouliou, J. Donoghue, 
M. Karkaletsi, V. Velissariou;  
Mitera Maternity & Surgical Center, Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology lab, 
Athens, Greece.
Quantitative Fluorescent Polymerase Chain Reaction (QF-PCR) is a 
well established method for the rapid prenatal diagnosis of the most 
common chromosomal aneuploidies found in amniotic fluid samples. 
In recent years it has also been applied to chorionic villi samples (CVS) 
in the first trimester.
Since June 2005 to date 1272 CVS samples were tested with QF-PCR 
in our lab for the diagnosis of aneuploidies involving chromosomes 13, 
18, 21 and X, Y. A total of 38/1272 (3%) fetal aneuploidies were de -
tected and confirmed after chromosomal analysis of long-term cultures 
(LTC). Twenty four cases with trisomy 21 (1 mosaic case), 10 cases 
with trisomy 18, 1 case with trisomy 13, 1 case with Klinefelter, 1 case 
with triploidy and 1 case of a mosaic sex chromosome abnormality 
were detected. Maternal contamination was detected in 5/1272 (0,4%) 
samples and therefore no QF-PCR results were obtained. No false-
positive or false-negative results were reported for the chromosomes 
tested. LTC analysis revealed an abnormal result for chromosomes 
not tested for by QF-PCR in 11/1272 (0,8%) cases. In another 5 (0,4%) 
cases there was a discrepancy between QF-PCR and LTC analysis 
due to in situ placenta abnormalities missed by sampling.
Based on our experience of two years, we consider QF-PCR to be a 
reliable, accurate, easy and relatively inexpensive method for rapid 
prenatal diagnosis in first trimester CVS.
P0475. Application of genetic methods in Prenatal Diagnosis: 
Experience in Iran
F. Mahjoubi1, M. Akbary2;  
1NRCGEB, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Akbary Laboratory of Medical Ge -
netics, Taleganee Ave., Tehran, Iran& Clinical Genetic Dept. Tarbiat Modaress 
University, Tehran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Prenatal diagnosis has revolutionized prenatal care from the perspec -
tive of both the patient and the physician. For the patient, prenatal di -
agnosis provides genetic, anatomic, and physiologic information about 
the fetus or fetuses. The information can help individual to make deci -Prenatal diagnosis10
sions regarding the pregnancy. For the physician, prenatal diagnosis 
provides vital information that can be utilized for better patient’s man -
agement. Prenatal knowledge about genetic abnormalities enables 
the physician to tailor or manage the timing and mode of delivery for 
optimal maternal and fetal outcomes.
Great efforts have been put forth to devise more efficient genetic pro -
tocols. Because of its ability to provide results early in pregnancy, first-
trimester screening is becoming increasingly more important. First-tri -
mester screening provides the opportunity for early risk assessment 
and early diagnosis of fetal aneuploidy via chorionic villus sampling 
(CVS). Early diagnosis allows for pregnancy termination earlier in ges -
tation, if the patient so desires,
While the advances in first-trimester genetic test are exciting, there will 
always be a role for second-trimester genetic test. Many patients may 
not present in time for first-trimester test. Likewise, many patients may 
not have access to providers skilled at CVS. In addition, a portion of 
patients may prefer amniocentesis to CVS.
In this talk, available genetic techniques for prenatal diagnosis in Iran 
will be discussed. In addition, from the prenatal diagnosis experiences 
in Iran, several other concerns noticed by genetecian such as fairness 
of access to genetic services, indications for prenatal diagnosis, confi -
dentiality problems etc will be mentioned.
P0476. Needs assessment regarding decision about Down’s 
syndrome prenatal testing: A systematic review of women, their 
relatives and health professionals’ perceptions.
F. Légaré1, S. St-Jacques2, S. Grenier2, M. Charland1, J. Forest1, F. Rousseau1;  
1CHUQ Research Center, CanGeneTest consortium, Québec, PQ, Canada, 
2CHUQ Research Center, Québec, PQ, Canada.
Background: Population-based prenatal testing for Down’s syndrome 
is being considered in the Province of Quebec. In order to elaborate 
effective decision support interventions, a systematic review was 
performed to identify the needs of women, their relatives and health 
professionals regarding decisions about prenatal testing for Down’s 
syndrome.
Methods: PubMed, EMBASE, CINHAL and PsycINFO were searched 
for original studies in English or French. Studies were identified inde -
pendently by two reviewers and discrepancies were resolved by a third 
one. Studies were included if they reported original data on difficulties 
and/or facilitators in making decisions about Down’s syndrome prena -
tal testing, enrolled women, their relatives and/or health professionals 
and were conducted in real clinical situation. Content analysis is being 
currently performed by two reviewers using a taxonomy adapted from 
the Ottawa Decision Support Framework and quality of studies, as -
sessed using Qualsyst validated tools.
Results: From 2390 potential titles, 64 publications covering 51 unique 
studies were included. The majority of studies were from UK (27%) 
followed by Canada and USA (12% each). Most targeted screening for 
Down’s syndrome (41%). Most used qualitative methods exclusively 
(45%). Three studies were grounded in theory. Validated measure -
ment tools were used in ten studies. Overall, the vast majority of stud -
ies targeted women (90%) followed by health professionals (12%) and 
partners (10%).
Conclusions: We observed an important gap in knowledge about the 
perceptions of health professionals and relatives. In order to elaborate 
effective decision support interventions for prenatal testing for Down’s 
syndrome, future studies will need to address these gaps.
P0477. A supernumerary marker chromosome with a related 
pseudodicentric chromosome detected in a fetus during 
prenatal diagnosis
S. Karymee1, F. Mahjoubi2, M. Khalegian1, S. Tootian1, M. Akbari3;  
11Medical Genetic Laboratory of Akbari, Taleganee St, Tehran, Iran, tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 21Medical Genetic Laboratory of Akbari, Taleganee St , 
Tehran, Iran &NIGEB, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 31Medical Genetic Labo -
ratory of Akbari, Taleganee St, Tehran, Iran& 3Clinical genetic Dept. Tarbiat 
Modaress University, Tehran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Dicentric autosomes are considered as unstable constitutional chro -
mosomes in humans. The presence of centromeres on the same chro -
mosome leads to a high risk of attachment of the same chromatid to 
the mitotic spindle from opposite poles and to the formation of ana -
phase bridge during cell division. Therefore, breakage of the dicentric 
can occur.We describe a fetus in which a minute supernumerary marker chromo -
some (SMC) was detected in addition to a larger pseudodicentri c chro -
mosome. The case was a 12-week fetus with mosaicism for a normal 
and two abnormal cell lines: one had a dic (12;15)(q11.2;q11.2) chro -
mosome, and the other had a minute SMC. Although the heart beat 
could be detected at the beginning of the pregnancy, the heart failed to 
fully develop and therefore therapeutic abortion was done at 16 weeks 
of gestation. Deletion of centromeric material was proposed as one 
mechanism of centromere inactivation in dicentric chromosomes. This 
SMC may be the result of a deletion event leading to inactivation of one 
centromere of a dicentric chromosome to generate a pseudodicentric 
chromosome. Therefore, this case suggests possible mechanisms for 
the origin of this SMC
P0478. Prenatal diagnosis of aneuploidies of chromosomes 13, 
18, 21, X and Y by QF-PCR in the Republic of Macedonia
D. Plaseska-Karanfilska , S. Talaganova, S. Trivodalieva, G. D. Efremov;  
Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Center for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia.
The great majority of chromosomal abnormalities are due to aneuploi -
dies of chromosomes 21, 18, 13, X and Y. The quantitative fluorescent 
(QF) PCR of selected small tandem repeat (STR) markers enables 
rapid and accurate prenatal diagnosis of these aneuploidies. Here, we 
present our results of the use of QF-PCR for prenatal detection of com -
mon chromosomal aneuploidies in 930 pregnancies at risk. The prena -
tal diagnosis was performed on genomic DNA isolated from fetal cells 
collected by amniocentesis and chorionic villus samples. All samples 
were analyzed by three multiplex PCR assays, amplifying a total of 
thirteen STR markers on chromosomes 21 (D21S1435, D21S1446, 
D21S1411 and D21S1414), 18 (D18S535, D18S1367, D18S978 and 
D18S386), 13 (D13S631, D13S258 and D13S1817) and X (DXS6803 
and XHPRT). When these markers were uninformative, additional 
markers were used. Using this approach, we have detected 17 fetuses 
with trisomy 21, 11 with trisomy 18, one with partial trisomy 18, four 
with trisomy 13, three fetuses with Turner syndrome (45,XO) and one 
with Klinefelter syndrome (47,XXY). A polymorphic duplication was de -
tected in two fetuses with STR marker D13S631; in both fetuses it was 
inherited from one of the parents. The parental origin of the aneuploidy 
was determined in 11 cases with trisomy 21, seven with trisomy 18, 
three with trisomy 13 and three with Turner syndrome. The origin was 
maternal in all complete trisomies and paternal in the partial trisomy 
18 and the Turner syndrome cases. Triple X syndrome (47,XXX) was 
detected in a woman with a fetus with trisomy 18.
P0479. QF-PCR on Amniotic Fluid and Corionic Villi. Diagnostic 
troublesome results.
C. Curcio1, V. Tieran1, F. Lalatta2, S. Guerneri1, P. De Leonardis1, M. Travi1, A. 
Kustermann3, D. A. Coviello1;  
1Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Servizio di Genetica Me -
dica, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina 
Elena, Milan, Italy, 3Cenro di Diagnosi Prenatale, Seconda Clinica Ostetrico 
Ginecologica, Università di Milano, IRCCS Fondazione Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy.
Autosomal trisomies, which account for about 80% of significant ab -
normalities, can be detected within 24-48 hours by quantitative flu -
orescence (QF)-PCR. In the last four years we have used QF-PCR 
to assess relative allele dosage at polymorphic loci of chromosomes 
13, 18, 21 and sex chromosome in more then 3.000 samples (80% 
amniotic fluid and 20% Chorionic Villus Samples-CVS). Samples of 
women with abnormal ultrasound referrals or from families with known 
chromosome rearrangements require full karyotype analysis, but if ab -
normalities are identified earlier this will aid the clinical management 
of pregnancy and will help to minimize the period of parental anxiety 
while awaiting for the diagnostic test result.
Mosaicism in CVS is well documented in the literature and it is detect -
ed in 1-2% of the CVS. Discrepancy between chromosome analysis 
of direct short-term cultures (cytotrophoblast cells) versus long-term 
cultures (mesenchymal cells) is very well known.
We describe here cases in which a discrepancy between QF-PCR 
and standard karyotype was observed in CVS analysis. In two cases 
QF-PCR showed the polymorphic markers of two X chromosomes (in Prenatal diagnosis11
agreement with while direct short-term cultures karyotype), while the 
long-term cultures showed a 45,X karyopype. Moreover one case was 
partially informative because QF-PCR showed only one informative 
polymorphic marker for trisomy 18. The karyotype of the long-term cul -
tures showed a trisomy 18. Our results confirm that QF-PCR technique 
is a rapid testing able to diagnose chromosome aneuploidy accurately 
in prenatal diagnosis on amniotic fluid but on chorionic villi more con -
troversial results can be obtained.
P0480. Detection of fetal aneuploidies by quantitative 
fluorescent polymerase reaction
Z. Ban , B. Nagy, L. Lazar, G. Nagy, Z. Papp;  
Semmelweis University, I. Dept. of Ob/Gyn., Budapest, Hungary.
Introduction: Multiplex quantitative fluorescent polymerase chain reac -
tion (QF-PCR) analysis of amniotic fluid samples has been shown to 
be a useful tool in the detection of fetal aneuploidies, but has its limita -
tions as it can not detect some fetal chromosome disorders of clinical 
importance.
Objective: To test the reliability of QF-PCR for the prenatal diagnosis 
of the common aneuploidies, to obtain data on the allele distribution of 
7 different short tandem repeats in Hungarian population and to ana -
lyze the indications in which QF-PCR can be applied safely in prenatal 
diagnosis.
Materials and methods: At 4985 patients (25 twin pregnancies) under -
going amniocentesis we compared the results of QF-PCR with those 
of the conventional cytogenetic study. We have analyzed allele distri -
bution of the applied STR markers. We compared the occurrence of 
chromosome disorders which can not be detected by amnio-PCR in 
cases with different indications of amniocentesis.
Results: 98.3% of amnio-PCR results were informative without false-
negative and false-positive results. 9 samples (0.16%) were incon -
clusive because of borderline peak ratios of diallelic results. 126 
chromosomal abnormalities of 152 were detectable by amnio-PCR. 
Amnio-PCR detected all chromosomal disorders in case of maternal 
age as indication for amniocentesis. In case of structural abnormalities 
detected by ultrasound, the chromosome disorder was not detectable 
by amnio-PCR in 23 cases.
Conclusion: All chromosome disorders of clinical significance were 
detected in case of advanced maternal age. The highest number of 
chromosome disorders that are not detectable by QF-PCR was in case 
of structural abnormalities detected by ultrasound.
P0481. Preparation of CVS for QF-PCR aneuploidy diagnosis and 
correlation with karyotype analysis of cultured cells
K. Mann , A. Hills, C. Donaghue, C. Mackie Ogilvie;  
Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
Aneuploidy mosaicism has been reported to occur in up to 1% of cho -
rionic villus samples (CVS), usually due to differences between the 
cytotrophoblast and mesenchyme cell lineages. Karyotype analysis of 
cultured metaphases from the mesenchyme gives an accurate prena -
tal diagnosis in the majority of cases. QF-PCR analysis of two sepa -
rate villus tips taken from different regions of the CVS has proven to 
be an accurate predictor of fetal status regarding chromosomes 13, 18 
and 21. Prior to June 2005 more than 3000 CVS were processed in 
our centre with no completely discrepant QF-PCR/karyotype results. 
However, in the following 6 months three such results were identi -
fied, all due to sample mosaicism and QF-PCR analysis of isolated 
cell populations. We therefore now test a small aliquot of dissociated 
cells prepared from 10-15 mg of CVS for cell culture. A case study 
has shown the mesenchyme to contribute between 40-50% of the 
DNA in these samples. Since this change in CVS preparation protocol, 
1738 CVS have been tested by QF-PCR for autosomal trisomy, and 4 
cases of mosaicism detected; 60% trisomy 13, 78% trisomy 18, 30% 
trisomy 21 and 35% trisomy 21. The first three cases showed non-
mosaic abnormal karyotypes with only the final case showing mosa -
icism (46,XY,der(21;21)(q10;q10),+21[23]/46,XY[13]). In all cases the 
mesenchyme cell lines were detected by QF-PCR and there were no 
completely discrepant results. In summary, the QF-PCR analysis of 
dissociated cells from whole CVS has resulted in better representation 
of the CVS and greater concordance with the karyotype result.P0482. DNA analysis with QF-PCR technique for confirmation of 
suspected fetal triploidy
R. Raynova1, S. Andonova1,2, V. Dimitrova3, V. Georgieva1, I. Kremensky1,2;  
1National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Molecular Medicine Center, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, 
Bulgaria, 3High-Risk Pregnancy Department, University Hospital of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Sofia, Bulgaria.
We report three cases of fetal triploidy diagnosed by QF-PCR analy -
sis. The patients were referred to our Lab due to abnormal ultrasound 
scan of both the placenta and fetus at 14 wg, 22 wg and 20 wg re -
spectively. QF-PCR technique was performed on DNA samples, ex -
tracted with commercial kit from amniocytes (case 3) and from fetal 
and placental tissue after termaniation of pregnancy (cases 1 and 2). 
Fourteen polymorphic STR markers (4 located on chromosome 21, 4 
- on chromosome 18, 3 - on chromosome 13 and 3 on chromosomes 
X and Y) were amplified with Cy5-labeled primers. The observed elec -
trophoretic profiles for all investigated STR markers showed diallelic or 
triallelic genotype concordant with trisomic pattern. No false negative 
results were observed. For case 3 DNA samples from parents were 
available and paternal origin of the additional chromosomal set was 
proved. The triploidy was confirmed by cytogenetic analysis performed 
after the termination of the pregnancy only in case 3. Our experience 
showed that QF-PCR analysis is a reliable technique for rapid prenatal 
diagnosis of triploidy when particular ultrasound anomalies are present 
and karyotyping is not available. A high-standard ultrasound examina -
tion was essential for the diagnosis of reported cases.
P0483. Evaluation of a non invasive prenatal RHD genotyping 
screening strategy
M. Tsochandaridis1, R. Desbriere2, N. Lesavre3, C. D’Ercole2, J. Gabert1, A. 
Levy-Mozziconacci1,2;  
1Laboratoire de Biologie Moleculaire, CHU Nord, Marseille, France, 2Service de 
Gynecologie-Obstetrique, CHU Nord, Marseille, France, 3Centre d’Investigation 
Clinique, CHU Nord, Marseille, France.
It has been amply documented that fetal genotyping is feasible, allow -
ing NIPD for the identification of RhD positive fetuses in RhD negative 
women. This approach now means that only those RhD negative wom -
en who are known to carry an RhD positive child will require treatment 
with anti-D IgG to prevent haemolytic disease of the newborn. We 
described our experience with plasma obtained from 250 RhD nega -
tive pregnant women between 10 and 28 weeks of gestation. 200 ul 
of maternal plasma is automated extracted by biorobot EZ1 (Qiagen, 
forencic card). The DNA eluate is tested in triplicate in RHD exon 7 and 
10 real-time quantitative PCR. To reduce false negative due to low ex -
tracellular nucleic acids concentration in plasma in some extractions, 
we tested β-globin gene systematically. Plasmidic ranges for differ -
ent genes were also used. A strategy based on β-globin quantification 
(cut-off at 1000 copies/ml) were established to perform this analysis in 
routine. All RHD NIPD were compared with RH genotyping cord blood. 
No false negative were obtained and two false positive cases were due 
to the presence of RHD variants. In these two cases, using plasmidic 
range permitted easily to confirm this diagnosis. In conclusion, auto -
mation and quality control of extraction step are essential to introduced 
this screening into restricted the antenatal anti-D immunoprophylaxys 
to women carrying RhD-positive fetuses.
P0484. Prenatal findings in a severe type of achondroplasia 
associated with mental retardation and acanthosis nigricans 
(SADDAN).
J. A. Kortmann1, A. van Essen1, K. M. Sollie2, C. E. M. de Die-Smulders3, P. J. 
Herbergs3, S. G. Robben4, M. M. Y. Lammens5, B. Timmer6, J. J. P. Gille7, M. 
Vreeburg3, M. van Steensel8, I. Stolte-Dijkstra1, D. Marcus-Soekarman3,9;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Center, Groningen, The 
Netherlands, 2Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Medi -
cal Center, Groningen, The Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, 
Academic Hospital, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 4Department of Radiology, 
Academic Hospital, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 5Department of Pathology, 
University Medical Center St Radboud, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 6Depart -
ment of Pathology, University Medical Center, Groningen, The Netherlands, 
7Department of Clinical and Human Genetics, Free University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 8Department of Dermatology, Academic Hospital, 
Maastricht, The Netherlands, 9GROW/University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Prenatal diagnosis12
Netherlands.
The detection of a skeletal dysplasia during pregnancy creates an intri -
cate situation depending on the type of the skeletal dysplasia and the 
stage of the pregnancy. Establishing a diagnosis as exact as possible 
is important for support and management of the existing pregnancy 
and may have consequences for future pregnancies. Due to the time 
factor, a diagnosis is not always found during the on-going pregnancy. 
Additional information, such as follow-up after birth, skeletal X-rays, 
obduction and chromosomal and DNA-investigations is essential in 
such a situation. We present one postnatal and two prenatal cases 
of a rare skeletal dysplasia, where DNA-investigation confirmed the 
subtype of the skeletal dysplasia and generated important informa -
tion about prognosis. In one prenatal case, MRI-examination of the 
pregnancy gave valuable additional information for the differential di -
agnosis.
P0485. β-Thalassemia Carrier Screening and Prenatal Diagnosis 
among Iranian Population
M. Sajedifar1,2, V. Lotfi1,2, P. Fouladi1,2, A. Joudaki1, F. Hashemi1, S. Zeinali1,3;  
1Medical Genetics Lab of Dr Zeinali, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Young 
Researchers Club of research and science branch of Islamic Azad University, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Human Genetics Unit, Dept of Biotech ,Pas -
teur Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Thalassemia is one of the most common monogenic disease world -
wide and also in Iran. More than 200 different mutations have been 
reported to date, and each ethnic population has it‘s own cluster of 
common mutations. This is well illustrated by the experience of the 
National Thalassemia Screening Program in Iran. Molecular analysis 
of β-globin mutations has been performed by PCR-based protocols 
(ARMS, RFLP, DNA Sequencing) mostly for prenatal diagnostic in our 
center.DNA samples are usually tested for mutations like IVS-II-I, IVS-
I-5, IVS-I-110,codon 5, codon 17,codon 41/42(-TTCT) and many com -
mon mutations and deletions.
In a population of 1954  prenatal diagnosis (PNDs) performed since 
mid 2000 and we have found 24% normal, 50.7% β-Thalassemia car -
riers and 22.9% affected (β-Thalassemia major).
Prenatal diagnosis has been an ongoing program in Iran since 1996 
by a religious decree. Our center is part of the PND Network in Iran 
and the above PNDs have been performed as a part of the program to 
curtail β-thalassemia.
Keyword: Thalassemia , Prenatal Diagnosis , ARMS , DNA Sequenc -
ing
P0486. Quality control of prenatal sonography in detecting 
trisomy 18. The value of perinatal autopsy
Z. Szigeti , Z. Csapo, J. Joo, B. Pete, Z. Papp, C. Papp;  
First Dept. of Ob/Gyn, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
Introduction: Trisomy 18 (Edwards-syndrome) is the second most 
common autosomal trisomy. The second-trimester ultrsonographic 
examination followed by fetal karyotyping is the most relevant way of 
diagnosing this aneuploidy. However, sonographic findings have been 
demonstrated to have significant rates of fals-positive and fals-nega -
tive diagnosis. Detailed pathologic examination of aborted fetuses has 
important role in the quality control of ultrasonographic diagnosis. This 
study was designed to compare the prenatal ultrasound findings and 
postmortem pathologic findings of fetuses with trisomy 18.
Materials and Methods: 70 fetuses with trisomy 18 were diagnosed 
between 1990 and 2004. Sonographic and autopsy findings were com -
pared by organ system and their correlation was assigned to 1 of 3 
categories.
Results: There were 164 separate major structural abnormalities found 
on autopsy. Of them, sonography detected 72 (43.9%). Among ma -
jor defects the agreement was more than 75% of all abnormalities 
of these systems: central nervous system (80%), abdominal abnor -
malities (87.5%) and cystic hygroma (100%). Whereas, the sensitiv -
ity of sonography was lower in these organ systems: cardiac system 
(66.6%), facial abnormalities (26.3%), urinary system (27.3%) and ex -
tremities (8.7%). The rate of additional findings at autopsy was 56.1% 
and involved mainly 2 organ systems: face (including ear) and extremi -
ties (including hands and feet). Some ultrasound findings (n=15) were 
not confirmed at autopsy in our series.
Conclusions: This study confirms that perinatal autopsy provides ad -
ditional information in many fetuses with trisomy 18. In addition, exam -ining the correlation between sonography and pathologic findings may 
indicate potential markers for sonographic screening of trisomy 18.
P0487. Characteristics of pregnancies with cytogenetic 
diagnosis of trisomy 21.
K. Keymolen , E. Sleurs, I. Liebaers, C. Staessen;  
University hospital, Brussels, Belgium.
Aim of the study: In this study we characterize the pregnancies with 
cytogenetic diagnosis of trisomy 21.
Materials and methods: We retrospectively looked at pregnancies in 
which trisomy 21 was found in chorionic villus sampling (CVS) or am -
niocentesis (AC) between 01.01.2002 and 31.12.2006. Data on mater -
nal and paternal age ,reason for referral, fetal sex, fetal and parental 
karyotype were recorded.
Results: In this 5 year period, 73 prenatal cytogenetic diagnoses of 
trisomy 21 were made in our centre. It concerned 44 chorionic villus 
biopsies and 29 amniocenteses. In all but one case, there was free 
trisomy. Mosaic trisomy was present in 3 cases. Forty-one trisomic 
fetuses were male and 32 female. The main reason why cytogenetic 
diagnosis was performed, was maternal age (31/73), fetal anomalies 
on ultrasound (18/73) and second trimester serum screening (7/73). In 
13 pregnancies there were 2 different reasons for referral.
The mean maternal age was 36 years, the mean paternal age 37.1 
years.
For 53 parents, a karyotype was performed, being normal for 52 and 
showing a translocation for 1.
Discussion: Trisomy 21 is the most common chromosomal anomaly 
encountered in CVS or AC. Despite the small sample of this study, the 
experience in our centre confirms the common knowledge that it oc -
curs more frequently in older parents and that in more than half of the 
cases there is an anomaly on ultrasound and/or biochemistry. For the 
majority of the pregnancies for which follow-up was available, termina -
tion of pregnancy was performed
P0488. Prenatal diagnosis of a marker chromosome derived 
from chromosome 3 in a fetus with growth retardation and 
microcephaly- a case report
M. I. Srebniak , P. dos Santos, P. Noomen, D. Halley, R. van de Graaf, L. Gov -
aerts, R. Galjaard, D. Van Opstal;  
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
We present a rare prenatal case of an “incomplete” trisomy 3 rescue 
which resulted in an extra chromosome 3-derived marker chromo -
some in the foetus.
The patient was referred for prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis in chori -
onic villi because of advanced maternal age and a growth discrepancy 
between both foetuses in her twin pregnancy, with foetus II being too 
small for the gestational age.
Whereas foetus I had a normal male karyotype, STC-villi of foetus II 
showed 100% trisomy 3 and in LTC-villi an extra marker chromosome, 
derived from chromosome 3, was found in all analysed cells. In order 
to exclude confined placental mosaicism follow-up investigations in 
amniotic fluid cells were performed which showed the marker chromo -
some to be present in 100% of the cells. Parental karyotypes were 
normal.
FISH- and DNA-studies that were performed in order to characterize 
the marker chromosome and to elucidate the mechanism of forma -
tion, respectively, as well as the clinical data of the foetus will be pre -
sented.
P0489. The incidence of prenatally diagnosed Turner syndrome 
and their referral indications
M. Akgul1, E. Ataman1, B. Durmaz2, A. Alpman2, E. Karaca2, O. Cogulu2, H. 
Akin1, C. Gunduz3, C. Ozkinay1, F. Ozkinay2;  
1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, 
Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, 
Turkey, 3Ege University, 3Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of 
Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey.
Turner syndrome occurring in 1/2000-5000 female live births is one of 
the most common chromosomal disorder. It is also a common reason 
in spontaneous miscarriages with an incidence of 10%. As 99% of em -
bryos with 45,X karyotype result in spontaneous abortion, only 1% of 
Turner syndrome fetuses survive till birth. Increased nuchal translucen -
cy, cystic hygroma, and renal and cardiac defects are typical findings Prenatal diagnosis1
of Turner Syndrome which can be determined by ultrasonographic ex -
amination. In this study 3595 amniocentesis, chorionic villus sampling 
and fetal blood sampling materials obtained during 1999-2006 were 
evaluated. Turner Syndrome was found in 16 cases (0.45%). The indi -
cations for prenatal diagnosis for those cases were cystic higroma in 8 
cases (50.00%), missed abortion in 5 cases (31.25%) and advanced 
maternal age in 3 cases (18.75%). It has been reported that 40-60% of cystic hygroma cases are associated with Turner Syndrome. Among 
all prenatally detected cystic higroma cases (15) detected by ultraso -
nography during 8 years, 8 cases (53.33%) were found to have 45,X 
karyotype. The present study indicates the importance of cystic hy -
groma in the prenatal diagnosis of Turner Syndrome.Prenatal diagnosis1
Po04. Cancer genetics
P0490. QMPSF : A novel method for detection of 1p19q deletions 
in gliomas
S. Monnot1, D. Fontaine2, F. Vandenbos3, P. Paquis2, J. Michiels3, J. Lambert1, 
V. Paquis-Flucklinger1,4;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Nice, France, 2Department of Neurosurgery, 
Nice, France, 3Department of Anatomopathology, Nice, France, 4UMR CNRS 
6543, Medicine School, Nice, France.
Gliomas are the most common primary cerebral malignancies. De -
letions of 1p and 19q chromosomes have shown to be predictors of 
chemotherapeutic response and better survival in oligodendrogliomas. 
Different techniques are available for the detection of these alterations 
including LOH, FISH and CGH. Despite good concordance exists in 
terms of sensitivity and specificity between these methods, all have 
specific limitations. The aim of our study was to describe a reliable 
novel technique for the detection of 1p/19q deletions in gliomas. For 
each chromosome arm (1p and 19q), we devised a multiplex PCR as -
say of fluorescent fragments corresponding to exons, which belong to 
genes located in the minimal deleted region. A control gene, located 
on chromosome 1q or 19p, is simultaneously amplified in each assay. 
PCR products are analysed on an automated sequencer and electro -
pherograms generated from control and tumor samples are superim -
posed. We have searched for 1p/19q deletions by LOH and QMPSF 
(Quantitative Multiplex PCR of Short Fluorescent fragments) in a se -
ries of 50 patients with a glioma. We found that QMPSF, which does 
not require constitutional DNA, is a simple, rapid and reliable method 
to detect 1p/19q deletions. There was a good concordance with LOH 
data in (88% for 1p deletion and in 83% for 19q deletion). Furthermore, 
we show that QMPSF has a higher sensitivity than LOH and allows the 
detection of 1p/19q duplications.
In conclusion, QMPSF can be routinely used in diagnosis laboratories 
for the detection of 1p/19q rearrangements in glial tumors.
.
P0491. Amplification of ABL1  gene without BCR/ABL1  fusion in 
two children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia
S. Berker Karauzum1, Z. Cetin1, S. Yakut1, G. Tezcan2, T. Tulumen3, V. Hazar2, 
T. Sipahi3, G. Luleci1;  
1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz 
University, ANTALYA, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatric Haematology and On -
cology, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz University, ANTALYA, Turkey, 3Department 
of Pediatric Haematology, Faculty of Medicine, Süleyman Demirel University, 
Isparta, Turkey.
The ABL1  proto-oncogene, located on chromosome band 9q34 is the 
known translocation partner of the BCR gene on chromosome band 
22q11, giving rise to t(9;22)(q34;q11). This is the most common chro -
mosomal abnormality in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) and adult 
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) patients. Otherwise, frequency 
of this translocation is only 3-5 % in childhood ALL patients. Amplifica -
tion of ABL1  gene is a rare event, that only 7 cases reported in the 
literature.
In this study, conventional cytogenetics (CC) and Flourescence In Situ 
Hybridization (FISH) studies were performed on two ALL patients. In 
the first case, which is a seven-year-old girl, amplification of ABL1  
gene, without BCR/ABL1  fusion, was observed in 27% interphase nu -
clei in FISH analysis while metaphases were not found in CC. In the 
second case which is a ten year old boy, translocation of t(9;15) was 
detected in CC and interphase cytogenetic analysis by FISH showed 
the presence of the 10% ABL1  gene amplification without t(9;22) trans -
location.
Our results indicate that, amplification of ABL1  gene without BCR/
ABL1  fusion can be shown by FISH methods. This amplification might 
play role in leukomogenesis of pediatric ALL and may be used for dis -
ease monitoring
P0492. Oligo array CGH on 1, 5 and 10 year old FFPE breast 
cancer samples
A. De Witte1, I. Bukholm2, V. Kristensen3, A. Borresen-Dale3, E. Klok4, J. Col -
lins1;  
1Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 2Department of Surgery, 
Akershus University Hospital, Nordbyhagen, Norway, 3Department of Genetics, 
Institute for Cancer Research, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Cen -ter, Montebello and the Faculty of Medicine University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 
4Kreatech Biotechnology B.V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) has 
become a powerful technique for studying DNA sequence copy num -
ber changes in breast tumors. The ultimate goal of these efforts is 
the identification of genomic markers that correlate with prognosis and 
prediction of clinical outcome. For many of these retrospective studies, 
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues are the only samples 
available. DNA extracted from FFPE tissue can present challenges as 
it is often degraded and damaged. In this study, we extracted DNA 
from 24 FFPE breast tumor samples (mostly ductal invasive cancers): 
ten 1 year, eight 5 year, and six 10 year old. Traditional enzymatic 
labeling of degraded DNA samples can decrease the DNA fragment 
length still further and moreover can result in the introduction of enzy -
matic biases. Therefore, we chose a non-enzymatic labeling method 
- the Universal Linkage System (ULS™, Kreatech Biotechnology). 
Analysis of these samples on Agilent Human CGH arrays showed that 
the average probe-to-probe log ratio noise (DLRSD) was 0.33 for the 
1 and 5 year old FFPE samples, indicating that high quality, reliable 
biological data were obtained. While the 10 year old FFPE samples 
showed higher average DLRSD values (0.53), the 60 mer probes 
still enabled detection of aberrations with a high level of confidence. 
Previously known aberrations associated with breast cancer, such as 
HER-2 (human epithelial receptor 2), PIK3CA (phosphatidylinositol 3-
kinase) and CCND1 (cyclin D1) were detected in several samples. We 
conclude that the method described here is well suited for analysis of 
archival pathology specimens for biomarker discovery.
P0493. Cytogenetic findings in a group of patients with acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia
H. G. Karabulut , B. Saglam, T. Tuncalı, N. Y. Kutlay, H. I. Ruhi, K. Yararbas, I. 
Akalın, F. Sadeghi, A. Vicdan, A. Tükün;  
Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey.
Cytogenetic analysis in bone marrow samples of acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia (ALL) patients have both pathophysiologic and prognostic 
significance. In this retrospective study, we present the results of cy -
togenetic analysis of 348 ALL patients (243 children and 105 adults). 
Cytogenetic abnormalities were found to be more frequent in adults 
than in children, 23,8 % and 13,6 %, respectively. Structural abnor -
malities were more frequent than numerical abnormalities in childhood 
ALL (61.5 % vs 38.5 %) while numerical abnormalities were observed 
more frequently than structural abnormalities in adults (56 % vs 44 %). 
Overall, the most frequent cytogenetic abnormality in both childhood 
and adult ALL patients was t(9;22)(q34;q11) with a frequency of 12,3 
% and 8,2 %, respectively. Monosomy 22 and trisomy 21 was the most 
frequent second and third cytogenetic abnormality in childhood ALL, 
followed by -7 and +8 at fourth place. On the other hand, - 21 was the 
most frequent second cytogenetic abnormality in adults, followed by 
-13, -15 and -20 at third place each with equal frequencies.
P0494. Cytogenetics in AML: results of 589 patients
N. Yurur-Kutlay , T. Tuncali, H. G. Karabulut, F. Sadeghi, B. Saglam, I. Akalın, 
K. Yararbas, H. Ilgın Ruhi, A. Vicdan, A. Tukun;  
Ankara University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, An -
kara, Turkey.
The role of cytogenetics in diagnosis and follow-up studies of acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML) is now widely recognized. However in con -
trast to chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML), the cytogenetics of AML 
is much more complex. More than 200 different structural and numeri -
cal changes have been found to be recurrent chromosome aberration 
in AML.
In this report, cytogenetic findings of 589 AML patients are pre -
sented. Novel translocations, deletions and numerical abnormalities 
were found besides of previously defined AML aberrations such as 
t(15;17), t(16;16), t(8;21), del11q, monosomy 7, and trisomy 8. Two 
complex, thirteen simple translocations, one inversion and three un -
balance changes t(2;19;10)(q21;q13;p11), t(15;17;21)(q24;q23;q21) 
and t(1;11)(q32.1;q13.9), t(2;5)(q24.2;p13.3) t(2;21)(q11.2;q11.2) 
t(3;5)(q21;q33), t(3;18)(p13;q23) t(3;18)(q21;q23) t(5;22)(p13:p11) 
t(8;19) (q22;q13) t(9;17)(p11;p13), t(16;17)(p13;q21), t(7;17)(q11;p13) 
t(8;18)(p23;q21.1), t(12;18)(p11;q11) inv (13)(p12q32) del(2)(q34), 
del(2)(q37) dup(2)(q35;qter) respectively, were not reported before 
as AML related translocations. Some of these breakpoints were previ -Cancer genetics1
ously defined for different rearrangements in AML patients, and other 
ones have been reported to be loci of some genes which take place in 
hematopoiesis. Possible effects of these new cytogenetic findings on 
prognosis of AML will be discussed.
P0495. Case report of a rare AF9-MLL fusion gene in pediatric 
acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
A. Divane1, M. Baka2, M. Varvoutsi2, A. Pourtsidis2, D. Bouhoutsou2, D. Doga -
nis2, K. Koronioti1, S. Velaeti1, H. Kosmidis2;  
1Department of Cytogenetics, Locus Medicus, Diagnostic Centre, Athens, 
Greece, 2Department of Oncology, Aglaia Kyriakou Childrens Hospital, Athens, 
Greece.
It is known that structural abnormalities involving the mixed -lineage 
leukemia (MLL) gene on 11q23 have been associated with hemato -
logic malignancies.
In acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) the MLL gene fuses to more 
than 30 different partner genes. To the best of our knowledge only 
few cases of AML-M7 have been associated with MLL rearrangement. 
We herein report a rare case of pediatric AML-M7 with translocation 
t(9;11)(p22;q23) leading to the AF9/MLL fusion gene.
An 18-month old girl presented with anaemia and thrombocytopenia. 
In repeated bone marrow (BM) examinations, patient exhibited cy -
topenia and 15-25% infiltration with blast cells. Immunophenotyping 
revealed blast positivity for CD41, CD42b and CD61 and the leuke -
mia was therefore classified as M7 according to FAB classification. 
Cytogenetic analysis of BM showed normal karyotype. FISH analysis 
was performed using the LSI MLL dual color break apart rearrange -
ment probe (Vysis) at 11q23. 27,5% of analysed nuclei contained a 
MLL rearrangement. Patient was treated as per the BFM98 protocol for 
AML . Analysis at a later time and when patient achieved clinical and 
hematological remission, showed 4,2% positive nuclei while investiga -
tion of metaphases spreads revealed that the translocation involved 
the short arm of chromosome 9 (9p22) and the chromosome 11 at 
band q23. Chromosome 9 was hybridized, simultaneously with probe 
for ABL gene (9q34), as a marker.
The patient continued chemotherapy according to protocol and she is 
candidate for allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.
P0496. Mutation analysis of the APC  and MYH genes in Spanish 
patients with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis
C. Ruiz-Ponte , N. Gomez-Fernandez, C. Fernandez-Rozadilla, A. Vega, A. 
Carracedo;  
Grupo de Medicina Xenómica USC, FPGMX-SERGAS, Santiago de Compos -
tela, Spain.
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant in -
herited syndrome caused by germline mutations in the adenomatous 
polyposis coli ( APC) gene. However, germline mutations in APC can-
not be identified in about 20-30% of patients with classical FAP and up 
to 90% of those with attenuated phenotype (AFAP). Recently, germline 
mutations in the base-excision-repair gene, MYH , have been associ -
ated with some APC negative FAP and AFAP patients.
Thirty-four unrelated patients with a clinical diagnosis of multiple pol -
yposis (15-100 colorectal adenomas) or classical FAP (>100 colorectal 
adenomas) were analysed for germline APC mutations. Patients with -
out APC detected mutations were investigated for MYH  mutations.
Eighteen families (54%) carried point mutations or large rearrange -
ments in the APC gene. p.R805X and p.R216X mutations were found 
twice in unrelated patients. Phenotypic heterogeneity was observed for 
the R805X, associated with either AFAP or FAP, suggesting that modi -
fier genes or environment could modulate FAP phenotype. Two new 
unclassified variants p.I1055M and p.R1171C were also identified.
Three biallelic (20%) and two monoallelic (14%) MYH germline mu -
tation carriers were identified in 4 AFAP and 1 FAP families APC 
negative.  The two most frequent germline mutations (p.Y165C and 
p.G382D) were observed as well as new genetic variants for which 
control populations studies were performed.
In this study 20% of the APC negative patients were found to be bi -
allelic MYH germline mutation carriers. Therefore, MYH  analysis is 
recommended for all APC negative families even if a recessive inheri -
tance is not confirmed. However, mutations in MYH can not explain all 
cases of FAP.P0497. Analysis of APC tumor suppressor gene promoter 
methylation status in adenocacinoma of stomach and in serum
M. Alivand1,2, F. Ratgar jazii3, M. Zare3,4;  
1National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology of Iran, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Khatam University, Tehran-ferdous blv., Islamic Re -
public of Iran, 3National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology of 
Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4khatam university, Tehran-ferdous blv., 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Adenocarcinoma of stomach has a high mortality rate . Its incidence 
rate in Ira is high. Often, the cancer is diagnosed when its is already 
advanced and has spread to other tissues, which makes treatment dif -
ficult. In order to early diagnose the disease attention is focused to the 
promoter methylation status of tumor suppressor genes. By applying 
Methylation Specific PCR(MSP) we studied the methylation status of 
the Adenomatous polyposis coli(APC) tumor suppressor gene in this 
type of cancer . MSP analysis of APC was done due to the fact that pro -
moter methylation is an important way of APC inactivation. Our study 
indicates methylation of APC promoter in %66.6 of tissue samples. We 
further extended our study on to serum of such patients and our results 
indicate that MSP could be applicable to the serum which clinically is 
important for diagnosis and evaluation of treatment strategy.
P0498. The coumarins and furanocoumarins induced apoptosis 
and inhibit proliferation in human leukemic cells
A. Bogucka-Kocka , D. H. Smolarz, J. Kocki;  
Medical University, Lublin, Poland.
Coumarins and furanocoumarins are plant compounds exhibiting an -
ticancer activities. A series of 15 coumarins and furocoumarins have 
been evaluated for anticancer activity in vitro on 6 human leukemic cell 
lines: HL-60, J45.01, Eol-1, 1301, U261, and ML1.
The cell cultures were stimulated with coumarin derivatives in various 
concentrations. As a negative control the cells were incubated without 
compounds. The cell growth was measured by using tetrazolium bro -
mide (MTT) assay. Coumarins and furanocoumarins induced apopto -
sis in cells as indicated by dose- and time-dependent (1) cytochrome c 
release, (2) caspase activation, (3) DNA fragmentation, and (4) reduc -
tion of expression of anti-apoptotic genes: BCL-2 , MCL-1  and BCL-xL . 
Genes expression activity were detected by using real-time quantita -
tive reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. After leukemic 
cells were treated with coumarins and furanocoumarins, the expres -
sion of BCL-2 , MCL-1  and BCL-xL  mRNAs decreased.
Our studies show the influence of coumarins: xanthotoxin, o,o-dim -
etyl-fraxetin, heraclenine and phelopterine on apoptosis process in hu -
man lymphocytes in vitro. The compounds showed very good activity 
against different leukemic cell lines. Supported by grant of Polish State 
Committee of Scientific Research No 2 PO5F 04928.
P0499. Alterations in ATP2A2  gene in correlation with colon and 
lung cancer
M. Ravnik-Glavač1, B. Korošec1, D. Glavač2;  
1Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia, 
2Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lju -
bljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Sarco/endoplasmic reticulum calcium transport ATPases (SERCA-
type calcium pumps), proteins that accumulate calcium in the ER, play 
an important role in numerous signaling pathways controlling tumor 
growth, differentiation and cell death. Reports that SERCA2 haploin -
sufficient mice often developed cancer prompted us to study the in -
volvement of the ATP2A2  gene in human cancer development. We 
found 13 novel different alterations of the ATP2A2  gene in 27 of 416 al -
leles of patients with two different types of cancer. Changes in ATP2A2  
were statistically significantly more common in patients with colon (p 
< 0.0001, OR = 25.3) as well as lung (p = 0.046; OR = 8.05) cancer. 
We found two missense mutations, two intronic deletions, an intronic 
insertion and 8 single nucleotide alterations, of which two were in the 
coding region, three in the intronic and three in the promoter region. 
We were able to detect lost or reduced expression of ATP2A2 in all pa -
tients with alterations in the promoter region, as well as in patients with 
a combination of gene alterations. Our results suggest that germline 
alterations of ATP2A2  may predispose to lung and colon cancer and 
that an impaired ATP2A2  gene might be involved, directly or indirectly, 
as an early event in carcinogenesis.Cancer genetics1
P0500. Automated FISH analysis predicts good outcome in 
CML patients with Imatinib-induced remission and detects 
very low level leukaemic cell population with double BCR-ABL  
rearrangement.
G. Calabrese1,2, D. Fantasia3, P. Guanciali-Franchi1, R. DiGianfilippo3, E. Mori -
zio3, M. Alfonsi1, R. DiLorenzo4, L. Stuppia1,2, G. Palka1,3;  
1Genetica Medica, Chieti Scalo, Italy, 2G. D’Annunzio Foundation, Chieti Scalo, 
Italy, 3Genetica Medica, Pescara Hospital, Pescara, Italy, 4Hematology Dept, 
Pescara Hospital, Pescara, Italy.
Seventy-six patients with CML, 69 in chronic phase, 1 in accelerate 
phase, and 6 in blastic crisis, were treated with imatinib mesylate (IM). 
The patients were studied for a 18-66 months follow up period using 
cytogenetics and FISH analysis with a dual-fusion BCR-ABL probe, 
and an automated FISH imaging system for rare cell events (BioView-
Duet). Before IM treatment 50 patients showed Ph chromosome in all 
examined cells while in the remaining 26 patients a normal clone was 
also found. Complete or partial cytogenetic remission rate [CCR or 
PCR: t(9;22) absent or <35% of cells, respectively] overlapped com -
plete or partial FISH remission rate (CFR or PFR: BCR-ABL absent 
or <35% of cells, respectively) in 74% of patients during the follow 
up period. However, CFR achievement within 12 months of treatment 
resulted in a disease-free second year of treatment in 97% of patients 
as previously reported using QF-PCR. Forty-three percent of CCR 
samples actually showed >0.5% leukaemic cells by FISH. Two cases 
showed 0.08% cells with double BCR-ABL (i.e. double Ph), unde -
tectable by QF-PCR, which disappeared after increasing IM dosage. 
Moreover, FISH unravelled leukaemic cells in 21% of samples unsuit -
able for cytogenetic investigation from 9 patients who subsequently 
developed haematological relapse. In 11 patients with partial deletion 
on der(9)(q34) at treatment start, no CCR/CFR was achieved. Clinical 
and haematological relapse occurred in 5 cases, while in the remain -
ing 6 a PCR/PFR was observed only after 30 months of treatment sup -
porting a negative role of der(9) deletion on IM effect in CML patients.
P0501. Serial quantitation of bcr-abl transcripts predict 
resistence to imatinib in chronic myeloid leukemia
S. Menif , K. Dellagi;  
Laboratoire Hematologie, Tunis, Tunisia.
Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) is attributed to a specific translo -
cation between chromosomes 9 and 22. the resulting bcr-abl fusion 
gene codes for a fusion protein with tyrosine kinase activity leading to 
uncontrolled cell growth.
Imatinib, a bcr-abl inhibitor, induces apoptosis in CML cells by stabiliz -
ing the non ATP-binding form of bcr-abl ,and in turn phosphorylation 
of its sustrates .
Despite the excellent clinical results with imatinib in CML, some pa -
tients develop resistence .Several mechanisms of resistance have 
been described ,the most important in clinical samples appears to be 
the development of mutations in the kinase domain of bcr-abl. routine 
screening of patient’s samples for bcr-abl kinase mutations is labori -
ous and expensive, serial quantitation of bcr-abl transcripts is a useful 
tool to diagnose theses patients .
Here we report 15 patients diagnosed with chronic myeloid leukae -
mia and treated with imatinib 400mg daily . serial quantitation of bcr-
abl transcripts in peripheral blood for a median followup of 36 months 
showed an emerging clone. indeed bcr-abl/abl ratios increased during 
the period of observation which is synonymous of resistence to treat -
ment.
RQ-PCR studies can identify degrees of molecular response that pre -
dict long term stability in chronic myeloid leukaemia. and thus can be 
used as a screening strategy for mutation analysis.
P0502. Robotic Microscopy for Fully-Automated FISH Testing: 
Application in Bladder Cancer Identification and Recurrence 
Monitoring
M. W. Kilpatrick1, F. Tafas1, R. Gasparini2, Y. Kim1, Y. Zhu1, P. Tsipouras1;  
1Ikonisys Inc, New Haven, CT, United States, 2Neogenomics Inc, Ft Myers, FL, 
United States.
FISH analysis for the identification of bladder cancer has been well 
documented. Quantitation of chromosomes 3, 7 and 17 and deletion 
of 9p21, has been found to complement urine cytology raising the 
sensitivity of testing to >97% (specificity of >94%). However, FISH is 
labor intensive requiring a high skill level and somewhat subjective interpretation. An automated system for FISH analysis has the poten -
tial to reduce interpretation errors and decrease turn around times for 
patient results. We report here the use of a fully-automated, robotic 
fluorescence microscopy platform in the identification and analysis of 
cells, in urine sediment, for the diagnosis of bladder cancer or tumor 
recurrence.
100 patients suspected of having bladder cancer or bladder cancer re -
currence were analyzed in a blinded study. A single slide was prepared 
from each patient’s urine then analyzed manually on a fluorescence 
microscope. The slide was then loaded on the automated microscopy 
platform for FISH analysis. 50 of the slides were run on a second plat -
form for intra-instrument comparisons.
97% of the samples showed complete concordance between the re -
sults obtained by manual and automated analysis. 19 samples were 
positive by both methods, 76 negative and 2 inconclusive. 2 samples 
were negative by manual analysis and inconclusive by automated and 
1 sample was negative by automated analysis and inconclusive by 
manual. For the 50 slides run sequentially on two instruments, 49 gave 
the same result from both analyses. One slide was read as normal on 
the first instrument and inconclusive when run a second time, probably 
due to deterioration of the FISH signals.
These data suggest that an automated FISH analysis system is ca -
pable of providing accurate detection and enumeration of FISH signals 
in voided urine samples and has the potential to increase efficiency in 
the detection of bladder cancer and tumor recurrence.
P0503. Polymorphism of DNA repair genes XRCC1 and risk of 
brain tumors
S. L. Cengiz1,2, H. Acar1,3, Z. Inan1,3;  
1Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey, 2Selcuk University , Meram Medicine Faculty, 
Neurosurgery Department, Konya, Turkey, 3Selcuk University , Meram Medicine 
Faculty, Genetics Department, Konya, Turkey.
Background and Objective: DNA repair genes play a major role in main -
taining genomic stability through different repair pathways. The current 
study was designed to evaluate the relation between polymorphism of 
DNA repair gene XRCC1 and brain tumours. Their frequencies were 
also compared with patient‘s age, gender, smoking, alcohol status, 
family history, and tumor histopathology in a Turkish population.
Methods: We conducted a case-population base study including 135 
cases of brain tumors and 87 population base age- and sex-matched 
healthy controls to examine the role of polymorphism of XRCC1 Arg-
399Gln gene, in the context of brain tumor risk for the Turkish popula -
tion. Tumors were subdivided into 4 main groups that constitute 85% 
of brain tumors, according to tumor histopathological examination.. 
Group I; patients with glial tumors (n=71), Group II; patients with me -
ningiomas (n=35), Group III; patients with pituitary adenomas (n=21) 
and Group IV; patients with metastases to the brain (n=8).
Results: There was no significant difference in the distributions of 
XRCC1  Arg399Gln polymorphisms among the gliomas, meningiomas 
and the controls. However XRCC1 Arg399Gln, polymorphism were 
significantly different in pituitary adenomas and metastases to brain. 
As metastases to brain were compared with primary brain tumors the 
difference was also significant.
Conclusion: These results suggest that the XRCC1  Arg399Gln poly -
morphism may be a marker for the susceptibility to pituitary adenomas 
and metastases to brain.
Key Words: brain tumors, DNA repair gene, genetics, polymorphism, 
XRCC1
P0504. The role of XPD gene polymorphism in brain tumors
S. L. Cengiz1,2, Z. Inan1,3, T. Cora1,4, H. Acar1,5, S. Yavuz1,6, A. Baysefer1,6;  
1Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey, 2Selcuk University, Meram Medicine 
Faculty,Neurosurgery Department, Konya, Turkey, 3Selcuk University,Meram 
Medicine faculty,Genetics Department, Konya, Turkey, 4selcuk University, 
Meram medicine Faculty,Genetics Department, Konya, Turkey, 5Selcuk 
University,Meram Medicine Faculty,Genetics Department, Konya, Turkey, 
6Selcuk University,Meram Medicine Faculty,Neurosurgery Department, Konya, 
Turkey.
Background and Objective: Deficits in DNA repair pathways may lead 
to tumorigenesis and pathogen defence. The current study was de -
signed to evaluate the relation between polymorphism of DNA repair 
gene xeroderma pigmentosum group D (XPD) and brain tumors. We 
aimed to investigate it’s role as susceptibility marker for brain tumors. Cancer genetics1
Their frequencies were also compared with patient‘s age, gender, 
smoking, alcohol status, family history, and tumor histopathology in a 
Turkish population.
Methods: We conducted a case-population base study including 136 
cases of brain tumors and 86 population base age- and sex-matched 
healthy controls to examine the role of polymorphisms of XPD gene, in 
the context of brain tumor risk for the Turkish population. Tumors were 
subdivided into 4 main groups that constitute 85% of brain tumors, 
according to tumor histopathological examination. Group I; patients 
with glial tumors (n=72), Group II; patients with meningiomas (n=35), 
Group III; patients with pituitary adenomas (n=20) and Group IV; pa -
tients with metastases to the brain (n=9).
Results: There were no significant difference among groups as com -
pared with each other (groups I-IV) and also compared with control 
healthy individuals in regards to XPD gene polymorphisms.
Conclusion: Lys751Gln polymorphisms of the XPD gene have not a 
functional consequence in brain cancer risk and do not have prognos -
tic significance in patients with brain tumors either.
Key Words: brain tumors, DNA repair gene, genetics, polymorphism, 
xeroderma pigmentosum group D, XPD
P0505. BRCA1 and BRCA2 sequence variability in normal 
population in Croatia
V. Musani1, M. Levacic Cvok1, M. Cretnik1, P. Ozretic1, A. Godan2, M. Markovic3, 
S. Levanat1;  
1Division of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 
2School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, General Practice Kalinovica, Zagreb, 
Croatia, 3Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia, Za -
greb, Croatia.
Hereditary breast cancer is characterized by an inherited susceptibility 
to breast cancer. The main candidates are BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes, 
which are acting as tumor suppressors, and are only genes known to 
be mutated in familial history of breast cancer. In familial cases an in -
dividual already carries a mutation in one of the alleles. Tumorigenesis 
is a result of inactivation of the second allele.
We are analyzing distribution of polymorphic variants of BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 genes in normal population to establish the reference values 
in healthy population, since no such screening has been undertaken in 
Croatia. We assume that by evaluating polymorphic forms of BRCA1 
and BRCA2 predisposition to breast and ovarian cancer can be esti -
mated.
Among a wide range of conventional mutation scanning methods 
based on conformational polymorphisms, we decided to use proce -
dures based on high resolution melting approach and heteroduplex 
formation that give different melting profile and fluorescence, accord -
ing to polymorphic or mutational variant.
This analysis is contributing to a program of an early detection and pre -
vention of breast cancer in Croatia with intention of forming a database 
of a high penetrance susceptibility genes BRCA1 and BRCA2.
P0506. Haplotype Analysis of Recurrent BRCA1 and BRCA2 
Mutations In Spain.
M. Infante , M. Duran, L. Perez-Cabornero, D. J. Sanz, E. Sanchez-Tapia, A. 
Osorio, G. Llort, O. Diez, M. de la Hoya, E. Esteban-Cardeñosa, A. Vega, E. 
Lastra, C. Miner, E. Velasco;  
IBGM, Valladolid, Spain.
Mutational analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes has been hampered 
by the large size of the two genes, and the frequent occurrence of 
unique mutations. Founder mutations for BRCA1 and BRCA2 have 
been identified in several populations, and haplotype analysis has pro -
vided evidence of a common ancestor. Several mutations (c.5272-1G>A 
from BRCA1, and c.3036delACAA, c.5344delAATA, c.5374delTATG 
and c.9538delAA from BRCA2) have been identified multiple times in 
our population, suggesting that could be founder in Spain.
Haplotype analysis using polymorphic markers spanning BRCA1 and 
BRCA2 loci was performed on index cases and on additional fam -
ily members. Sixty-two BRCA1/2 positive families were genotyped. 
D17S855, D17S1185, D17S1323 and D17S1326 polymorphic micro -
satellites linked to the BRCA1 gene were analysed in seven c5272-1 
G>A families. D13S171, D13S260, D13S1695 and D13S1698 STRs 
were typed in four different BRCA2 mutations c3036delACAA (36 
families), c5374delTATG (11 families), c5344delAATA (4 families), and 
c9538delAA (4 families).All carriers of c.5272-1 G>A and c.5374delTATG mutations shared 
the same haplotype at the four markers of BRCA1 and BRCA2, re -
spectively, and thus supporting the possibility of a common ancestry. 
Results in c.3036delACAA families provide evidence of at least two 
distinct lines of transmission in Spanish population. This facilitates the 
setting up of a less expensive and less time-consuming strategy to test 
the BRCA genes in high-risk Spanish BC patients.
P0507. The complete deletion of BRCA1  gene identified in the 
Slovak family by combination of sequencing, MLPA and array-
CGH techniques.
M. Konecny1, K. Zavodna2, V. Vranova3, M. Vizvaryova1, Z. Bartosova2, P. 
Kuglik3, E. Weismanova1, I. Mlkva4, J. Kausitz1;  
1St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Cancer Research Institute 
of Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Faculty of Science, Ma -
saryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Faculty Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Pathogenic germline substitutions and short deletions/insertions in 
BRCA1/2  account for the majority of hereditary breast/ovarian cancer 
cases, however, the large genomic rearrangements (LGR) also repre -
sent a substantial proportion of disease-causing changes. In this pilot 
study we demonstrate the specific case of Slovak family with breast/
ovarian cancer, where sequencing analysis (SA) of BRCA1  revealed 
the discrepancy of SNPs haplotypes and primarily indicated the pres -
ence of LGR.
Initially, the analysis of all exons of BRCA1  was based on the combi -
nation of SSCP and SA. Subsequently, MLPA analysis (P002B; P087 
kits) was performed. Finally, results were proved with array-compara -
tive genomic hybridization (array-CGH).
SSCP and SA demonstrated presence of 11 SNPs in BRCA1 , which 
indicated hemizygous status, and possible occurrence of LGR. The 
MLPA results showed reduction of peaks levels for each BRCA1 exon. 
Array-CGH displayed a single deletion signal for  BRCA1  among set of 
287 gene probes. Totally, 8 members of the family were analysed, in 3 
of them LGR was confirmed.
We have discovered rare germline LGR affecting complete BRCA1, 
according to our knowledge this is the second time it was described. 
Although, the breakpoints of LGR were not identified yet, concerning 
family history it is evident, that clinical effect is comparable with small 
deletions/insertions and substitutions and leads to the loss-off gene 
function.
In conclusion, it is important to note that DNA analysis of BRCA1/2  
genes should be performed in all affected members of breast/ovarian 
cancer families concurrently, since the discrepancy in the SNPs haplo -
types may indicate the presence of LGR.
P0508. Mutation screening of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in breast and 
breast/ovarian cancer families from the Slovakia.
M. Vizvaryova1, M. Konecny1, E. Weismanova1, D. Ilencikova2, I. Mlkva3, J. 
Kausitz1;  
1St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2National Oncological Insti -
tute, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Faculty Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia.
Germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes have been shown 
to account for the majority of hereditary breast and ovarian cancers. 
We have screened high-risk breast and breast/ovarian cancer families 
from Slovakia using combination of the SSCP and direct sequencing 
techniques.
Mutational analysis of all exons and flanking intronic splice sites of 
BRCA1 gene was performed in 156 suspected families and subse -
quently in 47 BRCA1 negative families, the analysis of complete cod -
ing region of BRCA2 was performed.
Fourteen different types  of BRCA1 pathologic mutations were identi -
fied in 31 breast/ovarian families. The most frequently found mutations 
were c.5266dupC (8 families), c.181T>G (5 families), c.68_69delAG 
(3 families) and c.843_846del4 (3 families), marked in the approved 
systematic nomenclature numbering. The novel BRCA1 mutation 
c.1166delG, which forms a stop codon in amino acid 393 giving rise 
to a truncation protein, was identified. This frame-shift mutation was 
identified in 2 patients suffered from breast cancer at the ages of 27 
and 32 years, and in 2 subclinical probands.
Mutational analysis of BRCA2 gene showed presence of 3 distinct 
pathogenic mutations. The mutations c.3G>A,  c.5946delT, c.9403delC 
were found in 3 families with strong family history for occurrence of 
breast cancer, all of them are already presented in BIC database.Cancer genetics1
In summary within 156 Slovak breast/ovarian families, we identified 
34 families (21,8%) with pathologic germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mu -
tations. A novel BRCA1 mutation c.1166delG was not previously de -
scribed in BIC database and published until year 2006 and we suspect 
it is of Slovak origin.
P0509. Germline BRCA2 large rearrangements are not a 
common cause of breast/ovarian cancer predisposition
S. Pagès-Berhouet1, S. Reynaud1, V. Caux-Moncoutier1, D. Michaux1, A. Lau -
gé1, A. De Pauw1, M. Gauthier-Villars1, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet1,2, C. Houdayer1,3;  
1Institut Curie, Paris, France, 2INSERM U509, Paris, France, 3UMR INSERM 
745, Paris, France.
Screening for large deletions and duplications of the BRCA1  gene is 
now recognized as an important part of routine molecular diagnosis in 
familial breast/ovarian cancer. The picture is less clear as to the value 
of screening BRCA2  for such alterations. The available studies seem -
ingly show that this is a worthwhile screening however they are based 
on patients selected for high probability of breast/ovarian cancer pre -
disposition. No data are available for patients routinely ascertained in 
genetic units.
Therefore we embarked upon BRCA2  large rearrangement screen -
ing on a large sample of 488 patients consecutively ascertained in 
our breast cancer family clinic for whom breast/ovarian cancer ge -
netic-predisposition was 1%-96% (mean 53%) according to the Claus 
model. Obviously all these patients were tested negative for BRCA1  
point mutations and large deletions and for BRCA2  point mutations. 
BRCA2  large rearrangement screening was performed using a previ -
ously published QMPSF assay and included control samples bearing a 
BRCA2  deletion and a trisomy 13 purchased from Corriel. All controls 
were successfully identified and no BRCA2  rearrangement was found 
in these 488 patients.
These results strongly suggest that BRCA2  large rearrangements are 
not a common cause of breast/ovarian cancer predisposition. Oncoge -
netic teams should now discuss if this screening should be proposed 
on a routine basis or only to highly selected patients. It could also be 
used as a second-line screening however this option could greatly de -
layed the results availability to the detriment of the genetic follow-up.
P0510. Breast cancer susceptibility association with a regulatory 
SNP in 3’utr region of E2F1 gene
E. Barroso1, E. Wentzel2, R. L. Milne1, J. Arias3, P. Zamora4, J. T. Mendell2, J. 
Benítez1, G. Ribas1;  
1CNIO, Madrid, Spain, 2The McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, United States, 3Monte Naranco Hospital, Oviedo, Spain, 4La 
Paz Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
SNPs located in regulatory regions (rSNPs) have been proposed as 
potential causal SNPs in complex traits and diseases because of their 
role in modulating gene expression.
In the current work, we present the research on a rSNP located in 3’utr 
of E2F1, rs3213180, within a case-control association study, using up 
to 854 sporadic breast cancer patient and 553 control samples. A rela -
tive risk of 2.3 (95%C.I.=0.48-11.10), was estimated for rs3213180, not 
statistically significant, possibly due to the low Spanish MAF=0.05. It 
has been described that the expression of the E2F1 gene is modulated 
by c-Myc, which activates E2F1 transcription, but also blocks its trans -
lation through the activation of transcription of some miRNAs. These 
miRNAs recognize two binding sites at the 3’utr region of the E2F1 
mRNA and delay the translation to protein, and rs3213180 is located 
at the 3’utr region, upstream of binding site 2.Luciferase expression 
assays using constructs with E2F1 3’utr have revealed a mild incre -
ment in expression in the presence of the minor allele (p-value<0.001) 
and a difference of expression with minor allele was again observed 
using constructs with binding site 2 mutated (p-value=0.02). Experi -
ments with binding site 1 mutated are in progress and they will help 
to determine whether rs3213180 affects miRNAs binding as previous 
experiments are pointing out. Additionally, E2F1 protein expression by 
using western analysis on lymphocytes and immunochemistry staining 
on normal breast tissues from patients with different genotypes will be 
further discussed.P0511. Search for a rapid pre-screening technique to identify 
heterozygous BRCA  mutation carriers using gene expression 
profiling in peripheral blood lymphoytes
M. Vuillaume1, N. Uhrhammer1, V. Vidal2, V. Sylvain Vidal2, V. Chabaud2, M. 
Agier3, Y. Bignon1;  
1Laboratoire Diagnostic Génétique et Moléculaire, Clermont ferrand, France, 
2Société Diagnogène division d’Imaxio, Biopôle Clermont Limagne, France, 
3INRA, Theix, France.
Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women in the western 
world. Approximately 5-10 % of breast cancers are due to strong ge -
netic susceptibility. Mutations in two major genes, BRCA1  and BRCA2 , 
account for at most 30 % of the families with hereditary breast can -
cer. Unfortunately, in most families there is little to indicate which gene 
should be targeted first for mutation screening, which is labor intensive, 
time consuming and often prohibitively expensive in poor and develop -
ing countries. We are investigating gene expression profiling to distin -
guish between BRCA1  and BRCA2  mutation carriers and non BRCA  
carriers.  Heterozygous mutations in either BRCA1  or BRCA2  could 
dysregulate the DNA damage response and alert the immune system 
by inducing or inhibiting transcriptional activity of genes involved in the 
downstream signaling cascade. RNA from samples of blood periph -
eral lymphocytes from BRCA1  mutation carriers and non-carriers from 
BRCA1  families were hybridized on an Agilent pangenomic microarray 
of 44000 complementary cDNAs. Among 576 genes over- or under-
expressed at least 1.5-fold between the two groups, Student’s t-test 
with a Benjamini and Hochberg multiple testing correction (p<0.05) re -
vealed 79 differentially expressed genes. Several of these genes are 
involved in transcription regulation or the BRCA1 signaling network 
and one is a stimulatory receptor of the innate immune system previ -
ously shown to be induced by DNA damage responses. We are now 
testing a larger sample set, as well as targeted experiments by RT-
PCR to validate this preliminary data before studying gene expression 
profiles of BRCA2  mutation carriers.
P0512. Germ line E-Cadherin mutation in familial lobular breast 
cancer
N. E. Larsson1, S. Masciari2, J. Senz3, D. Huntsman3, J. E. Garber2;  
1Lund University/Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Lund/Boston, Sweden, 2Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, United States, 3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
Background: The cell surface glycoprotein, E-Cadherin ( CDH1 ) is a 
key regulator of adhesive properties in epithelial cells. Germline mu -
tations in CDH1  are well-established as the defects underlying the 
cancer syndrome of Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer (HDGC): an 
increased risk of lobular breast cancer (LBC) has been described in 
HDGC kindreds. We sought to investigate the frequency of germline 
CDH1  mutations in LBC patients with early onset disease or family his -
tories of breast cancer without diffuse gastric cancer. Methods: Germ -
line DNA was analyzed in 23 women with invasive lobular or mixed 
ductal and lobular breast cancers who had at least one close relative 
with breast cancer or had themselves been diagnosed before age 45, 
had tested negative for a germline BRCA1  or BRCA2  mutation, and 
reported no personal or family history of diffuse gastric cancer. The full 
coding sequence of CDH1  including splice junctions was PCR ampli -
fied and screened for mutations using DHPLC. Results: A novel germ -
line CDH1 truncating mutation in the extracellular portion of the protein 
(517insA) was identified in one subject who had lobular breast cancer 
at age 42 and a first degree relative with invasive lobular breast can -
cer. Conclusions: Germline CDH1  mutations can be associated with 
invasive lobular breast cancer in the absence of diffuse gastric cancer. 
The finding may have implications for management of individuals at 
risk for this breast cancer subtype, and compels clarification of the 
cancer risks in the syndrome.
P0513. Screening of CDKN2A  and CDK  mutations in 
heterogeneous-phenotype breast cancer families presenting 
melanoma and/or pancreatic cancer.
P. M. Machado1, J. Eugénio1, S. Santos1, C. Moura2, F. Vaz3;  
1Molecular Biology Department-Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Lisbon, Por -
tugal, 2Breast Cancer Risk Evaluation Clinic-Portuguese Institute of Oncology, 
Lisbon, Portugal, 3Molecular Biology Department/Breast Cancer Risk Evalua -Cancer genetics1
tion Clinic-Portuguese Institute of Oncology, Lisbon, Portugal.
Breast cancer is hereditary in 10% of the cases, the majority related 
to mutations in BRCA1  and BRCA2  genes but only 20-25% of families 
screened are found positive, suggesting that other breast cancer sus -
ceptibility genes exist. Inherited mutations in the CDKN2A  tumour sup -
pressor gene, which encodes the p16INK4a/p14ARF proteins, and in the 
cyclin-dependent kinase 4 ( CDK4 ) gene, confer susceptibility to cuta -
neous malignant melanoma. The INK4a/ARF  locus on chromosome 
9q21, encodes for 2 unrelated and independently acting negative cell 
cycle regulators, p16INK4a and p14ARF, arising from alternative first ex -
ons (1α or 1β respectively) and common exons 2 and 3. Besides mela -
noma, a high frequency of other tumours (pancreatic, nervous system, 
head and neck and breast) has been reported in p16INK4a/p14ARF muta -
tion positive melanoma families. The objective of this study is to anal -
yse the presence of germline mutations in the CDKN2A  and in CDK4  
genes, in 21 families with breast, melanoma and/or pancreatic cancer. 
Two families were negative for full BRCA1/2  genetic screening. In the 
remaining 19 families, BRCA1/2  and CDKN2A /CDK4 screening are 
being done simultaneously, since BRCA  mutation probability was un -
der 25%. The entire CDKN2A  coding region and exon 2 of the CDK4  
gene are being screened by direct sequencing. Results of our screen -
ing will be presented and will help determine if CDKN2A  and C DK4 
screening is worth being done in heterogeneous-phenotype breast 
cancer families presenting melanoma and/or pancreatic cancer.
P0514. Screening of BRCA 1 gene in breast and ovarian cancer 
patients diagnosed at age under 40
N. Lojo-Kadric1, L. Kapur1, J. Ramic1, S. Beslija2, N. Obralic2, N. Bilalovic3, S. 
Vranic3, N. Pojskic1, K. Bajrovic1;  
1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, 2Institute of Oncology, KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
3Institute of Pathology, KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Since the identification of BRCA1 gene in 1994, there were numerous 
studies on prevalence and genetic background of breast and ovarian 
cancer. Introducing of new method for screening of large genomic re -
arrangements of BRCA 1 gene gave a new perspective to diagnosis, 
prognosis, therapeutical approaches and prevention of breast cancer.
Tumor bioptic specimens from patients fulfilling a criteria of high to me -
dium risk group for breast and ovarian cancer have been consecutively 
collected at Sarajevo Clinical Center during the period of two years.
DNA was isolated from tumor tissue samples using standard salting 
out procedure. After DNA isolation we introduced MLPA - Multiplex li -
gation-dependent probe amplification. 34 probe hybridization , ligation 
and PCR reaction was performed on Eppendorf Mastercycler gradi -
ent, and genotyping was performed on ABI PRISM 310 sequencer. 
Data analysis is performed using GeneMapper v. 3.2 and Coffalyzer 
software.
Results are displayed as RFU and peak area values and graphically 
as output of Coffalyzer.
P0515. Prognostic value of chromosomes 1 and  aneusomy 
in invasive ductal breast carcinoma among Iranian women: An 
interphase FISH analysis
F. Behjati1,2, M. Atri3, H. Najmabadi1, P. Mehdipour2;  
1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3De-
partment of Surgery, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Breast cancer is amongst the leading causes of death in women world -
wide and the most common cancer amongst Iranian women.
The aim of this retrospective study was to investigate the role of chro -
mosomes 1 and 8 copy number assessed by Interphase Fluorescence 
In Situ Hybridization (FISH), as the genetic prognostic parameters in 
70 Iranian women, aged 35 to 64 years(mean age of 48.1 ±7.7) , with 
primary sporadic invasive ductal breast carcinoma.
FISH, using centromeric probes for chromosomes 1 and 8 was applied 
to interphase cell suspensions all prepared from the carnoy fixed tu -
mor cells and selected paraffin embedded tumor sections.
More than 10000 cells for chromosomes 1 and 8 were assessed. An -
eusomies for chromosomes 1 and 8 were present in all the studied 
patients to different levels. The total abnormality rate for chromosome 
1 was 47 percent , whereas for chromosome 8, this rate was 33 per -cent. This was similar to other reported cases .Statistical significant 
associations (<0.05) were demonstrated between hyperdiploidy 1 and 
trisomy 8 and patients’ age below 50 years . Trisomy 1 and hyperdip -
loidy 1 showed significant correlation with poor survival. Larger tumor 
size and raised aneusomy 8 were significantly related. Patients with 
increased number of lymph node metastasis, involvement of lymph 
node metastasis and increased stage of the disease showed a poorer 
prognosis.
In conclusion, chromosomes 1 and 8 aneusomy alongside other clini -
cal and pathological parameters may be considered as useful prog -
nostic markers in invasive ductal carcinoma of breast.
P0516. Is telomere length in peripheral blood lymphocytes 
correlated with cancer susceptibility or radiosensitivity?
S. V. Hodgson1, J. G. Barwell2, L. Pangon3, I. Kesterton4, A. Georgiou3, R. 
Gilchrist3, B. Kato5, J. Ball3, J. Berg6, Z. Docherty4, A. Aviv7, J. Gardner7, R. 
Camplejohn5,3, T. D. Spector5,3;  
1St George’s, London, United Kingdom, 2St George’s, University of London, 
United Kingdom, 3King’s College, London, United Kingdom, 4Guy’s Hospital, 
London, United Kingdom, 5St Thomas’ Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 
6Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, United Kingdom, 7New Jersey Medical School, 
Newark, NJ, United States.
Mean terminal restriction fragment lengths (TRF) in white blood cells 
have previously been found to be associated with breast cancer in 
case-control studies. In order to assess whether this marker could 
be used as a test for breast cancer susceptbibility, TRF length was 
measured in 72 individuals after treatment for breast cancer, 125 
newly diagnosed breast cancer cases and 1804 unaffected controls 
between the age of 45 years and 77 years from the Twin Research 
Unit at St Thomas Hospital. Mean TRF was also tested for correlation 
with chromosome radiosensitivity and apoptotic response in the vari -
ous groups.
After adjusting for age and sex, there was no significant difference in 
TRF lengths between the breast cancer treated and unaffected controls 
(6.859 kb versus 6.858, p=0.988) or between newly diagnosed breast 
cancer patients and unaffected controls (6.65 kb for cases versus 6.60 
for controls P = 0.529). The only significant finding was a positive cor -
relation between age-adjusted apoptotic response and mean TRF in 
newly diagnosed breast cancer patients (p=0.008).
This suggests that TRF lengths in white blood cells, is not a marker of 
breast cancer susceptibility and does not vary significantly between af -
fected women who have or have not been treated for their cancer.
P0517. Genetic risk factors in non-BRCA breast/ovarian cancer 
families.
N. Uhrhammer , Y. Yang, J. Geneste, L. Delort, M. Vuillaume, Y. Bignon;  
Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
Mutations in the BRCA genes account for less than 30 % of families at 
risk of hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer. It is therefore impera -
tive to identify the other genetic factors contributing to familial breast 
cancer, to better ascertain risk to individuals in these families and 
decide on appropriate preventive and/or early detection measures. 
Deleterious mutations or polymorphisms of many genes have been 
described as associated with breast cancer risk.
We analysed two genes for deleterious mutations, and snps or mic -
rosatellites in seven cancer-associated genes in 600 cases from non-
BRCA1/2 breast/ovarian cancer families and in 400 women with no 
personal or familial breast/ovarian cancer history.
Deleterious mutations and missense variants of Chk2 were signifi -
cantly more frequent in cases than controls. No mutations in XRCC2 
were observed, although the variant allele His188 was significantly 
associated with cases. Polymorphisms affecting expression of IGF-
1 and EGFR were significantly different between cases and controls. 
Polymorphisms in other genes were not associated with cancer. Mul -
tivariate analysis suggested that Chk2 mutation, the His188 variant 
of XRCC2, and the risk-associated alleles at EGFR and IGF-1 were 
independent risk factors. There was no apparent effect on age at diag -
nosis or type of cancer (breast vs ovarian or other) among carriers of 
risk alleles. Segregation analysis of Chk2 mutations and of the XRCC2 
His188 variant are underway, as is the multiparametric analysis of ad -
ditional genes. These results are an encouraging first step in uncover -
ing the diverse genetic factors contributing to breast cancer risk in a 
polygenic model.Cancer genetics10
P0518. A map of nuclear matrix attachment regions within 
the breast cancer loss-of-heterozygosity region on human 
chromosome 16q22.1
S. Shaposhnikov1, S. Akopov2, I. Chernov2, L. Nikolaev2, E. Frengen3, A. Col -
lins3, V. Zverev1;  
1Institute of Viral Preparations, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Shemyakin and 
Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
3University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
To explore the DNA domain organization of the breast cancer loss-of-
heterozygosity region on human chromosome 16q22.1, we have iden -
tified a significant portion of the scaffold/matrix attachment regions (S/
MARs) within this region. Forty independent putative S/MAR elements 
were assigned within the 16q22.1 locus. More than 90% of these S/
MARs are AT rich, with GC contents as low as 27% in 2 cases. Thirty-
nine (98%) of the S/MARs are located within genes and 36 (90%) in 
gene introns, of which 15 are in first introns of different genes. The 
clear tendency of S/MARs from this region to be located within the 
introns suggests their regulatory role. The genomic interval mapped 
has been identified as a possible region harboring tumor suppressor 
genes in both invasive ductal and invasive lobular breast carcinomas. 
The E-cadherin gene, which is located within this region, has been 
shown to be mutated in lobular breast carcinomas, resulting in loss of 
E-cadherin expression. However, in most cases of ductal carcinoma, 
E-cadherin is normally expressed, suggesting that other genes within 
chromosome 16q22.1 may be involved in the development of this tu -
mor subtype. The construction of comprehensive S/MAR maps of the 
region using a panel of breast cancer cell lines may provide informa -
tion on relevance for the etiology of breast carcinomas. Changes of 
positions of regulatory elements such as S/MAR within the region may 
allow an understanding of how the genes in the region are regulated 
and how the structural architecture is related to the functional organi -
zation of the DNA.
P0519. Expression of two testis-specific genes, TSGA10 and 
SYCP3, in skin cancer
M. B. Mobasheri1, M. Aarabi2, I. Jahanzad3, M. H. Modarressi1,2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Teh -
ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Reproductive Biotechnology Research Center, 
Avesina Research Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of 
Pathology, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran.
Cancer-testis genes are a group of genes expressed in testicular ger -
minal cells and a range of human cancers. Testis specific gene A10 
(TSGA10) is expressed in testis and actively dividing and fetal differ -
entiating tissues. SYCP3 gene is supposed to be a testis specific gene 
and constitutes the core of the lateral elements of synaptonemal com -
plex. It has role in regulating DNA binding to the chromatid axis, sister 
chromatid cohesion, synapsis, and recombination. Methods:  In this 
study expression of TSGA10 and SYCP3 were investigated in 26 skin 
cancer using RT-PCR. Diagnosis of cancer was based on histopatho -
logical reports. Results:  TSGA10 expression was observed in 66.4% 
of total of skin tumors including melanomas with 85.7%, Basal cell car -
cinomas (BCC) with 75% and Squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) with 
40% positive expression of TSGA10, but, SYCP3 transcripts were not 
found in skin tumors. Conclusion:  These results may get further insight 
into the potential role as cancer marker and as cancer testis gene im -
plicated in tumorogenesis of skin tumors in the case of TSGA10
P0520. Evaluation of the relationship between  XRCC1  and XPD 
Polymorphisms and laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC)
H. Acar1, Z. İnan1, K. Öztürk2;  
1Dept. of Medical Genetics, Selcuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, Konya, 
Turkey, 2Dept. of Otolaryngology, Meram Medical Faculty, Selcuk Unıversıty, 
Konya, Turkey.
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common (90-95%) of all head 
and neck cancers (SCCHN), and laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma 
(LSCC) is one of the most common tumors of the upper aerodigestive 
tract. The incidence varies according to geographical area and most 
probably depends on specific environmental risk factors. Many studies 
reported that polymorphisms in DNA repair genes reduce their capac -
ity to repair DNA damage and thereby lead to a greater susceptibility 
to cancer. DNA repair enzymes continuously monitor DNA to correct 
damaged nucleotide residues generated by exposure to environmen -tal mutagenic and cytotoxic compounds or carcinogens. Our objec -
tive was to investigate the association, if any, between XRCC1 (X-ray 
repair cross-complementing 1) for Arg399Gln and XPD (ERCC2) for 
Lys751Gln polymorphic genotypes and LSCC, smoking and alcohol 
habits, tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) classification, and patient age. 
There was no significant difference in the genotype distribution of XPD 
between LSCC patients and their smoking and alcohol habits, tumor-
node-metastasis (TNM) classification, and patient age and controls for 
each polymorphism (p>0.05). There was a significant difference be -
tween the genotype distributions of XRCC1 in patients and in control 
groups (P<0.05). Our result concluded that polymorphism in XRCC1  
codon 399 was associated with risk of LCSS in a sample of the pa -
tients while polymorphism in XPD codon 751 was not.
P0521. Isolation and characterization of the putative bladder 
cancer stem cell
A. Bentivegna1, E. Sala2, G. Bovo2, F. Crosti2, N. Villa2, S. Redaelli1, S. Lisso -
ni1, M. Casu2, P. Viganò2, G. Strada2, L. Dalprà1,2;  
1Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Monza, MI, Italy, 2S. Gerardo Hospi -
tal, Monza, MI, Italy.
There is increasing evidence that the growth, spread and drug resis -
tance of cancers is driven by a subpopulation of cancer stem like cells 
(CSCs) the only cells able to long-term self-renewal and generation 
of the phenotypically diverse tumour cell population. Current failure 
of cancer therapies may be due to their lesser effect on potentially 
quiescent CSCs which remain viable and retain their full capacity to 
restore the tumour. However, the development of new CSC-targeted 
strategies is currently hindered by the lack of reliable markers for the 
identification of CSCs and the poor understanding of their behaviour 
and fate determinants. We report the isolation and characterization of 
a putative bladder CSC population from human bladder tumors. Speci -
mens were mechanically dissociated and digested by collagenase and 
plated at clonal density in serum-free medium containing mitogenic 
growth factors (basic fibroblast growth factor and epidermal growth 
factor). Karyotypic and interphasic FISH analysis were performed on 
fresh tumors and on tumor-derived cells after different times of culture. 
Preliminary results suggested a marked heterogeneity among differ -
ent tumors and a cell selection after isolation and culture. After 2 days 
in vitro few proliferating clusters were observed that forms detached 
spheres. Experimental procedures are in progress to test the capacity 
of long term proliferation and differentiation. This is the first report at 
our knowledge on putative CSCs from human bladder tumors.
P0522. DNA copy number changes in gastric adenocarcinoma 
patients from Turkey
G. Gümüş-Akay1, A. E. ÜNAL2, A. H. ELHAN3, A. Sunguoğlu1, A. Tukun4;  
1Ankara University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Biology, Ankara, 
Turkey, 2Ankara University Faculty of Medicine Department of Surgical Oncol -
ogy, Ankara, Turkey, 3Ankara University Faculty of Medicine Department of 
Biostatistics, Ankara, Turkey, 4Ankara University Faculty of Medicine Depart -
ment of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey.
Gastric cancer is one of the most common causes of cancer-related 
deaths in Turkey, but genetic changes underlying the development and 
progression of this cancer is poorly understood. In this study, DNA 
copy number changes were analyzed by comparative genomic hy -
bridization (CGH) in 43 gastric adenocarcinoma patients from Turkey 
and correlated with tumor invasion, lymph node involvement and his -
tological stage. Chromosomal imbalances were observed in 36 (84 
%) tumor samples. Frequent gains were found on 1q, 7p, 7q, 8p, 8q, 
11q, 13q, 16p, 20p, 20q and losses were found on 2q, 4q, 5q, 6q, 14q, 
15q, 18q and Xq. High level gains were detected on 1q, 7q, 8p, 8q, 
9p,13q and 16p. When all of the detected chromosomal imbalances 
were analyzed for the correlation with the histopathological factors, no 
statistically significant difference in the pattern of chromosomal imbal -
ances were observed in tumor invasion. However, gain of 13q with a 
minimally overlapping region 13q21-q31 was found to be significantly 
higher in tumors with increased lymph node metastasis (p<0.05). In 
addition, gains of 6p, 9p and 10q were found to be correlated with 
stage I tumors (p<0.05). Minimally overlapping regions were defined 
as 6p21.1 and 9p21-p13 for gains of 6p and 9p respectively. 10q21-
q23 and 10q25-qter, each of which was observed in two cases, were 
determined as minimally overlapping regions for gain of 10q. This data 
indicates that chromosomal imbalances play an important role in gas -Cancer genetics11
tric carcinogenesis and chromosomal regions identified in this study 
provide candidate regions for progression of gastric adenocarcinoma.
P0523. Mutations in CHEK2 gene in the Czech Breast Cancer 
Families
M. Lukesova , E. Machackova, P. Vasickova, M. Navratilova, H. Pavlu, J. Kuk -
lova, V. Kosinova, L. Foretova;  
Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, Brno, Czech Re -
public.
Cell cycle regulator CHEK2 is an important breast cancer susceptibility 
gene. It seems that the contribution and spectrum of CHEK2 mutations 
varies from country to country.
Our aim was to detect CHEK2 1100delC mutation and genomic rear -
rangements in CHEK2 gene among patients with breast cancer from 
high-risk families with negative testing results of BRCA1 and BRCA2 
genes.
Multiplex Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) has been ap -
plied for examination of CHEK2 rearrangements and CHEK2 1100delC 
mutation. DNA from 180 breast cancer patients with no previously 
found BRCA1/2 mutation was investigated. In addition 273 BRCA1/2 
negative breast cancer patients were investigate for the presence of 
CHEK2 exon 9-10 deletion using PCR reaction with specific primers. 
This deletion was originally reported in families of Czechoslovakian 
ancestry.
The 1100delC germline mutation was identified in one from 180 fami -
lies tested (0,56 %) and the deletion of exon 9-10 was identified in 4 
from 453 families tested (0,88 %). Both mutations lead to premature 
stop codon. The average age at the diagnosis of breast cancer in mu -
tation carriers was 41,2 years and three of them reported a positive 
family history of breast cancer.
It is suggested that there is a two-fold increased risk of breast cancer in 
1100C mutation carriers compared to noncarriers. However, the clinical 
impact of other CHEK2 gene mutations needs further investigations.
In the poster we present pedigrees of five breast cancer families that 
carry deleterious mutation in CHEK2 gene.
Contract grant sponsor: Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic: MZO 
00209805.
P0524. Cytotoxic and cytogenetic analysis in a human 
cholangiocarcinoma cell line after resveratrol treatment
L. Roncoroni1,2, L. Elli2, M. T. Bardella2, E. Dogliotti1,2, C. Terrani2, M. G. Gri -
moldi3, E. Dolfini1, L. Doneda1;  
1Department of Biology and Genetic for Health Sciences, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy, 2Center for Prevention and Diagnosis of Celiac Disease, IRCCS 
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy, 3Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dental Sciences, Pathology 
Unit, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
Cholangiocarcinoma represents 3% of all gastrointestinal cancers, its 
incidence is increasing and therapies are dissatisfied. In vitro stud -
ies demonstrated that resveratrol (RES), a poly-phenol agent, inhibits 
proliferation of cancer cells in two-dimensional cell cultures, through 
an increase of apoptosis and cell destruction. New insights into tumor 
biology are produced by another in vitro model, the multicellular tumor 
spheroids (MCTS). We evaluated the activity of RES on a human chol -
angiocarcinoma cell line (SK-CHA-1) growing in two-dimensional and 
MCTS culture.
SK-CHA-1 cell line with pseudo-triploid karyotype (modal chromo -
somes number 71) and 12 different markers chromosomes have been 
exposed to different doses of RES (8, 16, 32, 64 microM) in both mod -
els. We investigated: 1) cell viability; 2) cell morphology; 3) plasmatic 
membrane damage through lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and alka -
line phosphatase (ALP) medium release; 4) apoptosis through trans -
glutaminase type 2 (TG2) activity 5) karyotype.
RES significantly reduced viability in both cell culture systems (from 
89% to 16% vs 100% controls) and induced partial disaggregation of 
MCTS in a dose and time dependent fashion. In the culture media we 
found increased LDH levels (decupled vs controls) and ALP activity 
(quadruplicated vs controls), suggesting a plasma membrane injury; 
high levels of TG2 activity in treated cells suggested high pro-apoptotic 
stimuli (from 108% to 462% vs controls in both cell culture systems). 
No chromosomal changes have been observed.
In conclusion, the cytotoxic effect of RES on SK-CHA-1 cells supports 
further studies on the possible use of resveratrol as chemotherapic/chemopreventive drug in cholangiocarcinoma.
P0525. High-Resolution Genomic Profiling of Chronic 
Lymphocytic Leukaemia by Array CGH
S. Y. Moon1, J. L. McKenzie1, U. R. Jewell1, P. S. Ganly2,1, C. M. Morris1,2;  
1Christchurch School of Medicine, Christchurch, New Zealand, 2Canterbury 
Health Laboratories, Christchurch, New Zealand.
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is the most common form of leu -
kaemia in adults in the western world. Research into the genetic basis 
of CLL has successfully improved survival rate, but further advances 
are hampered by resolution limits of conventional genetic screening 
techniques such as cytogenetics, FISH, and metaphase CGH. We 
have applied high-resolution microarray CGH to analyse DNA copy 
number imbalances in a cohort of 50 CLL patient samples and identi -
fied genetic imbalances that have not previously been recognised, but 
correlate with disease progression and treatment outcome. Sample 
DNA was extracted from CLL cell populations with an average purity 
of 84%, and co-hybridised with normal reference DNA onto UCSF 1.4 
Mb BAC arrays. Reference DNA was taken from the same individual 
for all array hybridisations, and we identified sites of normal copy num -
ber variations (CNVs) in this reference in a separate study by array 
hybridisation against 20 non-CLL samples. In addition, approximately 
10% of CLL samples were also hybridised against DNA extracted from 
the same patients’ non-leukaemic neutrophils. Known recurrent copy 
number changes, such as deletions of 13q14, 11q22-23, 17p13, and 
trisomy 12, were detected in 27 (54%), 9 (18%), 8 (16%), and 7 (14%) 
samples, respectively. Novel sites of recurrent copy number changes 
that are not recognised as sites of normal CNV and have not been 
previously correlated with CLL have also been identified. These sites 
have high potential to assist future improved clinical stratification and 
better adjusted treatment regimes.
P0526. Detection of ABL tyrosine kinase domain mutations in 
Turkish chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) patients treated with 
imatinib mesylate
D. Akcora1, G. Akay1, A. Rüstemov1, O. Aydos1, B. Altınok2, A. Sunguroglu1, O. 
Ilhan3, M. Ozcan3, M. Beksac3, G. Gurman3;  
1Ankara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, An -
kara, Turkey, 2Ankara University, Institute of Biotechnology, Ankara, Turkey, 
3Ankara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Hematology, Ankara, 
Turkey.
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a malignant hematopoietic stem 
cell disorder that is characterized by the Philadelphia (Ph) chromo -
some which results in fusion of BCR and ABL genes. BCR-ABL fusion 
gene encodes cytoplasmic BCR-ABL oncoprotein with a constitutive 
tyrosine kinase activity that enhances the proliferation of affected cell 
clone. Selective inhibitor of BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase namely imatinib 
mesylate (Gleevec, STI571) is used as an effective therapeutic agent. 
imatinib induces the BCR-ABL protein into the inactive conformation 
by binding to amino acids in the ABL kinase domain and blocks the 
binding of adenosine triphosphate (ATP). This prevents the transfer 
of phosphate from ATP and blocks the downstream signal pathways, 
leading to growth arrest or apoptosis. Targeted therapy with imatinib 
has led to revolution in the treatment of CML. However, some patients 
develope resistance to imatinib. Point mutations in the ABL kinase do -
main is the major mechanism of resistance in patients treated with 
imatinib and these missense mutations cause different degrees of 
resistance. In this study we’ve investigated the frequencies of T315I 
found in imatinib binding region, E255K found in P-loop region and 
M351T found in catalytic region mutations by ASO-PCR in 30 CML 
patients treated with an inadequate response to imatinib. In our study, 
T315I mutation is seen in %43 of patients, E255K mutation is seen in 
%10 of patients and M351T mutation is seen in %26.6 of CML patients. 
The relation between the mutations and the clinical outcome is impor -
tant for predicting the treatment.
P0527. Karyotype monitoring during imatinib treatment in 
chronic myeloid leukemia
A. A. Arghir1, G. M. Cardos1, R. Colesniuc1, M. Bari2, A. G. Lungeanu1;  
1”Victor Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2Filantropia Clinical 
Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.
The non-transplantational therapy in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) 
has been dramatically changed by the introduction of imatinib mesyl -Cancer genetics12
ate. Glivec became the therapy of choice in chronic phase CML.
We present some preliminary results of cytogenetic evaluation within a 
study aiming the long term Glivec therapy monitoring.
Chromosomal studies were performed on GTG-banded slides ob -
tained from bone marrow, after short term culture and standard prepa -
ration. FISH studies were done with BCR/ABL probes (Vysis), BAC 
FISH probe (8p23.1) and WCP probes (Vysis, Cytocell).
Cytogenetic evaluations were performed at 6, 12, 18 and 24 months. 
After more than 2 years of treatment most of the patients were as -
sessed at 12 months intervals.
Sixty six out of 77 patients (86%) had advanced disease or a history of 
long term interferon-alpha and conventional chemotherapy in chronic 
phase CML. Eleven patients (14%) received imatinib as first thera -
peutic choice in early chronic phase. Among these patients, 2 had ad -
ditional pre-treatment chromosomal changes [7q additional material 
of unknown origin and translocation t(8;14), respectively], and 2 had 
variant t(9;22): t(3;9;22) and t(1;9;22). None of the patients receiving 
front line Glivec therapy showed karyotype evolution so far. Instead, 5q 
deletion was seen in Ph negative cells of one patient, after 24 months 
of therapy.
The evaluation of cellular genome, prior to Glivec therapy, helps the 
prediction of response. Monitoring both Ph positive and Ph negative 
clones for chromosomal changes allows a better management of CML 
patients.
Acknowledgements: The authors gratefully acknowledge to CNCSIS 
National Program Board (Project No. 19/2006).
P0528. Cytogenetic evolution patterns in CML post-SCT
K. Karrman1, B. Sallerfors2, S. Lenhoff3, T. Fioretos1, B. Johansson1;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Sweden, 2Depart -
ment of Medicine, Halmstad Hospital, Sweden, 3Department of Hematology, 
Lund University Hospital, Sweden.
The cytogenetic evolution patterns in CMLs after allogeneic SCT are dif -
ferent from the ones observed in non-transplanted patients, a phenom -
enon suggested to be caused by the conditioning regime. We reviewed 
131 CMLs displaying karyotypic evolution after SCT (122 allogeneic, 9 
autologous), treated at Lund University Hospital or reported in the lit -
erature. Major route abnormalities (i.e., +8, +Ph, i(17q), +19, +21, +17 
and -7) were seen in 14%, balanced aberrations in 61%, hyperdiploidy 
in 19%, pseudodiploidy in 79%, divergent clones in 14%, and Ph-neg -
ative clones in 21%. The breakpoints involved in secondary structural 
rearrangements clustered at 1q21, 1q32, 7q22, 9q34, 11q13, 11q23, 
12q24, 13q14, 17q10, and 22q11. Cytogenetic abnormalities common 
in AML after genotoxic exposure, i.e., der(1;7)(q10;p10), del(3p), -5, 
del(5q), -7, -17, der(17p), -18, and -21, were only rarely seen post-
SCT. Comparing the cytogenetic features in relation to type of SCT 
revealed that balanced aberrations were significantly more common 
after allogeneic than after autologous SCT (64% and 22%, respec -
tively, P = 0.03). In addition, there was a trend as regards hyperdiploidy 
being more common after autologous ( P = 0.07) and pseudodiploidy 
being more frequent after allogeneic SCT ( P = 0.09).
P0529. Classification of chromosomal aberrations in a group of 
patients with chronic myeloproliferative disorders
T. Tuncali , H. G. Karabulut, H. I. Ruhi, N. Y. Kutlay, F. Sadeghi, A. Ibrahim, B. 
Saglam, A. Vicdan, K. Yararbas, A. Tukun;  
Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Chronic myeloproliferative disorders (CMPD) are thought to be clonal 
disorders arising in a multipotent hematopoietic progenitor cell. The di -
agnosis of an CMPD other than chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) 
can be problematic due to a lack of clinically applicable clonal mark -
ers. It’s suggested that in patients with classical CMPD phenotype, the 
hematopoietic stem cells appear to be polyclonal, suggesting that the 
chronic CMPD other than CML may actually be a genetically heteroge -
neous group of disorders. Here, we present the results of a retrospec -
tive data mining study for CMPD patients refered to our department for 
cytogenetic analysis to seek the clonality. We followed the the most 
established criteria for CMPD released by the WHO and Polycthemia 
Study Group for inclusions. The data was obtained from results of the 
bone marrow and peripheral blood samples of 274 patients diagnosed 
or suspected as CMPD between May 1998 and January 2007 ana -
lyzed with conventional /FISH cytogenetic methods. The cohorts were 
formed as CMPD?, ET, PV, CMML, IMF, and HES. The existence of Ph chromosome in conventional analysis and/or BCR-ABL fusions were 
determined as 4%, 2.8%, and 1.9% in CMPD?, ET, and PV subgroups 
and excluded. In a total of 337 analysis the frequency of structural-
numerical abnormalities were determined (CMPD:30.9%-20.3 n=123; 
ET:13.8%-6.4% n=94; PV: 5.6%-9.3% n=54; CMML: 19.4%-45% n=40; 
IMF: 10.0%-15.0% n=20; HES: 16.7%-16.7% n=6). Structural and nu -
merical gathered the leading chromosomal aberations were 17, 22, 11 
for CMPD, 7, 17, 8 for ET, and 21, 8, 7 for PV.
P0530. Genetic aberrations appeared during the disease course 
may be associated with clinical progression in CLL patients
E. Arranz1, O. González1, S. Ramiro1, M. Renedo1, C. Blas1, A. Pastor1, C. 
Fernandez-R.1, A. Alonso2, E. Martí2, M. Pérez2, J. Fernández-Rañada2;  
1Gemolab, Madrid, Spain, 2Ruber Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
Chronic  lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most common type of 
leukaemia in adults. Clonal aberrations are found in about 50% of 
cases by chromosome analysis and in about 80% of CLL cases by 
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Progression of disease is ob -
served in some cases, but genetic factors involved are not completely 
known.
The aim of this study was to analyze the impact of genetic alterations 
that appear during disease evolution in clinical progression in CLL pa -
tients. Clinical parameters evaluated were: progression in stage, me -
dian survival time and need for treatment.
FISH using LSI D13S319/13q34/CEP 12 and LSI p53/ LSI ATM multi-
color probe sets (Vysis) was performed on bone marrow or peripheral 
blood samples from 21 CLL patients at various time points during the 
disease course [median follow up: 5 years (2-14)].
Genetic aberrations occurred during disease development were ob -
served in 5/21(24%) patients. Genetic alterations detected included: 
del (13q14) monoallelic (n=1), del (13q14) biallelic (n=1), del (13q14) 
monoallelic and biallelic (n=1), del (11q 22.3) (ATM gene) (n=2).
The median overall survival (OS) and need for treatment were not 
significantly different between patients with and without appearance 
of genetic aberrations during the disease course. The only difference 
between the 2 groups was a greater progression in stage in the for -
mer group (80% vs. 44%). It is remarkable that progression occurred 
despite the appearance of non high-risk genetic abnormalities (13q14 
deletion).Although more cases are needed to confirm these results, 
our data suggest that genetic aberrations appeared during evolution of 
disease may be associated with clinical progression in CLL patients.
P0531. Genome copy number variations unique to CML
A. Chanalaris1, D. Brazma1, C. Grace1, J. Melo2, J. F. Apperley2, T. L. Hollyo -
ake3, E. Nacheva1;  
1Royal Free & UC Medical School, London, United Kingdom, 2Imperial College 
and Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Glasgow Royal Infir -
mary, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
Copy number variations (CNVs) are now a recognised feature of the 
human genome with unknown phenotypic consequences. Chronic my -
eloid leukaemia (CML) is a haematopoietic stem cell disorder defined 
by expression of the BCR-ABL fusion gene, a constitutively activated 
tyrosine kinase. We studied 49 CML samples at various stages of the 
disease by arrayCGH using a 1 Mbase BAC chip (SGI2600, Perkin 
Elmer). The aCGH profiles revealed a large number of single BAC 
imbalances where fluorescence ratios exceeded a ± 3 SD threshold. 
We limited our analysis to imbalances found in at least three samples. 
A total of 194 BACs met this criterion and were compared with the 
CNVs recently published (Redon1 at al., Nature Genetics, 2006 and 
Database of Genomic Variations at http://projects.tcag.ca/variation). 
Many of the loci identified corresponded to the published data. Howev -
er, among the 99 loci unique to our study, the two most frequent were 
BAC clones RP11-452O22 (35%) and RP11-89C6 (26%). Confirmed 
by Q-PCR, these imbalances are not reported elsewhere. CML occurs 
in about 1 per 100,000 of the general population, so it is unlikely that 
any constitutional CNVs offering a predisposition to CML would occur 
in the 270 individuals studied by Redon et al. Our results suggest that 
these newly identified unique CNVs, either constitutional or disease 
associated, are specific to CML and offer new insights into the biology 
of this malignancy.Cancer genetics1
P0532. Secondary chromosomal abnormalities within 
Philadelphia positive Chronic Myeloid Leukemia
B. Saglam , K. Yararbas, I. Akalın, H. Ilgın Ruhi, T. Tuncali, H. G. Karabulut, N. 
Yurur Kutlay, A. Vicdan, F. Sadeghi, A. Tukun;  
Ankara University Faculty of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, An -
kara, Turkey.
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a stem cell disorder character -
ized by Philadelphia chromosome (Ph), showing a progression into 
an agressive blast phase from a chronic phase. This progression is 
frequently preceeded by secondary chromosomal abnormalities which 
are considered as the cytogenetic signs of progression. In this respect 
a retrospective analysis of 162 cases of CML with Ph was performed 
in our department. In 43 of the cases, presence of extra chromosomal 
abnormalities was observed. The most frequent abnormalities were +8 
(7 cases); -20, -21, -Y (4 cases each); -5, -7, -12, -13, del(17)(q25)(3 
cases each); and -18, -19, i(17)(q10), del(17)(p13)(2 cases each). 28 
different rearrangements such as t(2;8)(p21;q24), inv(4)(p14;q12), 
t(3;4)(q13;q31) not previously associated with Ph+ CML were ob -
served. The cumulative data on cytogenetic studies of Ph+ CML will 
contribute not only to the prediction of the prognosis but also to the 
enhancement of monitoring responses to the treatment.
P0533. A unique complex translocations (9;22;6) in a patient with 
chronic myelogenous leukemia
M. Khaleghian , C. Azimi;  
Cancer Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Re -
public of Iran.
Complex chromosome translocations involve changes between three 
or more chromosomes and are found very rarely in the general popu -
lation.
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is characterized in about 90-
95% of cases by a karyotypic marker, the Philadelphia chromosome, 
originating from a reciprocal translocation of chromosomes 9 and 22, 
t(9;22)(q34;q11), and genetically resulting in the fusion of BCR/ABL 
gene. About 5-10% of Philadelphia positive patients with CML show 
various complex translocations involving the third chromosome in ad -
dition to chromosomes 9 and 22.
In this study we report a 20-year-old male patient with a diagnosis of 
CML with unusual and complex translocations involving chromosomes 
9, 22 and 6.
Cytogenetic analysis was done on a 24-hour culture of bone marrow 
specimen. The cells were cultured by conventional methods and pro -
cessed by standard techniques, using GTG-banding. The FISH were 
performed according to the manufacturers’ directions, using whole 
chromosome painting probes.
The karyotype of our case was: t(9;22;6)(q34;q11;p21).
Apparently, the first translocation occurred between chromosomes 9q 
and 22q resulting to the formation of Philadelphia chromosome. Then 
the distal segment of the chromosome 6p has been translocated to the 
end of the derivative chromosome 9.
According to literature review and to the best of our knowledge, our 
case is a unique tranlocations which has not been reported.
P0534. Correlation between p53 protein accumulation and the 
development of colon cancer from Iran
N. Taghavi1, F. Biramijamal1, G. Iravanloo2, K. Shamimi3, P. Azimi4, M. Soltani1, 
E. Nazari1;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cancer Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
3University of Medical Sciences-Dept. Surgery, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
4University of Medical Sciences-Dept. Pathology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran.
Colorectal cancer is the third cause of the cancer-related death in the 
world and the fourth most common cancer in Iran. The peak age is be -
tween 60-80 years old, while about 20% of cases occur under the age 
of 50. It is estimated that the annual incidence rate of colorectal cancer 
is about 150,000 and the death toll is 50,000 around the world. One 
of the basic mutation involved in these tumors include inactivation or 
alteration of p53 gene. Changes in this tumor suppressor gene are the 
basic event in many cancers. One of the methods to identify changes 
in this gene includes Immunohistochemistry (IHC). We studied the ex -
pression of p53 protein in cancerous and normal tissues from colon 
cancer patients for predicting the natural path of the disease and also developing cancerous cells in tissue.
In order to evaluate the highest risk patients, p53 nuclear accumulation 
evaluated by monoclonal antibody DO7 and Envision + Dual link+DAB 
(kit) in ordinary paraffin-embedded tissue sections. The method used 
to assess p53 status were immunohistochemistry (IHC), indicating ac -
cumulation of p53 in tumoral and normal tissue in colorectal cancer 
patients. P53 protein accumulation was seen in tumor tissues and nor -
mal cells adjacent to tumor cells. Our finding suggested that detection 
of p53  protein accumulation may play an important role in developing 
colon cancerous cells among cancer patients. It is suggested that de -
tection of the p53 gene mutation can be investigate among colon can -
cerous cells and normal tissue adjacent to tumor cells in the future.
P0535. No association between the CHEK2 I157T allelic variant 
and colorectal cancer in Bulgaria
T. K. Kadiyska1, D. V. Konstantinova1, V. B. Sokolova1, M. B. Mirchev2, R. P. 
Kaneva1, I. M. Kremensky1, V. I. Mitev3;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2University Hospital “St. 
Marina”, Varna, Bulgaria, 3Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical 
University, Sofia, Bulgaria.
In the development of colorectal cancer (CRC), genetic and environ -
mental factors are involved, but the exact mechanism of carcinogen -
esis still remains unclear. The CHEK2 gene encodes a protein kinase 
that participates in the DNA damage response in many cell types. 
Three founder alleles have been described in this gene and all of them 
were associated with different cancer types.
The missense variant c.470 T>C, p. I157T has been associated with 
an increased risk of breast, colon, kidney, prostate, and thyroid cancer. 
This variant was also seen in healthy population controls.
Aim: To determine the frequency of the I157T alleles in Bulgarian pa -
tients with CRC and healthy controls.
Methods: The analysis was performed in a total of 299 patients and 
273 healthy individuals. Samples were analyzed by PCR- RFLP. All 
mutations were further confirmed by direct sequencing.
Results: The I157T variant was found in 8 patients (2,7%) and 8 con -
trols (2,9%). There was no association between the mutation and 
CRC. The patient group was then divided according to family history 
and each of them was compared to controls and in between, but again 
no significant differences were found in their frequencies. Different 
extra-colonic tumors were described in the pedigrees of three family 
cases. Conclusions: Our results from this case - control study do not 
confirm the role of the I157T mutation in the development of CRC in 
the Bulgarian population. Larger studies are required to investigate 
the tendency for higher frequency of different cancer types in mutation 
carriers.
P0536. Pattern of distribution of SNPs in DNA repair genes in 
colorectal cancer patients - a preliminary report.
J. Gil1, P. Karpinski1, P. Leszczynski1, I. Laczmanska1, D. Ramsey2;  
1Department of Genetics, Wroclaw, Poland, 2School of Mathematics and Statis -
tics, Limerick, Ireland.
Epidemiological data shows that colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second 
most frequent cancer. One to two percent of all CRCs are caused by 
mutation in APC which leads to familial adenomatuos polyposis while 
about 5-10% of all CCR is caused by mutations in mismatch repair 
genes leading to hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) 
syndrome . Although the participation of the mentioned above muta -
tions in CRC development is obvious, in more than 85% of cases the 
genetic background remains unknown.
The involvement of “minor impact genes” such as XME and DNA-repair 
genes in aetiology of sporadic cancer is postulated by other authors 
therefore in our research we focused on analysis of polymorphisms 
in DNA-repair genes in CRC. On the basis of the recently published 
studies we hypothesise that it is not a single genetic alteration but a 
network of polymorphisms that plays a key role in the individual sus -
ceptibility to cancer. In order to verify this hypothesis we have chosen 
11 genes involved in three different ways of DNA repair: base excision 
repair (BER- OGG1, XRCC1 ), nucleotide excision repair (NER- XPA, 
XPC, XPD, XPG, XPF, ERCC1 ) and homologous recombination repair 
(HR- RAD51, XRCC3, NBS1 ). The study group consists of 133 patients 
with CRC; 20 of them diagnosed with HNPCC or suspected of HNPCC 
and the rest with sporadic cancer.
We compare the frequency of polymorphisms between patients’ and Cancer genetics1
control groups and we define an individual profile for every investi -
gated person in order to establish the pattern of polymorphisms char -
acteristic for CRC patients.
P0537. Molecular analysis of some genetic polymorphisms 
associated with colorectal cancer in Romanian patients
M. L. Toma1, L. Belusica2, D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol1, M. Stavarachi1, I. Dumi -
trescu2, A. M. Craciun2, D. Usurelu1, I. Radu1, L. Gavrila1;  
1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2Clinical Hospital Dr. 
Cantacuzino, Bucharest, Romania.
Mutations in APC gene have not previously been characterized among 
Romanian patients with CRC. We analyzed blood and tumor samples 
collected from 32 patients (22 men and 10 women) and 32 relatives 
without CRC. We tested the presence of mutations in exons 6, 7, 12, 
13, 14 and in regions B, L and W of exon 15 by PCR multiplex and 5 
bp deletions at position 1061 by SSCP methods. We observed mul -
tiple deletions (e.g. in exon 6, 12, and in 15B, 15L and 15W regions) 
in a DNA extracted form the tumoral sample, but not in blood cell. We 
speculated that these mutations are an example of genomic instability 
described in malignancies. In one patient, we detected a deletion of 
exon 13 in DNA extracted from blood and tumoral tissues. For the pa -
tients analyzed until now we didn’t find any mutation at codon 1061.
Association between the VDR gene polymorphisms and cancer de -
velopment has been suggested by several studies. This study investi -
gate genotype frequencies and association of the VDR Taq I and Apa 
polymorphisms with colorectal cancers in Romanian patients (n=32) in 
correlation with normal population (n=40). Prevalence of VDR Apa al -
leles and genotype frequencies in patients with colorectal cancer was 
similar to that in the normal population ; in the same time, for VDR Taq 
I prevalence was different to that in normal population (p 0,0083 , 95% 
CI , 1.2992<RR<5.2609). We need to increase the size of the lots in 
order to confirm our data.
P0538. Analysis of the microsatellite  (tttta)n polymorphism of the 
CYP11A1  gene in patients with prostate cancer
T. Celhar1, K. Gersak2, Z. Ovcak3, B. Sedmak4, I. Mlinaric-Rascan1;  
1Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Division of Medical 
Genetics, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University Medical 
Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Institute of Pathology, Medical Faculty, University 
of Ljubljana, Slovenia, 4Department of Urology, University Medical Centre, Lju -
bljana, Slovenia.
The CYP11A1  gene encodes a cytochrome P450 enzyme, which 
catalyses the first step in the synthesis of sex hormones. There is a 
microsatellite (tttta)n polymorphism in the promoter of CYP11A 1 and 
the absence of the (tttta)4 CYP11A1  allele has been associated with 
clinically advanced prostate cancer. The aims of the present case-con -
trol study were (i) to examine the association of the number of tttta 
repeats with prostate cancer risk and aggressiveness and (ii) to test 
microsatellite instability. A total of 206 Slovenian males were enrolled 
in the study: 96 controls and 110 prostate cancer (CaP) patients with 
prostate gland confined (pT2) or extracapsular extended (pT3) can -
cer. Prostate tissue samples were collected in pairs of histologicaly 
normal and tumor tissue. Polymerase chain reaction followed by poly -
acrilamide gel electrophoresis revealed five CYP11A1  (tttta)n alleles, 
corresponding to 4, 6, 8, 9 and 10 repeat units. The frequency distri -
bution in the control group was similar to previously reported data for 
Caucasians. On the basis of the presence or absence of the (tttta)4 
allele, no statistically significant differences in genotype distributions 
were observed between the control and CaP group and no associa -
tion was found with tumor aggressiveness. Furthermore, no microsat -
ellite instability was observed in matched normal and tumor tissues, 
except for three samples that need further investigation. In conclusion, 
the (tttta)n CYP11A1  polymorphism may not be a useful biomarker for 
prostate cancer risk aggressiveness prediction.
P0539. Polymorphism in cytochrome P450c17 (CYP17) is 
associated with increased risk of breast cancer
M. Hosseini1, M. Houshmand2, A. Ebrahimi2;  
1Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for 
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The polymorphism in cytochrome P450c17 (CYP17), a key enzyme 
in the biosynthesis of estrogen, has been associated with breast can -
cer risk, but previous studies have been relatively small yet. CYP17 gene is reported to be associated with increased risk of breast cancer. 
This study evaluates the influence of genetic polymorphism of CYP17 
on breast cancer susceptibility. A polymerase chain reaction-restric -
tion fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method was used to 
detect the polymorphism, and the genotypes identified were assigned 
as homozygous wild type (A1A1), heterozygous variant (A1A2), and 
homozygous variant (A2A2).
Probably a statistically significant increased risk in carriers of homozy -
gous A2 allele was found in woman (P < 0.001) in comparison with A1. 
However, no significant association between the genotype and breast 
cancer risk was observed among women with strong family history 
yet.
We genotyped 200 cases of primary breast cancer and population 
controls, all age of Iranian women, for the CYP17 polymorphism stud -
ied. Small overall association was found between CYP17 and breast 
cancer risk, for the A2/A2 carriers compared to the A1/A1 carriers until 
today.
P0540. The Methylation Analysis of DAP Kinase  (DAPK1)  Gene in 
Chronic Myeloid Leukemia Patients
S. Celik1, T. Ozkan1, N. Varol2, O. Aydos2, D. Akcora2, A. Karadag2, G. Gur -
man3, A. Sunguroglu2;  
1Ankara University, Biotechnology Institue, ANKARA, Turkey, 2Ankara Univer -
sity, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Sihhiye-ANKARA, 
Turkey, 3Ankara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Haematology, 
ANKARA, Turkey.
Cancer occurs as a result of various genetic and epigenetic mecha -
nisms which cause loss/gain of functions of tumour suppressor genes, 
oncogenes, DNA repair and apoptosis genes. DAP kinase  gene, which 
is an proapoptotic gene, induces the cell to apoptosis response to sev -
eral internal and external apoptotic stimulants. Changes occurring in 
DAP kinase  gene cause uncontrolled proliferation instead of going to 
apoptosis of the cell and cause development. Therefore DAP Kinase  
gene is described as a tumor suppressor gene. DNA methylation, one 
of epigenetic mechanisms that have as much importance as genetic 
mechanisms in cancer formation can prevent gene expression by si -
lencing. Silencing of DAP kinase  through this methylation mechanism 
can be observed in many solid tumour and hematopoietic malignan -
cies. In this study methylation of DNAs of 35 patients with chronic my -
eloid leukaemia and DNAs of 25 healthy patients were analysed by 
Methylation Spesific PCR (MSP). As a result, it has been determined 
that 4 of 12 CML patients with drug resistance have hypermethylation 
and statistically the significant difference is established. However all of 
the CML patients with no drug resistance and all of the control sample 
groups DNAs don’t have methylation. In this study although no correla -
tion is found between hypermethylation of DAPK1 which is defined as 
a tumour suppressor gene and formation of CML, significant relation 
between hypermethylation of DAPK1and progress of CML and drug 
resistance is determined.
P0541. Mutation Analysis of the DBC2 Gene in Sporadic and 
Familial Breast Cancer
M. Ohadi, R. Habibi ;  
Royan Institute, Tehran, NJ, United States.
The expression of the recently identified tumor suppressor gene, DBC2 
(Deleted in Breast Cancer 2), is frequently extinguished in breast can -
cer cells or tissues. In the current study we have analyzed 100 spo -
radic breast cancer cases by PCR-SSCP, and DHPLC, followed by 
direct sequencing. An additional 17 breast cancer families, who were 
negative for the BRCA1/2 mutations, were analyzed by direct sequenc -
ing. Mutation analysis of the essential promoter region, all exons and 
exon/intron boundaries of the DBC2 gene was performed. Three novel 
mutations were observed in the promoter and 5’-untranslated region 
(UTR) of the gene; a G>A transition in the promoter at nt -238 from the 
transcription start site, and two tumor-specific mutations at nt -121C>T 
and nt +48G>A. No deleterious mutations were detected in the coding 
sequence of the gene in familial and sporadic breast cancer cases. 
The sequence variations found within the promoter and 5’-UTR region 
of the gene warrant expression analysis and screening more tumor 
samples at this region.Cancer genetics1
P0542. Differential methylation of HLAIII  locus (6q21) in normal 
and cancer cervical tissues
D. V. Gra1, T. L. Azhikina2, N. P. Kiseleva1;  
1Institute of Carcinogenesis, N.N. Blokhin Cancer Research Center of Rus. 
Acad. Med. Sci., Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Shemyakin and Ovchinnikov 
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 
Russian Federation.
Epigenetic alterations, such as abnormal DNA-methylation patterns, 
are associated with many human tumor types. New techniques have 
been developed to perform genome-wide screening for alterations in 
DNA-methylation patterns to identify new tumor-suppressor genes and 
to find patterns that can be used in diagnosis and prognosis.
Non-methylated Genomic Sites Coincidence Cloning (NGSCC) al -
lows to analyze tissue-specific distribution of the unmethylated CpG 
sites within the megabase(s)-long genomic DNA fragments (NGSCC; 
Azhikina et al., Mol Gen Genomics, 271: 22-32). We applied this tech -
nique to the HLA III  locus (6q21), containing D6S273 , the known as 
a marker of early genetic alterations in cervical neoplasias. Hetero -
zygocity loss in this specific locus correlates with tumor progression 
and suggests that there are potential tumor-suppressor genes in this 
region of the chromosome 6 (Mazurenko et al., Mol Biol (Mosk), 40: 
436-447).
With the use of NGSCC we constructed high density maps of unmeth -
ylated CpGs for both cancer and normal cervical tissues. We found 
the methylation patterns of CpG’s in promoter region of BAT2 , BAT3  
and MICB  differ in normal and cancer tissues. These results were con -
firmed by bisulfite sequencing of the CpG islands of these genes.
Thus, the applied approach revealed characteristic tissue-specific fea -
tures of large-scale distribution of unmethylated CpGs. The changes 
observed in this distribution might provide useful epigenetic markers of 
cancerous transformation.
P0543. Studying of adenovirus E1A gene silencing effects on 
HEK 293 cancerous cells using RNAi technique
H. Vosgha, M. Behmanesh , M. Sadeghizadeh;  
Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
RNA interference (RNAi) is a natural gene regulatory mechanism 
widely used for studying gene function in a variety of species. Small 
interference RNA (siRNA) technology has been reported to produce 
post-transcriptional gene silencing (PTGS) in mammalian cells. Stud -
ies have been shown that siRNA expression mediated by vectors 
causes efficient and stable down regulation of gene expression, result -
ing in functional inactivation of the targeted genes. So in this study, we 
designed a human U6 promoter-driven mammalian expression vector 
to produce small hairpin RNA (shRNA) for E1A gene transcripts. To 
transfect HEK 293 cells by our designed plasmid, dendrosome, a new 
designed chemical compound was used. Using this technique, we got 
a system for stable expression of shRNA to reduce Ad5 E1A gene tran -
scripts in these cells. In this report we will present the result of E1A si -
lencing effects on cell cycle genes such as Rb1 by gene expression.
P0544. Mutational analysis of the beta-catenin gene in MSI(+) 
and MSI(-) endometrial tumors from bulgarian patients
D. V. Konstantinova1,2, T. K. Kadiyska1, R. P. Kaneva1, S. I. Ivanov3, R. G. 
Dimitrov4, T. V. Dyankova3, E. Tiufektchieva5, K. P. Meinhardt6, N. I. Doganov7, 
V. I. Mitev2, I. M. Kremensky1;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gyne -
cology “Maichin Dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Chemistry and Biochem -
istry, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinic of Oncogynecology, National 
Centre of Oncology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4II Clinic of Operative Gynecology, Univer -
sity Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology “Maichin Dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5I 
Clinic of Operative Gynecology, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecol -
ogy “Maichin Dom”, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Department of Pathology, University 
Hospital “Aleksandrovska”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 7University Hospital of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology “Maichin Dom”, Sofia, Bulgaria.
Activating somatic mutations in exon 3 of the ß-catenin gene (CTN -
NB1) have been identified in 11 - 25% of endometrial cancer patients. 
Attempts to systematize their distribution among microsatellite unsta -
ble MSI(+) and stable MSI(-) tumors have produced conflicting results. 
Tumor MSI has been reported at frequences from 17 to 45% for en -
dometrial cancer.
In order to evaluate the frequency of exon 3 CTNNB1 mutations and 
their possible association with MSI status, we studied 35 patients with histologically confirmed stage I/II endometrial cancer.
DNA was extracted form fresh tumor tissue and from whole blood. For 
MSI status determination we used a panel of six polymorphic markers 
- BAT26, D2S123, D5S346, D18S35, FGA, and TP53. MSI(+) were 
defined cases where two or more markers showed instability. CTNNB1 
exon 3 was direcly sequenced.
We detected MSI in 10 tumors (28.6%). Two of them (20%) harbored 
CTNNB1 mutations - a transversion at Ser 37 and a previously unde -
scribed deletion of 48 bp corresponding to loss of codons 31 to 47. 
MSI(-) tumors had no mutations.
As a downstream transcriptional activator in the Wnt pathway, ß-
catenin is regulated by phosphorylation on Ser/Thr sites encoded by 
exon 3 of the gene. Mutations at these residues often lead to nuclear 
accumulation of the protein and activation of target genes c-Myc and 
cyclin D1.
We identified mutations that alter or abolish Ser/Thr residues impli -
cated in the down-regulation of ß-catenin. In our patient group their 
frequency is 5,7% and they are associated with MSI positive cases 
(p=0.021).
P0545. Identification of DNA methylation markers for detection 
and classification of colon cancer by epigenetic profiling
E. H. J. van Roon , M. van Puijenbroek, H. Morreau, J. M. Boer;  
LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Promoter methylation is thought to be an initial event in tumorigen -
esis. Especially right- sided colon cancer is associated with epigenetic 
modification of gene expression. The mismatch repair gene MLH1 is 
a prime target for epigenetic downregulation with a frequency of 40% 
in all right-sided colon carcinomas. Our aim in this study is to identify 
additional epigenetic markers to generate a panel that will allow the 
epigenetic detection and classification of colorectal cancer (CRC) and 
its precursor forms.
We carried out a genome-wide methylation study on clinically well-
described colorectal adenocarcinomas, adenomas and paired normal 
epithelium. DNA from macrodissected fresh-frozen tissue was digest -
ed by the restriction enzyme MseI, linker-ligated and subsequently di -
gested by two methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes. The remain -
ing fragments were amplified, labeled and hybridized to our 9K clone 
library CpG island microarrays. Recently, we extended the screen to 
high-density CpG island tiling oligonucleotide microarrays.
We identified several loci aberrantly methylated with a high frequency 
in carcinomas using our 9K array. Thusfar three loci were verified using 
direct- and clonal bisulfite sequencing and are currently being studied 
in more detail. Interestingly, one locus was shown to be hypermethyl -
ated in carcinomas as well as adenomas. Possible clinical applications 
of these markers include early detection of cancer with applications 
such as in feces screening, and cancer prognosis.
P0546. FISH studies using bac clones of the EVI1 locus 
in 9 patients with hematological malignancies carrying 3q 
rearrangements.
D. Costa1, I. Madrigal2, A. Carrió1, C. Gómez1, M. Rozman3, J. Esteve3, B. 
Nomdedeu3, E. Campo1;  
1Hematopathology Unit. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 2IDIBAPS, Biochem -
istry and Molecular Genetics Department, Hospital Clínic. Barcelona, Spain, 
3Hematology Service. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.
Chromosomal rearrangements involving 3q26 are a recurrent aberra -
tion in malignant myeloid disorders. Several of these rearrangements 
involve the EVI1  oncogene or its surrounding sequences and are asso -
ciated with a poor prognosis. In order to know whether the EVI1  locus 
was rearranged in 9 patients with hematological malignancies carrying 
3q abnormalities, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) studies using 
BAC (bacterial artificial chromosome) clones were carried on . A dual 
color probe was constructed with 9 BACs; centromeric clones covering 
1Mb and including EVI1  gene were labeled with a red fluorescent dye 
and telomeric clones covering 1 Mb were labeled with a green fluores -
cent dye. From the 9 patients, two patients showed normal copies of 
the EVI1  locus, four patients showed one EVI1 locus rearranged and in 
all of them the breakpoint on 3q26 was telomeric to EVI1  gene, one pa -
tient showed one copy of the EVI1  locus translocated to another chro -
mosome, one patient showed one copy of the EVI1  locus rearranged 
and the other copy translocated and one patient showed one extra 
copy of the EVI1  locus. FISH studies using the EVI1  clones allowed Cancer genetics1
the detection in 4 cases of different 3q abnormalities not previously 
found by conventional cytogenetics. FISH analysis with BAC clones 
was found to be a useful tool to identify the chromosome breakpoints 
affecting EVI1 locus in patients with 3q26 rearrangements.
P0547. Clinical and genetic characterization of Austrian FAP 
patients - A first report
B. Wolf1, S. Gruber1, E. Roth1, J. Karner-Hanusch2;  
1Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Research Laboratories, 
Vienna, Austria, 2Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Vienna, 
Austria.
Background: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an inherited 
colorectal cancer syndrome characterized by the early onset of nu -
merous polyps and associated with germ-line mutations in the adeno -
matous polyposis coli ( APC) gene.
Material and Methods: We analyzed a series of 128 unrelated Austrian 
families clinically diagnosed with FAP for mutations in the  APC gene. 
Protein-truncation test and heteroduplex analysis were used as pre -
screening tests previous to DNA sequence analysis. Linkage analysis 
was performed with 4 polymorphic microsatellite markers.
Results and Conclusion: Medical examination revealed 69 (67.6%) 
patients with classical FAP symptoms and 33 (32.4%) patients with an 
attenuated or atypical phenotype. In 55.6% of the families a genetic 
defect was identified with at least one of the methods applied. The 
detection of a genetic defect in the APC gene was highly significantly 
associated with a classical phenotype, the detection of innumerable 
polyps, lesions of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE) and des -
moids. DNA sequence analysis identified 61 pathogenic APC muta -
tions. Six mutations were detected in more than one family. Twenty-
nine mutations are novel. Only a polymorphic fragment pattern could 
be associated with the inheritance of the disease in two families. This 
study is the first comprehensive report of APC gene mutations in Aus -
trian FAP patients.
P0548. Association of biallelic BRCA2  mutations in a child with 
rhabdomyosarcoma
V. Nicolas1, A. Defachelles2, B. Catteau3, J. Peyrat4, S. Lejeune-Dumoulin1, S. 
Manouvrier-Hanu1, M. Holder-Espinasse1;  
1Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 2Ser-
vice d’Oncologie Pédiatrique, Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille, France, 3Service de 
Dermatologie, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, Lille, France, 4Biologie Moléculaire, 
Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille, France.
Growth retardation, microcephaly and solid tumour in childhood can 
be linked to Fanconi anaemia. Fanconi anaemia is an autosomal re -
cessive heterogeneous condition, consisting in 11 complementation 
groups and involving at least twelve genes. Recently, biallelic muta -
tions in BRCA2  have been discovered in patients classified as Fanconi 
anaemia complementation group FA-D1.
We report on a further case presenting with rhabdomyosarcoma, in -
trauterine and postnatal growth retardation and microcephaly. This is 
the first child of non consanguineous parents. At the age of one year, 
cutaneous lesions were observed (naevi, haemangioma and cutis 
marmorata). The motor milestones were achieved normally. Karyotype 
was 46XX, but breakage studies were not performed.
At 1.5 year of age, an embryonic paravertebral rhabdomyosarcoma 
with vertebral extension and pulmonary metastasis was detected. The 
association of this solid tumour and the growth retardation was sug -
gestive of Fanconi anaemia type FA-D1, despite no other typical fea -
tures of this condition were observed.
Sequencing of BRCA2  revealed two deletions: one in exon 8 (886del -
GT) and the other in exon 22 (9132delC). These two mutations are 
deleterious and have been previously reported in either Fanconi anae -
mia or breast cancer.
Heterozygous BRCA2  mutation carriers are at risk of breast and other 
cancers. In the family pedigree, there were cases of breast cancer in 
the father’s family and cases of prostate and pancreatic cancer in the 
mother’s family. BRCA2  molecular analysis is pending in the parents. 
We discuss the clinical phenotype of this rare form of Fanconi anae -
mia, and the complexity of the management in these cases.P0549. APC  and MYH  mutations in Czech and Slovak FAP 
families
M. Šulová1, J. Štekrová1, K. Zídková1, Z. Kleibl2, V. Kebrdlová1, K. Veselá1, M. 
Kohoutová1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine and 
General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biochemistry 
and Experimental Oncology of the First Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
Germline mutations in the adenomatous polyposis gene ( APC) result 
in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) as well as an attenuated form 
of this syndrome. FAP is an autosomal dominantly inherited disorder 
predisposing to colorectal cancer.
We analyzed the APC gene for germline mutations in 59 Czech and 
15 Slovak FAP patients. In addition, 50 APC-mutation-negative Czech 
probands and 3 probands of Slovak origin were screened for large 
deletions of the  APC  gene. Mutation screening was performed using 
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and/or protein truncation test. 
DNA fragments showing an aberrant electrophoretic banding pattern 
were sequenced. Screening for large deletions was performed by mul -
tiplex ligation dependent probe amplification (MLPA).
We identified 46 germline mutations among the 74 unrelated probands 
including large deletions. We reported 20 novel germline APC muta -
tions and 3 large deletions encompassing the whole-gene deletions 
and/or exon 14 deletion.
Some of the APC negative FAP/AFAP cases have recently been found 
to be attributable to MYH  associated polyposis (MAP), an autosomal 
recessive syndrome caused by mutation in the MYH  gene.
We screened for germline MYH  mutations in 120 APC-mutation-nega -
tive probands with classical and attenuated FAP. As a prescreening 
to detect DNA sequence changes, denaturing high performance liq -
uid chromatography (dHPLC) was performed using the WAVE system 
(Transgenomic). Samples showing unique profiles were sequenced in 
both directions on ABI Prism 310 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosys -
tems).
Altogether 10 previously reported changes and 8 novel genetic altera -
tions in MYH  gene, mostly in intronic sequences were identified.
Supported by the VZ MSM0021620808 of the Czech Republic.
P0550. Florescent in situ hybridization (FISH) for the detection 
of Ph- positive clone in CML: Comparison with metaphases 
banding analysis
A. Movafagh , I. F. Isfahani;  
Shahid Beheshti Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Introduction: Chronic Meyloid Leukemia(CML) is characterized by 
the formation of BCR/ABL fusion gene, usually as a result of the 
Philadelphia(Ph) translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22.CML 
is characterized by the Philadelphia in more than 90% of cases. Mate -
rial and method : In this study, we present our results of cytogenetic 
analysis with GTG banding and Fluorescent in situ hybridization(FISH) 
using dual color dual fusion probe CML patients registered at Taleghani 
hospital from March 2004 to March 2006 ,IRAN.
Results: GTG banding metaphases was Carried out in 30 Patients 
Blood /Bone marrow. Ph translocation showed in 26(87%). About 
23(76.6%) of Ph- positive patients displayed the typical D-FISH signal 
pattern, 17 included metaphase FISH and the rest has only interphase 
FISH results.
Conclusion: Fluorescence in situ hybridization has become a widely 
used method for studying Ph translocation . 
P0551. The role of CDH1 gene variants in inherited 
predisposition to gastric cancer
A. S. Tsukanov1, N. I. Pospekhova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, M. P. Nikulin2, R. F. 
Garkavtseva2, E. K. Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1;  
1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer 
Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation.
The CDH1 gene is a main suppressor of inherited gastric cancer. Nev -
ertheless only a small faction of familial gastric cancer cases is due 
to CDH1 mutations. The genetic reason for the other inherited gastric 
cancer cases is unknown at present time. One possibility is that CDH1 
variants confer gastric cancer risk. In particulary it is known that CDH1 
-160C/A promoter polymorphism is connected with functional activity 
of CDH1.
We investigated significance of CDH1 -160C/A and 2076C/T SNPs for Cancer genetics1
gastric cancer risk among probands with familial gastric cancer with -
out CDH1 mutations by case-control study. An association of 2076T 
variant with gastric cancer was found (P=0,007). The risk value for 
-160C/A was not significant. However a significant excess of geno -
types including both -160A and 2076T among probands in comparison 
with control sample was revealed (OR=3,33; P=0,009). The risk was 
the highest if the variants -160A and 2076T composed a haplotype 
(OR=13,6; P=0,003).
The data suggest a role of CDH1 -160C/A and 2076C/T SNPs in a pre -
disposition to gastric cancer, especially when both the variants -160A 
and 2076T occur on the same chromosome.
P0552. Differences in gene expression between transitional 
cell carcinoma of the human bladder with short and prolonged 
recurrence-free period using oligonucleotide microarrays
J. Mares1, M. Szakacsova2, F. Zelezny3, J. Klema3, V. Soukup2, J. Duskova4, M. 
Babjuk2;  
1Inst. of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical Faculty, Charles Univer -
sity, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Urological Clinic, 1st Medical Faculty, Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Dept. of Cybernetics, Faculty of Electrical 
Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 
4Inst. of Pathological Anatomy, 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
The prediction of tumour recurrence in patients with superficial bladder 
tumours is inaccurate. For the improvement of recurrence prognosis in 
patients with superficial bladder cancer we investigated gene expres -
sion and identified differences between superficial bladder tumours 
without recurrence during period of two years (5 patients) and with 
early recurrence (7 patients), which might explain differences in the 
biology and clinical outcomes of these groups of TCC. High-density 
oligonucleotide microarrays (29,019 genes) were used to analyze the 
transcript profiles of 12 superficial bladder tumours: 11 pTa and 1 pT1, 
grading 2 G1 and 10 G2. Statistical analyses were applied to inves -
tigate the ability of the genes to identify patients without recurrence 
during period of two years and with early recurrence. Initial screen -
ing using the GeneSpring and Bioconductor software tools revealed a 
putative set of about 120 genes associating with the recurrence class. 
Significant differences were observed by HOXA10, GPNMB, TCN1, 
H19, FABP3 and PLOD2 genes. Besides, we integrated the micro -
array dataset with additional background knowledge, in order to al -
gorithmically mine for differential-expression patterns in terms of the 
Gene Ontology functions and processes as well as known regulatory 
pathway memberships. Our results indicate that it may be possible to 
identify patients with a high risk of disease recurrence at an early stage 
using a molecular profile present already in the superficial tumours. 
Research is supported by MSM 0021620808 and IGA NR 8934-3.
P0553. Genetic disorders related neoplasia in childhood
M. Bataneant , S. Arghirescu, C. Petrescu, E. Boeriu, M. Puiu, I. Ferencs, M. 
Serban;  
IIIrd Pediatric Clinic, Timisoara, Romania.
Background. Despite the fact that neoplasia is not a deterministic ge -
netic disease, the majority of childhood malignancies result from errors 
that take place during early stages of cell differentiation, tissue matura -
tion and organ development.
Objectives. We aimed at evaluating the frequency of association be -
tween neoplasia and some genetic disorders, recognized for their in -
creased susceptibility role and predisposition for neoplasia in order to 
provide a basis for risk assessment and counseling of families prone 
to develop neoplasia.
Patients and methods. The study has been undertaken on all patients 
with neoplasia admitted in the IIIrd Pediatric Clinic, Timisoara between 
1981-january 2007.
Results. We analyzed 750 patients aged 1 month - 20 years. 730 pa -
tients (97,33%) had cancer and 20 patients (2,67%) had benign tu -
mors. We diagnosed 27 patients (3,6%) with neoplasia and concomi -
tent genetic disorder: Down (5), Peutz-Jegers (1), von Hippel-Lindau 
(1), Beckwith-Wiedemann (2), Rubinstein-Taybi (1), Nijmegen break -
age syndrome (2), Kostmann agranulocytosis (1), Fanconi anemia (1), 
Ataxia-telangiectasia (1), Bourneville disease (3), Neurofibromatosis 
type I (2), Proteus syndrome (1), Poland syndrome (1), minor anoma -
lies (5 cases). Types of neoplasia developed by the patients with ge -
netic disorders were dominated by solid tumors in 15 cases (55,5%) and non-lymphoblastic leukemia in 12 cases (44,5%).
Conclusions. The proportion of genetic disorders associated neoplasia 
is significantly higher than in normal population. Therefore the identi -
fication of risk factors in a family should be the first step for individual -
ized counseling and monitoring, able to assure the detection in early 
stage of the disease.
P0554. The Italian External Quality Control Programme for 
Adenomatous Polyposis of the Colon (APC gene): five years 
experience
F. Censi , V. Falbo, G. Floridia, M. Salvatore, F. Tosto, D. Taruscio;  
Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a rare autosomal dominant 
inherited disease (incidence 1/8000)1. More than 90% of families af -
fected by FAP have a mutation in the tumor suppressor gene APC 
gene  (5q21) (OMIM 175100). Mutations in this gene are characterized 
by 100% penetrance, although there is a variation in phenotypic ex -
pression of the disease1.
According to a 2004 survey of the Italian Human Genetic Society, 
about 264 APC gene molecular genetic tests were performed by Ital -
ian laboratories2.
The Italian External Quality Control Programme (IEQC), financially 
supported by the Ministry of Health and coordinated by the Italian Na -
tional Institute of Health - Istituto Superiore di Sanità, started in 2000 in 
order to improve the quality of molecular genetic tests in Italy3. In the 
frame of the IEQC, about 50% of public laboratories performing APC 
gene  tests have been monitored2.
The number of responding public laboratories versus enrolled labo -
ratories during the five years was 6/8, 7/8, 7/7, 7/7, 5/7 from 2001 to 
2006 respectively; on average of 93,3% of 192 samples were correctly 
genotyped.
Currently methods used by laboratories to detect mutation were direct 
sequencing, SSCP, PTT and DHPLC.
Written reports were not homogeneus among laboratories, although a 
new form of written report was proposed to laboratories in 2004.
Funded by: “Progetto nazionale per la standardizzazione e l’assicura -
zione di qualità dei test genetici”, Ministry of Health (Rome).
1. Fearnhead NS. et al. Hum Mol Genet , 10:721, 2001 
2. Dallapiccola et al., Analysis , 2006
3. Taruscio D. et al.  CCLM,  42(8):915-21 2004 
P0555. Cytogenetic and Moleculer cytogenetic Analyses (I-FISH, 
M-FISH) of Glial Tumors
S. Artan1, Z. Karakas1, B. Durak1, R. Durmaz2, A. Arslantas2, K. M. Canturk1, M. 
Ozdemir1;  
1Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genet -
ics, Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Depart -
ment of Neurosurgery, Eskisehir, Turkey.
Glial tumors are the most common tumors of the central nervous sys -
tem, affecting individuals of all ages but the underlying genetic chang -
es that give rise to these tumors are still poorly understood. Combi -
nation of conventional cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic (FISH, 
M-FISH) analyses identifies consistent chromosomal rearrangements 
and copy number changes of related genes in this group of tumors 
METHODS: Chromosome preperation was carried out on primary cul -
tures of the 23 primary glial tumor samples using standard cytogenetic 
techniques. Karyotyping, interphase fluoresence in situ hybridization 
(I-FISH) by using LSI p53(17p13.1), LSI p16(9p21)/CEP9, LSI 1p36/
1q25, LSI19q13/19p13, LSI EGFR/CEP 7, LSIPTEN ( 10q23)/CEP 10, 
and LSITOP2A /HER2 /CEP17 gene specific probes and Multiplex-
FISH (M-FISH) were applied for chromosome rearrangements and 
specific gene deletions/ amplifications. RESULTS: Karyotype analysis 
could be performed in 16/23 cases (70.0%), and complex chromo -
somal anomalies were seen in all tumors. The most frequently seen 
aberrations were monosomies of chromosomes 1p, 6, 9, 10, 11, 13, 
14, 16, 17, 19 and Y, trisomies of chromosomes 5p,7,12 and 15. Dou -
ble minutes were significant. The most frequently seen amplifications 
were TOP2A, HER2 and EGFR genes (43% each), followed by 19q13 
region amplification (30%). Chromosomes 9p21 (35%),17p31 (26%), 
1p36 (17%) and PTEN gene deletions were diagnosed. Chromosomal 
rearrengements such as t(9;Y), .t(7;10), t(21;17), t(15;9) were revealed 
by M-FISH analysis. CONCLUSION: Not only cytogenetic analysis, 
but also improved molecular cytogenetic techniques can increase our Cancer genetics1
abilities to progress toward effective strategies of molecular diagnosis 
and classification of glial tumors.
P0556. Study of genetic profile and intratumoral patterns of 
clonal evolution in gliomas
A. L. Vital1,2, M. D. Tabernero2, I. Crespo1,2, O. Rebelo3, H. Tão4, F. Gomes4, M. 
C. Lopes1,5, A. Orfao2;  
1Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Portugal, 
2Research Unit of University Hospital and Center for Cancer Research, Uni -
versity of Salamanca, Spain, 3Neuropathology Laboratory, Neurology Service, 
University Hospital of Coimbra, Portugal, 4Neurosurgery Service, University 
Hospital of Coimbra, Portugal, 5Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Coimbra, 
Portugal.
Diffuse infiltrating gliomas are the most common tumors of the central 
nervous system, being their clinical diagnosis based almost exclusive -
ly on tissue histology, which relies mainly upon the World Health Or -
ganization (WHO) classification scheme. However, a variable clinical 
behavior is observed even in the same histological category and diag -
nostic variability can occur due to the heterogeneous nature of these 
tumors. So, the association between histologic and molecular classifi -
cation will be helpful to give prognostic and predictive information.
The main objective of our study is to identify molecular genetic altera -
tions that may account for the heterogeneity of gliomas, which will per -
mit to establish the genetic profile and patterns of clonal evolution in 
individual patients. To correlate the chromosomal instability with the 
gene expression profiles of these tumors, the tumor samples are firstly 
studied by interphase fluorescence in situ  hybridization (iFISH) analy -
sis and then submitted to c-DNA microarrays.
A total of 40 glioma patients were already analyzed. In all cases, iF -
ISH studies were performed on fresh tumor samples for the detection 
of numerical/structural abnormalities for 10 loci in 8 different chromo -
somes (1p36, 7q11, 7p11, 9q34, 9p21, 10q23, 13q14, 17p13, 19q13, 
22q11). Among these 40 tumor samples, the mRNA from 20 samples 
was already extracted and submitted to c-DNA microarray studies, 
which are being performed.
Identification of homogeneous prognostic subgroups and definition of 
clonal evolution patterns may be valuable for diagnosing and for pre -
dicting prognosis and response to treatment in patients with glioma.
(Supported by a FCG project and FCT PhD fellowship, Portugal)
P0557. Surveillance of women at high risk of gynecological 
cancers: Ten years results from one surveillance center
M. Pöyhönen1,2, T. Löppönen3, R. Winqvist4, J. Ignatius4, U. Puistola5;  
1Department of Medical Genetics University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 
2Cancer Society of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Child Neurology 
Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland, 4Department of Clinical Genetics 
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 5Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology 
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
Backround: Women at high risk of ovarian or endometrial cancers are 
recommended to be under programmed surveillance once a year. The 
efficacy of the screening has not been proven. The role of screening 
instead of prophylactic surgery has been questionable.
Population and Screening: A cohort of 730 000 inhabitants in Northern 
Finland was included in the study. 453 families contacted the Depart -
ment of Clinical Genetics. 137 women were classified as high risk for 
gynaecological, breast or colorectal cancer and were taken for sur -
veillance program. The women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation were 
screened semiannually and other risk-groups annually with TVUS and 
CA125 measurements. Mammography and Ultrasound or MRI was 
performed once a year.
Results: Main indications for surveillance were: Family history of breast 
and ovarian cancer: 39%; Breast cancer at young age: 19%; HNPCC 
mutation: 20%; and BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation: 14%.
Prophylactic surgery was performed on 16 women (12%): Eight 
LH+BSO, six BSO and two mastectomies. 19 cancers and two pre -
malignant lesions were found: Seven breast cancer, two endometrial 
cancers, one ovarian cancer, one endocervical cancer, five colorectal 
cancers and three miscellaneous cancers (sarcoma, leukaemia, skin 
cancer). 70% of the cancers were diagnosed during the first two years 
surveillance period. 60% of the breast cancers and 80% of the colorec -
tal cancers were diagnosed in their advanced stage. Gynecological 
cancers were diagnosed in their early stage.Conclusion: In the screening and counselling program for women at 
high risk in gynaecological cancers the role of prophylactic surgery 
should be considered. 
P0558. Real time quantification of human telomerase reverse 
transcriptase mRNA in liver tissues from patients with 
hepatocellular cancer and chronic viral hepatitis
M. Satra1, N. Gatselis1, D. Iliopoulos2, D. Zacharoulis1, G. N. Dalekos1, A. 
Tsezou1;  
1University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece, 2The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
OH, United States.
Telomerase activity (TA) and human telomerase reverse transcriptase 
(hTERT) mRNA expression was determined, in liver tissues from pa -
tients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC; n=13), chronic viral hepa -
titis (CVH) B (n=19),C (n=13) and in 17 patients without liver disease 
in whom liver biopsy was performed during cholecystectomy (control 
group). TA was evaluated using TRAP assay and hTERT mRNA ex -
pression was assessed using the LightCycler technology. TA was de -
tected in all HCC tissues compared to 15.6% of CVH (p<0.001) and 
none of controls (p<0.001). TA levels and hTERT mRNA were higher in 
HCC compared to CVH (p<0.001) and normal livers (p<0.001). hTERT 
mRNA expression was correlated with TA (p<0.05). CVH patients that 
tested negative for TA and hTERT mRNA had significantly lower dis -
ease duration (58±85 months) compared with those tested positive 
(144±50 months; p<0.05). Detection of TA and quantification of hTERT 
mRNA expression in liver tissues could be useful and additional mark -
ers for HCC diagnosis and may serve as prognostic markers for HCC 
development in CVH patients. However, we were not able to draw 
general conclusions at this moment, as the number of CVH patients 
positive for hTERT mRNA was relatively small. Real-time quantifica -
tion of hTERT mRNA expression as a diagnostic/prognostic marker in 
patients with chronic hepatitis B and C and its relationship with hepa -
tocarcinogenesis needs further evaluation.
P0559. E-box methylation in hTERT promoter interferes with 
c-myc binding and predicts survival in early stage cirrhotic HCC 
patients.
M. Satra1, D. Iliopoulos2, G. N. Dalekos1, A. Tsezou1;  
1University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece, 2Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, 
United States.
Early detection of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is essential for the 
successful treatment of patients, however the molecular pathogenesis 
of the disease has not been elucidated. Human telomerase reverse 
transcriptase (hTERT) has been found up-regulated in HCCs, while it 
is not expressed in normal liver tissues. So far no mechanism describ -
ing the regulation of hTERT in liver tissues has been reported. In the 
present study we determined hTERT promoter methylation status in 
liver tissues and cell lines, correlated it with hTERT and c-myc expres -
sion levels and estimated its clinical significance in early stage cirh -
hosis HCC patients. Fifty-four patients were enrolled in this study: 27 
with HCC, 13 with chronic viral hepatitis and 14 without liver disorders. 
hTERT methylation status was detected by MethyLight analysis and 
sequencing, while hTERT and c-myc expression levels were assesed 
by real-time PCR. hTERT expression levels were strongly correlated 
with DNA methylation levels in all patients (r=0.912, p<0.001) and c-
myc expression levels in HCC patients (r=0.851, p<0.001). Specifi -
cally, hTERT promoter was found methylated in all CpG sites where c-
myc is binding in the first E-box. Moreover, hTERT methylation status 
showed an independent prognostic significance for overall survival in 
HCC patients (p<0.0001). We propose that hTERT methylation sta -
tus correlates with its expression in liver tissues and HCC cell lines 
and that E-box methylation in hTERT promoter inhibits c-myc binding 
and subsequently hTERT upregulation. Additionally, hTERT methyla -
tion levels correlate with overall survival of HCC patients suggesting 
that methylation status could be used as a prognostic marker of HCC 
progression.
P0560. Adaptation of hereditary breast/ovarian cancer genetic 
counselling and testing service in Lithuania
R. Janavičius1,2, J. Kasnauskienė1,2, V. Ostapenko3, V. Kučinskas1,2;  
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for 
Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Clinics, Vilnius, Lithu -Cancer genetics1
ania, 3The Institute of Oncology Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
The germline mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes account for 
the majority of hereditary breast and ovarian cancers. We present our 
approach for the adaptation of hereditary breast/ovarian cancer ge -
netic counselling and testing service in Lithuania. In the year 2006 we 
developed strict referral criteria for high/moderate-risk patients.
During appointment detailed three-generation genealogy is collected; 
pathological records are verified; genetic and risk information is com -
municated; availability of genetic testing and its limitations are dis -
cussed; informed consent is obtained; management and supportive 
options are provided.
BRCA1 testing is initiated with direct sequencing for three common 
mutations (c.4153delA, c.5382insC, c.300T/G), recently reported 
in Baltic and Slavic populations. 11 female patients diagnosed with 
breast cancer (<=35 year) and one with family history of ovarian can -
cer have had referred so far. 5382insC mutation was prevalent in three 
and c.4153delA mutation in one cases (33% overall).
We propose absolute indications for common mutations testing: a) 
breast cancer diagnosed before the age of 35 and ER negative or first 
degree relative/second through male; b) medullary breast carcinoma 
and c) invasive, nonmucinous epithelial ovarian tumor regardless the 
age.
After the exclusion of common mutations, DGGE prescreening for the 
genes prioritized according Manchester scoring system with variants 
confirmation by direct sequencing, as well as MLPA gene dosage anal -
ysis, are performed. We found several polymorphic variants in BRCA1 
gene: c.3232A/G, 3667A/G, 4427T/C, 4956A/G. No BRCA1 or BRCA2 
genes rearrangements were detected.
P0561. MSH2 deletions and anticipation effects in HNPCC
A. Stella1, P. Lastella1, C. Bozzao1, N. Resta1, D. Barana2, C. Oliani2, M. G. 
Tibiletti3, A. Viel4, C. Natale5, A. Piepoli6, G. Marra7, G. Guanti1;  
1Sezione di Genetica Medica Dipartimento di Biomedicina dell’Età evolutiva, 
Università di Bari, Italy, 2UOA di Oncologia ULSS 5 Ovest Vicentino, Vicenza, 
Italy, 3U.O. Anatomia Patologica Ospedale di Circolo, Varese, Italy, 4Oncologia 
Sperimentale 1, Centro Riferimento Oncologico, IRCCS, Aviano (PN), Italy, 5UO 
Chirurgia Generale Ospedaliera OORR, Foggia, Italy, 6Lab. Research Dept. of 
Gastroenterology IRCCS “Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza”, San Giovanni Ro -
tondo (FG), Italy, 7Institute of Molecular Cancer Research University of Zurich, 
Zurich, Italy.
Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is caused by 
mutations in mismatch repair genes. Using multiplex ligation-depen -
dent probe amplification, we identified three MSH2 deletions in Ital -
ian patients with HNPCC (proband A exons 1-3, proband M exon 8, 
and proband C exons 1-6). Deletion breakpoints sequencing allowed 
us to develop rapid PCR-based mutation screening, which confirmed 
the presence of the deletions in several affected and asymptomatic 
individuals. While the exon 8 and exon 1-3 deletions are novel, the 
MSH2 1-6 is identical to the one recently documented in two branches 
of another unrelated Italian family (family V+Va). Haplotype analysis 
showed that the kindreds C and V+Va (both from northeastern Italy, 
both displaying clinical features of the Muir-Torre syndrome) shared 
a common haplotype, indicating that the MSH2 1-6 deletion is a novel 
founder mutation. Families A,C, M, and V+Va all showed progressively 
earlier cancer-onset ages in successive generations. Analysis of 23 
affected parent-child pairs in the four kindreds showed median antici -
pation of 12 years in offsprings’ onset of cancer (p < 0.0001). No birth 
cohort effect was found. We have started to analyze by means of a 
cloning-sequencing approach the instability levels in PBLs and normal 
tissues from several both symptomatic and asymptomatic mutation 
carriers belonging to one of these families. Preliminary results sug -
gest that the age at cancer diagnosis correlates with the accumulation 
of instability in HNPCC target organs. These data represent the first 
significant evidence of anticipation effects in HNPCC families carrying 
MSH2 deletions.
P0562. Genetic testing in paragangliomas, the PGL.NET study
N. Burnichon1,2, A. Venisse2, P. Saugier-Veber3,4, L. Strompf2, X. Jeunemaitre1,2, 
A. Gimenez-Roqueplo1,2;  
1INSERM U772, Paris, France, 2Hopital Europeen Georges Pompidou, Paris, 
France, 3CHU Rouen, Rouen, France, 4INSERM U614, Rouen, France.
Purpose: Germline mutations on SDHD, SDHB or SDHC  genes 
cause Hereditary Paraganglioma. In 2003, the PGL.NET network has launched a multicentric prospective study to test the practice of the 
SDH genetic testing in every patient affected by head and neck or tho -
racic-abdominal or pelvic paragangliomas (PGL) in France.
Patients and Methods: 321 affected patients were genotyped in 3 years. 
86 had a positive family history. SDH  genetic testing was performed 
by SDHD , SDHB  and SDHC  direct sequencing and by the search for 
large genomic rearrangements by quantitative multiplex PCR of short 
fluorescent fragments (QMPSF).
Results: We identified a SDH germline mutation in 188 patients 
(58.6%). 104 patients had a mutation on SDHD,  74 on SDHB , and 
10 on SDHC . 79 different mutations were found among whom 4 large 
deletions comprising one to several exons (~5%). Age at the diagnosis 
of the first PGL was 36.2 years-old for the mutation-carriers compared 
to 48.9 for the non-mutation carriers. A head and neck PGL was diag -
nosed in 98.1% of the SDHD  subjects and in all the SDHC  subjects, 
but only in 40.5% of the SDHB  subjects. A thoracic-abdominal location 
was present in 64.9% of the SDHB  and in 17.3% of the SDHD  sub-
jects. A malignant PGL was diagnosed in 43.2% of the SDHB  subjects 
and only in 3.8% of the SDHD subjects.
Conclusion: The PGL.NET study data suggest a clinical-focused strat -
egy for the paraganglioma genetic testing. The benefits of such genetic 
testing in pre-symptomatic subjects is currently under evaluation.
P0563. SNP screening for HMGA1  mutations in 55 Dachshunds
H. Murua Escobar1,2, C. Beuing2, S. Willenbrock1,2, J. T. Soller1,2, S. Winkler1, I. 
Nolte2, J. Bullerdiek1;  
1Centre for Human Genetics, Bremen, Germany, 2Small Animal Clinic, Univer -
sity of Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany.
HMGA non-histone proteins participate in a wide variety of cellular 
processes including regulation of inducible gene transcription, integra -
tion of retroviruses into chromosomes, and the induction of neoplas -
tic transformation and promotion of metastatic progression of cancer 
cells.
For various malignant tumours over-expression of HMGA  was shown 
to be characteristic suggesting a relation between high titer of the pro -
tein and the neoplastic phenotype. Due to the similarities of human and 
canine cancer the dog has joined the common rodent animal model for 
therapeutic and preclinical studies. For use as a model system, in pre -
vious studies we characterised the canine HMGA1  gene completely 
and screened the protein coding sequences of twelve canine breeds 
for SNPs. In a Dachshund sample the screening revealed a transition 
from A to G in exon 7 leading to an amino acid exchange from threonin 
to alanin causing a mutated HMGA1 protein.
Herein we report the screening of 55 Dachshunds for the specific mu -
tation affecting the cancer related HMGA1 gene to elucidate if the ob -
served exchange is frequently existent in the Dachshund population. 
Genomic DNA was isolated from 55 collected Dachshunds samples 
using the QiaAmp kit. A specific genomic PCR reaction was estab -
lished allowing the amplification of the complete exon 7 and flanking 
regions of intron 6 and 7, respectively. Direct sequencing of the puri -
fied PCR products revealed that the observed mutation is absent in 
the studied cases. Combining both studies indicates that the observed 
HMGA1 mutation is rare in Dachshunds.
P0564. Missense mutations in the MMR genes MLH1  and MSH2  
and their clinical significance.
C. Graziano1, R. Tricarico1, B. Toschi1, L. Papi1, E. Lucci Cordisco2, C. Di Gre -
gorio3, M. Genuardi1;  
1Department of Clinical Physiopathology, Medical Genetics Unit, University of 
Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Catholic University A. Gemelli School of Medicine, 
Rome, Italy, 3Division of Pathology, Hospital of Carpi, Modena, Italy.
Mutations in the mismatch-repair genes MLH1 , MSH2 , MSH6  and 
PMS2  are responsible for Lynch syndrome (HNPCC), the most com -
mon form of autosomal dominant genetic predisposition to colorectal 
cancer. Germline mutations in MLH1  and MSH2  account for approxi -
mately 90% of detected mutations in families with HNPCC. We ana -
lyzed a cohort of patients selected on the basis of Bethesda criteria 
for microsatellite instability (MSI) and/or immunohistochemistry (IHC) 
for detection of the proteins encoded by MLH1 , MSH2 , and MSH6 . 
We identified 9 mutations in MLH1  and 16 mutations in MSH2  through 
sequencing analysis of the whole coding sequence and multiplex liga -
tion-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) method. Seven were mis -
sense mutations (4 in MSH2  and 3 in MLH1 ), that represent a chal -Cancer genetics10
lenge for the clinician and for the genetic counselor, who often can not 
use them for the management of Lynch syndrome families. Several pa -
rameters can be evaluated to gain insight into the significance of such 
unclassified variants (UVs): familial segregation analysis, absence of 
the variants in control samples, presence of other pathogenic muta -
tions, amino acid conservation, and functional and mRNA analyses. 
None of these variables can be used alone to predict the significance 
of UVs in a single case, but combined evaluation can be clinically use -
ful. We report our experience on the interpretation of these UVs and 
the clinical management of patients and their families.
P0565. Functional screening of MLH1  and MSH2  unclassified 
variants in a large cohort of French HNPCC families reveals an 
important fraction of splicing mutations
I. Tournier1, M. Vezain1, A. Martins1, F. Charbonnier1, S. Baert-Desurmont1, J. 
Soret2, J. Tazi2, S. Olschwang3, Q. Wang4, M. Buisine5, T. Frebourg1, M. Tosi1;  
1Inserm U614 and Rouen University Hospital, Institute for Biomedical Re -
search, Rouen, France, 2IGMM, CNRS UMR 5535, Montpellier, France, 3Inserm 
UMR 599, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France, 4Molecular Oncology 
Unit, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France, 5Laboratory of Biochemistry and Mo -
lecular Biology, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France.
Numerous unclassified variants (UVs) are detected in the mismatch 
repair genes MLH1  and MSH2  involved in hereditary nonpolyposis 
colorectal cancer (HNPCC) and cannot be used for genetic counsel -
ling. We have undertaken their systematic screening by developing a 
functional splicing assay using patient DNA. The genomic region of 
interest, either mutant or wild-type, was PCR-amplified and inserted 
into the intron of an expression vector. After transfection into HeLa 
cells and total RNA extraction, the effects of mutations on splicing were 
evaluated by RT-PCR and systematic sequencing. We have examined 
85 different UVs detected in 84 French HNPCC families (54 missense, 
10 silent, 3 deletions of a single codon and 18 intronic variants) and 
found that 26% affect splicing. Five variants are at positions distinct 
from splice sites, suggesting the presence of regulatory elements such 
as exonic or intronic splicing enhancers (ESE, ISE). We cloned the 
short regions (~30 bp) containing the putative exonic regulatory ele -
ments into the strictly ESE-dependent central exon of a modified β-
globin expression vector and demonstrated by cell transfection assays 
and RT-PCR that these sequences indeed contain splicing enhancers. 
This led us to examine in this ESE-dependent splicing assay other 
MLH1  and MSH2  exonic mutations detected in HNPCC patients and 
previously described as affecting splicing and found that the regions 
affected by these mutations do contain ESE elements. In absence 
of reliable bioinformatics predictions, the sequential use of these two 
functional assays represents a valuable tool for the interpretation of 
UVs found in these and other genes.
P0566. The significance of BCL-2  and IAP f amilies  genes 
expression in diagnostics of human acute leukemias
J. Kocki , M. Cioch, A. Dmoszyńska;  
Medical University, Lublin, Poland.
The aims of work: (1) The expression levels designation of the genes 
regulating the apoptosis process IAP and BCL-2 families  genes in the 
normal bone marrow cells and the human acute leukaemias cells. (2) 
The evaluation of the reciprocal correlations of IAP and BCL-2 families 
genes expression, typical for individual types of leukaemias. (3) The 
analysis of the potential dependence between the genetic investiga -
tions results and the clinical and laboratory parameters.Conclusions: 
(1) The gene expression levels of the IAP and BCL-2  families in normal 
bone marrow cells and the human acute leukaemias cells differed in 
the individual types of acute leukaemias and had prognostic signifi -
cance. (2) In ALL the MCL-1  gene showed the highest expression. (3) 
In M0/1 AML the BCL-xL  gene showed the highest expression. No de -
pendence between gene expression levels and the survival, however 
the correlations between the BAX or BCL-w  genes expression with 
CD34 antigen expression were affirmed; (4) In M2 AML the MCL-1  
gene showed the highest expression. The dependence of the SUR -
VIVIN  gene expression higher level on the bad prognosis for a patient 
was affirmed. (5) In M3 AML the MCL-1 gene showed the highest ex -
pression. The dependence of the SURWIWIN, NAIP  or MCL-1  genes 
expression higher levels on the poor prognosis for a patient were 
affirmed. (6) In M4 AML the NAIP  gene showed the highest expres -
sion. (7) In M5 AML the expression top-level for the MCL-1 gene was affirmed . Supported by grant of Polish State Committee of Scientific 
Research No 2 PO5B 064 30.
P0567. I171V mutation in the NBS1 gene is associated with 
predisposition to cancer.
J. Nowak1, D. Januszkiewicz1,2, M. Mosor1, I. Ziółkowska1, K. Rożnowski3, M. 
Wierzbicka3;  
1Institute of Human Genetics Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 
2University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3University of Medical Sci -
ences, Poznań, Poland.
Homozygous mutation 657del5 within the NBS1 gene is responsible 
for the majority of Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) cases. NBS 
patients are characterized by increased susceptibility to malignancies 
mainly of lymphoid origin. Recently it has been postulated that hetero -
zygous carries of 657del5 NBS1 mutation are at higher risk for cancer 
development. The aim of the study was to analyse the frequency of 
I171V mutation in NBS1 gene in 135 children with acute lymhoblas -
tic leukemia, 258 women with breast cancer, 176 patients with larynx 
cancer, 103 with second primary tumours and 385 healthy individuals. 
I171V mutation was present in 22 cancer patients compared with only 
one in healthy individuals. This constitutes 3.27% in studied patients 
with malignancies and 0.26% in the control group (P=0.0006; relative 
risk, 0.657; odds ratio, 0.077; 95% confidence interval, 0.01-0.57). 
Since DNA was isolated from non malignant cells, all mutations found 
in cancer patients appeared to be of germinal origin. It can be con -
cluded that NBS1 allele I171V may be a general cancer susceptibility 
gene.
P0568. Intracranial germ cell tumors: association with Klinefelter 
Syndrome and analysis of X/Y chromosome aneuploidies in the 
tumors
S. Kofman-Alfaro1,2, K. Nieto1,2, D. Aguirre1, I. Palma1, R. Peña3, G. Queipo1,2;  
1Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico, 2Facultad de Medicina Uni -
versidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico, 3Hospital Infantil 
de México Federico Gómez, Mexico City, Mexico.
Extragonadal germ cell tumors (EGCT) arise in specific midline re -
gions mainly in the anterior mediastinum, intracranial germ cell tumors 
(IGCT) occur mainly in male children and adolescents. X chromosome 
polyploidy and X hypometilation have been suggested as a mechanism 
for malignant transformation independently of the histological type. On 
the other hand, several reports associated EGCT with Klinefelter syn -
drome (KS). Recent reports indicate that KS patients have a relative 
risk (66.7) for development of malignant mediastinal germ-cell tumors 
and around 8% of male patients with primary mediastinal tumors have 
KS, corresponding to 50 times of the expected frequency. Trying to 
record the frequency of KS and to confirm the presence of X chromo -
some polyploidy in XY IGCT, 13 paraffin embedded tumoral and nor -
mal tissue specimens in XY cases with IGCT were studied using FISH. 
We confirm KS in two cases (8%) demonstrating that this constitutive 
aneuploidy could be related to carcinogenesis. A low percentage (1%) 
of X and Y chromosome polyploidy was observed in all cases. In the 
XY patients the aneuploidy could be involved in the tumorogenesis, 
however, malignant transformation arise through the accumulation of 
multiple and different genetic abnormalities. 
P0569. Inactivation of the laminin gamma 3 chain ( LAMC ) gene 
in various cancers
E. B. Kuznetsova1,2, D. S. Mikhaylenko1,2, E. A. Pudova3, S. S. Larin4, M. V. 
Nemtsova1,2, D. V. Zaletayev1,2, V. V. Strelnikov1,2;  
1Institute of Molecular Medicine, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Cen -
tre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Russian State Medical 
University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Institute of Gene Biology, Moscow, 
Russian Federation.
We have identified LAMC3  gene promoter CpG island among those 
abnormally methylated in breast cancer by methylation sensitive ar -
bitrarily primed PCR. Gene expression analysis by real-time RT-PCR 
has revealed extremely frequent (94%) decrease/loss of LAMC3  ex-
pression in breast cancer samples. Loss of expression was also de -
tected in the MCF7 breast cancer cell line. We have performed the 
fine mapping of the CpG island and designed a PCR assay for LAMC3  
methylation detection. Its promoter region appeared to be unmethyl -
ated in control samples and methylated in several breast cancer sam -
ples, but the frequency of this abnormal methylation was surprisingly Cancer genetics11
low: 8% (8/98 samples). Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) study with the 
intragenic microsatellite marker D9S313  revealed LAMC3  locus de -
letions in 8/48 (17%) breast cancer samples. Methylation and LOH 
studies were also performed for bladder and clear cell renal cancers, 
demonstrating higher frequencies of LAMC3  molecular alterations. 
The study was supported in part by Applied Biosystems, USA.
Molecular pathology of the LAMC3 gene in breast, renal and bladder cancers
LOH
Methylation ExpressionTotal number of  
samples testedNumber (%)of  
hetero-zygotesNumber (%) of  
samples with LOH
Breast cancer 58 48 (83%) 8 (17%) 8/98 (8%) 29/31 (94%)
Clear cell renal 
cancer75 49 (65%) 10 (20%) 8/34 (24%) n/a
Bladder cancer 77 45 (58%) 12 (27%) 13/45 (29%) n/a
P0570. Angiotensin Converting Enzyme (ACE) Insertion/Deletion 
(I/D) Gene Polymorphisms in Leukemic Hematopoiesis
I. Akalin1, E. Koca2, H. G. Karabulut1, D. Cetiner2, I. C. Haznedaroglu2, M. 
Hayran3, I. K. Onal4, O. I. Ozcebe2, A. Tukun1;  
1Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, 
Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University Medical School, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Hematology Division, Ankara, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University Medical 
School, Department of Preventive Oncology, Ankara, Turkey, 4Hacettepe Uni -
versity Medical School, Department of Internal Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Renin angiotensin system (RAS) represents an autocrin/paracrin sys -
tem affecting normal and neoplastic hematopoiesis. In this study, we 
investigated angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) insertion/deletion 
(I/D) gene polymorphisms, which may affect the behavior of the local 
RAS in hematological neoplastic disorders.
Our results indicated alterations in the polymorphisms of major RAS 
component, ACE in leukemic hematopoiesis. ACE ID/II genotype fre -
quency is increased in leukemic patients compared to the controls. 
Disease risk in patients with insertion (ID or II) is increased (chi-
squared, p=0.008, OR: 3.2[1.3-7.9]). ID/II genotype was found in 80.4 
% of the patients while it was 55.9 % in the control group. Hence, our 
study firstly provided evidence that the ACE ID/II gene polymorphism 
may be linked to the development of leukemia as a clue of activated 
local RAS in leukemogenesis.
Leukemias * ACE Gene Polymorphism Crosstabulation
ACE-Polymorphisms
DD ID/II TOTAL
Leukemia ALL Count 1 7 8
% within ALL 12,5% 87,5% 100,0%
% within ACE-pol 25,0% 22,6% 22,9%
AML Count 1 9 10
% within AML 10,0% 90,0% 100,0%
% within ACE-pol 25,0% 29,0% 28,6%
CML Count 2 15 17
% within CML 11,8% 88,2% 100,0%
% within ACE-pol 50,0% 48,4% 48,6%
Total Count 4 31 35
% within leukemias 11,4% 88,6% 100,0%
P0571. Molecular-genetic analyses of children with 
hematological malignances in Bashkortostan Republic, Russia
E. Yakupova , T. Krasavtceva, R. Stepanova, R. Bayramgulov, V. Mahonin;  
Children republic hospital, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Hematological malignances are the most common cancer in childhood. 
Chromosome rearrangements determine the prognosis of diseases 
and play an important role in the choice of treatment protocols, allow -
ing the control of minimal residual disease during and after treatment.
During the 2005-2006 years, 34 bone marrow samples of patients with 
leukemia tested to the presence of chromosomal aberrations by the 
method of reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.We detected three patents with t(1;19) E2A/PBX among 26 ALL sam -
ples. This translocation defines an unfavorable prognosis. Patients 
with t(1;19) received high-risk treatment protocol, that permit to reach 
molecular remission and decrease risk of relapses.
Among ALL patients - three were with t(12;21) TEL/AML1. This trans -
location defines a favorable prognosis. Patients with t(12;21) received 
standard-risk treatment protocol, that permit to reach molecular remis -
sion and decreases the risk of complications.
Among ALL patients - one had a t(9;22) BCR/ABL p210. This translo -
cation defines a very unfavorable prognosis. This child has received 
high-risk treatment protocol in combination with STI571 (Glivec) 400 
mg daily.
Among 6 AML patents, one was with AML-M3, translocation t(15;17), 
PML/RARA confirmed the diagnose. This patient has received AML-
APL protocol in combination with ATRA (Tretionin).
We detected t(9;22) BCR/ABL p210 translocation in two samples in 
patients with chronic phase of CML. These patients have received 
treatment with Glivec 400 mg daily. After 6 and 12 months of treatment 
molecular remission was achieved, t(9;22) was not detected.
Thus, molecular-genetic analyses plays an important role in diagnos -
tics, choice of treatment and prediction of relapse in hematological 
malignancies.
P0572. Cytogenetics, immunophenotype and biomolecular 
parameters-particularities in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
M. Puiu , S. Arghirescu, M. Bataneant, R. Firescu, L. Stana, M. Baica, M. Mi -
hailov, M. Serban;  
IIIrd Pediatric Clinic, Timisoara, Romania.
Background. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) refers to a group of 
heterogeneous diseases with different clinical expression and progno -
sis. Therefore, patients require precise and complete initial evaluation 
of risk factors including cytogenetics, immunophenotype and biomo -
lecular assessment in order to plan an individualised, optimal treat -
ment regimen.
Objectives. We aimed at evaluating the biological profile of leukemic 
cells and its particularities in ALL.
Patients and methods. We analyzed cytogenetics, cell surface markers 
and biomolecular parameters in connection with clinical parameters 
(sex, age, risk factors, ethnic group, central nervous system leukemia, 
mediastinal mass) in 156 ALL patients aged 0-18 years, treated in our 
Clinic between 1990-2002.
Results. Compared to data from literature, in our study group we 
noticed no differences between sex distribution (56% vs. 57% being 
males), a lower proportion of patients belonging to 2-6 years age group 
(53.8% vs. 77%) and a double proportion of patients older than 6 years 
(41.6% vs. 20%). Frequency of medium and high risk forms was higher 
in study group (75.6% and 10.2% vs. 59.46% and 10.65%) and also 
the incidence of L3-ALL (3.3%). Biomolecular assessment revealed 
a comparable proportion of patients with t(9,22)-BCR-ABL mutation 
(1.28%) and a higher proportion of t(14,11) MLL-AF4 (2.56%). Leu -
kemic cells expressed lymphoid CD10 marker in 35.07% vs. 63.01%. 
There were no differences between central nervous system involve -
ment in newly diagnosed ALL (3.8% vs. 4%). These data can explain 
the worse prognosis of our patients.
Conclusions. Our results provide practical information that should be 
taken into account for planning individualized treatment.
P0573. Molecular basis of the Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS): an 
update from the French LFS cohort
G. Bougeard1, S. Baert-Desurmont1, C. Martin1, S. Vasseur1, L. Brugières2, B. 
Bressac - de Paillerets3, A. Chompret4, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet5, C. Bonaïti-Pellé6, 
T. Frebourg1;  
1Inserm U614 and Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Institute 
for Biomedical Research, Rouen, France, 2Department of Pediatric Oncology, 
Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 3Department of Genetics, Institut 
Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 4Department of Medicine, Institut Gustave 
Roussy, Villejuif, France, 5Department of Genetics, Institut Curie, Paris, France, 
6Inserm U535, Villejuif, France.
The Li-Fraumeni syndrome represents one of the most devastating 
genetic predispositions to cancers and is characterized by a wide 
spectrum of early-onset malignancies (sarcoma, brain tumour, adre -
nocortical tumour, breast cancer, leukemia, lymphoma, gastric car -
cinoma, gonadal germ cell tumour, colorectal and lung cancer). We Cancer genetics12
have performed the extensive analysis of TP53 , based on complete 
sequencing of the 11 exons and on QMPSF, in 370 families sugges -
tive of LFS, fulfilling the French LFS network criteria (J. Med. Genet. 
2001). We detected in 73 families (20%) a germline alteration of TP53  
corresponding, in most of the cases (96%), to point mutations or small 
deletions or insertions, widely distributed between exons 3-11 and in 
4% of the cases to complete or partial genomic deletions (4%). These 
results constitute a definitive argument demonstrating that LFS results 
from a haploinsufficiency at the TP53  locus. If most of the families 
presented the classical LFS wide tumour spectrum, the presentation of 
some kindreds was remarkable, mimicking BRCA  families. The earlier 
development of tumours in TP53 wt/mt  mice compared to wt/- mice 
(Cell 2004) led us to compare the age of tumour onset between pa -
tients harbouring missense mutations (57 patients) and those carrying 
other alterations (35 patients). As predicted by the murine models, we 
indeed observed a significant difference between both groups (19.4 
y vs. 29.8 y). These results confirm that missense mutations not only 
inactivate the transcriptional activity of the wild-type protein but have 
also an additional oncogenic effect.
P0574. Telomere length in peripheral blood cells of germline 
TP53 mutation carriers is shorter than that of normal individuals 
of corresponding age.
M. Trkova , K. Prochazkova, V. Krutilkova, D. Sumerauer, Z. Sedlacek;  
Charles University Second Medical School and University Hospital Motol, 
Prague, Czech Republic.
A decrease in the age at cancer onset and increase in cancer incidence 
in successive generations in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) families 
with germline TP53 mutation have been previously described. In this 
study we analysed a possible relationship between telomere length 
and cancer onset in TP53 mutation carriers. Telomere length was 
measured using real-time quantitative PCR in 20 carriers of germline 
TP53 mutations and in 83 unrelated healthy individuals and the rela -
tive telomere/single copy gene (T/S value) was calculated. According 
to the age at blood sampling, patients and controls were divided into 
two age groups: children and adults. The telomere length was corre -
lated to TP53 mutation status, and the telomere shortening in patients 
to the age at cancer onset. t-test and linear regression were used to 
analyse the data. Compared to healthy controls, telomere length was 
significantly shorter both in the child (P=0.001) and adult (P=0.034) 
germline T53 mutation carriers. Although statistically significant corre -
lation between telomere shortening and the age at cancer onset could 
not be observed, there was a trend of shorter telomeres in mutation 
carriers affected in childhood compared to those affected later in life. 
Cancer therapy as well as sex differences were unlikely to affect the 
results. Statistically significant telomere shortening was observed in 
mutation carriers, providing a possible link between TP53 mutation, 
telomere length, predisposition to early-onset cancer and anticipation 
in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Supported by grants MSM0021620813 and 
MZO00064203.
P0575. Truncation of MBD4 predisposes to chromosomal 
translocations and alters the response to therapeutic agents
W. M. Abdel-Rahman1, S. Knuutila1, P. Peltomäki1, D. J. Harrison2, S. A. 
Bader2;  
1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 
United Kingdom.
We previously identified a novel genomic instability phenotype of 
multiple reciprocal chromosomal translocations in a MLH1-defective, 
microsatellite unstable (MSI) colon cancer cell line (HCA7) and, fur -
ther, showed that it was unlikely to be directly caused by the mismatch 
repair (MMR) defect in this cell line. To gain insight into the molecular 
basis to this novel translocation phenotype, we examined coding and 
splice-site nucleotide repeat tracts in DNA repair genes for mutations 
by direct sequencing together with RT-PCR expression analysis of the 
associated transcript. The material was a selected panel of 8 MSI cell 
lines including HCA7. A strong candidate identified through this ap -
proach was MBD4 as it showed a homozygous truncating mutation 
associated with substantial loss of the transcript in HCA7 not seen 
in the other lines. In previous published studies, heterozygous MBD4 
mutations were observed in up to 89% of sporadic MSI microdissected 
colon tumor foci. Using MFISH, we here show that over-expression of 
the truncated MBD4 ( MBD4tru) in DLD1, a MSH6 defective, MSI human colon carcinoma cell line predisposed these cells to acquire structural 
chromosomal rearrangements including multiple reciprocal transloca -
tions after irradiation, reminiscent of those seen in HCA7. We also 
found that over-expression of MBD4tru in DLD1 alters the colony surviv -
al after exposure to cisplatin, etoposide and gamma rays. These data 
suggest a wide role for MBD4 in DNA damage response and maintain -
ing chromosomal stability.
P0576. Identification and characterization of microRNAs on 
common genomic instability regions in breast cancer cells
S. D. Selcuklu1, C. Yakicier2, A. E. Erson1;  
1Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Bilkent University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
Various loss or amplification regions are known in breast tumors. An 
intensive search for potent tumor suppressors or oncogenes located in 
these regions continues. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are ~18-24 nt that reg -
ulate protein expression by binding to complementary sequences in 
the 3’ UTR regions of mRNAs. We hypothesized that miRNAs located 
on genomic instability regions in breast cancer cells may contribute to 
breast tumorigenesis. First, by using bioinformatics, we mapped miR -
NAs and candidate miRNAs to reported genomic instability regions. 
We found more than 38 known miRNAs and 35 candidate miRNAs in 
these regions. To further confirm loss or amplification of miRNA genes 
in these regions, we performed semi-quantitative PCR in 20 breast 
cancer cell lines, 2 immortalized mammary lines and 2 normal con -
trols. Our results showed 85% of selected miRNAs (29 of 34 known 
miRNAs) were either lost or amplified in at least 2 different lines and 
61% (21 of 34 known miRNAs) in at least 3 lines. Interestingly, most 
of these alterations were found to be amplifications even in regions 
reported to harbor losses in breast tumors.
Further studies are underway to verifiy deregulation of these miRNAs. 
Functional analysis will also clarify potential targets of these miRNAs. 
Our results will help us better understand the biological roles of miR -
NAs during breast tumorigenesis and will potentially lead to new diag -
nostic, prognostic and therapeutical findings in breast cancer.
P0577. Missense mutations in genes predisposing to colorectal 
cancer : Muddying the diagnostic and prognostic waters
C. D. Delozier1, J. Mann2, B. Box-Noreiga3, S. Rouillard4, F. Eggerding5;  
1Genetic Medicine Central California & Kaiser Permanente, Fresno, CA, United 
States, 2Genetics Department, Kaiser Permanente, Fresno, CA, United States, 
3Oncology Department, Kaiser Permanente, Fresno, CA, United States, 4Gas-
troenterology Department, Kaiser Permanente, Fresno, CA, United States, 
5Huntington Medical Research Institutes, Pasadena, CA, United States.
Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) and Hereditary Non-Polyposis 
Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC, Lynch syndrome) are classical colorectal 
cancer predisposition syndromes. FAP is generally due to mutations 
in APC, whereas HNPCC is caused by mutations in mismatch repair 
(MMR) genes, primarily MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2. Although 
most mutations are nonsense or small deletions/insertions, thus pre -
dicted to result in protein truncation, missense mutations have also 
been well-documented. Depending on patient selection criteria, the 
proportion of missense mutations is approximately 30-32% for MLH1, 
15-18% for MSH2, 5-12% for (classical) APC.
We present two families which demonstrate the diagnostic and prog -
nostic dilemmas associated with missense mutations in genes for FAP 
and HNPCC, which have led us to formulate somewhat different sug -
gestions for laboratory evaluation and clinical management. Patient 1 
developed colon adenocarcinoma at 24 and multicentric thyroid carci -
noma at 30. Sequencing showed a missense alteration in MLH1: G22A 
(65G->C), also present in her healthy 54-year-old-mother. Rather sur -
prisingly, both tumors were Microsatellite Stable (MSS) and conserved 
expression of the MLH1 protein. This constellation has been described 
previously in Lynch syndrome families, pleading the question of wheth -
er missense mutations are truly pathogenic and whether the mecha -
nism of malignant transformation is other than impaired DNA repair.
Patient 2, who presented at age 67 with rectal bleeding, had approxi -
mately two dozen polyps on colonoscopy. Histologically, several were 
tubulo-villous adenomas, suggesting attenuated FAP. Sequencing 
identified a missense alteration in APC: L1129S(3386->C). Family his -
tory was positive for polyps. Discussion has centered on management, 
which generally includes colectomy in FAP.Cancer genetics1
P0578. Somatic mitochondrial DNA mutations in gastric 
intraepithelial neoplasia: a histopathologic and biomolecular 
study.
L. Rigoli1, C. Di Bella1, F. Verginelli2, M. Falchetti3, A. Bersiga4, A. Rocco5, G. 
Nardone5, R. Mariani-Costantini2, R. Caruso6;  
1Department of Pediatrics, Medical School, University of Messina, Messina, 
Italy, 2Department of Oncology and Neurosciences, University G. d’Annunzio, 
and Center of Excellence on Aging (Ce.S.I.), G. d’Annunzio Foundation, Chieti, 
Italy, 3‡Departments of Experimental Medicine and Pathology, University La 
Sapienza, Roma, Italy, 4Pathology Division, Istituti Ospedalieri, Cremona, Italy, 
5Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Gastroenterology Unit, 
University Federico II, Naples, Italy, 6Department of Human Pathology; Univer -
sity Hospital, Messina, Italy.
We analysed molecular changes in the displacement loop (D-loop) re -
gion of mitochondrial DNA in 24 gastric intraepithelial neoplasias (GINs) 
from a high gastric cancer risk area in Northern Italy. Helicobacter py -
lori (H. Pylori) infection was assessed by histological examination. The 
mtDNA D-loop was amplified and sequenced from matched paraffin-
embedded gastric mucosa and GIN samples. The GINs were divided 
into two groups. Group A, with H. pylori-positive gastritis, contained 
7 patients, and Group B without H pylori gastritis, contained 17 pa -
tients. Group A had a larger proportion of high-grade lesions than B (p= 
0.004). Group B had a larger proportion of cases with mtDNA D-loop 
mutations than A (p=0.004). We found that 15 (62%) of the 24 patients 
with GINs harbored tumor-associated somatic mutations as following: 
a G>A transition at nucleotide position (np) 16004; an A>C transver -
sion at np 16013; a T>G transversion at np 16045 ; a C>T transition at 
np 16380 ; a C>T transition at np16495 (2 cases); an A>G transition 
at np 16510 ; an A>G transition at np 16515; a T>G transversion at np 
10; a 1-base-pair insertion at np 12 (12.1 insA); an A>G transition at 
np 13; a C>G transversion at np 552; a C>G transversion at np 572; 
a T>G transversion at np 579; a previously described C>T transition 
at np 559. These results provide further evidence for the morphologic 
and mtDNA biomolecular heterogeneity of GINs, and suggest the ex -
istence of two distinct pathways to gastric cancer - corpus-dominant H 
pylori gastritis and the atrophy-metaplasia pathway.
P0579. The role of Multidrug Resistance-associated Protein 1 
(MRP1) expression and its polymorphisms in Iranian pediatric 
acute leukemia patients : impact on treatment outcome
S. Akbari1, F. Mahjoubi2, B. Shamsi3, S. Nazari4, E. Elahi2;  
1NIGEB & Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2NIGEB, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Animal Science Dept. Tehran University, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Hematology and Oncology Dept. Mofid Hospital, Teh -
ran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Occurrence of cross-resistance to structurally and functionally un -
related drugs, called Multidrug Resistance (MDR), is a main cause 
of failure in the chemotherapeutic treatment of malignant disorders. 
Several mechanisms of MDR have been identified; one of these is 
the overexpression of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-dependent mem -
brane proteins that function as drug-efflux pumps. The multidrug re -
sistance protein MRP1 is a member of the superfamily of ATP-binding 
cassette (ABC) transporters. MRP1, a 190-Kd protein, is encoded by 
the MRP1 gene located on chromosome 16p13 and has been shown 
to transport a broad range of organic substrates, such as glutathione 
(GSH) conjugates and other anionic conjugates.
Our aim was to investigate the possible association between MRP1 
gene expression level and its polymorphisms and clinical outcomes in 
Iranian pediatric patients. In a retrospective study, we analyzed sam -
ples obtained from 42 ALL similarly treated pediatric patients to assess 
whether the overexpression and/or function of this protein and also 
correlation between SNPs and Overexpression correlate to treatment 
failure and therefore affects clinical outcome. In this regard total RNA 
and DNA was isolated from peripheral blood of ALL acute leukemia 
patients and ten healthy individuals. MRP1 gene overexpression was 
detected in 12 patients using Real-Time RT-PCR and compared to the 
type of response to chemotherapy.
We also have investigated the associationn between MRP1 mRNA 
level and other clinical characteristics including cytogenetic subgroups 
and FAB subtypes. We also studied the effects of 4 SNPs (in exon 16 
and 20) of MRP1 gene on its overexpression using PCR-SSCP meth -
ods followed by sequencing.P0580. Neurofibromatosis, lymphoma and cavernoma in a child 
with homozygous genomic deletion in the MSH2  gene
C. Colas1, F. Coulet1, S. Haouy2, I. Husson3, T. André4, M. Vidaud5, F. Soubrier1, 
A. Verloes6;  
1APHP - Département de Génétique - GH Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 
2APHP - Service d’hématologie - Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 3APHP 
- Service de Neurologie - Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 4APHP - Service 
d’Oncologie Médicale- Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France, 5APHP - Service de bio -
chimie - Hôpital Beaujon, Clichy, France, 6APHP - Département de Génétique 
- Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France.
Heterozygous mutations in one of the DNA mismatch repair genes 
(MLH1, MSH2, MSH6,  PMS2 ) cause hereditary non polyposis colorec -
tal cancer (HNPCC). Homozygous or compound heterozygous mu -
tations in those genes have been reported in about 20 families and 
cause patchy pigmented skin anomalies reminiscent of neurofibroma -
tosis I (NF1) and childhood malignancies (both haematological and 
HNPCC-related).
We report a 3 years old boy, born to first cousin parents, referred for 
NF1 who presented with café-au-lait spots and Lish nodules of the 
irides. No mutation was found in the NF1 gene. He subsequently de -
veloped an intracerebral cavernoma treated by surgery, and a lym -
phoblastic lymphoma. A metastatic colon cancer was diagnosed in his 
father at age 29 but no other familial history was consistent with he -
reditary non polyposis colorectal cancer. We identified a homozygous 
deletion of exon 8 of the MSH2  gene in this child. Both parents were 
heterozygous for this deletion. This is the first report of a homozygous 
genomic rearrangement in the MSH2  gene. All clinical features of this 
child, but the cavernoma and Lish nodules, are consistent with those 
previously described. No vascular malformations have been described 
so far in this syndrome so it is unclear if this association is coincidental 
or not.
P0581. Mutation screening of the MUTYH  gene by high 
resolution melting analysis
R. Tricarico1, B. Ciambotti1, R. Sestini1, C. Orlando2, M. Genuardi1;  
1Department of Clinical Physiopathology, Medical Genetics Unit, University 
of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Department of Clinical Physiopathology, Clinical 
Biochemistry Unit, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
High-resolution melting analysis (HRMA) is a mutation detection meth -
od based on the principle that the melting curves of DNA fragments 
vary depending on base composition. Heterozygous samples can be 
detected with high sensitivity, whereas homozygosity for a nucleotide 
change may not lead to significant curve shape or melting tempera -
ture changes compared to homozygous wild-type samples. We have 
evaluated whether HRMA could be used for the identification of ho -
mozygous mutations in the MUTYH  gene, implicated in the autosomal 
recessive form of intestinal polyposis ( MUTYH -associated polyposis; 
MAP). HRMA was first tested on a set of 30 samples of known geno -
type at exons 7 and 13, where the mutations 495a>g (Y165C) and 
1145g>a (G382D) are located. These account for about 70% of MU-
TYH mutations among Caucasians. In order to generate a condition of 
artificial heterozygosity, test samples were mixed with a homozygous 
wild-type reference control sample and amplified by PCR. Samples 
heterozygous or homozygous for the two common mutations, as well 
as for other exon 7 and 13 sequence variants, could be identified by 
HRMA. The experiments were then repeated without mixing the test 
samples with the reference control DNA. We found that homozygous 
mutant samples could be consistently distinguished from homozygous 
wild type samples also under these conditions. We applied HRMA as 
mutation screening test in a series of samples of unknown genotype. 
The results obtained were confirmed by sequencing, indicating that 
HRMA is a sensitive and reliable method for the identification of muta -
tions in the hotspot exons of the MUTYH  gene.
P0582. Cytogenetic evaluation of 506 myelodysplastic syndrome 
patients
H. Ilgin-Ruhi , T. Tuncali, N. Yurur-Kutlay, H. G. Karabulut, K. Yararbas, I. Aka -
lin, B. Saglam, F. Sadeghi, A. Vicdan, A. Tukun;  
Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are clonal hematologic malignan -
cies with associated genetic abnormalities. The heterogeneous genetic 
changes have a role in MDS pathogenesis. Hence, cytogenetic testing 
is important in the diagnosis and prognosis of these disorders. Cha -Cancer genetics1
racteristic chromosomal abnormalities in MDS are del(5q), -5, del(7q), 
-7, +8, del(11q), del(12p), del(13q), del(17p), del(20q), +21. The abera -
tions in chromosome 5 and 7 are the most frequent cytogenetic findin -
gs. In the present study, we defined cytogenetic changes with respect 
to their predictive value. We retrospectively analyzed cytogenetic cha -
racterization of 506 consecutive patients with suspected or confined 
MDS referred to our department from different centers. There were 
254 male and 252 female patients with an age-range of 0 to 87 (me -
dian 54). For each case, bone marrow or peripheral blood cells were 
cultured in vitro for 24h at 370C. Chromosome spreads were obtained 
following standard techniques. In 140/506 (28 %) patients the quality 
of the slides were insufficient for evaluation. The number of abnor -
mal and normal karyotypes were 256 (62 %) and 140, respectively. Of 
226 patients, 161 (71 %) showed a single anomaly (-7, +8, etc.) The 
most common abnormality was pertaining to chromosome 7. Complex 
karyotypes (≥ 5) were found in 13 patients (6 %). Hypodiploidy de -
tected in 86 (38 %) of the patients.
Our results corroborate that cytogenetic findings are in a heteroge -
neous state and conventional cytogenetic analysis are important in the 
diagnosis and prognosis of MDS cases.
P0583. Analysis of JAK2(V617F) Mutation in Turkish Patients 
with Myeloproliferative Disorders
O. Cilingir1, B. Durak1, M. H. Muslumanoglu1, G. Bademci1, M. O. Akay2, E. 
Atli1, E. Tepeli1, Z. Gulbas2, S. Artan1;  
1Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genet -
ics, Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Depart -
ment of Hematology, Eskisehir, Turkey.
Polycythemia rubra vera (PCRV), essential thrombocythemia (ET) and 
agnogenic myeloid metaplasia (AMM) are clonal myeloproliferative 
disorders arising from a multipotent progenitor. The recent identifica -
tion of a V617F mutation in the JAK2 tyrosine kinase gene in a high 
proportion of patients suffering from MPDs may provide confirmation 
of a diagnosis. Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) is a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase 
that transduces signals, especially those triggered by hematopoietic 
growth factors such as erythropoietin, in normal and neoplastic cells. 
Here we analyzed JAK2(V617F) mutation in 41 Turkish patients with 
myeloproliferative disorders. METHODS: DNAs from bone marrow 
samples of the patients were extracted and then PCR reactions by 
using F:5’-TGC TGA AAG TAG GAG AAA GTG CAT- 3` and R:5’- TCC 
TAC AGT GTT TTC AGT TTC AA-3’ primers and sequencing analysis 
were performed. RESULTS: A single point mutation (Val617Phe) was 
identified in JAK2 in 19 (73.0 %) of 26 patients with PCRV, six (50%) of 
12 with ET, and two (66.0 %) of three with AMM. Total V617F mutation 
prevelance was 66.0% (27/41). CONCLUSION: JAK2V617F mutations 
are present in almost all patients with PCRV, and in approximately half 
of those with ET and AMM. This molecular abnormality takes an in -
creased importance in the knowledge of the physiopathology of MPDs, 
particularly in PCRV and also in prognosis of the patients. However, 
further studies are necessary to answer many questions regarding the 
role of a single allele in three clinically distinct disorders, the mecha -
nism of activation of JAK2V617F, and the pathogenesis of JAK2-nega -
tive myeloproliferative disorders.
P0584. NANOG expression in Ewing’s sarcoma and 
desmoplastic small round cell tumor
Á. F. L. Rios, L. G. Tone, C. A. Scridelli, R. P. Queiroz, E. S. Ramos ;  
University of São Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil.
The initiation and development of cancer include several molecular 
events like accumulation of genetics and epigenetic alterations. Since 
the 19th century, several researchers have noted the homologies be -
tween cancer and embryonic cells. The hypothesis that cancer arise 
from adult stem cells can be supported by the studies showing gene 
expression profile similar to normal stem cells. The transcription fac -
tor NANOG  maps on the chromosome 12 in humans, it is uniquely 
expressed in embryonic stem (ES) cells and in germ cell tumors, and 
it is important for self-renewal. Knockout of this gene provokes the 
differentiation of epiblast cells into parietal endoderm cells, in mouse. 
The expression of Nanog  in the NIH3T3 transformed these cells, sug -
gesting an oncogenic potential of this transcription factor. Some re -
ports have demonstrated the expression of NANOG  in seminoma and 
breast carcinoma. We identified the expression of NANOG  transcripts 
in samples of Ewing’s sarcoma and desmoplastic small round cell tu -mor by RT-PCR assay of RNA extracted from fresh tumor samples. 
This data suggests that this factor is involved in other kinds of cancer. 
Take together, the expression of NANOG  in these tumors, and the ef -
fects of their disruption in animal models suggest that this gene could 
be a new therapeutic target for cancer.
P0585. Molecular variants of the NBS1 gene in glial and 
embryonal brain tumors in children
K. H. Chrzanowska , E. Ciara, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, E. Popowska, 
W. Grajkowska, S. Barszcz, B. Dembowska-Bagińska, E. Kowalewska, A. 
Czajńska, M. Krajewska-Walasek, D. Perek, M. Roszkowski;  
The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
Mutations in the NBS1  gene, which is involved in double-strand DNA 
repair, are associated with an autosomal recessive disorder, Nijmegen 
breakage syndrome. Several studies strongly suggest that NBS1  het-
erozygosity may be associated with elevated risk of some cancers.
The aim of the study was to identify molecular variants of the NBS1  
gene in a total of 109 children with glial (juvenile pilocytic astrocyto -
mas, astrocytomas anaplasticum, glioblastomas) and embryonal brain 
tumors (medulloblastomas, atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors, supra -
tentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumors). Blood and tumor DNA 
samples from all patients were screened for the presence of the two 
most common mutations, c.657del5 (p.K219fsX234) and c.643C>T 
(p.R215W), in exon 6 of the NBS1  gene. In addition, in glial tumor 
tissue exon 5, and in embryonal tumor tissue exons 3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 13, 
14, were investigated. Molecular studies consisted of PCR-SSCP and 
sequencing analyses.
Of 53 patients with glial tumors, two heterozygous cases with mutations 
in exon 6 of the NBS1  gene, c.657del5 (p.K219fsX234) and c.643C>T 
(p.R215W), were identified. In the group of 56 patients with embryonal 
brain tumors, two heterozygotes for mutation c.511A>G (p.I171V) in 
exon 5, and three heterozygotes for a common mutation, c.657del5 
(p.K219fsX234), in exon 6 of the NBS1  gene were found. Moreover, 
five frequent polymorphisms: c.553A>G (p.E185Q), c.2016A>G 
(p.P672P), c.1197C>T (p.D339D), IVS12-7A>G, IVS10+45delA, were 
revealed. The frequency of sequence variants of the NBS1  gene in 
children with glial and embryonal brain tumors differs from that ob -
served in the general population.
This study was supported by grant PBZ-KBN-090/P05/04-17.
P0586. Evidence for amplification of the mutant NBS1 allele in 
tumour samples from NBS-heterozygotes
M. Stumm1, A. Pelz2, K. Sperling3, M. Maurer3, R. Schneider-Stock4, J. Steffen5, 
R. Varon3;  
1Zentrum für Pränataldiagnostik, Berlin, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, 
Universitätsklinikum Magdeburg, Germany, 3Institut für Humangenetik, Charité 
Berlin, Germany, 4Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsklinikum Magdeburg, 
Germany, 5MSC Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, 
Poland.
Mutations of the NBS1 gene cause an increased tumour risk in NBS-
homozygotes as well as in NBS-heterozygotes. However, in the lat -
ter case the underlying mechanisms are completely unknown. To 
approach this problem, ten tumour samples of 9 different NBS-het -
erozygotes from Poland were analyzed by FISH and RT-PCR. The 
tumour samples were derived from carriers of the 657del5 mutation or 
the R215W variant. Interphase FISH was performed on isolated nuclei 
from paraffin embedded tumour samples by means of a Cy3-labeled 
BAC-probe containing the whole NBS1 gene region. A BAC-probe 
flanking the NBS1-region and/or a chromosome 8 centromeric probe 
were hybridised as controls. Four tumour samples showed a deletion 
of the NBS1 gene due to a monosomy 8. In contrast, three tumours 
demonstrated an amplification of the NBS1 gene due to trisomy or 
even pentasomy of chromosome 8. Additionally, two samples showed 
both, deletions as well as amplifications of the NBS1 gene in different 
cells of one tumour. RT-PCR analyses on 4 tumour samples demon -
strated a loss of the NBS1 wild type allele and a gain of the NBS1 
mutant allele. In this context it is important to note that the 657del5 
mutation is hypomorphic because a 70kDa amino-terminal truncated 
fragment is produced by alternative initiation of translation at a start 
codon upstream of the deletion through which it is brought into frame. 
We speculate that overexpression of this fragment might exert a domi -
nant negative effect. This and/or loss of the NBS1 wild-type allele are 
possible mechanisms for tumorigenesis in NBS-heterozygotes.Cancer genetics1
P0587. Differential expressed genes in favourable versus 
unfavourable neuroblastoma tumors
F. E. Abel , A. Wilzen, T. Martinsson;  
Biomedicine, Goteborg, Sweden.
Neuroblastoma (NB), a childhood tumor originating from neural crest 
cells in the sympathetic nervous system, has a complex biological het -
erogeneity depending on clinical stage and age at diagnosis. In order 
to screen for genes involved in tumour development, a global micro 
array expression analysis was performed on six NB tumours (three 
favourable and three unfavourable). Data indicated that the expres -
sion levels of several important players in the noradrenalin biosyn -
thesis pathway were significantly lower in unfavourable NB tumours 
compared to favourable. The 95 most significant genes with a fold 
change above 2.0 between groups were picked out for verification 
with real-time PCR (with TaqMan Low Density Array cards, Applied 
Biosystems) on tumours included in the micro array study. Thirteen 
additional tumours were also analyzed by real-time PCR in order 
to explore if the expression pattern is applicable to a larger group. 
The preliminary results show that transcripts encoded by solute car -
rier family 6 (SLC6A2 ), transcription factor AP-2 beta (TFAP2B ), and  
chromosome 5 open reading frame 13 (C5ORF13 ) all show a distinct 
down-regulated pattern in unfavourable tumours versus favourable. 
The protein encoded by SLC6A2 is an important mediator  in the nor -
adrenalin biosynthesis pathway. Both TFAP2B and C5ORF13 (also 
known as P311) are known to induce the expression levels of cell-
cycle regulator P21. Also, TFAP2B has been shown to regulate ex -
pression of genes required for development of tissues of ectodermal 
origin, such as neural crest. These findings insist us to further explore 
these genes and their involvement in neuroblastoma development 
and progression.
P0588. Screening 80 unrelated neurofibromatosis type 1 
patients for deletions of the NF1 gene.
O. Drozd1,2, O. Babenko1,2, M. Nemtsova1,2, D. Zaletayev1,2;  
1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2I.M. 
Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) is a common autosomal dominant 
disorder affecting 1/3,500 individuals. The major diagnostic features 
include café-au-lait spots, neurofibromas, axillary/inguinal freckling, 
and Lisch nodules. Various constitutional mutations of the NF1 gene 
have been found in NF1 patients. However, no clear genotype-pheno -
type correlation has been established so far, except for patients with 
deletions of the entire NF1 gene who have a more severe phenotype, 
including facial abnormalities, mental retardation, developmental de -
lay, early development of numerous cutaneous neurofibromas, and 
plexiform neurofibromas. We have developed the panel of intragenic 
microsatellite markers (D17S1307, D17S1849, TAGA/TAGGint27a, 
ACint27b and GTint38) for detection of NF1 region gross deletions 
and indirect NF1 DNA-diagnostics. Moreover, we used 3 polymor -
phisms (702A>G, 1528-29delT and 5546-19T>A) for the definition of 
NF1 locus heterozygosity. A total of 80 unrelated patients who met the 
diagnostic criteria for NF1 were included in our study. In five patients 
all markers were homozygous and one patient had a deletion (TAGA/
TAGGint27a, GTint38). Parents DNA was accessible only for three of 
five potential carriers of deletions. Among the latter, two of three had 
no severe phenotype characteristic for loss of the entire NF1 gene. 
Based on the heterozygosity of each marker, the probability of random 
homozygosity of eight markers in one individual could be calculated 
as 0.00027. It is possible to explain such contradiction by the pres -
ence of a small number of allelic variants of marker D17S1307 and 
prevalence of one allelic variant (52 %) of marker D17S1849.
P0589. Expression analysis and investigation of single 
nucleotide polymorphisms in putative NF1 modifying genes
M. Wuepping , B. Bartelt-Kirbach, D. Kaufmann;  
Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common autosomal 
dominantly inherited tumor diseases. Several symptoms of NF1 as the 
dermal neurofibromas show a high interfamilial variability in classical 
NF1. In the familial spinal neurofibromatosis, a very rare variant of 
NF1, the number and onset of neurofibromas is obviously decreased. 
On the other hand, patients with microdeletions spanning the NF1 and several contiguous genes have an earlier onset and a higher number 
of dermal neurofibromas as classical NF1 patients. To explain this 
variability the existence of NF1 modifying genes in this region has 
been proposed. Our expression studies in dermal neurofibromas re -
vealed four putative NF1 modifying genes: CENTA2, UTP6, C17orf79 
and RAB11FIP4. We investigated the expression level and SNP vari -
ability of these genes in more detail. First results will be presented.
P0590. Disruptive mitochondrial DNA mutations in complex I 
subunits are markers of oncocytic phenotype in thyroid tumors
G. Gasparre1, A. Porcelli2, E. Bonora1, L. Pennisi1, M. Toller3, L. Iommarini4, A. 
Ghelli2, C. M. Betts5, V. Carelli4, M. Rugolo2, G. Tallini6, G. Romeo1;  
1Unità di Genetica Medica, Policlinico Universitario S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bolo -
gna, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Biologia Evoluzionistica Sperimentale, University of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Patologia e Medicina Sperimentale 
e Clinica (DPMSC) and Centro Interdipartimentale di Medicina Rigenerativa 
(CIME), University of Udine, Udine, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Scienze Neurolo -
giche, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5Dipartimento di Patologia Spe -
rimentale, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 6Dipartimento di Anatomia 
Patologica, Ospedale Bellaria, Bologna, Italy.
Oncocytic tumors are lesions composed of cells characterized by mi -
tochondrial hyperplasia particularly common in the thyroid gland. Be -
cause of their distinctive features they represent a good model to study 
the role of mitochondria in tumorigenesis. We recently demonstrated 
the association between two pathogenic mitochondrial mutations and 
a defective biochemical phenotype in a cell line model of oncocytoma. 
To understand whether specific mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) muta -
tions are associated with the oncocytic phenotype we sequenced 
the entire mtDNA in 45 oncocytic thyroid tumors (HCTs), 5 oncocytic 
breast tumors and 52 control cases (21 non-oncocytic thyroid tumors, 
15 breast carcinomas and 16 gliomas) utilizing a recently developed 
technology (Applera). Thirteen oncocytic lesions (26%) presented dis -
ruptive mutations (nonsense or frameshift), whereas only 2 samples 
presented such mutations in the non-oncocytic control group (3.8%). 
In one case with multiple thyroid nodules analyzed separately a dis -
ruptive mutation was found in the only nodule with oncocytic features. 
In one of the 5 oncocytic breast tumors a disruptive mutation was 
identified. All disruptive mutations were found in complex I subunit 
genes and the association between these mutations and the onco -
cytic phenotype was statistically significant (p=0.001). To study the 
pathogenicity of these mitochondrial mutations, primary cultures from 
oncocytic tumors and corresponding normal tissues were established. 
Molecular and biochemical analysis and electron microscopy showed 
that primary cultures derived from tumors bearing disruptive muta -
tions failed to maintain the mutations and the oncocytic phenotype. 
We conclude that disruptive mutations in complex I subunits are mark -
ers of thyroid oncocytic tumors.
P0591. P53, H-ras, c-myc, c-erbB2 and bcl2 analysis in oral 
squamous cell carcinomas
J. Milasin1, B. Popovic1, B. Jekic2, G. Tredici3, I. Novakovic2, V. Lekovic1;  
1School of Dentistry, Belgrade, Serbia, 2School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia, 
3Department of Neurosciences, University Milano, Milano-Bicocca, Italy.
A comprehensive study of molecular changes during oral carcinogen -
esis has been performed on 60 specimens of squamous cell carci -
noma (OSCCs). P53 and H-ras have been subjected to mutational 
analysis by SSCP followed by sequencing. C-myc and c-erbB2 have 
been tested for amplification using differential PCR and bcl2 gene ex -
pression has been determined by immunohistochemistry.
Mutations in one or more exons of the p53 gene have been found in 
60 % of cases. H-ras codons 12/13 mutations have been detected in 
22% of cases, while c-myc and c-erbB2 amplification has been re -
corded in 35% and 32% of specimens, respectively. Bcl2 expression 
has been registered in 68% of OSCCs.
We confirmed a positive association between the presence of p53 
mutations and bcl2 expression, as well as a significant correlation 
between c-erbB2 amplification and bcl2 expression. No statistically 
significant correlation was found between molecular and histopatho -
logical changes (p53 mutations showed a borderline correlation with 
histological grades).Cancer genetics1
P0592. Different profiles of BRCA1 and BRCA2 SNPs association 
with breast/ovarian cancer risk among sporadic cases and 
BRCA1 mutation carriers
T. Y. Smirnova1, N. I. Pospekhova1, A. N. Loginova1, L. N. Lubchenko2, R. F. 
Garkavtseva2, E. K. Ginter1, A. V. Karpukhin1;  
1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer 
Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation.
The BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are the main suppressors of inherited 
breast and ovarian cancer. The molecular basis for cancer localization 
in either the breast or in the ovary is unclear. We speculate that cancer 
localization may be modified by different variants of BRCA1/2 genes.
We studied 4 samples of patients for SNPs in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 
genes. Patients with sporadic breast and ovarian cancer, patients with 
the same types of cancer with BRCA1 mutations and a control sample. 
The BRCA1 E1038G and BRCA2 N372H, H1256P coding variants, 
and a SNP located in the 5’-untranslated region were investigated. 
In a sample of sporadic breast cancer patients, an association of the 
1038EG variant with cancer risk was found (OR=2,11; P=0,016). There 
was no difference in four SNPs frequencies between BRCA1 mutation 
carriers with breast cancer and control sample. This may means that no 
modifications are required for breast cancer localization under BRCA1 
mutations. In sporadic ovarian cancer 203AA homozygous variant was 
associated with cancer risk (OR=6,59; P=0,0016). An association of 
1038GG (OR=0,12; P=0,019) and 203GA (OR=0,29; P=0,0033) were 
revealed for cases of ovarian cancer with BRCA1 mutations.
In conclusion, the data suggest a possibility distinguish four groups of 
patients with breast or ovarian cancer by profiles of BRCA1/2 SNPs 
association with cancer risk. The risk of sporadic breast and ovar -
ian cancer is associated with different SNPs. The BRCA1 mutations 
caused breast cancer independent of the SNPs studied. We conclude 
that BRCA1/2 polymorphic variants may act as modifiers of the magni -
tude of ovarian cancer risk of BRCA1 mutations.
P0593. Coexistence of copy number changes of different genes 
(erbB-1, erbB-2, CMYC, CCND1 and ZNF217) in ovarian tumors
I. Dimova1, A. Josifova1, S. Raicheva2,3, R. Dimitrov2,4, N. Doganov2,4, D. Ton -
cheva1;  
1Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2University Hospital “Maichin dom”, 
Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Laboratory of Gynecopathology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Second Gy -
necological Clinic, Sofia, Bulgaria.
The aim of this study was to establish the frequency of combinatorial 
and separate copy number changes of erbB-1, erbB-2, c-myc, CCND1 
and ZNF217 in ovarian tumors from different phenotype; icroarray of 
507 ovarian tumors was analyzed by fluorescence in situ hybridization. 
A total of 47 tumors were successfully analyzed for all 5 loci, among 
them 38 were malignant, 7 were tumors with low malignant potency 
(LMP) and 2 were benign. Normal gene copy numbers of all loci 
were established in 12 malignant tumors (31.6%), in 2 of LMP tumors 
(28.6%) and in both adenomas. At least one aberration was found in 
26 malignant tumors (68.4%) and in 5 LMP tumors (71.4%). Single 
abnormalities were detected in 14 malignant tumors (36.8%) and in all 
aberrant LMP tumors, while double or higher abnormalities were found 
only in malignant tumors (31.6%). The most frequent genetic change 
both in malignant and LMP tumors was copy number increases of c-
myc. Coexistence of two or more abnormalities was more frequent 
in serous (64.3%) than in non-serous (40%) tumors (p<0.19). Copy 
number changes of c-myc and CCND1 were predominantly found sep -
arately, while copy number increases of erbB-1, erbB-2 and ZNF217 
were usually combined with another aberration. We concluded that, 
in particular, c-myc gain is early event in ovarian carcinogenesis, 
whereas gains of erbB-1, erbB-2 and ZNF217 are late events. Serous 
cancers are genetically more instable than non-serous cancers. About 
70% of ovarian cancers have unbalanced alterations in some of the 
analyzed loci.
P0594. The right cutoff point: is it possible to improve the 
predictive value of p53 immunohistochemistry?
S. Kappel1, C. Ludwig1, B. Wolf1, F. Wrba2, M. Ploner3, M. Mittlböck3, E. Roth1, 
D. Kandioler4;  
1Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery/ Surgical Research, Vi -
enna, Austria, 2Medical University of Vienna, Department of Pathology, Vienna, 
Austria, 3Medical University of Vienna, Department of Biostatistics, Vienna, Austria, 4Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Vienna, Austria.
p53 immunohistochemistry (IHC) has been performed in thousands of 
malignant tumors but its clinical impact is still unclear.
We have already demonstrated that the p53 genotype assessed by 
sequencing is predictive for response to preoperative cancer therapy. 
Aim of the present study was to evaluate whether p53 IHC is of any 
use for predicting response to p53 dependant treatments.
Using one of the most frequently applied antibodies for IHC, pAb1801, 
we calculated different cutoff points for scoring positivity, ranging from 
>0% to >80%, for their correlation with the response to preoperative 
cancer therapy.
In 106 patients (22 lung cancer, 49 rectal cancer and 35 breast cancer 
patients) a mutant p53 genotype has been shown to be significantly 
associated with treatment failure. A positive IHC calculated with a 10% 
cutoff did not show any correlation with treatment response in lung and 
in rectal cancer patients, respectively. Only in breast cancer patients, 
treatment failure was related to the presence of a positive IHC staining, 
but specificity - the probability of recognizing responders - was lower 
than calculated by sequencing.
Raising the cutoff improved specificity, but we could reach 100% in 
breast cancer only. Furthermore, correlation of p53 IHC and treatment 
response was found in breast cancer patients only.
We conclude that the specificity of p53 IHC to detect responders to 
cancer therapy may be improved by changing the cutoff. However the 
later decreases the sensitivity of recognizing nonresponders. There -
fore, in contrast to p53 sequencing, p53 IHC does not qualify for clini -
cal application.
P0595. Correlation between genetic polymorphisms of GST-P1, 
p53, COX-2 and overexpression of p53 in esophageal squamous 
cell carcinoma from Iran
F. Biramijamal1, M. Soltani1, N. Saligheh Araghi1, G. Iravanloo2;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cancer Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The incidence of esophageal cancer (EC) is depended on the geo -
graphic differences. It is due to specific environmental factors and 
chemicals. Northern Iran is the highest risk area for this type of cancer, 
but the specific environmental factors are very important as determi -
nants of esophageal cancer risk in Iran is not clearly defined. It is dem -
onstrated that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in various genes 
revealed a correlation between the presence of specific allelic variants 
and cancer susceptibility in diverse malignancies. Furthermore, stud -
ies of polymorphisms in cancer susceptibility genes included GST-P1, 
p53 and COX-2 in various types of cancer were shown. Therefore, in 
this investigation, we assesed the role of genetic polymorphisms of 
GST-P1 , p53, COX-2  in risk of developing esophageal squamous cell 
carcinoma from Iran.
The p53 Pro72Arg, GST-P1  Ile105Val and COX-2 -765G>C genotypes 
were determined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment 
length polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) and direct DNA sequencing analy -
sis in healthy controls and patients. Also, Immunohistochemistry was 
performed to determine p53 expression. Among the EC patients sub -
jects, the frequency of G allele for p53 gene, A allele for GST-P1 gene 
and C allele for COX-2 gene were high. Accumulation of p53 protein 
in tumor cells was not correlated with investigated genetic polymor -
phisms.
This preliminary study support a hypothesis that GST-P1 , p53 and 
COX-2 variants are involved in development of esophageal cancer 
from Iran. However nothing is known so far about the status of GST-
P1, p53 and COX-2 genetic polymorphisms and its association with 
overexpression of p53 in EC from Iran.
P0596. Is 16bp intron 3 polymorphism for p53 gene associated 
with esophageal cancer in Iran?
E. Nazari1, F. Biramijamal1, M. Soltani1, G. Iravanloo2, M. Karim2;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cancer Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
The p53 protein is considered a key combination in countering stress 
messages such as DNA damage. This protein is a transcription factor 
and it can induce cell growth arrest or apoptosis to protect genome and 
cell against genotoxic damage. Also, the p53 gene is involved in the 
etiology of malignant disease. It is recorded that most cancers carry 
p53 gene mutations. The frequency of esophageal squamous cell car -Cancer genetics1
cinoma (ESCC), which it is predominant cancer in esophagus, is very 
high in northern Iran. The incidence pattern of esophageal cancer is 
different among Iranian population and up to 171/100,000. So, iden -
tification of p53 gene mutations and polymorphisms is very important 
to find the major causes of this type of cancer in Iran. Several studies 
were described the polymorphism in intron 3 of the p53 gene (16bp 
intron 3 insertions) and susceptibility to several types of cancer and 
diseases. This type of polymorphism can change the expression of 
p53 gene.
In this investigation, we assessed allele frequency of p53 polymor -
phism in intron 3 among Iranian ESCC patients and healthy controls. 
The p53 genotypes were determined by direct DNA sequencing analy -
sis in healthy controls and patients. Among the ESCC patients sub -
jects, the 16bp intron 3 polymorphism for p53 gene were significantly 
higher than healthy controls. Our finding suggested that p53 genotype 
may play an important role in developing esophageal tumor among 
ESCC patients. It is suggested that protein expression of the p53 gene 
can be investigate among Iranian ESCC patients in the future.
P0597. Epigenetic regulation of shc1 protein expression, and 
genetic variation within the SHC1 gene in breast carcinomas.
K. Duda , L. Hansen;  
University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark.
The SHC1 gene encodes three isoforms: p66shc, p52shc and p46shc. 
Both p52/46shc activate the mitogen activated protein kinase pathway 
(MAPK), in contrary to p66shc which downregulates MAPK. Moreover 
p66shc plays an important role in apoptosis and response to oxidative 
stress by transferring signal from p53. Despite that p66shc and p52/
46shc are involved in different cell functions, they all play an important 
role in tumorigenesis.
Western blot analysis of cytosol fractions from breast tumours revealed 
that p66shc protein expression is decreased for most of the samples. 
Sequencing of bisulphite treated DNA from the same patients showed 
that the level of methylation inside the p66shc promoter region cor -
relates with protein expression. Additionally, samples which did not fit 
properly to this thesis underwent mutation analysis. Exon 1 and the 
promoter region of SHC1 were sequenced in 20 breast tumours, but 
no common mutation was found. There was  discovered mutation with -
in the Sp1 binding site for one of the samples, but a single nucleotide 
change did not affect expression of p66shc. Moreover, SNP analysis 
was performed, comprising four known and two new polymorphisms 
within the common part for all 3 SHC1 isoforms. 200 DNA breast can -
cer samples and 252 DNA samples from healthy individuals serving as 
controls were analyzed. Two independent haplotypes were identified 
based on the SNP genotypes. Despite the presence of two rare poly -
morphisms, one of the discovered haplotypes may have a protective 
effect against breast cancer. The genotype was twice as frequent in 
the control population as in the tumour samples.
P0598. p73 regulates PTEN genic expression
C. Puppin1, F. Frasca2, V. Vella2, L. Messina2, R. Vigneri2, G. Damante1;  
1Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Università di Udine, Udine, 
Italy, 2Endocrinologia, Dipartimento di Medicina Interna e di Medicina Speciali -
stica, Università di Catania, Catania, Italy.
p73 belongs to a family of p53-related nuclear transcription factors that 
includes p53, p73 and p63. Differentially from p53, p73 is expressed 
as two NH2-terminally distinct isoforms, due to a second downstream 
promoter: transcriptionally active (TAp73) and transcriptionally inactive 
(ΔNp73) forms. The ΔNp73 isoforms can act as dominant negative 
inhibitors of the TA isoforms and p53, so TA and ΔN show pro- and anti-
apoptotic properties, respectively. Moreover additional complessity is 
generated at the COOH terminus because p73 undergoes multiple 
COOH-terminal splicing (α being full-length isoforms). PTEN is a dual-
specificity phosphatase and has a tumor suppressor function. This 
study investigates the regulation of PTEN expression by p73 in thyroid 
cells because in thyroid carcinomas both decrease of PTEN expres -
sion and increase of p73 expression have been previously shown. Sta -
ble thyroid cell line was generated expressing inducible p73 isoforms, 
these cells showed incremented PTEN protein upon over expression 
of TAp73α and β; instead cell line expressing ΔNp73α showed decre -
mented PTEN protein. Cell transfection studies indicated that TAp73α 
and TAp73β can activate PTEN promoter, instead ΔNp73α inhibits it, 
in a p53 independent way. Moreover the ΔNp73α inhibitory action is prevalent on TAp73α and TAp73β activatory actions. This evidence 
supposes that in thyroid cancers, in which there are a high ΔNp73α 
expression respect to the normal thyroid tissue, ΔNp73α could reduce 
PTEN expression even in presence of the others activating isoforms.
P0599. Searching for polymorphisms in paclitaxel elimination 
pathway influencing drug efficacy and toxicity
S. Leskelä1, C. Jara2, J. García-Donás2, R. Villafañe2, J. Sánchez-Torres2, 
C. Montero-Conde1, I. Landa1, E. López-Jiménez1, R. Letón1, A. Cascón1, M. 
Robledo1, C. Rodríguez-Antona1;  
1Spanish National Cancer Research Centre, Madrid, Spain, 2Unidad de On -
cología Médica, Fundación Hospital Alcorcón, Madrid, Spain.
Paclitaxel is an anti-cancer drug widely used in the treatment of a 
variety of solid tumors, including breast, ovarian and lung. There is 
a large interindividual variation in the efficacy and adverse effects of 
this drug, mainly hematologic toxicity and neurotoxicity. It has been 
proposed that polymorphisms in genes encoding drug-metabolizing 
enzymes and drug transporters might contribute to the differences 
in paclitaxel outcome. Thus, the aim of this work is to identify SNPs 
involved in paclitaxel elimination that could influence its efficacy and 
toxicity. Paclitaxel elimination is mediated by hepatic metabolism and 
biliar excretion: the uptake of paclitaxel into the hepatocytes is me -
diated by the organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP)1B3, in 
the liver cytochrome P450 2C8 (CYP2C8) and CYP3A4/5 hydroxylate 
paclitaxel and the P-glycoprotein mediates biliar excretion. Thus, we 
selected variants in these  genes and genotyped them in more than 
80 oncology patients treated with paclitaxel: four CYP2C8  SNPs from 
which two are in the coding region; one CYP3A5  SNP causing alterna -
tive splicing; one CYP3A4  promoter SNP influencing transcription; two 
coding OATP1B3  SNPs and three MDR1 SNPs previously associated 
with altered activity. Neurotoxicity was evaluated in the patients and 
the influence of clinical variables, such as total paclitaxel dose, time 
to neurotoxicity and time to recovery were taken into account in the 
study. Then, the genotypes were compared to the clinical data of the 
patients, in order to assess their effect. In conclusion, the identification 
of genetic variants involved in paclitaxel elimination could be useful to 
predict drug effects.
P0600. Molecular genetic analysis of pheochromocytomas and 
paraganglioma in Czech patients
Z. Musil1, A. Krepelova1, J. Widimsky2, T. Zelinka2, M. Kohoutova1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine, 
Prague, Czech Republic, 2Third Medical Department - Clinical Department of 
Endocrinology and Metabolism of the First Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
The pheochromocytoma is tumor arising in adrenal or extra-adrenal 
sites and occurs as a sporadic form or, less frequently, in familial set -
ting as a part of inherited syndromes. Paraganglioma of the head and 
neck occurs mostly sporadically and also in syndromic or nonsyndrom -
ic familial settings. To date four susceptibility genes for pheochromocy -
toma have been reported that included RET proto-oncogene, VHL tu -
mor suppressor gene and recently identified genes SDHB and SDHD 
for succinate dehydrogenase subunit B and D respectively. Mutations 
in these genes can predispose one to pheochromocytoma and para -
ganglioma.
All established genes were analyzed to investigate possible genetic 
cause of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma in the population of 
Czech patients. Among 100 patients we have found several previously 
described mutations or polymorphisms. Besides that one novel muta -
tion was found in the  SDHB gene in a child patient. We conclude that a  
large part of diseases could be be due to mutations in an unidentified 
gene(s).
Supported by the grant project MŠMT &#268;R MSM0021620808
P0601. Methylation-associated PHOX2B  gene silencing in human 
neuroblastoma
L. de Pontual1, D. Trochet1, F. Bourdeaut2, S. Thomas1, H. Etchevers1, A. 
Chrompret3, D. Valteau3, L. Brugière3, A. Munnich1, O. Delattre2, S. Lyonnet1, I. 
Janouex-Lerosey2, J. Amiel1;  
1Département de Génétique, Paris, France, 2Institut Curie, Paris, France, 3Insti-
tut Gustave Roussy, Paris, France.
Neuroblastoma (NB), an embryonic tumour originating from neural 
crest cells, is one of the most common solid tumours in childhood. Cancer genetics1
Although NB is characterized by numerous recurrent, large-scale 
chromosome rearrangements, the genes targeted by these imbal -
ances have remained elusive. We recently identified the paired-like 
homeobox 2B ( PHOX2B , MIM 603851) gene as disease-causing in 
dysautonomic disorders including Congenital Central Hypoventilation 
Syndrome (CCHS), Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) and NB in various 
combinations. Most patients with NB due to a germline heterozygous 
PHOX2B  gene mutation are familial and/or syndromic. PHOX2B , at 
chromosome 4p12, does not lie in a commonly rearranged locus in 
NB. To evaluate the role of PHOX2B  in sporadic, isolated NB, we 
analysed 13 NB cell lines and 46 tumors for mutations of coding and 
promoter sequences, loss of heterozygosity (LOH), or aberrant hyper -
methylation of PHOX2B  (13 cell lines and 18 tumors). We identified no 
mutation but LOH in about 10% of the cases and aberrant CpG island 
methylation of the 500 bp PHOX2B  promoter region in 4/31 (12.9%). 
Altogether, both germinal and somatic anomalies at the PHOX2B  lo-
cus are found in NB.
P0602. Breast cancer and the promyelocytic leukemia gene
I. Jeziskova1, P. Plevova1,2, S. Walczyskova1, A. Krepelova3, K. Pavlikova3, V. 
Kotala4, E. Silhanova1;  
1University Hospital, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 2Palacky University, Olomouc, 
Czech Republic, 32nd Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech Re -
public, 4Weizmann Institute, Rehovot, Israel.
Introduction: The PML (promyelocytic leukemia) protein  is a tumor sup -
pressor gene that encodes a multifunctional protein with critical tumor 
suppressive functions such as induction of apoptosis, growth arrest 
and cellular senescence. Its expression is downregulated in about one 
third of tumors, including breast cancer. With respect to these facts we 
tested the hypothesis that germline mutations of the PML gene might 
predispose to breast cancer.
Patients and methods: Thirty five patients fulfilling the criteria for 
BRCA1/BRCA2  gene mutation analysis in whom no germline BRCA1/
BRCA2  gene mutation was found were included into the study. Ge -
nomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood. Nine exons of the PML 
gene were screened for mutations using heteroduplex analysis. Sam -
ples with fragments of abnormal mobility were sequenced using ABI 
prism 3100 genetic analyser.
Results: No germline mutation was found in the PML gene in any of 
the patients.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that predisposition to breast cancer is 
probably not associated with germline mutations of the PML gene. Ac -
knowledgements: The project was supported by IGA MZ CR NR/9092-
3/2006.
P0603. Array CGH of dic(7;9)(p11-13;p11-13) in B-cell precursor 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia reveals clustered breakpoints at 
7p11.2-12.1 and 9p13.2
C. Lundin1, M. Heidenblad1, B. Strömbeck1, Å. Borg2, R. Hovland3, S. Heim4, B. 
Johansson1;  
1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Lund, Sweden, 2Dept of Oncology, Lund, Sweden, 
3Dept of Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Bergen, Norway, 4Dept of 
Medical Genetics, Oslo, Norway.
The dic(7;9)(p11-13;p11-13) is a recurrent chromosomal abnormality 
in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), mainly of B-lineage. Although 
more than 20 dic(7;9)-positive ALLs have been reported to date, the 
molecular genetic consequences of this aberration are unknown. 
We performed high-resolution (32K) genome-wide array-based com -
parative genomic hybridization (array CGH) and locus-specific fluo -
rescence in situ  hybridization analyses on three cases with dic(7;9) 
in order to characterize the breakpoints on 7p and 9p. The analyses 
showed a clustering of breakpoints at 9p13.1-13.2 in all three cases 
and at 7p11.2 in two; the array CGH revealed two different breakpoints 
- 7p12.1 and 7p14.1 - in the remaining case. Based on the present 
results this abnormality should hence be designated dic(7;9)(p11.2-
12.1;p13.1-13.2). Unfortunately, lack of material precluded further mo -
lecular genetic studies, and it thus remains to be elucidated whether 
the pathogenetically important outcome of the dic(7;9) is formation of a 
chimeric gene or loss of 7p and 9p material.P0604. POET (Prevention of Endometrial Tumours), a 
randomised control trial of the effect of the Mirena Intrauterine 
System (IUS) with surveillance, versus surveillance alone, on 
the development of atypical endometrial hyperplasia (AEH) and 
carcinoma (EC) in women with Lynch Syndrome aged 35-65y.
S. V. Hodgson1, V. Murday2, P. Sasieni3, E. Sheridan4, T. Bourne5, E. Okaru6;  
1St George’s, Tooting, London, United Kingdom, 2Department of Medical Genet -
ics, Yorkhill NHS Trust, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 3Wolfson Institute, Queen 
Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom, 4Yorkshire Regional Clini -
cal Genetics Service,St James’ University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 
5Dept. Gynaecology, St.George’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 6Dept. 
Gynaecology, Barts and the London NHS Trust, St.Bartholomew’s Hospital,, 
London, United Kingdom.
Women with Lynch syndrome have an increased risk of developing en -
dometrial cancer (up to 65% lifetime risk, 20% before 50y). The Mirena 
progestogen-releasing intra-uterine system greatly reduces the thick -
ness of the endometrium. This study proposes to evaluate whether 
treatment with the Mirena for 4y reduces the rate of detection of AEH 
and EC in women with Lynch Syndrome on surveillance by annual 
transvaginal ultrasound (TVS) and EB. Secondary study outcomes in -
clude determination of the sensitivity and specificity of surveillance, the 
age-related incidence of AEH and EC in women with Lynch syndrome, 
the premalignant pathway to carcinoma, the psychological effects of 
this management protocol and any adverse effects of surveillance and 
use of the Mirena IUS. We piloted the Mirena IUS for 6 months in 15 
women, average age 42y (24-56y). 9 experienced mild, 4 moderate 
and 2 severe pain on insertion. One IUS was removed for excess uter -
ine bleeding; 7 women had spotting and 7 no endometrial bleeding. 
EB was successful before and after the trial period; all post-Mirena 
biopsies showed decidualisation of the endometrium. 5 women chose 
to continue for longer with the Mirena.
This study is funded by CR-UK for 5y. in the UK, where we have initi -
ated it as a multi-centre National study. We welcome expressions of 
interest to initiate wider international collaboration.
P0605. Detection of PML-RARA rearrangement by RT-PCR in an 
acute promyelocytic leukemia without evidence by FISH.
S. Ramiro1, O. González1, C. Blas1, M. Renedo1, C. Castellanos1, L. de la 
Vega1, M. Calderón1, C. Martinez-Chamorro2, P. Font2, C. Alaez2, A. Alegre1, A. 
Escudero2, E. Arranz1;  
1Gemolab, Madrid, Spain, 2Ruber Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
Acute promielocytic leukemia (APL) is characterized by a reciprocal 
translocation, t(15;17), resulting in fusion of the genes promyelocytic 
leukemia (PML) and retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA). This translo -
cation is detected in about 70-90% of patients by conventional cytoge -
netic methods. There are also masked or cryptic t(15;17) that may be 
generated by submicroscopic insertions of PML or RARA or more com -
plex rearrangements. Those masked PML-RARA fusions can be iden -
tified by molecular analyses such reverse transcriptase-polimerase 
chain reaction (PCR) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
We have studied the case of a 55-years-old woman that shows clini -
cal, morphological and inmunophenotypic features of APL. The PML-
RARA was not evident on FISH test, while RT-PCR revealed the pres -
ence of PML-RARA transcript (bcr-3). The probe used was PML-RARA 
dual color dual fusion (Vysis). It was not possible to perform the chro -
mosomal analyses because of the coagulation of the sample of bone 
marrow. The patient was treated with a standard protocol for APL that 
includes All Trans Retinoic Acid (ATRA) and chemotherapy.
The FISH probes used in this case are a good molecular testing to 
detect cryptic, variants or complex PML-RARA rearrangements, but 
depending on the size of the insertion of PML-RARA, the target could 
be so small that it would not hybridize with the probe or even hybrid -
ization itself might not generate a fluorescent signal large enough to 
be visualized by FISH. Thus, a combination of molecular testing FISH 
and PCR could avoid false negative results in presence of masked 
PML-RARA fusions.
P0606. Overexpression of CD2  and c-myc  in prostate cancer 
tissue samples obtained by needle biopsy.
A. Szendrői , B. Nagy, Z. Papp, I. Romics;  
Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
Objective: Altered CD24  and c-myc  expression was reported in dif -
ferent cancers. We decided to establish a quantitative real-time PCR Cancer genetics1
method to measure the expression of these genes in prostate cancer 
tissues and compare it to a non-cancerous samples.
Subjects and methods: Prostate tissue samples were collected using 
needle biopsy from 21 prostate cancer (PCA) and 10 benign pros -
tate hyperplasic (BPH) patients. RNA was isolated; cDNA synthetized; 
CD24  and c-myc  expressions were determined by quantitative real-
time PCR method. The expression of phospholipase 2A  gene was 
measured for normalization of the gene expression results. Serum 
prostate specific antigen (SPA) levels were determined by micropar -
ticle enzyme immunoassay (MEIA) method.
Results:  PSA levels were significantly different between the PCA and 
BPH groups, 252.37±308.33 ng/ml vs. 3.5±2.14 ng/ml (p=0.001). CD24  
expression was 33.65±47.39 ng/μl in prostate tumorous and 4.00±4.25 
ng/μl in the BPH group (p=0,014), while the c-myc  expression was 
88.85±114.95 ng/μl in the prostate tumorous and 17.08±21.75 ng/μl in 
the BPH group (p=0.028).
Conclusion: Overexpression of CD24  and c-myc  was observed in pros -
tate cancer samples using quantitative real-time PCR method. CD24  
expression could be an independent marker on tumour invasion and 
metastasis, with c-myc  which plays also role in cell cycle regulation 
and metastasis development.
P0607. Significance of VDR, MTHFR and Insulin Gene 
Polymorphisms in Prostate Cancer in Turkish Population
M. H. Muslumanoglu1, M. Turgut2, S. Demir1, T. Basmaci1, E. Tepeli1, E. Atli1, 
D. Uzun1, M. Ozdemir1;  
1Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genet -
ics, Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Depart -
ment of Urology, Eskisehir, Turkey.
Prostate cancer is an increasingly common disease for which there are 
few well-established risk factors. Family history data suggest a genetic 
component; however, the majority of prostate cancer cases cannot be 
explained by a single-gene model. AIM: We examined genetic poly -
morphisms in Vitamin D receptor (VDR), methylenetetrahydrofolate 
reductase (MTHFR) and insulin genes in a case-control study of pros -
tate cancer in Turkish population. METHODS: VDR gene BsmI and 
FokI, insulin gene PstI and MTHFR gene A1298C and C677T poly -
morphisms were analyzed using DNAs from peripheral blood samples 
of 100 prostate cancer patients and 200 controls with benign pros -
tate hyperplasia. RESULTS: No significant difference was seen in all 
genes, but the significance for A1298C polymorphism is in the edge of 
range. CONCLUSION: None demonstrated any significant variation in 
distribution within these genes and therefore we concluded that VDR, 
MTHFR and insulin genes polymorphisms might not be major risk fac -
tor for prostate cancer in Turkish population.
P0608. Molecular genetic alterations in tumor epithelium and 
tumor-associated stromal cells of prostate cancer.
T. V. Kekeeva1, O. P. Popova1, Y. Y. Andreeva2, L. E. Zavalishina2, D. V. Za -
letaev1,3, M. V. Nemtsova1,3;  
1Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Moscow Herzen 
Oncological Research Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Medical Genetic 
Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation.
We investigated epigenetic changes and allelic imbalance (LOH/AI) 
in prostate cancer epithelia, tumor-associated stroma and prostate 
intraepitelial neoplasia (PIN) in prostatectomy specimens. Adenocarci -
noma epithelia, foci of PIN and benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) and 
stroma adjacent to tumor tissues were isolated from 34 whole-mount 
prostatectomy specimens of patients with pT1-T4 stage prostate can -
cer by using laser capture microdissection.
The methylation status of p16, HIC1, N33  and GSTP1  genes were 
evaluated using methylation-sensitive PCR. We found high levels of 
gene methylation in the tumor epithelium (78, 89, 33, 70%) and high-
grade PIN (57, 71, 33, 71%) and some methylation in BPH (25, 25, 
13, 0%) located adjacent to tumors. All investigated genes were meth -
ylated with very similar frequencies in adjacent stroma. There is no 
methylation in BPH and stroma from patients with hyperplasia.
Microsatellite allelotyping was performed using 5 polymorphic mark -
ers for regions 8p22, 16q23 and 13q14. The frequencies of LOH/AI 
were higher in the corresponding stroma (Table). LOH/AI in tumour 
epitelium at 16q23 and 13q14 were significantly associated with stage, 
Gleason score, metastasis, but no positive correlation between LOH/AI and clinicopathologic parameters in adjacent stroma was observed. 
The epithelium LOH/AI frequencies at all loci were increased from 
stage I to IV, in contrast, stromal LOH/AI frequencies were diminished 
respectively.
MarkerLOH/AI frequencies
Tumour stroma PIN stroma
D8S1731 15/31 (48%) 16/28 (57%) 1\13 (7.7%) 1\9
D16S534 15/30 (50%) 16/29 (55%) 3\9 (33%) 1\6
D16S422 14/25 (56%) 9/18 (50%) 1\8 (13%) 1\6
RB1.20 11/30 (37%) 15/26 (58%) 2\9 (22%) 2\7
The finding of frequent genetic and epigenetic alterations in tumor-associated stroma 
suggests a more important role for stromal fibroblasts in prostate cancerogenesis than 
was previously appreciated.
P0609. Aberrant expression of TGIFLX/Y  gene in prostate cancer
Z. Ousati-Ashtiani , R. Ghassemi, M. Modarresi, M. Heidari;  
Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Prostate cancer is the most common malignancy and the second lead -
ing cause of cancer in men. Genetic studies have revealed this disorder 
to be heterogenous in nature.  The molecular biology of prostate can -
cer and its progression is characterized by aberrant activity of several 
regulatory pathways at the cellular level, and the surrounding tissue 
of the prostate.. Alterations at the DNA, RNA and/or protein expres -
sion levels of molecules involved in these pathways are all potential 
candidate markers of prognosis and therapeutic response. It is known 
that homeobox genes encode transcription factors which regulate mul -
tiple developmental processes. These homeodomain proteins play 
an important role in determining cell fate. TGIFLX/Y  is a homeobox 
gene, contains two genes; TGIFLX (X-linked) and TGIFLY  (Y-linked). 
The biological function of these genes is unknown. In order to deter -
mine the potential function and involvement in normal and abnormal 
development, the expression pattern of TGIFLX/Y  in prostate cancer 
tumors was investigated. In this study a RT-PCR assay for detection 
of TGIFLX/Y  mRNA was carried out. Two different types of clinical 
samples including 100 prostate tumors and 95 benign prostate hyper -
plasia (BPH) were studied. RT-PCR analysis reveals different patterns 
of TGIFLX/Y gene expressions among prostate cancers. In some tu -
mor samples the expression of both genes was detected. However, 
in some cases either no expression or just one gene was detectable. 
In contrast, no expression of TGIFLX/Y  mRNA in BPH samples was 
observed. Our results suggest possible TGIFLX/Y  involvement in pros -
tate cancer development .
P0610. Cowden syndrome in Norway
C. F. Rustad1, M. Bjørnslett2, K. R. Heimdal1, L. Mæhle1, J. Apold3, P. Møller1;  
1Section for Inherited Cancer, Dep. of Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet-Ra -
diumhospitalet Medical Cent, Oslo, Norway, 2Section for Molecular Genetics, 
Dep. of Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Cent, Oslo, 
Norway, 3Centre for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Institute of Clini -
cal Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
We report the results of diagnostic and predictive testing in all families 
possibly having Cowden syndrome or families with breast and thyroid 
cancer registered at the Norwegian cancer family clinics.
Cowden syndrome (multiple hamartoma syndrome, MIM 158350) is 
characterized by multiple hamartomas in the skin, mucous membranes, 
breast, thyroid and endometrium. Patients with Cowden syndrome 
have increased risk of breast cancer, thyroid cancer and endometrial 
cancer. In 1997 germline mutations in PTEN were demonstrated to 
cause Cowden syndrome. By analyzing the computerized medical files 
in our department we identified families with a diagnosis of Cowden 
syndrome, all families suspected to have Cowden syndrome, and all 
families with a combination of breast and thyroid cancers. The other 
Norwegian genetic centres contributed their families with Cowden stig -
mata.
PTEN mutations were found in all six families meeting the clinical crite -
ria for Cowden syndrome, in none of the two families assumed to have 
Cowden syndrome but not fulfilling the criteria, and in none of the eight 
families with a combination of breast and thyroid cancers. Mutations in 
PTEN were identified in all affected members of the families fulfilling 
the Cowden syndrome criteria. 56 persons were tested, 19 were identi -
fied as mutation carriers.Cancer genetics10
Penetrance of PTEN mutations was high and expressions were 
Cowden syndrome stigmata in early infancy or childhood and cancer 
in adolescence or early adulthood. All families but one were small, and 
de novo mutations were found. Outside clinically identifiable Cowden 
families, PTEN mutations may not contribute to inherited breast can -
cer.
P0611. Analysis of TP53 Arg72Pro and MDM2 SNP309 T>G 
polymorphisms as modifier factors in hereditary retinoblastoma.
K. Sampieri1, F. Ariani1, D. Giachino2, G. Mandrile2, M. De Marchi2, M. Bruttini1, 
M. Mencarelli1, F. Mari1, T. Hadjistilianou3, S. De Francesco3, A. Acquaviva4, A. 
Renieri1;  
1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Medical Genetics SSD, 
ASO San Luigi Orbassano, Turin, Italy, 3Retinoblastoma Referral Center, De -
partment of Ophtalmology, Siena, Italy, 4Pediatrics Department, University of 
Siena, Siena, Italy.
Retinoblastoma (RB) is the most common primary intraocular ma -
lignancy in children, arising by two-hit inactivation of the RB1 gene. 
Hyper-expression of negative p53 regulators was recently found as a 
frequent somatic event. Most RB1 mutation carriers develop multifocal 
RB. However, they show a broad range of phenotypic variability (age 
of onset, involvement of one/two eyes and needed therapy). To test the 
hypothesis that this may in part results from variable function of genes 
involved in cell cycle and apoptosis, we investigated the effect of two 
functional polymorphisms, one in TP53 (Arg72Pro) and the other in the 
promoter of MDM2 (SNP309 T>G), on the age of tumour diagnosis. 
The TP53 Pro allele has been shown to have a weaker proapoptotic 
activity and to influence age of onset in Lynch syndrome; the MDM2 
309G allele to accelerate tumour formation in Li-Fraumeni syndrome 
and sporadic cancers. We tailored specific Pyrosequencing (C) as -
says for the two SNPs and genotyped 43 RB patients with a charac -
terized or suspected RB1 germline mutation (i.e. familial and bilateral 
cases). At univariate analysis, neither the MDM2  nor the TP53 SNP 
did reveal significant differences on RB onset. We then evaluated their 
combined effect through modelling estimates. Patients with the GG-
ProPro genotype showed an earlier tumour onset compared to those 
with GG-ArgArg or GG-ArgPro. An increased number of patients is 
needed to firmly establish this association. This approach could help in 
better characterizing the role of the p53 pathway in RB carcinogenesis, 
and defining more accurate prognosis for patients.
P0612. RNASEL gene polymorphisms and the risk of prostate 
cancer: a meta-analysis
H. Li1, B. Tai2;  
1National Cancer Centre Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University 
of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
Studies revealing conflicting results of the role of RNASEL polymor -
phisms Glu265X, Arg462Gln and Asp541Glu on prostate cancer risk 
led us to perform a meta-analysis on published data investigating the 
association of these polymorphisms and the prostate cancer risk.
We performed a meta-analysis of 5 studies with Glu265X genotyping, 
7 studies with Arg462Gln genotyping and 6 studies with Asp541Glu 
genotyping. The overall results of the meta-analysis suggested no ma -
jor influence of these variants on the prostate cancer risk. However, 
analysis of the Asp541Glu polymorphism by ethnicity showed that 
the genotypes with Glu variant including Asp/Glu (Familial cases vs. 
Control: OR=1.38, 95% CI=1.04 - 1.82; Sporadic cases vs. Control: 
OR=1.26, 95% CI=1.07 - 1.48; Prostate cancer vs. Control: OR=1.29, 
95% CI=1.12 - 1.48) and Asp/Glu+Glu/Glu (Familial cases vs. Control: 
OR=1.37, 95% CI=1.10 - 1.70; Sporadic cases vs. Control: OR=1.24, 
95% CI=1.07 - 1.44; Prostate cancer vs. Control: OR=1.27, 95% 
CI=1.13 - 1.44) increased the prostate cancer risk in Caucasians, thus 
suggesting a dominant model for the Glu variant. Analyses by sub-
population also showed no evidence of effects of either Arg462Gln or 
Glu265X on the prostate cancer risk in Caucasians.
Our meta-analysis of available studies indicates that as compared with 
genotype Asp/Asp, the Glu variant at the Asp541Glu polymorphism in -
creases the risk of prostate cancer by no more than 2-fold in Caucasian 
subjects, regardless of family history of the disease. This suggests that 
genuine genetic effects of this polymorphism probably account for only 
a small part of prostate cancer in the Caucasian population.P0613. Chracterization of chromosomal alterations in paraffin-
embedded salivary gland tumors by comparative genomic 
hybridization.
G. Floridia1, F. Censi1, M. Foschini2, V. Falbo1, D. Taruscio1;  
1Dipartimento di Biologia cellulare e Neuroscienze, Istituto Superiore di SanitÃ , 
Roma, Italy, 2Section of Pathology, University of Bologna, Bellaria Hospital, 
Bologna, Italy.
Salivary gland tumours (SGTs) are rare tumors of the neck and head 
with an overall incidence in the Western world of approximately 2.5-
3/100.000/year. SGTs involve the major glands (parotid, submandibu -
lar and sublingual) and the minor glands (oral mucosa, palate, uvula, 
floor of mouth, posterior tongue, retromolar area and peritonsilla area, 
larynx and paranasal sinuses).
SGTs are remarkable for their histopathologic and biologic diversity; 
they include benign and malignant tumors of epithelial, mesenchymal 
and lymphoid origin.
Although exposure to ionizing radiation has been implicated as a cause 
of SGTs, the etiology of most of these tumors cannot be determined; 
moreover it’s difficult to determine the prognosis and select the optimal 
therapeutic modality. The study of molecular pathogenesis of SGTs is 
a challenging task because of the rarity and histopathological diversity 
of these malignancies.
Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) is a powerful tool for de -
tecting chromosomal aberrations in archival paraffin embedded tumor 
samples.
CGH analysis, performed on four adenoid cystic tumor samples (with 
different hystotypes) and one pleomorphic adenocarcinoma , revealed 
fourteen aberrations (on average 2.8 per case). Gains involved chro -
mosomal regions 3q28-29, 4q35, 6q27, 10q15, 18p11, 20p13,22q12-
13; losses involved 2q36 -q37, 6p25, 11p15, 22q13. The correlation 
of CGH results with clinical-pathological data and a comparison with 
literature data will be discussed.
This work has been funded in the frame of “Programma di collabora -
zione ISS-NIH , Area Malattie Rare” Fasc.526/B
P0614. Gene copy number profiling mucoepidermoid 
carcinomas of salivary glands by using array comparative 
genomic hybridization
K. Jee1, K. Heikinheimo2, S. Knuutila1, I. Leivo1;  
1Haartmanin Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 2Institute of Dentistry, Turku, Finland.
The recent development of DNA microarray- based comparative ge -
nomic hybridization has greatly facilitated the identification of chromo -
somal regions of imbalance and the target genes in them. The purpose 
of this paper is to identify whole genome aberrations in mucoepider -
moid carcinoma (MEC) of salivary gland and to corelate genetic differ -
ences and histologic in mucoepidermoid carcinomas. We performed 
an oligonucleotide based array-comparative genomic hybridization 
(aCGH) survey in 9 cases of low-and 5 cases of high-grade mucoepi -
dermoide carcinomas. All cases of low-grade MECs had no genomic 
aberrations while in high-grade MECs were seen a complex for copy 
number aberrations including 3q amplification.
In conclusion, by using aCGH, we defined differences of copy number 
aberrations between the histologic grades of the MECs that might be a 
directly influence to the behavior of these tumors.
P0615. SEMAB  is a candidate tumor suppressor gene on 
19p13.3
V. V. Strelnikov1,2, E. B. Kuznetsova1,2, E. A. Pudova3, S. S. Larin4, M. V. 
Nemtsova1,2, D. V. Zaletayev1,2;  
1Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research Centre 
for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Russian State Medical 
University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Institute of Gene Biology, Moscow, 
Russian Federation.
It was previously suggested, by the results of high-resolution 19p13.2-
13.3 allelotyping in breast carcinomas, that this region might contain 
at least four tumor suppressor genes corresponding to the peak fre -
quencies of loss of heterozygosity (LOH). We have recently found 
one of the 19p13.3 genes, SEMA6B , to be abnormally methylated in 
breast cancer. The SEMA6B  promoter CpG island was methylated 
in 37/98 (38%) tumors and in 3/98 (3%) adjacent apparently normal 
tissue samples (p<0,0001). Gene expression analysis performed by 
real-time RT-PCR revealed SEMA6B  downregulation in 11/25 (44%) 
breast cancer samples, upregulation in 1/25 (4%) and unchanged ex -Cancer genetics11
pression (compared to the adjacent tissue) in 13/25 (52%) samples 
(p=0,0006). Expression was normal in the MCF7 cell line and absent in 
the T47D cells. SEMA6B  LOH studies are hampered by the absence of 
the informative microsatellite markers within the gene. Thus we have 
elaborated a single nucleotide primer extension-based method allow -
ing semiquantitative analysis with capillary electrophoresis of fluores -
cently labeled products (SNaPshot, Applied Biosystems). Two intra -
genic SNPs with the heterozygosity close to 50% were selected for the 
LOH analysis, one located within exon 1 of the gene (rs2304213) and 
the other intronic (rs4807602). By this approach SEMA6B  LOH was 
detected in 31/98 (32%) samples, indicating high frequency of dele -
tions in this locus. Taken together, our data suggest that SEMA6B  is a 
strong candidate tumor suppressor gene on 19p13.3. Recently identi -
fied tumor suppressor function of a number of other members of the 
semaphorin family supports this suggestion. The study was supported 
in part by Applied Biosystems, USA.
P0616. Expression study of receptor tyrosine kinase targets of 
Imatinib mesylate in skull base chordomas
M. Stroppi1, F. Orzan1, M. Longoni1, M. R. Terreni2, N. Boari3, P. Mortini4, C. 
Doglioni2, P. Riva1;  
1Department of Biology and Genetics, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Depart -
ment of Pathology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 3Department 
of Neurosurgery, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 4Department of 
Neurosurgery, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
Chordoma is a rare embryonal neoplasm arising from notochordal 
remnants. The current therapy is a combination of surgery and radio -
therapy; chemotherapy is not applied due to its reported low efficacy. 
Evidence on the efficacy of Imatinib mesylate (STI571), an inhibitor of 
the tyrosine kinases c-kit and PDGFRs, has been reported in five chor -
doma patients expressing PDGFRβ. We determined the expression of 
PDGFRA  and PDGFRB , encoding PDGFRα and PDGFRβ receptor 
subunits respectively, by means of RT-PCR in 15 skull base chordo -
mas including a primary tumor and its recurrency. Fourteen tumors 
expressed both genes, while the recurrency expressed only PDGFRB . 
We then performed immunohistochemistry of PDGFRα and PDGFRβ 
in 11 chordomas, which stained stromal cells and focally some tumor 
cells. In order to identify a possible autocrine or paracrine loop, we 
determined by RT-PCR the expression of their ligands PDGFA  and 
PDGFB , which  were found to be both expressed in 8 tumors, while 
PDGFB was observed in one sample. Because homodimeric or het -
erodimeric PDGF ligands activate both homodimeric or heterodimeric 
PDGFRs, it can be hypothesized that in 9 chordomas PDGFRα and/or 
PDGFRβ are activated. KIT mRNA was detected in three chordomas, 
while its ligand SCF only in one tumor, not expressing KIT. The expres -
sion study will be extended to additional chordomas to verify whether 
PDGFR expression in stroma is a characteristic of this kind of tumor. 
Protein phosphorylation status will be determined in suitable samples. 
This work provides new insight on STI571 targets in chordoma and 
might contribute to address pharmacological and clinical research.
P0617. Mutation Analysis of RAP1A in Sporadic Breast Cancer
H. Ebrahimi1, A. Jalali1, H. R. Khorram Khorshid1, A. Aghajani1, M. Gilanipour1, 
M. R. Etminan1, A. Kian Mehr1, N. Ahmadbeigy2, M. Ohadi1;  
1Genetic Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Hematology Department, Tarbiat Modarres 
University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Breast cancer is one of the most common neoplasms and is the main 
cause of death due to cancer among females in civilized and in many 
developing countries.
Among the genetic abnormalities, Loss of Heterozygosity (LOH) is fre -
quently observed in 1p13.3, the region that is involved in the sporadic 
type of breast cancer. The tumor suppressor gene, RAP1A, which has 
a critical role in contact inhibition, is located at this locus. In this study, 
50 sporadic breast cancer tumor specimens were examined using 
PCR-SSCP analysis and sequencing. No deleterious mutations were 
observed in the promoter (500 base pairs upstream of the transcrip -
tion initiation site), and the protein-coding exons including exons 3, 4, 
5, 6 and 7. We observed variations including an A>T transversion in 
intron 3 at nt + 29 and nt + 44 (4%). These observations indicate that 
mutations are not a common cause of RAP1A abnormality in sporadic 
breast cancer. Other means of RAP1A inactivation such as promoter 
hypermethylation need to be investigated in sporadic breast cancer.P0618. Detection of hypermethylated APC DNA in squamous 
cell carcinoma of esophagus and possible application as a 
molecular marker
M. Zare1,2, F. Rastgar Jazii1, M. Alivand1,2;  
1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Khatam higher education institution, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Squamous cell carcinoma of esophagus (SCCE) is a very lethal type of 
cancer with the highest incidence rate in Iran. For effective treatment 
of SCCE, early detection and availability of molecular markers could 
be very helpful. Methylation of cytidine nucleotide in CpG islands of 
genes is a mechanism of transcriptional regulation. The importance 
of this event becomes prominent especially in case of tumor suppres -
sor genes which leads to inactivation of these genes. Evaluation of 
methylation status of the Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) tumor 
suppressor gene has formerly been shown to be well applicable as 
a molecular marker for adenocarcinoma of esophagus. Regarding to 
this, an optimized method of Methylation Specific PCR was applied 
to analyze the methylation status of promoter region of APC in pa -
tients of SCCE with different stages of tumorogenesis. Extracted DNA 
from tumor and normal tissues of SCCE were digested with appro -
priate restriction enzyme, treated with sodium bisulfite, and amplified 
in a two-step PCR applying methylation specific primers. According 
to our results, all normal tissues were observed to be unmethylated, 
while 45% of tumor tissues were methylated such that 35% were ho -
mozygous and the 65% were heterozygous. Indeed hypermethylation 
of APC was seen even in early-stage tissues. These results indicate 
that hypermethylation of APC gene provides an important mechanism 
for APC inactivation and its involvment in esophagous cancer, so APC 
promoter hypermethylation changes could provide a molecular marker 
system for the detection of esophagus cancer and could be applied in 
combination with other molecular markers.
P0619. Novel splice isoforms of STRADα differentially affect 
LKB1 activity, complex assembly and subcellular localization
N. Resta1, P. A. Marignani2, K. D. Scott2, R. Bagnulo1, D. Cannone1, A. Stella1, 
G. Guanti1, C. Simone1,3;  
1Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Biomedicine in Childhood, Univer -
sity of Bari, Italy, 2Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty 
of Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 3Sbarro Institute for 
Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Center for Biotechnology, College of 
Science and Technology, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
STRADα is a pseudokinase which forms a heterotrimeric complex with 
the scaffolding protein MO25 and the tumor suppressor serine threo -
nine protein kinase LKB1. Mutations in LKB1 are responsible for the 
Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome (PJS) which predisposes to hamartomatous 
polyposis and are also observed in some sporadic tumors. The LKB1/
STRAD/MO25 complex is involved in the regulation of numerous sig -
naling pathways including metabolism, proliferation, and cellular polar -
ity of human intestinal epithelial cells.
Cell polarization, together with tissue-restricted transcription, rep -
resents the main feature of enterocytes differentiation. Since a full-
length STRADα transcript has not been reported so far in these cells, 
we evaluated the expression of endogenous STRADα in 5 colorectal 
cancer cell lines characterized by their diverse ability to differentiate 
in vitro .
We report herein the absence of full-length STRADα in these cells, 
and the discovery of several novel splice isoforms of STRADα that dif -
ferentially affect the kinase activity, complex assembly and subcellular 
localization of LKB1.
P0620. Construction of a new chimeric receptor for T_cell 
therapy by using single domain antibody
S. Aghaee Bakhtiari1, F. Rahbarizadeh1, A. Biglari2, M. Rasaee1, D. Gilham3;  
1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Zanjan Univer -
sity of Medical Sciences, Zanjan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Paterson Institute 
for Cancer Research, Mancheter, United Kingdom.
The specific activation of the immune system to control cancer growth 
has been a long-lasting goal in cancer immunotherapy. Employment 
of T cells for tumor therapy is an attractive approach. In order to re -
direct and enhance the ability of the patient’s own immune cells to 
fight cancer, the chimeric receptor (CR) approach that endows lym -
phocytes with antibody specificity was developed. The CR consists of 
scFv that is linked through an extracellular linker to transmembrane Cancer genetics12
and cytoplasmic domains of lymphocyte triggering moieties.The most 
important problem of this type of immunotherapy is scFv, because of 
its poor solubility and stability, the big size and unstable linker. Part 
of the humoral immune response of camels and lamas is based on 
heavy-chain antibodies where the light chain is totally absent. These 
unique antibody isotypes interact with the antigen by virtue of only one 
single variable domain, referred to as VHH. VHH have these unique 
features:
1) Solubility and stability
2) Specificity and binding to their antigen with nanomolar affinity
3) Recognizing unique conformational epitopes that are currently out 
of reach for conventional antibodies
4) Homology to human VH sequences that causes VHH is not immu -
nogene for human
We are developing a new construct which expresses a CR contain -
ing VHH instead of scFv. This construct might provide opportunities to 
develop a new generation of T cell therapy that hope to solve some of 
the problems of T_cell therapy.
P0621. A novel approach for the determination of T-cell clonality 
using microarray
O. A. Gra1, J. V. Sidorova2, E. A. Nikitin2, A. B. Sudarikov2, A. S. Zasedatelev1, 
T. V. Nasedkina1;  
1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology Russian Academy of Sciences, Mos -
cow, Russian Federation, 2Hematology Research Center, Russian Academy of 
Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation.
T-cell lymphomas account for 15-20% of all lymphoid malignancies in 
Western countries. Determination of T-cell clonality has important for 
the differential diagnosis between malignant and non malignant T-cell 
proliferation.
We developed a new method for the post-PCR analysis of TCR-γ re -
arrangements using hybridization on oligonucleotide microchip. The 
TCR-γ has become a favorite target for T-cell clonality assays because 
the γ-chain undergoes rearrangement before the α- and β-chains and, 
consequently, is rearranged in all lymphocytes.
The microchip contains oligonucleotide probes for all variable (V) and 
joining (J) gene segments involved in rearrangements of the TCR-γ 
locus. To estimate the accuracy of the method, we examined 49 sam -
ples of patients with lymphoproliferative disorders and 47 samples of 
normal donors. The results of hybridization on the microchip displayed 
100% coincidence with the results obtained by other methods. The 
sensitivity of the method is sufficient to determine 10% of clonal cells 
in the sample.
Furthermore this biochip has been used for determination of the of Vγ 
and Jγ genes frequencies. Among the Vγ gene segments, those of 
family 1 were most commonly used (total frequency 62%), while the 
lowest frequency (3.5 %) was observed for the family 4 gene segment 
Vγ11. As for the Jγ gene segments, the Jγ1 and Jγ2 gene segments 
are most commonly used in clonal rearrangements: their frequency 
was 81.6% in the total rearrangements with the Jγ gene segments.
The results demonstrate the principal possibility of detecting T-cell 
clonality in patients with T-cell lymphoid malignancies by hybridization 
on the microchip.
P0622. “Familial and sporadic Thyroid Tumors: new variants 
in candidate genes and their relevance for the oncocytic 
phenotype.”
E. Bonora , C. Evangelisti, L. Pennisi, G. Romeo;  
Unit of Medical Genetics, Bologna, Italy.
Familial Non-Medullary Thyroid Cancer (fNMTC) is associated with 
some of the highest familial recurrence among all cancers. Inheritance 
patterns indicate that fNMTC is transmitted as an autosomal domi -
nant trait with reduced penetrance, but a multigenic inheritance is not 
excluded. TCO (Thyroid tumor with Cell Oxyphilia), a predisposing 
locus for recurrence of oxyphilic/oncocytic tumors, characterized by 
the presence of oncocytic cell, rich in mitochondria, was previously 
mapped to the 19p13.2 region.
In order to identify the TCO gene, genes on chromosome 19p13.2 
were analyzed in patients of the families contributing to linkage. We 
screened 9 genes with a role in tumor development and/or mitochon -
drial functions: MUC16, DNMT1, ICAM1, EIFS4, MBD3L1, SMARCA4, 
ILF3, TYK2, ZNF358. We identified new variants in the coding region 
of MUC16, a member of the mucin family and highly expressed in thy -roid tumors. Haplotype analysis and functional study of these variants 
is currently ongoing and results will be presented.
In parallel, we previously identified disruptive mutations in a panel 
of sporadic oncocytic thyroid tumors in genes of complex I subunits 
encoded by mitochondrial DNA. These changes correlated with the 
biochemical defects identified in oncocytic neoplasia. However, the 
mutations do not account for all the cases of thyroid oncocytic tumors, 
suggesting that other nuclear changes might be involved. We are cur -
rently screening nuclear genes encoding for the complex I subunits 
and for PolG, the mitochondrial polymerase. Results of the screening 
will be presented.
P0623. Tumor necrosis factor gene -308 (G→A) polymorphism 
and risk of Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
A. R. Nestorovic1, M. Radojkovic2, B. Ristic2, M. Stankovic1, M. Andjelic3, D. 
Radojkovic1;  
1Institute of molecular genetics and genetic engineering, Belgrade, Serbia, 
2Clinic of Internal medicine, Clinical Center Dr. Dragisa Misovic, Belgrade, 
Serbia, 3Department of Pulmonology, University Clinical Centar Zvezdara, Bel -
grade, Serbia.
Common genetic variants in inflammatory response genes can affect 
the risk of developing Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). The tumor ne -
crosis factor (TNF) is central in proinflammatory response and there -
fore represents a strong candidate for mediating the risk of developing 
immunologicaly related malignant disease. Recent data have sug -
gested that TNF -308 (G →A) polymorphism might be associated with 
increased risk of NHL. Genotype AA is associated with higher serum 
levels of soluble TNF.
This study investigated the potential influence of TNF -308 polymor -
phism on the etiology on NHL in Serbian population. A total of 48 NHL 
patients and two control groups consisting of 102 diabetes patients 
and 120 healthy blood donors were included in the analysis. All subject 
were genotyped for TNF -308(G→A) by PCR-RFLP analysis. One of 
48 patients (2%) was homozygous (AA), and 13 of 48 patients (27 
%) were heterozygous (GA). In control group consisted of diabetes 
patients, 3 of 102 (3%) were homozygous and 28 of 102 (27%) were 
heterozygous and in healthy blood donors control group, two of 120 
(2%) were homozygous and 30 of 120 (25%) were heterozygous. Our 
study found no association between TNF-308 polymorphism and risk 
of NHL:the differences in allelic and genotype distribution was not 
statistically significant among tested groups. However, hypothesis on 
involvement of TNF -308 polymorphism in NHL deserves further in -
vestigation on a larger cohort of patients. In future studies additional 
polymorphisms within the TNF gene and inflammatory response genes 
should be taken into consideration
P0624. TP53 mutation frequency analysis in breast cancer 
against other carcinoma types
D. Macic1, L. Kapur1, J. Ramic1, N. Pojskic1, N. Obralic2, S. Beslija2, N. Bi -
lalovic3, K. Bajrovic1;  
1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, 2Institute of Oncology, KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 
3Institute of Pathology, KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The aim of this study was to compare occurrence of somatic mutations 
at codons 248 and 273 of TP53 gene in patients with breast cancer to 
patients diagnosed with other types of cancer.
TP53 is a tumor suppressor gene involved in control of cell division 
and mutations in the gene are considered to represent the most com-
mon genetic alteration in human cancers. These mutations may dam -
age the normal function of TP53 as a transcription factor and the induc -
tion of repair or apoptosis may be diminished. Consequently, genetic 
alterations may accumulate in the cell.
Codons 248 and 273 are positioned at DNA binding domain of TP53 
gene and mutation that are to be tested are single base substitution 
A>G in exons 7 and 8. As a result amino acid sequence is changed 
from Arg-Gln and Arg-His respectively.
This study included 100 subjects, half of which are breast cancer af -
fected individuals and rest are patients with other cancers. Genetic 
material was extracted from bioptic tissue specimen. Mutations occur -
rence in TP53 (codons 248 and 273) was determined by PCR analysis 
using single strand conformation polymorphism and restriction enzyme 
digestion. Pathohistological findings obtained from clinic were correlat -
ed with molecular alterations. Genetic data were evaluated in respect Cancer genetics1
to available biological markers values (ER, PR, Her2 status, lymph 
nodes status, age, etc).
P0625. Identification of tumor-suppressor loci that may 
contribute to the pathogenesis of uveal melanoma
I. K. Manokhina1, N. V. Sklyarova2, S. V. Saakyan2, D. V. Zaletaev1;  
1Institute of Molecular Medicine, I.M. Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, 
Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Helmholts Moscow Research Institute of Eye 
Diseases, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Uveal melanoma (UM) is the most common primary intraocular neo -
plasm. More than 50% of uveal melanomas are linked to large dele -
tions or monosomy of chromosome 3, but the specific genetic mecha -
nisms responsible for the malignant behavior of UM are still unknown. 
OBJECTIVE: To identify tumor-suppressor loci that may contribute to 
the pathogenesis of UM. METHODS: Loss of heterozygosity on chro -
mosome 3 was investigated by PCR-based microsatellite analysis 
in 45 tumors and related to clinical data. Microsatellite analysis was 
performed using markers at 3p25.3, 3p21.3, 3p14.2, 3q26.3, 13q14, 
9p21.2-p21.3, close to or within the VHL, RASSF1, FHIT, TRAIL, RB1, 
CDKN2A loci. The methylation status of the VHL, RASSF1, FHIT, RB1, 
CDKN2A promoter regions was analyzed using methyl-sensitive PCR. 
RESULTS: In the majority of cases, LOH on chromosome 3 was de -
tected at all informative markers, indicating of monosomy 3 (20 of 45 
tumors). RASSF1  promoter methylation was detected in 10 of the 45 
(22%) patients with primary UM regardless of LOH status. No hyper -
methylation of the VHL and FHIT  promoter regions was found. Neither 
LOH at RB1 locus, nor hypermethylation of the RB1 promoter region 
was found. Methylation of the CDKN2A  promoter and LOH in its lo -
cus occured in some tumors. CONCLUSIONS: These data show that 
monosomy 3 could be the most common event in UM development, 
potentially of clinical relevance. LOH and promoter hypermethylation 
of Rb1-pathway genes are rare events in UM. Further studies are nec -
essary to understand if the RASSF1  promoter methylation could have 
a pathogenic effect in UM.
P0626. Inactivation of the VHL gene in sporadic clear cell renal 
cancer
D. Mikhaylenko1,2, R. Kurynin3, A. Popov4, O. Karyakin4, M. Enikeev3, Y. Aly -
aev3, M. Nemtsova1,2, D. Zaletayev1,2;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federa -
tion, 2Institute of Molecular Medicine at Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, 
Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Clinic of Urology at Sechenov Moscow Medical 
Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Medical Radiological Research Cen -
ter RAMS, Obninsk, Russian Federation.
Renal cell carcinoma is the most common variant of the kidney can -
cer, which accounts approximately 75% patients with this disease. The 
majority of those tumors are characterized by inactivation of the VHL 
gene suppressor as a result of mutations, allelic deletions and/or meth -
ylation. We have conducted the complex molecular-genetic analysis 
of 64 samples obtained from patients with the clear cell renal cancer. 
VHL mutations were detected by SSCP and subsequent sequencing, 
loss of heterozygosity was analyzed using STR-markers D3S1317 
and D3S1038, methylation was tested by methylsensitive polymerase 
chain reaction. All revealed variations were statistically analyzed 
in respect to the parameters of primary tumors in various groups of 
patients. Seventeen VHL somatic mutations were detected, 12 from 
which were described for the first time. Allelic deletions of VHL were 
found in 31.6%, and methylation - in 7.8% samples of the renal cancer. 
As a whole, VHL inactivating events were presented in 46.9% cases 
of disease, in 51.7% - among renal cancer patients with stage I. We 
have not observed any association of mutations, loss of heterozygos -
ity and methylation with clinical-pathological parameters of disease. 
Results of this investigation can be used in creation of a molecular 
markers system of the renal cancer, for example, a methylation panel 
of suppressor genes, they can be applied in investigation of properties 
of various VHL mutations.
P0627. Molecular genetic testing in Von Hippel-Lindau 
syndrome: limitations and implication for genetic counselling.
B. Quintáns1, M. Sobrido2, B. Graña3, F. Barros2, A. López-Soto4, M. Castro5, J. 
Castro2, A. Carracedo2;  
1Grupo de Medicina Xenómica-Hospital Clínico Universitario, Santiago de Com -
postela, Spain, 2Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Servicio de Oncología-Hospital Clínico Universitario, 
Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 4Servicio de Medicina Interna-Hospital Comar -
cal do Salnés, Vilagarcía de Arousa, Spain, 5Servicio de Neurología-Complejo 
Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain.
Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) is a dominantly inherited cancer syndrome 
caused by mutations in the VHL tumour suppressor gene. Tumours 
associated to VHL are haemangioblastomas of brain, spinal cord, and 
retina, renal cell carcinoma, pheochromocytoma and endolymphatic 
sac tumours. Manifestations and severity are highly variable within 
and between families. Molecular genetic testing is indicated for at-risk 
subjects in order to identify those deserving surveillance. We present 
two kindreds with clinical diagnosis of VHL, molecular genetic test -
ing and counselling. Proband of FamS had bilateral renal carcinoma, 
kidney and pancreatic cysts, a cerebellar syndrome since infancy 
and neck-face dystonia, but no brain or spinal haemangioblastomas. 
Family history: daughter (renal and pancreatic cysts), son (testicular 
cysts), maternal aunt (metastasic tumour), and cousin (pheochromo -
cytoma age 30). A mutation not previously described in VHL was found 
in the proband and both affected children: c.261_263delATGinsGCT 
(W88L). A third, 9-year old child, tested negative for W88L. The muta -
tion was not present in her cousin. In FamV two individuals fulfilled 
VHL criteria (brain and spinal cord haemangioblastomas, pancreatic 
and renal cysts). No mutations were identified in VHL after sequencing 
and dosage analysis by MLPA. Genetic counselling was requested for 
a 28 year-old, asymptomatic sibling. None of the affected individuals 
showed retinal angiomas, one of the cardinal features of VHL. These 
families exemplify practical situations in which genetic counselling may 
be hampered: 1) Novel mutations without proven pathogenicity, 2) Tu -
mours of the VHL spectrum in family members not co-segregating the 
mutation (phenocopies) and 3) Failure to identify the causative muta -
tion.
P0628. A frequent XPC mutation in xeroderma pigmentosum 
patients from North Africa
N. Soufir1, A. Sarasin2, A. Bourillon1, A. Stary2, K. Khadir3, B. Grandchamp1, H. 
Benchikhi3;  
1Hopital Bichat, APHP, Paris, France, 2Institut gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 
3CHU Ibn Rochd, Casablanca, Morocco.
Introduction. Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) is a rare autosomal reces -
sive disorder that is associated with a germline nucleotide excision re -
pair defect. Patients exhibit extreme sensitivity to sunlight and a 4000-
fold increased frequency of skin cancers. Seven XP complementation 
groups and a variant group have been identified, three of which are 
believed to be more frequent (XPC, XPA, XPD-ERCC2).
Methods. We investigated the role of XPC, XPD and XPA genes in 
eight unrelated consanguineous XP families from Maghreb (six from 
Morocco, two from Tunisia). All index cases presented typical XP 
symptoms including pronounced photosensitivity, multiple basal cell 
carcinomas (80%), and malignant melanomas (20%). DNAs was ex -
tracted after informed consent and initially subject to microsatellite 
analysis by studying 2 microsatellites located in each three XP gene. 
Homozygous patients were further analysed by sequencing the entire 
gene coding sequence on a ABIPRISM 3130.
Results: A previously reported and recurrent homozygous nonsense 
mutation in the XPA gene, R228X, was found in a patient from Tunisia. 
Surprisingly, in the remaining seven unrelated families (87%), we iden -
tified the same homozygous frameshift mutation, c.1643_1644delTG, 
p.V548AfsX572. This mutation was previously reported in two other 
unrelated families from Maghreb. XPC haplotype analysis highly sug -
gested a common fondator effect.
Conclusion. Our study suggests a predominant involvement of XPC 
as a XP susceptibility gene in countries from North Africa. The high 
frequency of the frameshift XPC mutation could, if confirmed, simplify 
the molecular diagnosis of XP patients from Maghreb, and facilitate 
prenatal diagnosis if requested by the families.Cancer genetics1
Po05. Molecular and biochemical basis of 
disease
P0629. The relationship between the -765G>C COX-2 
polymorphism and the development of cutaneous inflammatory 
process
S. Schipor1, R. Cocoş2, E. Păune-Buşe3, I. Nicolae4, R. Creţu2, A. Ştefănescu-
Winterlike5, F. Raicu6,7;  
1C. I. Parhon Institute of Endocrinology, Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2Carol 
Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 3University 
of Bucharest, Faculty of Biology, Bucharest, Romania, 4Centre of Dermato -
venereology, Dermato-venerological Hospital “Prof. S. Longhin”, Bucharest, 
Romania, 5Caritas Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 6Department of Clini -
cal Sciences and Imaging G. d’Annunzio University Foundation Chieti-Pescara, 
Chieti-Pescara, Italy, 7Aging Research Center (CESI), G’ d’Annunzio University 
Foundation, Chieti, Chieti, Italy.
Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is up-regulated in epidermis inflamma -
tory processes and plays an important role in control of keratinocytes 
proliferation and differentiation. We analysed the association between 
COX-2 polymorphism (-765G>C) and molecular markers that quantify 
the inflammatory reaction.
The study was conducted on 67 subjects, divided into 3 groups: 26 
normal subjects in group 1, 28 patients with cutaneous malign tumors 
in group 2 and 13 patients with psoriasis in group 3.
The intensity of inflammatory process was assessed by determining 
the seric levels of C-reactive protein (CRP), fibrinogen and alpha1-acid 
glycoprotein (AAG). The -765 G>C variant of the COX-2 gene was 
genotyped by restriction endonuclease digestion of polymerase chain 
reaction products.
Patients carrying the -765C allele had markedly lower seric levels of 
CRP, AAG and fibrinogen vs patients homozygous for -765G in the 
groups 2, 3 respectively.
The authors suggest that there is an association between COX-2 poly -
morphism (-765G>C) and the amplitude of cutaneous inflammation, 
probably as a result of the alteration of binding sites from COX-2 gene 
promoter for various transcription factors that participate in the initia -
tion and progression/resolution of inflammatory process.
P0630. Progressive Familial Intrahepatic Cholestasis type 3 
(PFIC3): evidence of allelic heterogeneity and of a possible 
evolutionary marker for mammalian ABCB4 genes
D. Degiorgio1, C. Colombo2, M. Seia1, L. Porcaro1, V. Paracchini1, L. Costanti -
no1, L. Zazzeron2, D. Bordo3, D. A. Coviello1;  
1Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Centro Fibrosi Cistica, 
Università degli Studi di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Poli -
clinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 3Bioinformatica e Proteomica 
Strutturale, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genoa, Italy.
PFIC3 is an autosomal-recessive disorder due to mutations in the 
ATP-binding cassette, sub-family B, member 4 gene ( ABCB4 ). ABCB4 
is the liver-specific membrane transporter of phosphatidylcholine, a 
major and exclusive component of mammalian bile. The disease is 
characterized by early onset of cholestasis with high serum-glutam -
yltranspeptidase activity, that progresses to cirrhosis and liver failure 
before adulthood. We analysed 68 children with a PFIC3 phenotype 
by sequencing of the entire open reading frame of ABCB4  gene.In 13 
patients mutations were found on both alleles, whereas in 5 cases only 
one mutated allele was identified; in total, 31 different mutated ABCB4  
alleles were observed with 25 new mutations. Exon 17 showed a high -
er frequency of mutations (20.7%). The elucidation of the three-dimen -
sional structure of bacterial homologues allows to locate the position 
of the mutated amino acids in the predicted ABCB4 tertiary structure. 
The mutations are located in the NBDs (8 mutations, accounting for 
the 27.6% of the total), in the TMDs (10 cases, 34.5%) and in the ICDs 
(9 cases, 31%); only, one mutation was found in the EC4 and one in 
the linker region. Our results indicate a broad allelic heterogeneity of 
the disease with exon 17 that, as recently demonstrated for the closely 
related paralogous ABCB1  gene, could contain an evolutionary marker 
for mammalian ABCB4  genes in the seventh transmembrane segment 
(TM7). The low detection rate of ABCB4  mutation in our patients (about 
26%) suggest genetic heterogeneity of PFIC type 3 disease.P0631. ABCB4 molecular characterization in patients with 
Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy (ICP): is high serum 
gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase (gammaGT) level a marker for 
unambiguous genetic deficiency?
D. Degiorgio1, B. Acaia2, C. Colombo3, S. Saino2, M. Seia1, L. Porcaro1, V. 
Paracchini1, L. Costantino1, D. A. Coviello1;  
1Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Po -
liclinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 2Patologia della Gravidanza, 
II Clinica Ostetrica, Fondazione IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Man -
giagalli Regina Elena, Milan, Italy, 3Centro Fibrosi Cistica, Università degli Studi 
di Milano, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e 
Regina Elena, Milan, Italy.
Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) is a disorder that occurs 
mainly in the third trimester of pregnancy and is characterized by pru -
ritus, elevated fasting serum bile acids (>10μmol/L), and spontaneous 
relief of signs and symptoms within 2 to 3 weeks after delivery. It is 
regarded as a benign disease with no meaningful consequences to 
the mother but associated to an increased perinatal risk with increased 
rates of fetal morbidity and mortality. To date, γGT is considered a 
marker to differentiate between ICP due to ABCB4 deficiency (high 
γGT) from ICP due to ATP8B1 or BSEP deficiency (normal γGT). 
ABCB4 mediates the translocation of phospholipids across the cana -
licular membrane of the hepatocyte, a process that is of crucial im -
portance in protecting cholangiocyte membranes from high concentra -
tions of detergent bile acids. We enrolled 26 women with ICP pheno -
type and all the 27 coding exons of ABCB4 were sequenced. In three 
women we identified heterozygous missense mutations: two of them 
are already described (T424A, R590Q) in others ABCB4 deficient phe -
notype and one is a new mutation (L627V); all three mutations are 
located in the very well conserved Nucleotide Binding Domain. Our 
patients had serum γGT values within the normal range. Our finding 
indicate that ABCB4  mutations are present not only in ICP patients 
with high γGT but also in women with normal γGT; these results are 
in agreement with the recent finding by linkage analysis of a splice 
site mutation in a large ICP Mennonite pedigree (Schneider G. et al.; 
Hepatology 2007; 45(1):150-8).
P0632. A missense CNGA3 mutation which is rare in Western 
populations is frequent among both Muslim and Oriental Jewish 
patients with achromatopsia
D. Sharon , L. Bida, A. Greenberg, A. Blumenfeld, S. Merin, A. Rosenmann, E. 
Banin;  
Hadassah- Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
Achromatopsia is a heterogeneous autosomal recessive condition 
characterized by the absence of cone function causing reduced vi -
sual acuity, nystagmus, photophobia and lack of color vision. Three 
causative genes have been identified so far. Aiming to study the ge -
netic basis of achromatopsia in the Israeli population, we recruited 9 
Arab-Muslim and 7 Jewish families with the disease. Clinical evalu -
ation included a full ophthalmologic examination, color vision testing 
and full-field electroretinography. We excluded the most frequently 
reported achromatopsia-causing mutation, c.del1148C in the CNGB3 
gene, in all studied patients. In contrast, a rare missense CNGA3 mu -
tation (c.1585g>a, V529M) that was reported in only three patients 
worldwide, was found homozygously in patients from 5 families and 
heterozygously in patients from 2 additional families. Interestingly, the 
V529M mutation was found in both Arab-Muslim families (6/18 chro -
mosomes, 33%) and Oriental Jewish families from Iraq, Iran, Buchara, 
and Afghanistan (6/8 chromosomes, 75%). On the other hand, it was 
not found in any of the 6 analyzed chromosomes from Ashkenazi-
Jewish origin. The mutation was also absent in 13 patients with the 
clinical diagnosis of cone dystrophy. Haplotype analysis using markers 
located within the CNGA3 gene suggested two different CNGA3 hap -
lotypes in both groups. In summary, we report here the identification 
of a specific CNGA3 mutation which is the cause of disease in 44% of 
Israeli achromatopsia cases. Our results demonstrate genetic differ -
ences in the etiology of achromatopsia between the Israeli population 
and the American / European populations that were thus far reported 
in the literature.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
P0633. Acute intermittent porphyria: impact of newly found 
mutations on the biochemical and enzymatic protein properties
D. Ulbrichova , M. Hrdinka, J. Zeman, P. Martasek;  
1st School of Medicine, Prague 2, Czech Republic.
Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is a low-penetrant autosomal domi -
nant inborn error. It results from the half-normal activity of porphobi -
linogen deaminase (PBGD, EC 4.3.1.8), the third enzyme in the heme 
biosynthetic pathway. AIP is manifested by life-threatening neurovis -
ceral attacks. Acute attack can be provoked by various factors such 
as drugs, hormones, and alcohol, and is accompanied by massive 
accumulation of porphyrin precursors in the urine. To date, over 300 
different mutations have been found in the PBGD gene.
During systematic genetic analysis of Czech and Slovak AIP patients, 
we found four novel mutations (610 C>A, 675 delA, 750 A>T, 966 insA) 
and five previously reported mutations (76 C>T, 77 G>A, 518 G>A, 
771+1 G>T, 973 insG) in eight unrelated families. Mutational screen -
ing was performed by PCR, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis 
(DGGE), and DNA sequencing.
To establish the effects of these mutations on the protein structure of 
PBGD, we expressed mutant constructs with the described mutations 
in E. coli,  and we analyzed their biochemical and enzymatic properties. 
All purified enzymes carrying causative mutations had relative activi -
ties lower then 1.0 % of the average level expressed by the normal 
allele.
The identification and characterization of these novel mutations within 
the PBGD gene of the newly diagnosed AIP patients provide insight 
into the molecular heterogeneity of AIP. Investigation of the effects of 
the present mutations on the protein structure and function provide 
further understanding of the molecular basis and interaction of the mol -
ecules in the system.
(Supported by Grants MSM0021620806, 1M6837805002, GAUK)
P0634. Neurodegeneration in X-Adrenoleukodystrophy: a 
mitochondrial disease?
A. Pujol1, S. Fourcade1, J. López-Erauskin1, A. Schlüter1, E. Domènech-Es -
tévez1, J. Galino1, J. Martínez-García1, M. Portero-Otin2, I. Ferrer1;  
1IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, BArcelona, Spain, 2Universitat de Lleida, 
Lleida, Spain.
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD), is the most frequent inher -
ited monogenic demyelinating disease (minimal incidence 1:17,000). 
X-ALD leads to death in boys or to motor disability in adults (adreno -
myeloneuropathy or AMN). The gene mutated in the disease (ABCD1) 
is a peroxisomal ATP-binding transporter of very-long-chain-fatty acids 
(VLCFAs), whose accumulation in plasma and tissues is the hallmark 
of the disease. We have generated and characterized mouse mod -
els for X-ALD, by classical knockout of the ABCD1 gene. These mice 
exhibit a late-onset phenotype closely related to AMN patients, with 
neurodegenerative features (excitotoxicity, microgliosis, axonal de -
generation, slower nerve conduction velocity and psychomotor impair -
ment), that begins at 15 months of age (1,2,3). The pathogenesis of 
X-ALD is largely unknown, so are the mechanisms of toxicity through 
VLCFAs. Using microarrays, Q-PCR and Western Blots of mouse spi -
nal cords, we have identified and confirmed dysregulation of oxida -
tive stress routes and mitochondria depletion as early events in the 
pathogenesis. Indeed, markers of oxidative lesions of lipids (MDAL), 
glucides (CML) and proteins (AASA) are upregulated in mutant spinal 
cords. Treatment with VLCFAs of glial and neuronal cultures induces 
ROS generation and decrease of mitochondria membrane potential. 
Ex-vivo organotypic spinal cord slice cultures recapitulate closely the 
pathogenic events seen in spinal cords, and will constitute a powerful 
screening tool for therapeutic agents, and for deciphering molecular 
cues underlying neurodegeneration in X-ALD.
(1) Pujol et al, Hum Mol Genet. 2002 Mar 1;11(5):499-505; (2) Pujol 
et al, Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Dec1;13(23):2997-3006; (3) Ferrer et al, 
Hum Mol Genet 14(23):3565-77 (2005)
P0635. Functional analysis of secretion-impaired fibrinogen 
mutants rescued at low temperature: implications for treatment 
of protein-misfolding disorders.
D. Vu1, C. Di Sanza1, M. Neerman-Arbez1,2;  
1University Medical Centre, Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, 
Geneva, Switzerland, 2University Hospital, Division of Angiology and Haemo -stasis, Geneva, Switzerland.
Congenital afibrinogenemia is a rare bleeding disorder characterised 
by the complete absence of fibrinogen in blood. To date, 72 causative 
mutations accounting for complete fibrinogen deficiency have been 
identified in the three fibrinogen genes, FGA, FGB and FGG . Among 
these, 9 missense or late-truncating nonsense mutations have been 
shown to specifically impair secretion of fully assembled fibrinogen 
molecules, implying the existence of a quality control for fibrinogen 
secretion. We previously revealed opposite roles for the homologous 
betaC and gammaC domains in secretion and demonstrated that se -
cretion-impaired fibrinogen mutants are retained in a pre-Golgi com -
partment. The aim of this study was to restore the secretion of these 
mutants and study the properties of the rescued fibrinogen hexamers. 
We found that the secretion defect of two missense mutants but not 
that of late-truncating nonsense mutants can be partially corrected by 
incubating cells at low temperature (27°C) in a co-transfected COS-7 
cell model. By contrast, exposure of cells to the chemical chaperones 
4-phenylbutyrate (4-PBA), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and triethyl -
amine N-oxide (TMAO) failed to rescue the secretion of any mutant. 
The mutants rescued at low temperature could be incorporated into 
fibrin clots and formed factor XIII-mediated gamma-gamma dimers in 
contrast to a dysfibrinogenemia mutant, used as a negative control for 
these assays. However, plasmin digestion analyses revealed abnor -
mal patterns for the mutants compared to normal fibrinogen, suggest -
ing that the rescued mutants have a non-native conformation. Our data 
underline the importance of careful functional investigations before 
validating chemical or pharmacological chaperone-based therapies for 
misfolded proteins.
P0636. CACNA1F gene mutation is behind Åland Island eye 
disease
R. Jalkanen1,2, N. Bech-Hansen3, R. Tobias3, E. Sankila4,5, M. Mäntyjärvi6, H. 
Forsius4, A. de la Chapelle7, T. Alitalo1,2;  
1Biomedicum Helsinki, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Helsinki 
University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Medical Genetics, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Departments of Medical Genetics and 
Surgery, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 4The Folkhälsan Institute 
of Genetics, Department of Molecular Genetics and Population Genetics Unit, 
Helsinki, Finland, 5Department of Ophthalmology, Helsinki University Central 
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 6Department of Ophthalmology, University of Kuo -
pio, Kuopio, Finland, 7Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH, United States.
Åland Island eye disease (AIED), also known as Forsius-Eriksson 
syndrome, is an X-chromosomal recessive retinal disease character -
ized by a combination of fundal hypopigmentation, decreased visual 
acuity due to foveal hypoplasia, nystagmus, astigmatism, protan color 
vision defect, progressive myopia and defective dark adaptation. We 
have previously localized AIED to the pericentromeric region of the 
X-chromosome, but the causative gene is still unknown. In this study, 
we screened the CACNA1F  gene from genomic DNA and lymphoblast 
mRNA to identify the mutation underlying the disease phenotype in 
the original AIED family. A novel deletion in the CACNA1F  gene was 
identified, covering exon 30 and portions of the flanking introns. Ex -
pression studies indicated that the particular exon was excluded from 
the mRNA. This CACNA1F  mutation co-segregated completely with 
the disease phenotype in the AIED family and was not observed in 121 
control chromosomes. Mutations in CACNA1F  are known to cause 
the incomplete form of X-linked congenital stationary night blindness 
(CSNB2). Since the clinical picture of AIED is quite similar to CSNB2, 
it has long been discussed, whether these disorders might be allelic or 
form a single entity. CACNA1F  mutations have been identified in pa -
tients with an AIED-like phenotype, but previous studies have failed to 
reveal any CACNA1F  mutation in patients of the original AIED family. 
Our results now show that AIED is caused by a novel deletion mutation 
within CACNA1F .
P0637. Gene conversion leading to a severe Adenylate Kinase 
deficiency.
C. Brunel , H. Wajcman, M. Goossens, S. Pissard;  
INSERM U841, Eq 11, Lab Biochimie et Génétique, Créteil, France.
We describe a family in which a 15-year-old boy displays a non-sphe -
rocytic chronic haemolytic anaemia associated with a mental retarda -
tion, and a Willebrand disease. This phenotype led us to measure the Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
activities of erythrocyte enzymes including the Adenylate Kinase 1. The 
proband had an AK1 deficiency (OMIM:103000) with an activity equal 
to 0. This rare recessive disorder is due to mutations in AK1 (Gen -
Bank J04809; 9q34.12). Molecular screening of the AK1 gene showed 
the proband to be homozygous for a missense mutation within exon 4 
(c.63G>T; p.Lys21Asn) whereas the mother was heterozygous for this 
mutation and the father wild type. To explain this genetic discrepancy, 
we searched a familial inconsistency and/or a deletion in the AK1 pa -
ternal allele in the proband. Microsatellites analysis on chromosomes 
1 to 5 showed an exclusion of paternity; and using QMPSF method we 
found that the proband was not hemizygous for the AK1 exon 4. We 
also showed that the proband had two different chromosomes 9, by 
studying haplotypes for several microsatellites tightly surrounding the 
AK1 locus, ruling out the hypothesis of a consanguinity. Considering 
the rarity of the AK1 deficiency (only 9 families described including 
3 molecular characterizations), the most likely event leading to this 
genotype should be a conversion of the paternal allele.
Enzymes activities and haplotypes surrounding AK1 locus (9q34.1)
Proband Mother Father
AK1 
(N: 164-228 UI/gHb)0 UI/gHb 108 UI/gHb 292 UI/gHb
Hexokinase 
(N: 0.74-1.14 UI/gHb)1.00 UI/gHb 0.80 UI/gHb 0.85 UI/gHb
D9S290  
D9S159  
D9S1831  
2.5 Mb  
D9S179  
D9S1847  
D9S164262/262 
301/299 
258/258 
AK1 
247/233 
190/182 
91/96262/260 
301/293 
258/243 
AK1 
247/241 
190/182 
91/97
P0638. Elevated alpha synuclein mRNA levels are associated 
with alcohol dependence
A. E. Taraskina1, V. A. Filimonov2, U. A. Kozlovskaya1, M. N. Morozova1, D. V. 
Gaschin2, A. Schwarzman1;  
1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Medical Center «Bekhterev», Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Dopaminergic neurotransmission has been suggested to be a main 
system mediating alcohol dependence. However, genetic factors that 
contribute to risk for alcohol addiction are unknown. We hypothesize 
that genetic variations of gene expression of key proteins of dopa -
minergic system determine the basic phenotypes associated with al -
cohol dependence. Several studies have linked alcohol dependence 
phenotypes to chromosome 4. One candidate gene is a gene cod -
ing for alpha synuclein (SNCA). Therefore, the main goal of our study 
was to investigate whether the expression of alpha synuclein gene is 
associated with alcoholism. The SNCA mRNA expression level was 
measured by quantitative polymerase chain reaction in the peripheral 
lymphocytes of 26 male alcoholics and 20 nondrinking healthy control 
subjects from North West region of Russia. The expression differences 
between control and alcohol were evaluated using one-way ANOVA the 
SPSS 12.0 software package. The SNCA expression in patients with 
alcoholism (1,2 ΔCT; SD 0,53; p=0,006) was significantly higher when 
compared with healthy control subjects (0,8 ΔCT; SD 0,4). In contrast, 
no differences were found for mRNA expression for transcription fac -
tor Nurr1(NR4A2) in lymphocytes between these groups (p=0,09). We 
suggest that increased level of alpha synuclein might contribute to the 
development of alcohol dependence in addicted patients.
This work was supported by Russian Fund for Basic Research (grand 
06-04-49075-a).
P0639. Sixteen novel mutations identified in COLA , COLA  
and COLA  genes in Slovenian families with Alport syndrome 
and benign familial hematuria
D. Glavac1, M. Šlajpah1, A. Meglič2, A. Vizjak1, A. Hvala1, M. Ravnik-Glavač1, 
D. Ferluga1;  
1Department of Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljublja -
na, Slovenia, 2Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University Medical Center 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Alport syndrome and benign familial hematuria are type IV collagen 
inherited disorders. Mutations in COL4A5  are generally believed to 
cause X-linked Alport syndrome, while mutations in COL4A3  and CO-L4A4  genes can be associated with the autosomal recessive and dom -
inant type of Alport syndrome or benign familial hematuria. In view of 
the wide spectrum of phenotypes, an exact diagnosis is sometimes dif -
ficult to achieve. This study involved screening each exon with bound -
ary intronic sequences of COL4A3 , COL4A4  and COL4A5  genes by 
optimised PCR-SSCP analysis in 17 families with Alport syndrome and 
in 40 families diagnosed as having benign familial hematuria. Twelve 
different mutations were found in the COL4A5  gene in Alport syndrome 
patients, comprising nine missense mutations, a splice site mutation, 
a mutation causing frameshift and a nonsense mutation. One of the 
missense mutations (p.G624D) was present not only in one family with 
Alport syndrome, but also in five families with suspected benign fa -
milial hematuria. Three heterozygous mutations in the COL4A3  gene 
(two missense and one frameshift) and four heterozygous mutations 
in COL4A4  (two splice site, one in-frame deletion and one missense) 
were identified in patients with benign familial hematuria.
P0640. Cytoskeleton proteins are modulators of mutant tau-
induced neurodegeneration in drosophila
O. Blard, S. Feuillette, J. Bou, B. Chaumette, T. Frebourg, D. Campion, M. 
Lecourtois ;  
Inserm U614 and Rouen University Hospital, Institute for Biomedical Research, 
Rouen, France.
Tauopathies, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and fronto-temporal 
dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17), are 
a group of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by the presence 
of intraneuronal filamentous inclusions of aberrantly phosphorylated 
tau. Tau is a neuronal microtubule-associated protein involved in mi -
crotubule assembly and stabilization. Currently, the molecular mecha -
nisms underlying tau-mediated cellular toxicity remain elusive. To ad -
dress the determinants of tau neurotoxicity, we first characterized in 
Drosophila the cellular alterations resulting from the overexpression 
of a mutant form of human tau associated with FTDP-17 (tau V337M). 
We found that the overexpression of tau V337M, in Drosophila  lar-
val motor neurons, induced disruption of the microtubular network at 
presynaptic nerve terminals and changes in neuromuscular junctions 
morphological features. Second, we performed an extensive misex -
pression screen to identify genetic modifiers of the tau V337M-induced 
neurodegeneration. The screening of 1250 mutant Drosophila  lines al -
lowed us to recover 30 modifier genes, including several components 
of the cytoskeleton, and particularly from the actin network. Further -
more, we found that numerous tau modulators identified in our screen 
were involved in maintenance of synaptic function. Taken together, 
these findings strongly suggest that disruption of the microtubule net -
work in presynaptic nerve terminals could constitute early events in the 
pathological process leading to synaptic dysfunction in tauopathies.
P0641. Possible mechanism of mirror symmetry motifs forming 
in amyloidogenic proteins
V. V. Egorov1, J. P. Garmaj2;  
1Influenza Institute, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2State Polytechnical 
University, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation.
In our previous investigation we showed that mirror symmetry motifs 
play role in abnormal fibrillogenesis of several proteins. Now we sug -
gest the mechanism of such motifs forming. This mechanism is similar 
to mechanism of the expansion diseases developement. So we show 
that expansion of repeats in DNA sequence may lead to mirror sym -
metry motifs forming. A computational method for mining shared short 
repeats in protein sequence was developed. Testing of our in silico 
method on sequence of prion protein and alpha-synuclein allowed us 
to find known repeats in amyloidogenic determinants of these proteins. 
This method can be useful for mining of potential amyloidogenic de -
terminants in proteins. Proposed mechanism allow us to suggest a 
role of short DNA repeats in forming of protein-protein interaction sites 
during evolution.
P0642. A novel frameshift mutation in SLC12A6 in patients with 
Andermann syndrome.
E. Nelis1, K. Yilmaz2, P. De Jonghe1,3;  
1Neurogenetics Group, VIB - Department of Molecular Genetics, University of 
Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 3University Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
Hospital Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium.
Andermann syndrome (OMIM 218000) or agenesis of the corpus cal -
losum with peripheral neuropathy (ACCPN) is an autosomal reces -
sive trait characterised by severe progressive motor and sensory neu -
ropathy, mental retardation and a variable degree of agenesis of the 
corpus callosum. The disease is rare, but has a high prevalence in 
the province of Quebec, Canada due to a founder effect. Up to date 
five different protein-truncating mutations and one missense mutation 
were found in the gene that encodes the solute carrier family 12 (po -
tassium/chloride transporters), member 6 (SLC12A6)(1,2).
Here we report a Turkish family with a novel homozygous truncating 
mutation in SLC12A6 in 2 sibs. The patients have agenesis of the 
corpus callosum and motor and sensory neuropathy consistent with 
the diagnosis of Andermann syndrome. Mutation screening was per -
formed by sequencing analysis of all coding exons and intron/exon 
boundaries of SLC12A6 (NM_133647.1). In exon 21, a 1-bp deletion 
was detected at nucleotide position 2902 (c.2902delC). This mutation 
is predicted to cause a frameshift and a premature stop (Arg968fsX6), 
deleting the K-Cl co-transporter domain of the SLC12A6 protein. The 
mutation was homozygous in both patients; the asymptomatic parents 
were heterozygous for the sequence variation. This study extends the 
spectrum of SLC12A6 mutations observed in patients with Andermann 
syndrome.
1. Howard HC et al. Nat Genet 2002; 32(3):384-392.
2. Uyanik G et al. Neurology 2006; 66(7):1044-1048.
P0643. Exclusion of SARA2 gene in 2 families with genetic lipid 
malabsorption syndrome: Anderson’s disease (or Chylomicron 
Retention Disease).
M. Varret1, M. Parisot2, M. Silvain3, A. Grodet4, A. Munnich1, C. Boileau1, L. 
Ferkdadji5, L. P. Aggerbeck3, J. Schmitz6, M. E. Samson-Bouma7;  
1INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2INSERM U781, Paris, France, 3Centre de Gé -
nétique Moléculaire, CNRS, Gif sur Yvette, France, 4INSERM U773 / Université 
Paris VII D Diderot, Paris, France, 5Service d’Anatomie Pathologique, Hôpital R 
Debré, Paris, France, 6Département de Pédiatrie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Mala -
des, Paris, France, 7INSERM U773, Paris, France.
The study of naturally occurring mutations in hypocholesterolemic pa -
tients presenting with lipid malabsorption syndrome has been useful 
in identifying new target for lipid-lowering therapy. Anderson’s disease 
(or Chylomicron Retention Disease), is a very rare lipid malabsorp -
tion syndrome, usually diagnosed in early infancy, characterized by 
an inability to export dietary lipids as chylomicrons due to a recessive 
genetic defect in lipoprotein secretion. Recently, the molecular basis 
of this defect was shown to be due to mutations in the SARA2 gene 
encoding the Sar1b protein. This protein is involved in the vesicular 
transport between the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi appara -
tus. We report here 4 patients from 2 families, clearly diagnosed as 
Anderson’s disease patients. They had low levels of cholesterol and 
of lipid soluble vitamins. No chylomicrons were secreted after a fat 
load, and alpha and betalipoproteins were 50% of normal. Endoscopy 
showed a typical white stippling-like hoar frosting covering the intesti -
nal mucosal surface. Ultrastructural examination of intestinal biopsies 
showed an accumulation of free lipid and lipoprotein-like particles, re -
flecting the secretory defect. Direct sequencing of the 7 exons of the 
SARA 2 gene revealed no mutation. This result thus excludes, in these 
patients, SARA2 as the molecular basis of the lipoprotein secretory 
defect and suggests the existence of at least another gene. Proteins 
involved in the intracellular processing of chylomicron secretion would 
be good candidates.
Informed written consent was obtained from all participants or from 
their legal guardians (RBM 93018, CCPPRB 94002).
P0644. Two novel mutations in the AR gene in Greek patients 
with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome
A. Galani1, C. Sofocleous1, F. Karahaliou2, A. Papathanasiou3, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, 
E. Kanavakis1, A. Kalpini-Mavrou1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Choremeio Research Laboratory, Agia Sofia 
Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Growth and Development, 
P. and A. Kyriakou Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Department of Endo -
crinology, P. and A. Kyriakou Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome (AIS) is an X-linked disorder, charac -
terized by incomplete or absent virilization in 46XY individuals, caused 
by mutations along the Androgen Receptor (AR) gene. We report on two novel mutations, one frameshift (Gln711ArgfsX787) and one mis -
sense (Leu881Pro) detected in two unrelated  patients referred with 
complete AIS. Patients 1 and 2, aged 9 and 14 years old respectively, 
had a 46, XY karyotype but exhibited a complete female phenotype. 
Both presented with inguinal hernia, while patient 2 also reported pri -
mary amenorrhea. PCR reaction was performed for exons 2-8 of the 
AR gene followed by direct sequencing. The Gln711ArgfsX787 mu -
tation, revealed in patient 1, concerns a single nucleotide deletion 
(2494delA) at codon 711. This frameshift mutation results in glutamine 
to arginine substitution at that position as well as in the formation of a 
premature stop codon at position 787. Further molecular analysis re -
vealed the same mutation in patient’s mother as well as in two affected 
with CAIS maternal aunts. The Leu881Pro mutation, detected in pa -
tient 2, is a single base alteration (3004 T>C) that results in leucine to 
proline substitution at position 881. Molecular analysis of the patient’s 
mother revealed normal alleles in her peripheral blood thus implying 
that the mutation is either de novo or the result of a possible gametic 
mosaicism. Both mutations are reported for the first time and provide 
further evidence on the phenotypic outcome of various AR mutations.
Acknowledgements
The project is co-financed within Op. Education by the ESF (European 
Social Fund) and National Resources.
P0645. G743E mutation in the androgen receptor gene detected 
in a familial primary amenorrhea
R. Braham1, S. Trimeche1, B. Lakhal1, H. Elghezal1, M. Gribaa1, F. Audran2, C. 
Sultan2, L. Chaieb1, A. Saad1;  
1Hopital Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Hopital Lapeyronie, Montpellier, 
France.
Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) is an X-linked genetic disorder 
of male sexual differentiation caused by mutations in the androgen 
receptor (AR) gene. The defects of receptor function that have been 
characterized fall into two categories. The first are those that disrupt 
the primary sequence of the AR. The second is that which is caused by 
single amino acid substitutions within the AR protein. Mutations in the 
AR gene result in a wide range of AIS phenotypes.
We report here a new case of amino acid replacement G◊E at codon 
743 in exon 5 within the hormone binding domain of the AR in a 17-
year-old pubertal female who consulted for primary amenorrhea. She 
had a family history of amenorrhea (2 aunts) but no history of am -
biguous genitalia. She had fully developed breasts, pubic hairs, and 
no axillary hair (Tanner stage M4, P3, A0). External genitalia were a 
normally sized clitoris, normal labia majora and minora. The follow -
ing serum levels of hormones were determined: Testosterone, 9,6 ng/
ml; estradiol, 50 pg/ml and LH, 5,6 mUI/ml. A sonogram of the pelvis 
demonstrates the absence of uterus and the presence of testes in the 
inguinal canal. The karyotype was 46,XY. This female phenotype with 
pubic hair is defined as partial AIS.
At our knowledge, this mutation was identified in only one case led to 
complete AIS. With the advent of molecular analysis of the AR gene, 
it was hoped that a correlation between a molecular defect and a par -
ticular phenotype could be established.
P0646. Analysis of molecular defects in Polish Angelman 
Syndrome patients
M. Gos1,2, A. Szpecht-Potocka1, R. Struniawski1, J. Polosak1, M. Laniewski-
Wolk1, J. Bal1, T. Mazurczak1;  
1National Research Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2MSCM 
Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland.
Angelman Syndrome (AS) is a rare neurogenetic disorder that is 
caused by impaired UBE3A  gene expression resulting from changes 
in the parental genomic imprinting or specific mutations. Four known 
types of molecular defects might be responsible for the AS: deletion 
of 15q11-q13 region, paternal uniparental disomy, imprinting defects 
or UBE3A  mutations. The imprinting defects may result from micro -
deletion of the imprinting center or somatic mosaicism. The aim of the 
study was the identification of molecular defect in the patients with 
clinical manifestation of AS.
Two hundred twelve patients with clinical symptoms of AS were in -
cluded in the study. First, the analysis of imprinting defect was done 
with PCR-based DNA methylation analysis of PW71  and SNRPN  loci 
(MS-PCR). When the mosaic methylation pattern was detected, the 
quantitative methylation assay (QAMA) has been performed (28 cas -Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
es). The patients with the normal methylation pattern were qualified to 
the analysis of the UBE3A  coding sequence.
The QAMA analysis did not reveal somatic mosaicism in any of the 
patients selected for this procedure. In patients without imprinting de -
fect several single nucleotide polymorphisms have been found (T/G in 
intron 7, T/C in intron 9, A/G in exon 13, insT in intron 6). In one patient, 
the G>A substitution in exon 6 was found that changes alanine into 
threonine within hydrophobic domain of the protein.
The molecular analysis performed for AS patients revealed several 
new genetic variantsin UBE3A . Moreover, the QAMA method was de -
veloped for the mosaicism detection and can be used to diagnostic 
procedure of AS.
P0647. RSPO4 mutations cause autosomal recessive anonychia 
and cluster in the furin-like cysteine-rich domains of the Wnt 
signaling ligand R-spondin 4
C. Bergmann1, J. Senderek1, V. Frank1, C. T. Thiel2, A. B. Ekici2, M. van 
Steensel3, S. Dominik4, G. Nürnberg4, A. Akar5, M. Lerone6, D. Rigopoulos7, O. 
Caglayan8, M. Dundar8, H. Hamm9, P. Nürnberg4, A. Reis2, J. Frank3, K. Zerres1;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Aachen, Germany, 2Department of Human 
Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 3Department of Dermatology, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands, 4Cologne Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany, 5Department 
of Dermatology, Ankara, Turkey, 6U.O. Genetica Medica, Genova, Italy, 7Depart -
ment of Dermatology, Athens, Greece, 8Department of Medical Genetics, Kay -
seri, Turkey, 9Department of Dermatology, Würzburg, Germany.
Congenital anonychia is a rare autosomal recessive disorder charac -
terized by absence of finger- and toenails. In a large German non-con -
sanguineous family with four affected siblings with isolated total con -
genital anonychia we performed genome-wide mapping and showed 
linkage to 20p13. Analysis of the RSPO4 gene within this interval 
revealed homozygous and compound heterozygous mutations in this 
and other families with autosomal recessive anonychia of different eth -
nic origins. All mutations were not present among controls and shown 
to segregate with the disease phenotype. RSPO4 is a member of the 
recently described R-spondin family of secreted proteins that have 
been shown to activate the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway known to 
be evolutionary conserved and pivotal for embryonic development by 
regulation of cell morphology, proliferation, and motility. Given that all 
but one RSPO4 mutations detected so far, affect the highly conserved 
exons 2 and 3 and adjacent introns, it can be postulated that RSPO4 
mutations cluster in the furin-like cysteine-rich domains. This is in line 
with experimental data proposing that for ß-catenin stabilization a 
shortened R-spondin 4 protein comprising just these two furin-like re -
gions is sufficient. Our findings add to the increasing body of evidence 
indicating that mesenchymal-epithelial interactions are crucial in nail 
development and put anonychia on the growing list of congenital mal -
formation syndromes caused by Wnt signaling pathway defects. To the 
best of our knowledge, this is the first gene known to be responsible for 
an isolated, non-syndromic nail disorder.
P0648. Somatic APC mosaicism in FAP quantified by SNaPshot 
analysis
S. Aretz1, D. Stienen1, N. Friedrichs2, S. Stemmler3, S. Uhlhaas1, N. Rahner1, P. 
Propping1, W. Friedl1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2In-
stitute of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of 
Human Genetics, Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
Somatic mutational mosaicism presents a challenge for both molecular 
and clinical diagnostics and may contribute to deviations from predict -
ed genotype-phenotype correlations. During APC mutation screening 
in 1248 unrelated patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), 
we identified 75 cases with an assumed or confirmed de novo muta -
tion. Prescreening methods (PTT, DHPLC) indicated the presence of 
somatic mosaicism in eight cases (11%).
Sequencing of the corresponding fragments revealed very weak muta -
tion signals, pointing to the presence of either nonsense or frameshift 
mutations at low level. All mutations were confirmed and quantified by 
SNaPshot analysis: in leukocyte DNA taken from the eight patients, 
the percentage of mosaicism varied between 5.5% and 77%, while the 
proportion of the mutation in adenomas was consistently higher.
The eight mutations identified as mosaic are localised within codons 
216-1464 of the APC gene. According to the known genotype-pheno -
type correlation, patients with mutations in this region exhibit typical or severe FAP. However, six of the eight patients presented with an 
attenuated or atypical polyposis phenotype.
Our data demonstrate that in a fraction of FAP patients the causative 
APC mutation may not be detected due to weak signals or somatic mo -
saicism that is restricted to tissues other than blood. SNaPshot analy -
sis was proven to be an easy, rapid, and reliable method of confirming 
low-level mutations and evaluating the degree of mosaicism. Part of 
the deviations from the expected phenotype in FAP can be explained 
by the presence of somatic mosaicism.
The study was supported by the Deutsche Krebshilfe.
P0649. Apolipoprotein A5 T-1131C alleles in pediatric patients 
with obesity and metabolic syndrome
K. Horvatovich1, L. Magyari1, A. Maász1, P. Kisfali1, S. Bokor2, B. Faragó1, V. 
Csöngei1, L. Járomi1, E. Sáfrány1, C. Sipeky1, D. Molnár2, B. Melegh1;  
1Medical Genetics and Child Development, Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of 
Pediatrics, Pécs, Hungary.
The prevalence of the metabolic syndrome is elevated among obese 
children and adolescents. The aim of present study was to examine the 
distribution of -T1131 C allele of apolipoprotein A5 gene in pediatric pa -
tients with metabolic syndrome and obesity. A total of 76 children with 
metabolic syndrome and 64 with obesity were studied. In both groups 
the serum triglycerides were significantly higher as compared with 116 
pediatric, or with 189 adult controls (p<0.05). Triglyceride levels in 
children carrying -1131C allele were significantly increased, compared 
to the subjects carrying -1131T allele (p<0.05). In obese children the 
prevalence of the ApoA5 -1131C allele frequency was approximately 
two fold elevated compared to the healthy pediatric and adult controls 
(10.9% vs. 6.40% and vs. 5.60% respectively; p<0.05); while in meta -
bolic syndrome patients the prevalence of the ApoA5 -1131C allele fre -
quency did not differ from the healthy pediatric or adult controls (6.60% 
vs. 6.40% and vs. 5.60%). Multiple regression analysis model adjusted 
for total serum cholesterol levels, BMI, triglycerides revealed that the 
ApoA5 -1131C variant confers risk for the development of obesity in 
children (OR at 95% CI was 5.95, range 1.48-23.97, p<0.012). Since 
the -T1131C variant was found previously to confer risk for adult meta -
bolic syndrome, increased prevalence of this variant in pediatric obese 
subjects suggest, that perhaps these children are the future selected 
candidates to develop metabolic syndrome in adulthood.
P0650. Apolipoprotein A5 T-1131C variant confers risk for 
metabolic syndrome
A. Maasz1, K. Horvatovich1, P. Kisfali1, M. Mohas2, L. Marko2, V. Csongei1, B. 
Farago1, L. Jaromi1, L. Magyari1, E. Safrany1, C. Sipeky1, I. Wittman2, B. Me -
legh1;  
1University of Pecs, Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, 
Pecs, Hungary, 2University of Pecs, 2nd Department of Medicine and Nephro -
logical Center, Pecs, Hungary.
Objectives : The promoter region T-1131C mutation of the recently 
identified apolipoprotein A5 (ApoA5) gene has been shown to associ -
ate with increased triglyceride levels in several studies. This variant 
was found to confer risk for development of ischaemic heart disease 
and stroke. The gene is in linkage disequilibrium with factors known 
to correlate with impaired glucose homeostasis; one of the criterias of 
metabolic syndrome. Therefore, the distribution of the ApoA5 -1131C 
allele was examined in patients with metabolic syndrome. Methods 
and results : PCR-RFLP assays were performed to detect the -1131C 
variant in a total of 122 patients affected with metabolic syndrome and 
210 controls. The triglyceride levels of patients carrying -1131C al -
lele were significantly elevated in carriers than in non-carriers in both 
groups (3.40 ± 0.59 mmol/l vs. 2.40 ± 0.14 mmol/l in the metabolic 
syndrome patients, p<0.05; 2.10 ± 0.19 mmol/l vs. 1.22 ± 0.05 mmol/l 
in the controls, p<0.05). The serum cholesterol levels did not differ be -
tween subjects with C allele and non-carriers in either group. In meta -
bolic syndrome patients the prevalence of the ApoA5 -1131C variant 
was increased compared to the healthy controls (12.7% vs. 6.20%, 
p<0.05). Logistic regression analysis model adjusted for differences in 
age, gender, total serum cholesterol levels, acute myocardial infarcts 
and stroke events revealed that the ApoA5 -1131C variant confers risk 
for the development of metabolic syndrome (OR: 2.458 at CI: 95%: 
1.294-4.671; p=0.006). Conclusions : The data presented here show 
that bearing ApoA5 T-1131C variant represent independent risk factor 
for metabolic syndrome.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
P0651. Androgen insensitivity syndrome: mutations in exon 3 of 
AR gene in patients with partial and mild forms
C. Vretos, E. S. Ramos ;  
University of São Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil.
Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) is one of the entities of ab -
sent or deficient masculinization in individuals 46, XY. It can present 
a clinical spectrum [complete (normal female phenotype), partial (P) 
or frankly ambiguos, and mild (M) or normal or near-normal male], de -
pending on alterations of the androgen receptor gene ( AR), located on 
chromosome Xq11-12. The objective of the present study was to eval -
uate patients referred to the University Hospital, School of Medicine 
of Ribeirão Preto (USP), with a clinical diagnosis of AIS. The medical 
records of 31 patients were reviewed, and 14 patients with a probable 
diagnosis of AISP and eight with AISM were submitted to cytogenetic 
analysis and studied by PCR-SSCP, for each of the eight exons of 
the AR gene. One novel point mutation not previously reported in the 
literature involving exon 3 was detected in an AISP patient (Met623Ile). 
Three other point mutations previously described in the same exon 
were identified: one patient with AISP (Arg607Gln), one patient with 
AISM (Gly589Gln), and one patient with AISM (Tyr602Pro).  Based on 
these results, it was verified that it is possible to systematically employ 
SSCP-PCR as a very useful screening tool of patients referred to med -
ical services, for the confirmation of the etiopathogeny of the disease, 
the clinical management of patients and genetic counseling.
P0652. Genotyping of patients with arrhythmias
A. Bittnerová1, J. Kadlecová1, T. Novotný2, O. Toman2, J. Špinar2, R. Gailly -
ová1, P. Kuglík1,3;  
1University Hospital Brno, Department of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech 
Republic, 2University Hospital Brno, Department of Cardiology, Brno, Czech 
Republic, 3Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Department of Genetics and 
Molecular Biology, Brno, Czech Republic.
Electrical heart disorders are caused by problems with the electrical 
system that regulates the steady, rhythmic beat of the heart. Some 
arrhythmias are dangerous and cause sudden cardiac death. Other 
type of the electrical heart disorder is the Long QT Syndrome (LQTS).
LQTS is associated with two cardiac muscle ion channels: voltage-gat -
ed K+ channels and voltage-gated Na+ channels. To the voltage-gated 
K+ channels belong IKr and IKs channels. IKs channels consist of KvLQT1 
(KCNQ1 ) as an α subunit and minK ( KCNE1)  as a β subunit, while IKr 
channels have HERG ( KCNH2 ) subunit and MiRP1 subunit.
Common genetic variations might modify arrhythmia susceptibility in 
the general population. Polymorphisms located within the gene cod -
ing region can directly influence the structure of its protein product, 
while others located within the gene regulatory sequence can influ -
ence the regulation of its protein expression levels. For this reason it 
is important to study polymorphisms of genes associated with LQTS 
(play important role in standard heart function) in sudden cardiac death 
survivors.
The mutation analysis of KCNQ1  and KCNH2  was performed using 
methods multiplex-PCR, multiplex SSCP (single strand conformation 
polymorphism) as the screen method, and automated sequencing. 
In the group of of 20 patients (sudden cardiac death survivors), we 
have identified some characteristic nucleotide polymorphisms (Y662Y, 
I489I, F513F, IVS13+22G>A, IVS8+40GG>CA).
Prevalence of cardiac ion channel genes polymorphisms seems to be 
much more common than hypothesized thus far.
This work was supported by grants IGA MZ CR NR/9340-3, MSM 
0021622415 and by the Czech Society of Cardiology.
P0653. Identification and functional characterization of three 
novel mutations in desmocollin-2 gene associated with 
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
G. Beffagna1, M. De Bortoli1, A. Nava2, M. Salamon1, A. Lorenzon1, M. Zacco -
lo3, L. Mancuso4, L. Sigalotti5, B. Bauce2, G. Occhi1, C. Basso6, G. Lanfranchi1,7, 
J. A. Towbin8, G. Thiene6, G. Danieli1, A. Rampazzo1;  
1Department of Biology, University of Padova, Padua, Italy, 2Department of 
Cardiothoracic-Vascular Sciences, University of Padua Medical School, Padua, 
Italy, 3Venetian Institute of Molecular Medicine, Padua, Italy, 4Venetian Institute 
of Molecular Medicine, University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 5Cancer Bioimmuno -
therapy Unit, Department of Medical Oncology, Padua, Italy, 6Institute of Pathol -
ogy, University of Padova, Padua, Italy, 7CRIBI Biotecnology Centre, University 
of Padua, Padua, Italy, 8Department of Pediatrics, Section of Cardiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States.
Mutations in genes encoding desmosomal proteins have been reported 
to cause arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), an 
autosomal dominant disease characterised by progressive myocardial 
atrophy with fibro-fatty replacement. We screened 54 ARVC probands 
for mutations in desmocollin-2 ( DSC2 ), the only desmocollin isoform 
expressed in cardiac tissue. We identified three heterozygous muta -
tions (c.304G>A (p.E102K), c.631-10C>T and c.1034C>T (p.I345T)) in 
three probands and in five family members. The two missense muta -
tions p.E102K and p.I345T map to the N-terminal region, relevant to 
adhesive interactions. In individual carrying the c.631-10C>T mutation, 
cDNA analysis failed to detect aberrant transcripts, and real-time quan -
titative RT-PCR showed an approximately 50% reduction of DSC2  ex-
pression, implicating haploinsufficiency as the operant mechanism in 
this DSC2  mutation.
To evaluate the pathogenic potentials of the DSC2  missense mutations 
detected in patients affected with ARVC, full-length wild-type and mu -
tated cDNAs were cloned in eukaryotic expression vectors to obtain a 
fusion protein with green fluorescence protein (GFP); constructs were 
transfected in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes and in HL-1 cells. Unlike 
wild-type DSC2, the N-terminal mutants are predominantly localised in 
the cytoplasm, thus suggesting the potential pathogenic effect of the 
reported mutations.
Mutations in DSC2  gene in patients with ARVC provide further evi -
dence that many forms of ARVC are due to alterations in cell-cell ad -
hesion.
P0654. Assay of determination of the frequency of different 
desmosomal genes in Arrhythmogenic right ventricular 
cardiomyopathy
V. Fressart1, E. Delacretaz2, F. Hidden Lucet1, F. Simon1, C. Coirault3, D. 
Keller4, P. Cosnay5, R. Frank1, P. Charron1, B. Hainque1;  
1Hôpital de la Pitié Salpétrière, Paris, France, 2University Hospital, Bern, Swit -
zerland, 3Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France, 4Hôpital de Bale, Bale, 
Switzerland, 5Hôpital Trousseau, Tours, France.
Background. Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy 
(ARVC) is a rare disease characterized by fibrofatty replacement in 
the right ventricular. It is a familial disease in 30-50%, with autosomal 
dominant inheritance. Genes encoding desmosomal proteins were 
identified as responsible for ARVC. Preliminary studies suggest that 
plakophilin-2 (PKP2) is involved in about 11-47%, desmoglein (DSG2) 
in 10% and desmoplakin (DSP) in 5-16% of ARVC. Mutation in Plako -
globin gene (JUP) is reported in autosomal recessive Naxos disease. 
Objectives. Our aim was to identify mutations in PKP2, DSG2, DSP and 
JUP genes and estimate their prevalence in ARVC patients. Methods. 
For 23 independent patients with classical ARVC, after DNA extrac -
tion from blood samples, mutation screening analysis was performed 
by direct sequencing of PKP2, DSG2, JUP and DSP genes. Results. 
PKP2 gene: Eight causal mutations (3 frame shift, 2 small deletions, 1 
insertion, 2 missense) and 3 additional missense variants were identi -
fied in 10/22 index patients. DSG2 gene: three mutations were found 
in 6 / 16 patients (1 frame shift and 2 missense mutations). Among 19 
analysed patients, two missense mutations were identified in DSP and 
none in JUP. Conclusions. We reported high prevalence of PKP2 and 
DSG2 gene mutations among ARVC patients with respective frequen -
cy of 45% and 37%. Rarely, we found mutations in DSP gene (1%) 
and none in JUP gene in our population. These results highlight the 
frequency of the PKP2 and DSG2 gene involved in ARVC and suggest 
the interest of molecular analysis of this gene for clinical purpose.
P0655. ARX syndrome is due to a variable duplication size at the 
critical region
O. Reish1, T. Fullston2, M. Regev1, J. Gecz2;  
1Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, Zerifin, Israel, 2Women’s and Children’s Hospi -
tal, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
We describe a novel polyalanine tract expansion mutation of the ARX 
gene, a 27-bp duplication of exon 2, which segregates in a newly iden -
tified family.
The index case was ascertained due to psychomotor retardation, 
hypotonia and myoclonic seizures with normal brain MRI. Additional 
affected boys were reported in this family, which is otherwise compat -
ible with X linked inheritance. Using PCR and sequence analysis on 
peripheral blood cell DNA, a 27-bp duplication of the critical region of Molecular and biochemical basis of disease10
exon 2 of the ARX gene, starting from position c.430, was detected. 
This mutation affects the same region as the recurrent 24-bp duplica -
tion. Mutation segregation and haplotype analysis shows that this mu -
tation arose  de novo  in the grand mother on the great grand paternal 
chromosome. Our data also suggest that the grand mother might be 
a somatic mosaic for the 27-bp duplication. The 27-bp mutation was 
transmitted steadily, i.e. without signs of somatic instability, through 2 
generations leading to the affected proband.
Conclusions: 1. ARX gene mutation analysis is strongly recommended 
in families with yet undefined X linked mental retardation. 2. The criti -
cal region of exon 2 may involve at least two variable duplication sizes, 
24bp and also 27 bp. 3. Post zygotic duplication leading to mosaicism 
in the carrier female, may be a possible mechanism in the evolution of 
the ARX condition.
P0656. Hypometylation at the KvDMR in clinically normal 
children conceived by assisted reproductive technologies
M. V. M. Gomes, J. Huber, R. A. Ferriani, E. S. Ramos ;  
University of São Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil.
Recent evidences have suggested an association between assisted 
reproductive technologies (ART) and alterations in the mechanism 
of genomic imprinting. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is 
a congenital overgrowth disorder characterized by abnormalities in 
the 11p15.5, mainly hipomethylation at the KvDMR imprinting control 
region. A 4-9 fold increased incidence of BWS has been reported in 
children conceived by ART when compared to naturally conceived chil -
dren. In the present study, we investigated the methylation pattern at 
the KvDMR, by the methylation-specific PCR approach (MS-PCR) in 
samples obtained from 18 clinically normal children conceived by ART. 
Abnormal methylation pattern (hypomethylation) at KvDMR was found 
in three children. Paternal uniparental disomy (UPD) was considered 
unlikely by the identification of normal methylation pattern (mono-allel -
ic) at H19DMR in all patients. Although the limited sample size and the 
qualitative aspect of methylation obtained by the MS-PCR approach, 
we speculate that hypomethylation at the KvDMR is not sufficient to 
cause the clinically aspects of BWS and might be present in clinically 
normal children conceived by ART. Additionally, follow-up studies are 
indicated to determine the consequences of this unusual hypomethyl -
ated pattern at the KvDMR in these cases.
P0657. Sperm Mitochondrial DNA is better than blood in 
pathogenesis of asthenozoospermia
R. Dada1, R. Kumar1, R. K. Sharma2, R. Kumar1;  
1AIIMS, New Delhi, India, 2Army Research and Referral Hospital, New Delhi, 
India.
Mitochondria play an important role in cellular energy metabolism, free 
radical generation and apoptosis. The number, shape and size of mi -
tochondria vary from tissue. In addition number of mitochondrial DNA 
also vary. Mitochondria thus contain their own genome and their own 
transcription, translation and protein assembly machinery. Mutation in 
mitochondrial DNA has been known to cause several neuromuscular 
diseases, cardiomyopathies but their role in pathogenesis of sper -
matogenetic arrest and impaired sperm motility is not known. In the 
present study we analysed mitochondrial mutation in blood and sperm 
mitochondrial DNA. The mitochondrial DNA mutation in sperm DNA 
was higher (32 substitutions) as compared to blood (20 substitutions). 
A comparison of the sequences of the above genes with a reference 
sequence revealed a total of 32 nucleotide substitutions in the sperm 
mtDNA but not in the DNA from the blood cells. Of the 32 substitutions 
in sperm DNA, 7 were in COI, 12 were in COII, 4 were in ATPase8, and 
9 were in ATPase6. This may be due to ROS mediated damage. As 
sperm has just 10-100 copies of mitochondrial genome,mutations in 
these result in early phenotype manifestation. In such cases sperms of 
men with impaired motility are due to disruption of OXPHOS pathway. 
The effects of these mutations to correlate the mitochondrial DNA mu -
tation with phenotype are required. This will aid in providing compre -
hensive counseling and most adapted therapeutics to the couple.
P0658. Association Analysis MMP9 Polymorphisms with Asthma 
in Mexican population
S. Jimenez-Morales1,2, J. L. Jimenez1, L. A. Muñoz1, F. Cuevas3, N. E. Marti -
nez-Aguilar4, G. Escamilla5, Y. Saldaña1, L. Orozco1;  
1Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, Mexico, Mexico, 2Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana-Iztapalapa, Programa de Doctorado en Biologia Ex -
perimental, Mexico, 3Instituto Nacional de Pediatría, Mexico, Mexico, 4Hospital 
regional 1° de Octubre, ISSSTE, Mexico, Mexico, 5Instituto Nacional de Pedia -
tria, Mexico, Mexico.
Asthma is an inflammatory disease of the small airways of the lung. 
Asthma has now reached epidemic proportions, with more than 10% 
of children being affected in many westernized societies. This disease 
has been characterized by chronic and allergic airway inflammation, 
which induces cytological and histological changes in the in the arir -
way structure overtime. Those changes have been called airway re -
modeling, involving changes in the extracellular matrix, collagen and 
elastin; airway smooth muscle globet cell hyperplasia; subepitelial 
fibrosis; and hyperplasia and hypertrophy of airway smooth muscle 
cells. Recent studies have demonstrated the molecular and cellular 
mechanisms of remodeling. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and 
the metalloproteinase inhibitor (TIMP)-1 play an important role in tis -
sue remodeling. Patients with severe or uncontrolled asma show in -
creased activity of these proteins in the bronchial biopsy specimens, 
blood, induced sputum, and brochoalveolar fluid. Our aim was to in -
vestigate whether MMP9 and TIMP1 polymorphisms are associated 
with asthma in Mexican Pediatric patients. We performed a case-con -
trol study in 110 Mexican patients with clinical diagnosis of asthma and 
250 control individuals without allergy or asthma history. We genotyped 
3 SNPs in the MMP9 and TIMP1 genes using the 5´ exonuclease as -
say (TaqMan) for allelic discrimination. The TIMP1 polymorphism did 
not show association with asthma. However, both MMP9 SNPs ana -
lyzed (rs2274755G/T and rs2274756G/A: R668Q) which are in linkage 
disequilibrium were significantly associated with the risk of childhood 
asthma (5.2% vs 2%, P=0.003; OR= 2.30; 95% CI = 1.30-4.06). Our 
results shown that the MMP-9 gene might be involved in the develop -
ment of asthma in our population.
P0659. Role of mitochondria in Ataxia-Telangiectasia: 
Investigation of mitochondrial deletions and Haplogroups
M. Shafa Shariat Panahi , M. Houshmand, M. Sanati, M. Banoei, B. Hooshiar 
Kashani;  
National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB), Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Ataxia-Telangiectasia (AT) is a rare human neurodegenerative auto -
somal recessive multisystem disease that is characterized by a wide 
range of features including, progressive cerebellar ataxia with onset 
during infancy, occulocutaneous telangiectasia, susceptibility to neo -
plasia, occulomotor disturbances, chromosomal instability and growth 
and developmental abnormalities. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) has the 
only non-coding regions at the displacement loop (D-loop) region that 
contains two hypervariable segments (HVS-I and HVS-II) with high 
polymorphism. We investigated mt-DNA deletions and haplogroups in 
AT patients. In this study, 24 Iranian patients suffering from AT and 100 
normal controls were examined. mt-DNA was extracted from whole 
blood and examined by 6 primers for existence of mitochondrial dele -
tions. We also amplified and sequenced the mtDNA HVS-I by standard 
sequencing techniques. mtDNA deletions were observed in 54.1% 
(13/24) of patients (8.9 kb deletion in all samples, 5.0 kb in one and 7.5 
kb in two patients), representing mtDNA damage which may be due to 
oxidative stress in mitochondria. Our results showed that there is no 
association between mtDNA haplogroups and AT. This data may indi -
cate involvement of mitochondrial damage in the pathogenesis of AT.
P0660. ABCA1 transporter in atherosclerosis development.
T. Rodygina1, E. Demina1, A. Sheydina1, V. Zvereva1, A. Denisenko2, A. Sh -
varcman1;  
1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Gatchina Leningradskaya oblast, Rus -
sian Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg Institute of Experimental Medicine, Saint-
Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Abnormalities in reverse cholesterol transport (RCT) are involved in ar -
terial atherosclerosis (AA). ABCA1 transporter is a key protein of RCT 
and facilitates cholesterol efflux from peripheral cells to high density 
lipoproteins particles. However, the genetic factors that contribute in 
ABCA1-mediated RCT are not well understood.
It is reasonable to propose that polymorphic alleles of ABCA1 as well 
as genetic variation in ABCA1 gene expression may contribute to AA.
Our aim was to study correlation between polymorphic markers C69T, 
C(-17)G, 319insG, R219K of ABCA1 gene, the level of ABCA1 gene Molecular and biochemical basis of disease11
expression and AA development. We have investigated association of 
C69T, C(-17)G, 319insG, R219K genetic variants with atherosclerotic 
lesions among patients with angiographically verified atherosclerosis 
(N=108). Carriers of 319insG allele of ABCA1 gene have less athero -
sclerotic lesions than individuals that did not have this allele (p=0.01).
For measuring ABCA1 gene expression, we employed real-time quan -
titative polymerase chain reaction using cDNA isolated from peripheral 
leucocytes of patients with angiographically verified AA (N=9) and con -
trols (N=5).
We have discovered 2-fold reduction in mRNA levels (mean) of 
ABCA1 gene in patients comparing with controls (0.928 versus 0.470, 
p=0.007).
We suggest that ABCA1 gene expression level is a significant risk fac -
tor in AA development.
The study was supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research 
(grant 06-04-49609).
P0661. The p22 phox gene is transcriptionaly regulated by NF-
KB and AP-1 in human aortic smooth muscle cells
A. Manea , A. Gafencu, S. Manea, M. Raicu, M. Simionescu;  
Institute of Cellular Biology and Pathology “Nicolae Simionescu”, Bucharest, 
Romania.
Objective: Accumulating evidence demonstrates the involvement of 
the oxidative stress in the pathophysiology of several major cardio -
vascular diseases including atherosclerosis, hypertension, stroke or 
heart failure. However, the molecular mechanisms accountable for the 
increased production of reactive oxygen species remain uncertain. 
Among others, NADPH oxidase is one of the most important sources 
of superoxide in vascular cells. NF-kB and AP-1 transcription factors 
are down stream targets of NADPH oxidase-derived radicals, which 
control the expression of inflammatory and immune genes, matrix 
remodeling, apoptosis, and cell proliferation. Here we investigate the 
role of NF-kB an AP-1 itself in the regulation of p22phox, an essential 
subunit of NADPH oxidase, in human aortic smooth muscle cells.
Methods and results: Computer analysis revealed the presence of 
potential NF-kB and AP-1 cis-acting elements in the human p22phox 
gene promoter. Deletion analyses together with transcription factor 
pull-down assays demonstrated that NF-kB and AP-1 are particularly 
important in the regulation of p22phox transcriptional activity. Real time 
PCR and Western blotting analysis showed that p22phox mRNA and 
protein expression are significantly down-regulated by NF-kB and AP-
1 inhibitors or decoy oligodeoxynucleotides. 
Conclusions: Taken together, the present study provides evidence that 
NF-kB and AP-1 transcription factors are important regulators of the 
NADPH oxidase essential subunit, p22phox, in human aortic smooth 
muscle cells. Given the importance of reactive oxygen species in vas -
cular physiology and pathology, members of this transcription factor 
family may be important therapeutic targets in the treatment of cardio -
vascular diseases.
This work was supported by the Romanian Academy (grant no. 
56/2006).
P0662. Serotonin transporter gene polymorphisms and 
intraplatelet serotonin concentration in autism
J. Ferreira, P. Levy , M. Bicho;  
Genetics Laboratory, Lisbon Medical School, Lisbon, Portugal.
Serotonin is released in pre-synaptic membrane and can reach spe -
cific receptors in post-synaptic membrane or be partially reuptaked by 
its specific transporter at the synaptic cleft. Serotonin circulating levels 
and its effects depend on specific serotonin transporter activity whose 
efficacy changes with its gene polymorphisms. In that way,
serotonin transporter gene may be a likely candidate in autistic dis -
order. The aim of this study is to determine a possible association 
between serotonin tranporter gene polymorphisms 5-HTTVNTR and 
5-HTTLPR and autism and to evaluate intraplatelet serotonin concen -
tration.
Patient group was made of 118 individuals (3,6 and 41 years) subdivid -
ed in 82 with idiopathic autism, 15 with pathology associated autism, 
15 with PPD-Nos and 6 with Asperger syndrome. Control group was 
made of 68 individuals (45,57±11,23 years).
We studied 5-HTTLPR and 5-HTTVNTR by PCR and intraplatelet se -
rotonin concentration by ELISA.
We found no significant differences in genotype and allelic frequencies between patient subgroups and between patient and control groups in 
both polymorphisms.
we found a significant higher serotonina concentration in the patient 
group when compared with control individuals. We did not find sig -
nificant differences between the different genotypes of both polymor -
phisms and serotonin concentration.
In this study we did no find any association between serotonin trans -
porter gene polymorphisms and autism.
Autistic patients have higher intraplatelet serotonin concentration, 
which may contribute for their characteristic behaviour disturbances.
Intraplatelet serotonin concentration is independent of serotonin trans -
porter gene polymorphisms.
P0663. Prevalence of complete and partial AZF deletions in 
Russian infertile men
T. M. Sorokina , V. B. Chernykh, E. M. Grishina, L. V. Shileiko, L. F. Kurilo, A. L. 
Chukhrova, T. S. Beskorovainaya, S. V. Gudzenko, E. V. Il’ina, F. S. Myachina, 
A. V. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sci -
ences, Moscow, Russian Federation.
The aim of presented study was to evaluate a prevalence of complete 
and partial AZF deletions in Russian infertile men. We have exam -
ined a cohort of 446 men from infertile couples. The semen analysis 
had been performed according to the WHO recommendations (WHO, 
1999). The patients with chromosome abnormalities were excluded 
from this study. Complete AZF deletions have been detected accord -
ing to Laboratory guidelines for molecular diagnosis of Y-chromo -
somal microdeletions (EAA/EMQN, 1999), with some modifications. 
Molecular analysis for partial deletions within AZFc region has been 
performed using multiplex PCR amplifications with following STSs: 
sY142, sY1192, sY1197, sY1291, sY1206, and sY1125.
Complete AZF microdeletions and partial AZFc deletions have been 
found in 6.3% and 12.1% examined patients, respectively. ‘Classic’ 
AZFc (b2/b4) deletions comprised 86% complete AZF deletions. In 
other cases complete AZFa (n=2) and AZFb+c (n=2) deletions have 
been identified. In contrast to partial AZFc deletions the complete AZF 
deletions were identified only in azoospermic and severe oligozoo -
spermic patients (sperm count ≤5mln/ml). Between examined men 
with partial AZFc deletions the sperm parameters varied from astheno -
zoospermia, oligozoospermia to azoospermia. The commonest type of 
Y chromosome microdeletions was b2/b3 deletion. This partial AZFc 
deletion has been revealed in about 9% examined men. In 2.5% pa -
tients the gr/gr deletions have been found. Three unclassified partial 
AZFc deletions were characterized of an absence of sY1197; sY1192 
and sY1206; sY142 and sY1197 loci, respectively.
We have demonstrated high prevalence of both complete AZF dele -
tions and partial AZFc deletions in Russian infertile men.
P0664. Microarray-based mutation analysis of Bardet-Biedl 
genes in  Spanish patients
I. Pereiro1,2, C. Ayuso2, M. Baiget2, G. Antiñolo2, J. Millán2, M. Carballo2, D. 
Valverde1,2;  
1Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2EsRetNet, Spain, Spain.
The Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a complex and genetically het -
erogeneous disorder with diverse clinical manifestations (early retinal 
dystrophy, polydactily, mental delay, obesity and hipogonadism). Until 
now, 12 BBS genes have been described ( BBS1 -BBS12 ), with evi -
dence for at least one more gene implicated. Its inheritance pattern is 
not clear, since there are families that show a complex inheritance of 
the syndrome. Therefore, genetic analyses of BBS are complicated To 
overcome this challenge we screened our population with a genotyp -
ing microarray comprehending 9 BBS genes ( BBS1-BBS10 ) (Asper 
Ophtalmics, Estonia) that contains 110 disease-associated changes 
and other SNPs currently known, enabling simultaneous detection of 
the BBS genes variants.
Until now, we have analyzed 44 BBS samples, with at least one mu -
tation identified in 41% of them. The distribution of the mutated al -
leles identified was: 1 patient with three mutated alleles, 9 patients 
with two mutated alleles, and 8 patients with one mutated allele. The 
most prevalent mutation was the M390R, accounting for 36% of all the 
mutations detected.
The BBS genotyping microarray is a robust, cost-effective, and com -
prehensive screening tool for genetic variation analysis, suitable for Molecular and biochemical basis of disease12
the study of one heterogenetic? syndrome as BBS. Nevertheless, it is 
necessary to search for new mutations to update the chip and improve 
its clinical application.
Project: FIS PI060049
P0665. A digenic defect on both the chloride channels ClC-Ka 
and ClC-Kb mimics a Bartter like type IV Syndrome.
N. Borsa1, M. Syrèn1,2, C. Melotti1, C. Radaelli1, A. Bettinelli3, D. Coviello1, S. 
Tedeschi1;  
1Fondazione IRCCS Opedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, 
Milan, Italy, 2Dept. of Pediatrics and Neonatology, University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy, 3Dept. of Pediatrics, San Leopoldo Mandic Hospital, Merate, Lecco, Italy.
Usually mutations in the BSND gene product, a protein called barttin, 
are responsible for a Bartter syndrome associated with sensorineural 
deafness (Bartter type IV or BSND), an inherited tubulopathy kidney 
disease. The BSND syndrome is characterized by a marked polyhy -
dramnios, severe renal salt wasting and deafness.
There is only one exception, previously reported, where a patient was 
affected by sensorineural deafness and renal Bartter phenotype with -
out BSND mutations; simultaneous mutations in both CLCNKB and 
CLCNKA genes (coding for ClC-Kb and ClC-Ka chloride channels re -
spectively) were demonstrated to be the disease-causing mutations.
We describe here a new patient who has a digenic disorder due to 
a contemporary combined impairment of two closely related genes, 
CLCNKA and CLCNKB, leading to a phenotype that combines a se -
vere renal salt wasting and sensorineural deafness. The molecular 
analysis performed on the BSND, CLCNKB and CLCNKA genes re -
vealed the absence of mutations in the former gene and a homozy -
gous deletion of exons 1-6 for the CLCNKB gene and of exons 7-19 for 
the CLCNKA.The simultaneous disruption of both ClC-Ka and ClC-Kb 
chloride channels leads to a syndrome clinically not distinguishable 
from Bartter type IV. This event should be due to the tight topology 
of the highly homologous CLCNKA gene which might predispose to 
an unequal crossing over leading to partial or complete deletions of 
the CLCNKB gene. We hypothesize that this chimaeric resulting gene 
interferes with the correct function of both the channels, and leads to a 
Bartter IV-like phenotype.
P0666. Evaluation of the stress effect on expression of BEST-5 
gene in cultured hepatocytes and cloning of this gene
G. Hassanshahi ;  
Rafsanjan University of Medical Sciences, Rafsanjan, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Liver has important roles in body metabolic regulation and for this 
reason hepatocytes are used worldwide. Investigations showed that 
isolation of hepatocytes causes activation of stress related genes. The 
aim of this study was to study the stress related expression of BEST-5 
following hepatocytes isolation and culture.The BEST5 gene is cloned 
and analysed for the first time from isolated and cultured rat hepato -
cytes. Very little is known about this gene and almost nothing is known 
about its function. RNA was isolated from hepatocytes after 3h culture 
and used for generation of PCR products corresponding to the BEST5. 
cDNA generated was cloned into pCR®2.1 plasmid vector. Following 
transformation into TOPO10 oneshot® cells, the cells were grown in LB 
agar plates containing X-Gal and ampicillin, overnight at 37°C. To con -
firm that the plasmids contained inserts of the correct size, the vectors 
obtained from mini-preparations were digested with the desired restric -
tion enzymes. Sequencing was performed for the gene. RT-PCR and 
Northern blotting analysis showed that BEST5 mRNA is expressed, 3h 
after isolation and culture of primary hepatocytes (3h) BEST5 mRNA 
was observed until 5h of culture and then there is no detectable band 
of BEST5 at further time points. Comparison of expression of the level 
of mRNA of BEST5, when data statistically were analysed, there was 
a significant difference between the expression of BEST5 mRNA ex -
pression at 3h with 0h, 24h, 35h and 48h of culture (P<0.001). Key 
words:  BEST-5, Stress, Hepatocytes, RT-PCR, Northern Blotting
P0667. A new IVSI-7 A→T beta globin mutation discovered in 
three beta carrier subjects and in a beta thalassemia intermedia 
patient.
G. Ivaldi1, C. Curcio2, D. Leone1, M. Baffico1, M. I. Parodi1, V. Tieran2, A. Biasi2, 
F. Dagna Bricarelli1, D. A. Coviello2, M. Travi2;  
1Laboratorio di Genetica, EO Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Genova, Italy, 2Labo -
ratorio Genetica Medica, IRCCS Fondazione Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, Italy.
Beta thalassemia is a very important health problem in Italy not only 
associated to the Italian population but also to other different ethnic 
groups due to the increased Asian and African immigration. In fact the 
considerable level of immigration in our country over the last decade 
has obviously led to significant social and economic changes as far as 
public health is concerned. So far more than 250 different mutations 
have been found in the beta globin gene. We report a new beta thalas -
semia mutation detected in four members of two different families of 
Italian origin. In the first family two subjects were beta thalassemia 
trait (mother and her daughter) while on the second one the A->T sub -
stitution at IVS1 nucleotide 7 was identified in an adult woman in the 
heterozygous state and in her child related to the codon 39 mutation. 
The genetic compound codon 39/IVS1-7 was found in a fifteen years 
old boy with the thalassemia intermedia phenotype.
The new mutation here described seem to be completely in super -
position with the haematological phenotype associated to the IVS1-6 
mutation in carrier state. It is assumable that this mild phenotype can 
be related to the progressive distance between the mutation and the 
consensus sequence of the first intron donor site of the β gene, reliev -
ing the negative consequence of the efficiency of the splicing mecha -
nism.
P0668. A Novel Cryptic Splice Site in IVSI-110 β-thalassemia
S. Mansoori Derakhshan1,2,3, H. Wardan1, M. Kleanthous4, S. Christou5, J. 
Vadolas1;  
1Cell and Gene Therapy Group, The Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, 
Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 2Paediatrics department, Mel -
bourne University, Melbourne, Australia, 3Tabriz University of Medical Science, 
Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genet -
ics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 5The Thalassaemia Center, Nicosia, Cyprus.
The IVSI-110 β-thalassemia mutation was first described in 1981 and 
is one of the most common β-globin splicing mutations found in pa -
tients of Greek or Cypriot origins. This mutation is the result of a G to A 
substitution at position 110 in the first intron. This mutation has previ -
ously been reported to generate an aberrant 3’ acceptor splice site, 
which is preferentially recognised by the spliceosome over the normal 
3’ acceptor splice site. The IVSI-110 mutation leads to a 90% reduc -
tion in normal β-globin chain synthesis causing transfusion-dependent 
disease in homozygous patients. Our group recently reported the cre -
ation and characterisation of ‘humanised’ transgenic mice containing 
the IVSI-110 human β-globin locus. Using human β-globin-specific RT-
PCR, we noted two human β-globin-specific aberrant spliced products. 
We observed quantitative differences in the aberrant β-globin specific 
RT-PCR spliced products in peripheral blood and bone marrow-de -
rived cells from ‘humanised’ IVSI-110 transgenic mice and IVSI-110 
human patient-derived peripheral blood cells. We attribute the rela -
tive differences in the level of aberrant splice products to mRNA in -
stability. In this study, we confirm by cloning of RT-PCR products and 
DNA sequencing the identity of the novel activated cryptic 3’ acceptor 
site in mice and also in humans containing the IVSI-110 mutation. We 
conclude, that the identification of novel cryptic splice site indicates 
that IVSI-110 splicing is more complex than previously reported, and is 
worthy of further investigation.
P0669. Combination of Hb Knossos [Cod 27 (G-T)] and IVSII-745 
(C-G) in a Turkish Patient with Beta-Thalassemia Major
I. Keser1, E. Manguoglu1, O. Kayisli1, A. Yesilipek2, G. Luleci1;  
1Akdeniz University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Anta -
lya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Antalya, Turkey.
Beta-thalassemia is the most common disease among hemoglobin -
opathies in Antalya, Turkey, as well as worldwide. Mutations found in 
Turkish beta-thalassemia patients constitute a heterogeneous group, 
consisting mostly of point mutations. Only in very rare cases, deletions 
or insertions cause affected or carrier phenotypes. Hb Knossos (beta 
27 (B9) Ala-Ser) is a rare variant with a normal HbA2 level. In this 
study, we aimed to investigate the effect of compound heterozygosity 
for Hb Knossos [Cod 27 (G-T)] and IVSII-745 (C-G). To our knowledge, 
this is the first report of such a combination related with beta-thalas -
semia major phenotype in a Turkish family, where Reverse Dot Blot 
Hybridisation (RDBH) and DNA sequencing analysis were used. Het -
erozygous inheritance of the mutation results in mild beta-thalassemia Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
phenotype, whereas homozygous inheritance leads to intermediate β-
thalassemia. As a result, the compound heterozygosity of Hb Knossos 
with IVSII-745 appears as the cause of the beta-thalassemia major 
phenotype in our case. In conclusion, we suggest that combination of 
these mutations in beta-globin gene is important in expression of beta-
thalassemia major phenotype in a marriage between a beta-thalasse -
mia carrier and a person who has Hb Knossos and its like some other 
silent beta-thalassemia mutations are not associated with an elevated 
HbA2 level.
P0670. Genetic diagnosis in the Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome
S. Giraud1, E. Chanard1, C. Bourdin1, S. Lefebvre1, I. Coupier2, D. Bessis3, 
O. Caron4, A. Hovnanian5, P. Delobre1, M. Avril6, A. Calender1, S. Richard7,8, 
French NCI “Inherited Kidney Cancer Network”;  
1Hôpital E. Herriot, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 2Hôpital Arnaud de 
Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 3Hôpital Saint Eloi, Montpellier, France, 4Hôpital 
Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 5Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 6Hôpital 
Cochin-Tarnier, Paris, France, 7Hôpital de Bicêtre, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 
8EPHE-FRE2939, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
Birt-Hogg-Dubé (BHD) syndrome is an inherited autosomal dominant 
genodermatosis characterized by predisposition to cutaneous fibrofol -
liculomas, lung cysts leading to pneumothorax and renal cell carcino -
mas. The age-dependent penetrance and the great variability of the 
clinical manifestations even within a given family suggest that BHD re -
mains underdiagnosed. The disease is caused by heterozygous germ -
line mutations in the BHD gene, encoding fibrofolliculin. Mutations are 
identified in 85% of BHD patients. All mutations previously reported 
putatively lead to protein truncation. More than 50% of mutations are 
frameshift located in a C-poly-tract in the exon 11.
We have performed genetic diagnosis with DNA sequencing of BHD 
and Multiplex PCR/Liquid Chromatography for detection of rearrange -
ment of this gene. We have analyzed 100 unrelated index cases with 
suspected or confirmed clinical diagnosis of BHD syndrome and identi -
fied 14 germline BHD different mutations in 24 probands: 8 frameshifts 
with two recurrent mutations (one duplication in exon 11 was found in 
9 patients, one deletion in the exon 9 in three patients), 3 nonsense 
mutations, two splice site mutations, one missense mutation and one 
rearrangement. Ten were novel mutations including the missense mu -
tation and the large rearrangement that have not yet been described 
in BHD. Presymptomatic diagnosis was then performed in 47 relatives 
revealing 34 gene carriers at whom clinical surveillance including kid -
ney imaging has been proposed.
We discuss our results according to patients’ clinical manifestations 
and clinical indications of research of BHD mutations.
P0671. The Bloom‘s syndrome helicase interacts with the MutS 
homolog, MSH4, during meiosis
F. Lespinasse, F. Lahaye, V. Paquis-Flucklinger, S. Santucci-Darmanin ;  
Equipe M3R UMR CNRS 6543, Nice, France.
Bloom’s syndrome (BS) is a recessive human genetic disorder char -
acterized by marked genetic instability associated with a greatly in -
creased predisposition to cancers of most types. The gene mutated in 
BS encodes a 3’-5’ DNA helicase (BLM) identified as a member of the 
RecQ family. BLM is involved in the cellular response to DNA damage 
and stalled replication forks. Moreover, several studies support a role 
of BLM during meiosis and it is noteworthy that human males homo -
zygous for BLM mutation are infertile. However, the specific function 
of BLM during meiosis remains unclear. Here, we provide biochemical 
evidence indicating that BLM interacts with MSH4 during meiotic pro -
phase I. These data are consistent with cytological analyses showing 
that both BLM and MSH4 foci are located on chromosome cores at 
the same stages of the meiotic prophase I. MSH4 is a meiosis-specific 
MutS homolog known to participate to several steps of meiotic recom -
bination process. MSH4 acts first at the step of homologous chromo -
somes synapsis and, in ensuing steps, to promote meiotic crossovers. 
Based on the biochemical properties of BLM and MSH4, we consider 
the possibility that interaction between BLM and MSH4 may have im -
plications in the regulation of meiotic recombination events which is 
crucial since impaired meiotic recombination process may result in 
nondisjunction of homologous chromosomes at the first meiotic divi -
sion and formation of aneuploid germ cells.P0672. Semax exerts vasotropic and neuroprotective effects in 
experimental brain ischemia
V. V. Stavchansky1, L. V. Dergunova1, V. V. Yuzhakov2, T. V. Tvorogova3, V. I. 
Skvortsova3, S. A. Limborska1;  
1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Medical 
Radiology Research Center RAMS, Obninsk, Russian Federation, 3Institute of 
Stroke RSMU, Moscow, Russian Federation.
We have analyzed the effects of Semax ( synthetic peptide Met- Glu-
His-Phe-Pro-Gly-Pro; its N-terminus represents a fragment of adre -
nocorticotropic hormone - ACTH 4-7) and its C- terminal fragment 
Pro-Gly-Pro (PGP) on functional morphology and proliferative activity 
of cells from different cerebral regions of the rats subjected to global 
brain ischemia. The study was carried out on brain of 2-month-old male 
Wistar rats (n=45). After 15 minutes of irreversible bilateral common 
carotid artery occlusion the animals were exposed to intraperitoneal in -
jection of Semax, PGP or 0,9% NaCl. The repeated introductions were 
made at 1h, 4h and 8h after operation. Animals were decapitated at 30 
min and 24 h after operation. Intact and sham-operated animals were 
used as a control group. The sections were stained with hematoxylin 
and eosin for histological analysis. Murine monoclonal antibodies to 
PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear antigen) were used for immunostain -
ing of proliferating cells. In intact animals, comparative morphofunc -
tional analysis of effect of Semax or PGP has indicated that both pep -
tides have exerted vasotropic effects based on activation of capillary 
network. The increase of intensity of immunopositive reaction of prolif -
erating cells demonstrates trofic action of Semax on ependyma of ven -
tricles, cells of blood-brain barrier and neuroglia. In this study, among 
these investigated peptides only Semax has manifested neuroprotec -
tive action on animals with acute stroke. Semax decreases ischemic 
injury of neurons and prevents progress of local foci of destruction of 
neuronal tissue. Furthermore, signs of vascular stasis decrease in the 
ischemized rat brains under Semax trearment.
P0673. Estrogen receptor (ER) beta2 negatively regulates the 
transactivation of ERα in human breast cancer cells
C. Zhao1, J. Matthews2, M. Tujague1, J. Wan3, A. Ström1, G. Toresson1, E. W-F 
Lam4, G. Cheng1, J. Gustafsson1, K. Dahlman-Wright1;  
1Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 2University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, 
Canada, 3KTH-Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Imperial 
College London, London, United Kingdom.
Estrogens, by binding to and activating two estrogen receptors (ERs), 
ERalpha and ERbeta, are critically involved in the development of the 
mammary gland as well as breast cancer. An isoform of ERbeta, ER -
beta2 (also called ERbetacx), with an altered C-terminal region, is co-
expressed with ERalpha in many human breast cancers. In this study, 
we generated a stable cell line from MCF7 breast cancer cells express -
ing an inducible version of ERbeta2, along with endogenous ERalpha, 
and examined the effects of ERbeta2 on the ERalpha protein levels 
and function. We showed that ERbeta2 inhibited ERalpha-mediated 
transactivation via ERE and AP-1 sites of reporter constructs as well 
as the endogenous genes pS2 and MMP-1. Chromatin immunopre -
cipitation (ChIP) assays revealed that ERbeta2 expression caused a 
significant reduction in the recruitment of ERalpha to both the pS2 and 
MMP-1 promoters. Furthermore, ERbeta2 expression induced protea -
some-dependent degradation of ERalpha. The inhibitory effects of ER -
beta2 on ERalpha activity were further confirmed in HEK293 cells that 
lack functional endogenous ERs. We also demonstrated that ERbeta2 
can interact with ERalpha both in vitro and in mammalian cells which 
is compatible with a model where ERbeta2/ERalpha heterodimers are 
targeted to the proteasome. Finally, in human breast cancer samples, 
we observed that expression of ERbeta2 significantly correlated with 
ERalpha-negative phenotype. Our data suggest that ERbeta2 could 
influence ERalpha-mediated effects relevant for breast cancer devel -
opment including hormone responsiveness.
P0674. STAT6 and ADAM33 single nucleotide polymorphism in 
association with Bronchial asthma
F. Kopriva1, R. Vodicka1, R. Vrtel1, L. Dusek2, M. Godava1, M. Markova1, J. 
Bohmova1, J. Zavodska1, A. Plocova1, E. Schneiderova1, E. Krejcirikova1;  
1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Repub -
lic, 2CBA Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
Bronchial asthma is one of the most frequent childhood chronic ail -
ments, defined on the basis of epidemiological, physiological, patho -Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
logical and immunological criteria.
Immunopathological process induces both local and general changes 
and can negatively influence child development.
Main aim of this project, supported by IGA MZ CR: NR8383-3/2005 
is to test if the bronchial hyperreactivity level is associated with cer -
tain alleles or haplotypes of genes (ADAM 33 and STAT 6) involved in 
immune system activity in course of allergic illness development and 
bronchial epithelium remodelling .
Examination of responsible polymorphisms of ADAM 33 and STAT 6 
genes was accomplished by sequence analysis in 20 children with 
asthma bronchiale, their sibs and parents and 20 control healthy chil -
dren.
Statistical evaluation of association of genes polymorphisms with 
asthma bronchiale occurrence and bronchial hyperreactivity level in 
children will be presented by our poster.
Examination of polymorphisms positively associated with allergic re -
action could become a routine part of diagnostics. The description of 
influence of particular sequence changes could contribute to additional 
insight to the bronchial hyperreactivity genetic background.
P0675. Functional consequences of eIF2B mutations in cells 
from affected patients
L. Horzinski1, C. Gonthier1, L. Kantor2, O. Elroy-Stein3, O. Boespflug-Tanguy1,4, 
A. Fogli1;  
1INSERM UMR384, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2Department of cell reserach 
and immunology, George S Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 
3Department of cell research and immunology, George S Wise Faculty of Life 
Sciences, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 4CHU, Centre de référence Leucodystrophies, Cler -
mont-Ferrand, France.
The Childhood Ataxia with diffuse Central nervous system Hypomy -
elination (CACH)/Vanishing White Matter (VWM) syndrome is an auto -
somal recessive leukodystrophy characterized by a progressive spas -
tic ataxia and a CSF-like aspect of the white matter on MRI. Severity 
is correlated with age at disease onset and with episodes of rapid 
deterioration following febrile infection or head trauma. Mutations in 
the five subunits of the eIF2B translation initiation factor (alpha to ep -
silon) are the most frequent cause of the disease. eIF2B is involved in 
the first step of protein synthesis by activating the translation initiation 
factor eIF2 thanks to its guanine nucleotide exchange activity (GEF 
activity). By regeneration of active eIF2, eIF2B is a key factor in the 
cellular stress response. We demonstrated that GEF activity of eIF2B 
is decreased 63 CACH/VWM patients lymphoblastoid cell lines (llb) 
in correlation with disease severity whereas no significant decrease 
was observed in 10 primary fibroblasts. Determination of llb GEF activ -
ity is relevant to prescreen patients eligible for eIF2B sequencing. In 
contrast, no difference in reticulum endoplasmic stress responsse was 
observed between eIF2B-mutated and control llb whereas mutated fi -
broblasts expressed an enhanced response to stress in comparison to 
control ones. Therefore we initiated a differential transcriptomic study 
(on pangenomic chips arrays) on 10 couples (mutated patients versus  
controls) with or without cellular ER-stress. The first results suggest 
the involvement of multiple pathways.
P0676. Primary calpainopathy, the new mutation detected in the 
CAPN3 gene (the case of Moldavian LGMD2A patient).
V. C. Sacara1, E. V. Ilina2;  
1Centre of reproductive health and medical genetics, Chisinau, Republic of 
Moldova, 2Research Centre of Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Introduction. Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2A (LGMD2A) is an 
autosomal recessive muscular disorder caused by mutations in the 
gene coding for calpain 3, a calcium-dependent protease. While a 
large number of CAPN3 gene mutations have already been described 
in calpainopathy patients, the diagnosis has recently shifted from mo -
lecular genetics towards biochemical assay of defective protein.
Methods. Mutation search was conducted using SSCP and direct se -
quencing methods.
Rezults. We perform direct sequencing analysis in 8 exons (exons 4, 
5,10,11, 12,20, 21 22) in Laboratory of DNA-diagnosis (Moscow) of 
patient with clinical features of LGMD,2A. The onset of the disease 
is 16-17 age. Involvement was first evident in either the pelvic, with 
asymmetry of wasting when the upper limbs were first involved. Spread 
from the lower to the upper limbs occurred within 26-27 years. Pseudo -
hypertrophy of the calves was not established. Biochemical analysis: elevated levels of serum creatine kinase [hyperCKemia]. By Molecu -
lar -genetics analysis we detected two mutation in heterozygous oc -
currence of a missense and deletion mutations: c.550del A (exon 4) 
and c.1302C>T (exon 10). These mutations are no conjunction with a 
frame-shift mutation. The c.1302C>T mutation did not descript in the 
mutation data base. We suggested that this mutation have the impor -
tant role in clinical phenotype (compound effect).
Conclusion: Our results illustrate the importance of DNA analysis for 
reliable establishment of mutation status, and provide a new insight 
into the process of genotype-phenotype correlations of LGMD2A pa -
tients.
P0677. Molecular and clinical study of Bulgarian patients 
with Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2A (LGMD2A, 
Calpainopathy)
B. Georgieva1, A. Todorova1, T. Todorov1, I. Tournev2, I. Kremensky3, V. Mitev1;  
1Sofia Medical University, Medical Faculty, Department of Chemistry and Bio -
chemistry, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Sofia Medical University, Alexandrovska Hospital, 
Department of Neurology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Sofia Medical University, Hospital of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Sofia, Bulgaria.
A total 24 LGMD2A Bulgarian patients (22 unrelated families) were di -
agnosed on DNA. Two of them were reported previous [Richard et al., 
1999]. In about 40% of the cases the first clinical diagnosis was differ -
ent from LGMD2, namely DMD/BMD and SMA. The affected females 
are two times more than the male patients. Calf hypertrophy, early con -
tractures, proximal muscle weakness in the four extremities simultane -
ously, pelvic/shoulder muscles weakness were more frequently found 
in male patients. Females present with later onset, slowly progression, 
milder course of the disease, become wheelchair bound later than 
male patients. Heart involvement was seen in 2 cases. Interfamilial 
and intrafamilial variability were also observed.
We detected 12 CAPN3  gene mutations. Five of them (42%) fall in 
exons 4 and 7 and cover 70% (28/44) of the affected unrelated chro -
mosomes.
The most frequent mutations are c.550delA (50%), p.Glu323X (7%) 
and the big deletion del2-8 (5%). They were found in 68% (15/22) of the 
families and cover 61% (27/44) of the affected chromosomes. The rest 
mutations were found in single cases and five of them (p.Arg118Gly, 
p.Arg169Gly, p.Gly333Asp, c.1811_1812delTC, c.1981_1984de -
lATAG) were detected only in Bulgarian patients. In six families the 
second mutation was not found.
Calpainopathy occurred the most frequent LGMD2 form in Bulgaria 
which accounts for at least 50% of all LGMD2 cases. We developed 
a systematic approach for DNA diagnostics of LGMD2A, starting with 
mutation screening in exons 4 and 7. The introduced method permits 
to perform an adequate prophylaxis of the disease in our country.
P0678. Distinct spectrum of CFTR  mutations and IVS8 poly (T) 
variants in Persian males with congenital bilateral absence of 
the vas deferens
R. Radpour , H. Gourabi, M. Sadighi Gilani, A. Vosough Dizaj;  
Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center of Royan Institute, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD) is a fre -
quent cause of obstructive azoospermia and nearly 75% of patients 
have at least one detectable CFTR  mutation. To study the CFTR gene 
mutations in Persian CBAVD patients with presumed low cystic fibrosis 
(CF) frequency, we analyzed 112 Persian CBAVD and 7 CUAVD males 
from Iran with 52 fertile males as control.  All 27 exons and their flank -
ing sequences was analyzed using a combination of the SSCP and 
direct sequencing.  Forty-six of the 112 patients (41.07 percent) had 
two mutations in the CFTR  gene, 41 of them had the 5T allele. Forty-
three patients (38.39 percent) had a mutation in one copy of CFTR 
gene. In 23 patients (20.53 percent) no CFTR  mutations were found. 
IVS8- 5T was observed with TG12 or TG13 haplotypes, on 61 chromo -
somes thus confirming the association of this variant with CBAVD in 
Persian patients. Screening for the IVS8- 5T and F508del together led 
to the identification of more than one-third of alleles. Exon 9 skipping 
was strongly joined with 5T/5T genotype, the rate of normal CFTR  
mRNA increased by having IVS8- 9T (TG) 9-10 and IVS8- 7T (TG) 10-11-12. 
We could detect one novel nonsense mutation (K536X) in the NBD1 
region and two novel missense mutations (Y122H & T338A) in the M2 
and M6 regions of CFTR  gene. The combination of the 5T allele in one Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
copy of the CFTR gene  with a cystic fibrosis mutation in the other copy 
is the most common cause of CBAVD in Persian population.
P0679. Molecular genetic diagnostics of celiac sprue from frozen 
biopsy material and significance of multi-disciplinal cooperation
J. Simova , D. Markova, J. Dvorackova, I. Urbanovska, M. Cegan, D. Kon -
valinka;  
CGB laboratory Ltd, Ostrava, Czech Republic.
Celiac disease (CD) is a multi-factorial disease characterised by a 
lifelong abnormal immune response showing the features of an au -
toimmune reaction to gluten, causing morphological changes in the 
intestinal mucosa to occur in sensitive individuals. CD manifests itself 
through various atypical symptoms and can be masked by a symptom -
atology leading to a diagnosis of another disease. Prevalence range 
from 1/200-1/300 individuals. The disease is closely associated with 
HLA class II alleles. About 95 % of the persons with CD possess HLA 
class II alleles DQA1*0501 and DQB1*0201/202 (coding heterodimer 
DQ2) and DRB1*04 (in close relation with heterodimer DQ8).
The diagnostics of CD is currently based on assessment of clinical 
symptoms, serologic tests, histological and enzymohistochemical ex -
aminations of the duodena mucosa. The spectrum of diagnostic ap -
proaches at our laboratory is supplemented with a molecular detec -
tion of selected risk HLA alleles, which may substantially contribute 
particularly to the differential diagnostics of infiltrative type CD (type 
1 according to the Marsh´s modified classification), which occurs both 
in CD-diagnose patients being on a gluten-free diet, CD-manifest rela -
tives (,,potential CD“) and Duhring-dermatitis-herpetiformis-diagnose 
patients. The presence of risk HLA alleles was determined using the 
PCR method.
The cooperation between pathologists and molecular geneticists sub -
stantially contributes to vindicating the clinical diagnosis of CD, par -
ticularly in cases unclear in histological terms as well as in potential 
and latent forms of the disease. It makes possible to find other risk 
individuals among the relatives of CD patients. The absence of these 
examinations may result in a diagnostic unclearness.
P0680. Expression of Centa2 during early heart development: 
a new candidate gene for the onset of cardiovascular 
malformations
M. Venturin1, S. Brunelli2,3, G. Gaudenzi4, F. Cotelli4, P. Riva1;  
1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, Medical Faculty, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2Stem Cell Research Institute, H. San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Experimental Medicine, Univer -
sity of Milano-Bicocca, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Biology, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
We previously showed that cardiovascular malformations (CVMs), in -
cluding pulmonic stenosis, septal and valve defects, have a higher in -
cidence in patients (pts) with NF1 microdeletion syndrome, compared 
to classical NF1 pts, likely owing to 17q11.2 region haploinsufficiency. 
RT-PCR and Northern blot analysis of 9 genes within the NF1 deleted 
region showed that Centa2, Suz12 and C17orf40 are expressed in hu -
man fetal and mouse embryonic heart. In situ hybridization on mouse 
whole embryos and sections allowed us to asses their expression pat -
tern during development. Centa2 was expressed in encephalon, gut, 
otic vesicles, developing limbs and heart; in particular, a strong hybrid -
ization signal was detected in heart at 9-9.5 dpc, when the heart tube 
begins to loop and endocardial cushions, primordia of the valve leaf -
lets and membranous septa are forming; Centa2 expression in heart 
continued until the last stage analyzed (15 dpc). Suz12 was found in 
encephalon, pharyngeal arches and developing limbs, with a weak sig -
nal in heart at 10 dpc. C17orf40 was expressed in otic vesicles, pha -
ryngeal arches and limbs, but not in heart. Preliminary results following 
RT-PCR and in situ hybridization experiments on zebrafish showed 
expression of Centa2 in adult heart.
These findings suggest that Centa2 might be involved in heart de -
velopment and in CVMs onset. Expression studies of Centa2 will be 
extended to zebrafish embryos and immunohystochemistry with anti-
Centa2 antibodies on mouse sections will be performed to provide 
further evidence on the involvement of Centa2 in heart development 
and CVMs.P0681. Clinical phenotype in a Portuguese patient with a 
deletion of the entire coding region of the connexin 32 gene
R. Cerqueira1, L. Lameiras1, H. Gabriel1, L. Negrão2, A. Matos2, P. Tavares1, A. 
R. Fernandes1;  
1CGC Centro Genética Clínica, Porto, Portugal, 2Serviço de Neurologia, Hospi -
tais da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTX) is a peripheral nerve 
disorder that has been linked to mutations in the connexin 32 (Cx32) 
gene ( GJB1 ). Cx32 works as a gap junction protein found in myelin -
ated peripheral nerve and mutations in the protein are predicted to 
interfere with the formation of functional channel in a dominant nega -
tive manner. The majority of GJB1  mutations are missense mutations, 
while a minority is nonsense mutations or small deletions. CMTX is 
characterized by a moderate to severe motor and sensory neuropathy 
in affected males, and usually mild to no symptoms in carrier females.
Here we report an 18 year old Portuguese male patient, with walking 
difficulties, prominent muscular atrophy of muscles below the knee, 
lower limbs with ‘invert champagne bottle’ appearance and with step -
page gait, associated with a deletion that, at least, eliminates the 
Cx32 gene entire coding sequence. A few families with deletions of 
the GJB1  gene have recently been reported [1,2]. This rare mutation 
is described for the first time in a CMTX Portuguese patient. As in the 
previous reported cases, the CMTX clinical phenotype of this patient is 
similar to the ones associated with missense or nonsense mutations in 
this gene. However, he has a complete absence of the Cx32 gene and, 
therefore, a model of dominant negative inactivation of the function of 
other gap junction does not apply, at least in this case.
[1] Nakagawa M. et al, J Neurol Sci. 2001, 185: 31-7
[2] Takashima H. et al, Acta Neurol Scand. 2003, 107:31-7
P0682. Mitochondrial Coupling Defect in Fibroblasts from 
Patients with Mfn2-Related Charcot-Marie-Tooth Type 2a
D. Bonneau1,2, D. Loiseau1,2, A. Chevrollier1,3, C. Verny4, V. Guillet1, M. Poux1, 
Y. Malthièry1,2, P. Amati-Bonneau1,2, P. Reynier1,2;  
1INSERM, U694, Angers, France, 2Dept de Biochimie et Génétique, CHU, 
Angers, France, 3Dept de Biochimie et Génétique, Angers, France, 4Dept de 
Neurologie, CHU, Angers, France.
The mitofusin 2 gene (mfn2) encodes a dynamin GTPase, located 
in the outer mitochondrial membrane, which is involved both in the 
maintenance of the mitochondrial network and in the modulation of 
cellular energy balance. Mutations of mfn2 may account for at least a 
third of the cases of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2A (CMT2A). 
In this study, we investigate mitochondrial cellular bioenergetics in 
MFN2 -related CMT2A. Methods: mitochondrial network morphology 
and metabolism were studied in cultures of skin fibroblasts obtained 
from four CMT2A patients harboring novel missense mutations of the 
MFN2  gene. We studied intracellular reactive oxygen species, mito -
chondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm), respiratory parameters, rate of 
mitochondrial ATP synthesis and ATP/O ratio. Results and interpreta -
tion: No alteration of the morphology of the mitochondrial network was 
observed. In contrast, the mitochondrial energetic metabolism was 
greatly altered in the fibroblasts from patients with MFN2 mutations. 
We found a significant coupling defect leading to reduced OXPHOS 
efficacy (reduction of ATP/O). However, this uncoupling did not lead 
to a deficiency in ATP production since it was compensated by an in -
crease in the basal respiration. In other words, the ATP production was 
maintained, although at a higher energetic cost. A 30% decrease of 
the ΔΨm was also observed in fibroblasts patients as a direct conse -
quence of impaired mitochondrial coupling. These results suggest that 
the sharply reduced efficacy of oxidative phosphorylation in MFN2 -
related CMT2A may contribute to the pathophysiology of the axonal 
neuropathy.
P0683. Duplication of the Xq28 region including GDI and FLNA , 
but not MECP2 , in a family with moderate MR and ataxia
H. Van Esch1, J. Vandewalle2, E. Pijkels1, P. Marynen2, J. Fryns1, G. Froyen2;  
1Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Center for Human Genetics 
- Human Genome Laboratory - VIB, Leuven, Belgium.
The advent of new techniques such as array-CGH and MLPA has 
led to the characterization of several new cryptic microdeletions and 
duplications as the cause of mental retardation syndromes (MR). By 
high resolution chromosome X specific array-CGH, we identified small 
duplications of the MECP2  locus as the underlying cause of a distinct Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
severe MR phenotype in males (Van Esch et al. AJHG, 77, 2005). Most 
of these duplications comprise, next to the MECP2  gene, several other 
MR-related genes, such as L1CAM , GDI and FLNA . However, delinea -
tion of the minimal critical region and detection of a twofold increased 
expression of MECP2  mRNA in the patient-derived cell lines compared 
to controls, pointed to an increased dosage of MECP2  as the major 
cause of the MR phenotype in these families.
Here we present a large X-linked MR family with a small duplication at 
Xq28 harboring the GDI and FLNA  genes, but not the MECP2  gene, 
segregating in the family. The MR phenotype consists of mild to mod -
erate MR and ataxia as cardinal features.
Further screening of patients for this duplication, not including MECP2 , 
revealed one additional family. This finding illustrates that a duplication 
of the GDI and/or  FLNA  genes can also result in an MR phenotype, 
and might play an additive effect in the larger duplications also includ -
ing MECP2 . The clinical data of this second family, delineation of the 
extent of both duplications as well as proposing the most likely candi -
date gene will be presented.
P0684. Functional analysis of pancreatitis-associated missense 
mutations in the pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor (SPINK1) 
gene
A. Boulling1,2, C. Le Maréchal1,2, P. Trouvé1,2, O. Raguénès1,3, J. Chen4,1, C. 
Férec1,2;  
1INSERM, U613, Brest, France, 2Université de Bretagne Occidentale, Faculté 
de Médecine de Brest et des Sciences de la Santé, Brest, France, 3Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire de Brest, Hôpital Morvan, Laboratoire de Génétique 
Moléculaire et d’Histocompatibilité, Brest, France, 4Etablissement Français du 
Sang – Bretagne, Brest, France.
Variations in the SPINK1 gene [encoding pancreatic secretory tryp -
sin inhibitor (PSTI)] are associated with chronic pancreatitis. We 
have recently determined the functional consequences of three mis -
sense mutations which occurred within the signal peptide sequence 
of PSTI by Western blotting analysis of wild-type and mutant PSTI 
expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Here, this approach was 
extended to analyse seven missense mutations [p.N34S, p.G48E, 
p.D50E, p.Y54H, p.P55S, p.R65Q, and p.R67C) occurring within the 
mature peptide of PSTI. This analysis enabled us to classify these mis -
sense mutations into three categories. The first category comprises 
the p.N34S and p.P55S polymorphisms, both of which occurred in 
evolutionarily non-conserved residues, involved amino acid substitu -
tions with similar physico-chemical properties, and did not cause any 
significant reduction in terms of PSTI mature peptide expression. The 
second category contains only the p.R65Q missense mutation, which 
occurred in a well-conserved residue, involved the substitution of a 
positively charged amino acid by a non-charged one, and caused 
about 60% reduction of protein expression. The third category con -
sists of p.G48E, p.D50E, p.Y54H, and p.R67C, all of which occurred in 
strictly conserved residues, involved charged amino acids, and caused 
complete or nearly complete loss of PSTI expression. Having excluded 
the possibility that the reduced protein expression may have resulted 
from reduced transcription or unstable mRNA, we surmise that these 
missense mutations may have disturbed the intracellular transporta -
tion of their respective mutant proteins. This is suggestive of a possible 
unifying pathological mechanism underlying both the signal peptide 
and mature peptide mutations.
P0685. Triplication/duplication of the trypsinogen locus in 
patients with hereditary and idiopathic chronic pancreatitis
C. Férec1,2, E. Masson1,2, C. Le Maréchal1,2, J. Chen3,1;  
1INSERM, U613, Brest, France, 2Université de Bretagne Occidentale, Faculté 
de Médecine de Brest et des Sciences de la Santé, Brest, France, 3Etablisse -
ment Français du Sang – Bretagne, Brest, France.
Hereditary pancreatitis (HP) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder. 
Apart from an early age of onset and a positive family history, HP is 
clinically indistinguishable from other forms of chronic pancreatitis. HP 
as well as idiopathic chronic pancreatitis (ICP) have previously been 
reported to be caused by ‘gain of function’ missense mutations in the 
cationic trypsinogen (PRSS1) gene. These findings as well as other 
complementary observations potentiated the importance of a tightly 
regulated trypsin activation/inhibition balance for pathophysiology and 
suggested that trypsinogen may be sensitive to a gene dosage effect. 
We therefore surmised that an increased copy number of the PRSS1 gene located at chromosome 7q34 might account for some of the un -
identified families with HP. Using semi-quantitative fluorescent multi -
plex PCR and FISH, we identified a triplication of a ~605 kb segment 
containing the PRSS1 gene on chromosome 7 in five out of 34 French 
HP families, in which no known point mutations in the PRSS1, PRSS2, 
SPINK1 and CFTR genes had been found. We also investigated tryp -
sinogen copy number variations in 1246 French Caucasians with ICP. 
The ~605 kb triplication and a novel duplication of the trypsinogen lo -
cus were detected in 10 and four subjects with ICP, respectively. Of the 
14 events, 12 (6%) were found in the 202 ICP patients whose age of 
disease onset was <20 years. Our results thus have revealed a novel 
molecular mechanism (i.e. increased copy number or gene dosage) 
causing HP and ICP; and demonstrated that chronic pancreatitis is 
also a genomic disorder.
P0686. Mutations screening in patients with different types of 
hereditary motor and sensory neuropathies
N. V. Hryshchenko , L. A. Livshits;  
Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics National Academy of Science of 
Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine.
Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN), including Charcot-
Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease, is a common disability impairing the pe -
ripheral nerve function in 1:2500 persons. We have provided the mo -
lecular genetic analysis of duplication/deletion of chromosome 17p11.2 
including PMP22 gene encoded Pmp22 protein which plays a crucial 
role in the development and maintenance of compact myelin in auto -
some dominant HMSN patients. We identified 17p11.2 duplication/de -
letion using STR markers from 17p11.2 region (D17S122, D17S921, 
D17S1358, and D17S2226). For fragment STRs analysis Cy5-labeled 
primers and the “ALF express II” were used. Duplications were found 
in 19 CMT type 1A families form Ukraine. We detected the deletion in 2 
patients of one family with hereditary neuropathy with liability to pres -
sure palsies (HNPP type). The CMTX1 is X-linked type of HMSN asso -
ciated with mutations in GJB1(Cx32) gene coding for the gap junction 
protein connexin 32. CMTX1 may arise due to incorrect trafficking of 
Cx32 protein or reduction in the gap junction mediated communication 
pathway in PNS. So the next aim of our investigation was the screen -
ing of Cx32 gene mutation variants. We have developed and applied 
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis of Cx32 ex -
ons 1B and 2 for suspected X-linked CMT patients. DGGE analysis 
revealed 4 aberrant Cx32-probes. We analysed and identified these 
probes by direct sequencing.It has been sown the PMP22 duplication/
deletion and Cx32 gene mutations association with CMT1A, HNPP 
and CMTX1 clinical phenotypes. The methods of 17p11.2 duplica -
tion/deletion detection and Cx32 mutation variants analysis in Ukraine 
have been developed.
P0687. Early onset Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease caused by 
Leu239Phe mutation in the GDAP1 gene in three Russian 
families: evidence for a founder effect
O. A. Schagina1, E. L. Dadali1, V. P. Fedotov2, A. V. Polyakov1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Vorone -
zhskaya medical genetics consultation, Voronezh, Russian Federation.
Mutations in the ganglioside - induced differentiation-associated pro -
tein 1 ( GDAP1 ) gene are common a cause of the Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
(CMT4A) disease with autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. To 
date more than twenty mutations in the GDAP1  gene have been re -
ported in patients suffering from the demyelinating, axonal or mixed 
form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.
24 patients from 20 unrelated families with severe early onset polyneu -
ropathy and possible autosomal recessive inheritance were screened 
for mutations in GDAP1 gene by SSCP analysis.
In one affected family we revealed c.458C>T (Pro153Leu) mutation. 
A c.715C>T transversion at codon 239 (Leu239Phe) was detected in 
seven affected subjects from five apparently unrelated families. All pa -
tients had early onset and axonal type of CMT disease.
Haplotype analysis of the GDAP1  locus for markers D8S279; D8S1776; 
D8S286; D8S551; D8S548; D8S1805; D8S1705 and D8S1757 dem -
onstrated a common disease haplotype for markers D8S286; D8S551, 
D8S548, and D8S1805. The association of the mutation with a com -
mon haplotype suggested a founder effect.
This work was pertly supported by Russian President‘s grant 
NSh5736.2006.7Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
P0688. Coffin-Lowry syndrome - two novel mutations in the 
RSK2  gene in Polish patients
D. Jurkiewicz , E. Popowska, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, E. Ciara, M. Boruc -
ka-Mankiewicz, P. Kowalski, M. Gajdulewicz, K. Spodar, K. Chrzanowska, M. 
Krajewska-Walasek;  
Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS) is an X-linked semidominant disorder 
characterized by mental retardation, facial dysmorphism and skeletal 
abnormalities. CLS is caused by mutations of the RSK2  gene ( RP-
S6KA3 ) located in Xp22.2 region and split into 22 exons. The gene 
encodes for a serine/threonine kinase RSK2, composed of two func -
tional kinase catalytic domains. RSK2 acts at the distal end of the mito -
gen induced Ras-MAPK signaling pathway involved in regulating wide 
range of cellular functions.
The aim of the study was to identify RSK2  mutations in a group of 
Polish patients with clinically recognized Coffin-Lowry syndrome as -
sembled in Department of Medical Genetics of the Children’s Memorial 
Health Institute in Warsaw. Mutation screening of the entire RSK2 gene 
was performed in seven patients. Twenty-two exons were amplified by 
PCR and subsequently analyzed by SSCP and sequencing technics. 
Molecular analysis revealed the presence of two novel mutations in the 
RSK2  gene. One of them was a one-nucleotide deletion (c.896delT) 
in exon 11. The deletion creates a stop codon at codon 311, resulting 
in a truncated RSK2 protein lacking a part of N-terminal domain and 
the whole C-terminal domain. The other mutation was a substitution G 
to A in the first position of intron 10 (c.845+1G>A), affecting the splice 
site. In both cases mutations appeared de novo . Further studies are 
planned to evaluate the role of the RSK2  gene in the pathogenesis of 
CLS in Polish population.
The study was supported by MNiI Project 0624/P01/2006/31 and par -
tially by CHRU de Strasbourg (Dr. JP Delaunoy).
P0689. Mutational spectrum in steroid 21-hydroxylase gene 
(CYP21A2) in Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia patients of Russia
N. S. Osinovskaya , T. E. Ivaschenko, E. L. Soboleva;  
Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion.
More than 90% of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) of cases re -
sult from 21-hydroxylase deficiency caused by mutations in the CY -
P21A2 gene. By means of PCR analysis the spectrum of mutations in 
the steroid 21-hydroxylase gene (CYP21A2) was analyzed in 72 Rus -
sian patients with salt-wasting (SW) and simple virilizing (SV) forms 
of CAH. Specific patterns of diagnostically important mutations were 
identified for each clinically different CAH forms. The salt-wasting form 
of the disease is most frequently associated with gene deletion (48%) 
and the 655A/C→G mutation in the second intron (24%) of CYP21A2 
gene. 1172N mutation in exon 4 (18%), 655A/C→G mutation (24%) 
and gene deletion (14%) were most frequent in the patients of simple 
virilizing CAH form. Altogether mutation detection rates were equal to 
86% and 66% of affected chromosomes from the patients with the SW 
and SV forms respectively.
P30L, del8, delA2, 655A/C→G, I172N, V237G, V281L, Q318X, 
R356W, P453S mutations were studied in 26 patients affected with 
the non-classical form (NC) of CAH. Mutations were detected in 60% 
(15/26) of the chromosomes from the patients with NC form altogether. 
Novel type of mutation - CYP21gene/CYP21pseudogene hybrid gene 
was identified in 31% (8/26) of patients. Hybrid gene resulted from 
the fusion of 5’ part of CYP21A2 gene with 3’ part of the neighboring 
CYP21A1P pseudogene with the common junction site located some -
where after exon 8 of CYP21A2 These data are of substantial practi -
cal value for genetic counseling and prenatal diagnostics of CAH in 
Russia.
P0690. Congenital heart disease: a genealogical and genetic 
study in São Miguel Island, Azores
R. Cabral1,2, R. Anjos3, L. de Fez1, P. R. Pacheco1,2, M. São-Bento1, C. T. 
Gomes1, C. C. Branco1,2, C. P. Duarte4, L. Mota-Vieira1,2;  
1Mol Genetics & Pathology Unit, Ponta Delgada - Azores, Portugal, 2Instituto 
Gulbenkian Ciencia, Oeiras, Portugal, 3Pediatric Cardiology Department, Hos -
pital Santa Cruz, Carnaxide, Portugal, 4Pediatric Department, Hospital Divino 
Espirito Santo, Ponta Delgada - Azores, Portugal.
Congenital heart defects are among the most common birth defects, 
and the leading cause of birth defect-related deaths. Recently, we dem -onstrated that in Sao Miguel Island the CHD prevalence is relatively 
high: 9.16 per 1000 live births. Considering that half of the population 
lives in small rural localities and the internal migration is reduced, as -
pects that increase endogamy and inbreeding, we performed a struc -
tured family questionnaire which includes: 1. queries for CHD risk fac -
tors (maternal diabetes mellitus, alcohol and drug abuse by the mother 
during pregnancy, viral infections of the fetus and genetic conditions), 
and 2. a detailed family history to construct the ascending genealogy 
until the 3rd generation. To that end, 195 CHD families were contacted 
by phone and/or letter, 109 (55.9%) of which accepted to participate. 
We identified 39 (35.8%) multiplex families (with 2 to 5 patients), 5 
(4.6%) consanguineous families, and 5 (4.6%) multiplex families with 
consanguinity. In order to carry out molecular genetic analysis, a bio -
bank consisting of DNA and RNA from patients and parents was built 
after written informed consent. The first mutation analyzed was the 
C677T of the MTHFR  gene in 469 healthy individuals from Sao Miguel, 
being 84 (17.2%) homozygous for the mutation (TT) and 221 (45.5%) 
heterozygous (CT). From these observed genotypes, the C677T allele 
frequency in Sao Miguel population is 41.5%, the second highest value 
in Europe. A comparative analysis will be performed for this mutation 
in the CHD patients, as well as for other candidate genes (NKX2.5, 
TBX5 and GATA4).
P0691. The analysis of a mouse mutant that models aspects of 
human Cri du Chat syndrome.
E. Rivkin , G. Xie, S. Cordes;  
Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Human Cri Du Chat Syndrome (CDCS) is a common deletion disorder 
with an incidence of 1 in 20,000 live births. Hallmarks of CDCS include a 
cat-like cry, mental retardation, hypotonia, microcephaly, micrognathia, 
and a spectrum of behavioural abnormalities. Ultimately, identification 
of the key genes involved and analysis of their functions should aid in 
the design of better diagnoses and therapies for CDCS patients. To 
identify novel mouse mutations that affect cranial nerve development 
we performed a small-scale, recessive mutagenesis screen using the 
chemical mutagen N-ethyl- N-nitrosourea (ENU). In one of the mutants, 
anti-neurofilament staining of 10.5dpc revealed an abnormally sprout -
ing facial nerve (cranial nerve VII). At embryonic days 11.5-12.5dpc, 
homozygotes have severely reduced lower jaws (micrognathia), ab -
normally shaped heads, and various vascular defects. These mutants 
are lethal at day 13.5dpc. Using meiotic recombination I mapped this 
phenotype to a 1.4Mb region on mouse chromosome 15, which is syn -
tenic to the critical interval associated with craniofacial abnormalities 
and mental retardation of human CDCS. By sequencing the genes 
within this interval and by expression analyses, I have identified an ex -
cellent candidate gene and am currently employing further molecular 
and genetic approaches to understand its role in normal craniofacial 
development and in Cri Du Chat syndrome.
P0692. Novel CARD15/NOD2 mutations in Finnish patients with 
Crohn’s disease and their relation to phenotypic expression
M. Lappalainen1, P. Paavola-Sakki2, L. Halme3, U. Turunen4, M. Färkkilä4, H. 
Repo5, K. Kontula1;  
1Research Program for Molecular Medicine, Biomedicum Helsinki and Depart -
ment of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of 
Medicine, University of Helsinki and Department of Gastroenterology, Helsinki 
University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Transplantation and 
Liver Surgery, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of 
Gastroenterology, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 5Department 
of Bacteriology and Immunology, the Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, 
Helsinki, Finland.
Crohn’s disease (CD) is a multifactorial trait with significant genetic 
predisposition. R702W, G908R, and 1007 fs mutations of the CARD15/
NOD2 gene associate with CD and account for 80% of disease sus -
ceptibility caused by this gene. In Finland, only 16% of the CD patients 
carry one of these mutations even though CD prevalence and inci -
dence are comparable to other Western populations. Our aim was to 
explore whether Finnish type of CARD15 mutations exist that would 
explain the residual linkage to chromosome 16. We screened the 
CARD15 gene in 240 CD patients. For in vitro  functional studies, blood 
mononuclear cells were cultured alone or with MDP, and IL8 levels 
were measured. We identified 30 sequence variations, including 12 
new ones. Allele frequencies for the R702W, G908R, and 1007 fs muta -Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
tions were 3.3%, 0.4%, and 4.8%, respectively. Five novel amino acid 
substitutions (R38M, W355X, P727L, W907R, R1019X) were found in 
five CD patients; four of these patients also carried another CARD15 
variant. The biochemical nature of these mutations, cross-species 
comparisons, and low IL8 production all favour their pathogenic role. 
These mutation carriers had a complicated form of ileal or ileocolonic 
disease. We were unable to identify any novel population-prevalent 
CD susceptibility allele, and only the 1007 fs mutation associated with 
CD susceptibility. In conclusion, our data suggest that there may be yet 
undetectable pathogenic mutations in the flanking or intronic regions of 
the CARD15 gene. Compound heterozygosity or homozygosity for the 
CARD15 mutations should be considered in complicated CD patients.
P0693. Molecular analysis of the CUL7 gene in 3 M syndrome
C. Huber1, A. L. Delezoide2, C. Baumann3, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1, the 
international collaborative group on 3 M syndrome;  
1Department of Medical Genetics and INSERM U781, Hopital Necker, Paris, 
France, 2Foetopathology Unit , Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3Depart -
ment of Medical Genetics, Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France.
3M syndrome is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by 
pre- and post-natal growth retardation, facial dysmorphism, large head 
circumference, normal intelligence and skeletal changes including long 
slender tubular bones and tall vertebral bodies. Studying a series of 29 
families, we have mapped the disease locus gene on chromosome 
6p21.1, and then identified mutations in the CUL7 gene.
Following this initial study, we have collected the samples of 29 addi -
tional 3 M families and identified CUL7 mutations in 16/29 comprising 
18 novel mutations. This series included one terminated pregnancy 
at 33 weeks of gestation. The fetus presented with severe growth 
retardation, normal head circumference, facial features, prominent 
heels and long slender tubular bones suggestive of 3 M syndrome. 
By direct sequencing, we first identified a CUL7 splice site mutation 
(c.1215+1G>A), inherited from the father. In addition, we found a large 
de novo deletion (> 3.84 Mb) encompassing the CUL7 gene. Histo -
logical study of the femoral growth plate from this case showed an 
increase in the chondrocyte density and size in the resting and prolif -
erative zones but no major abnormalities in the prehypertrophic and 
hypertrophic zones, suggesting that CUL7 is mainly involved in the 
chondrocyte proliferation but not in their differentiation.
We conclude that CUL7 is the major gene responsible for 3 M syn -
drome accounting for 77.6 % of our cases (45/ 58). The absence of 
any mutation in 13 patients and the exclusion of the 6p21.1 locus in 5 
consanguineous families argue in favor of a genetic heterogeneity.
P0694. Mutational analysis of CYP 21  gene in patients with non-
classical and heterozygous forms of 21-Hydroxylase deficiency
T. Bilgen1, G. Karaguzel2, S. Karauzum1, I. Bircan2, S. Akcurin2;  
1Departments of Medical Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Akdeniz 
University, Antalya, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Faculty of 
Medicine, Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a common autosomal reces -
sive disorder and more than 90% of CAH cases are caused by muta -
tions in the CYP 21  gene. Variable degrees of 21-hydroxylase enzyme 
impairment caused by different mutations are correlated with the clini -
cal severity of the disease. Two forms of CAH exist depending on the 
clinical symptoms. The classical, severe form consists of the simple 
virilizing and the salt-wasting types, whereas the non-classical (NC) 
form is milder and later onset. In this study, we screened CYP 21  gene 
in forty-one NC and heterozygote form of patients to detect the most 
common mutations, other rare mutations, and possible novel muta -
tions. At first, we screened all cases for the V281L mutation by PCR-
RFLP. We detected V281L mutation in three patients, one of whom 
was homozygote, and two were heterozygote for the mutation. Using 
sequencing technique, we detected two different partial gene conver -
sions comprising the promoter and the first exon of the CYP 21  gene. 
Some alterations associated with 21-hydroxylase deficiency were 
detected, such as C89T, C/A655G, C2108T, and C2578T. We also 
described three novel non-synonymous exonic alterations (T2555A, 
A2094T, and C2700A) that could be considered as potential mutations 
affecting the enzymatic activity. In addition, we identified a new ge -
nomic change (G-47A) in the promoter region of the gene. The other 
alterations detected in this study were intronic or at the 3’ UTR of the 
CYP 21 . This is the first study characterizing the molecular basis of NC and heterozygous forms of CAH in Turkey.
P0695. No evidence for a founder effect of CYP21A1P/CYP21A2 
chimeric genes causing 21-hydroxylase deficiency in Brazil
F. B. Coeli1, R. D. Bernardi1, R. R. De Carvalho1, R. J. Petroli1, F. C. Soardi1, G. 
Guerra-Junior2, S. H. V. Lemos-Marini3, M. P. De Mello1;  
1Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética, Campinas, Brazil, 2Cen-
tro de Investigação em Pediatria, Campinas, Brazil, 3Centro Investigação em 
Pediatria, Campinas, Brazil.
CYP21A2  gene which encodes 21-hydroxylase enzyme, as well as the 
class III histocompatibility genes, is located between HLA-B and HLA-
DR loci. In the same loci there is a cluster of overlap genes including 
RP, C4, CYP21  and TNX which is known as RCCX module. Almost 
70% healthy individuals present a duplicated RCCX module arranged 
in tandem (bimodular), but mono- or trimodular arrangements are also 
observed in normal populations. The variability of RCCX number is 
considered to be a result of unequal crossovers. Mutations on CY-
P21A2  gene cause 21-hydroxylase deficiency which is responsible for 
95% Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia, an inborn error of metabolism 
that impairs cortisol synthesis in the steroidogenesis. In Brazil, after 
studying the molecular basis of 21-hydroxylase deficiency in 112 unre -
lated patients, a total of 44 disease-causing alleles were found to carry 
a chimeric CYP21A1P/CYP21A2  gene (20%). In the present study we 
describe different compositions of chimeric genes observed in mono- 
, bi- and trimodular alleles (50%, 41% and 9%, respectively). Seven 
different chimeric  CYP21A1P/CYP21A2  haplotypes were observed in 
momomodular alleles whereas five and four chimeric haplotypes were 
identified in bi- and trimodular alleles, respectively. In conclusion, the 
results described here indicated that there is no evidence for a founder 
effect of alleles bearing chimeric genes causing 21-hydroxylase defi -
ciency in Brazil.
P0696. Cystic fibrosis studies: an individual spectrum of CFTR 
gene mutations in Lithuania
V. Kucinskas1,2, K. Končiūtė1,2, A. Utkus1,2;  
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius 
University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University 
Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Mutational testing of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regu -
lator (CFTR) gene is in action in Lithuania since 1993. However, mo -
lecular genetic diagnostics of cystic fibrosis (CF) in is still a consider -
able problem due to mutational heterogeneity of this gene in the Lithu -
anian population. 68 unrelated CF patients (136 CF chromosomes) 
were tested for CFTR gene mutations combining different methods. 
Initial testing for F508del using PCR with oligonucleotide primers 
bridging the deletion was followed by the DGGE-based screening 
of all CFTR gene exons and subsequent identification of the muta -
tions by direct sequencing. Duplex PCR was applied to identify the 
CFTRdele2,3(21kb) mutation. The CF patients with one or two CFTR 
gene mutations unidentified were tested for 33 most common muta -
tions using Cystic Fibrosis v.3 Genotyping Assay (Abbott, Germany). 
18 different CFTR gene mutations were identified in Lithuania. Out 
of them, five appear to be relatively common: F508del (61.76%), 
CFTRdele2,3(21kb) (5.15%), R553X, N1303K, 3849+10kbC>T (each 
2.94%). Other mutations were identified in single cases (0.74%). 
Some of them are relatively common in other populations (W1282X, 
G542X, 394delTT), but the majority are rare (G314R, R1066H, 3667in -
sTCAA, 574delA, L138ins, 4006-4A>G, E217G, V754M) or even not 
yet described elsewhere (4171insCCTA, 794delC). Mutations on 20 
CF chromosomes (14.71%) have not yet been identified. In conclu -
sion, the applied PCR-based approach resulted in 18 different CFTR 
gene mutations in CF patients from Lithuania with the overall identifi -
cation rate of 85.3%. F508del prevails (61.76%), but the spectrum of 
CF mutations in Lithuania appears to be individual in comparison with 
other European populations.
P0697. Cystic fibrosis and modifier genes in mexican population
C. N. Sanchez-Dominguez1, M. A. Reyes-Lopez1, R. Ortiz-Lopez2, H. L. Gal -
lardo Blanco2, A. Bustamante Saenz2;  
1Instituto Politecnico Nacional, Reynosa, Mexico, 2Universidad Autonoma de 
Nuevo Leon, Monterrey, Mexico.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common monogenic disease in Cau -
casian population, its frequency is about one in 2500 live born. The Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
estimated frequency in Mexican population is about 1/8500. The muta -
tion frequency differs specially for low frequent alleles. Heterogene -
ity in pulmonary manifestations cannot be explained by the genotype. 
Recent studies are focused to the study of genes modifiers, which are 
different genes from the primary gene cause of the disease that influ -
ences the clinical manifestations. This work shows some advances in 
CF diagnosis and modifier genes analysis in Mexican population. DNA 
was extracted from peripheral blood of CF patients. Thirty six frequent 
mutations in CFTR gene were analyzed by PCR and reverse hybrid -
ization with Allele Specific Oligonucleotides probes. The polymorphism 
analyses of modifier genes were made by PCR-RFLP. Mutation was 
detected in one or both alleles in 15 out of 19 patients (79%). Delta 
(D) F508 frequency was 45%, lower than the reported for Caucasian 
population (60-70%), and in agree of a published paper for our popula -
tion. Twenty nine percent was different mutant alleles of DF508, and 
26% of the mutant alleles remain undetected. This work is in prog -
ress of selection and recruitment of patients and controls, as well as 
standardization of the other genes modifiers, along with some other 
biomarkers that will allow to understand the physiopathology of CF and 
to define a possible genetic risk profile of severe pulmonary disease, 
and the pursuit of patients with risk profile with the purpose of improv -
ing the quality of life.
P0698. CFTR gene study in African children with cystic fibrosis-
like phenotypes: identification of a novel p.A204T mutation
L. Mutesa1, C. Verhaeghe1, K. Segers1, J. Vanbellinghen1, L. Ngendahayo2, C. 
Oury1, L. Koulischer1, V. Bours1;  
1University of Liège, liège, Belgium, 2National University of Rwanda, Butare, 
Rwanda.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is one of the most common autosomal recessive 
disease in Caucasians with an incidence of 1 in 2500 births. However, 
very little is known about CF in Black populations from Africa where this 
disease has been considered to be rare. Nevertheless, CF is still un -
der-diagnosed in this population. Indeed, CF clinical features are often 
similar to those of other frequent diseases in Africa such as malnutri -
tion, tuberculosis, chronic pulmonary infections and HIV/AIDS. More -
over, molecular analyses remain inaccessible in many African coun -
tries. We investigated 60 unrelated Rwandan children with CF clinical 
features. We applied a gene scanning approach using DHPLC and 
MLPA techniques to analyse all exons and flanking intron sequences 
of the CFTR gene, in order to characterise CF mutations, sequence 
variations and gross genomic rearrangements. Four different CF-
mutations, including one previously undescribed missense mutation 
(p.A204T in exon 6a), and 9 polymorphisms were identified. A study of 
CFTR-p.A204T mutation by immunoblotting in transiently transfected 
HeLa cells, revealed a lower level of p.A204T CFTR mature protein 
relative to CFTR-wild type. The frequencies of coding single-nucleo -
tide polymorphisms (c.2694T>G, c.4521G>A and c.1540A>G) were 
similar in a control group. Our study identified five African patients with 
CF clinical features, a positive sweat test and a single CFTR mutation. 
One of them carried a novel mutation. Despite of multiple phenocopies 
due to environment-linked diseases, we consider that a sweat chloride 
test and, if positive, a specific CFTR mutation screening could be use -
ful for these patients with CF-like symptoms.
P0699. A new splicing mutation in CFTR gene
V. Faa‘1, A. Meloni1, M. Masala2, D. Corda2, G. Ibba2, F. Incani2, A. Cao1, M. 
Rosatelli2;  
1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, CNR, Cagliari, Italy, 2Diparti -
mento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Universita’ degli Studi, Cagliari, 
Italy.
We describe 2 unrelated Italian patients affected by Cystic Fibrosis 
whose CFTR mRNA contains an insertion of 100 nt between exons 6b 
and 7 corresponding to a portion of intron 6b.this sequence resembles 
a cryptic exon because it is characterized by an upstream ag and a 
downstream gt sequence which is most probably recognized as 5’ and 
3’ splice site by the spliceosome. At DNA level, sequencing analysis of 
the 2 patients showed a short deletion in intron 6b. We hypothesized 
that the mechanism involved in the aberrant splicing may be that the 
mutation creates a new sequence identified as a target sequence of 
an SR protein. In fact, the inserted sequence at transcript level was 
analyzed by ESEfinder web site (http://exon.chsl.edu/ESE/) that iden -
tifies exonic splicing enhancer (ESE) consensus motifs. The analysis showed that the short deletion creates a new sequence that is the tar -
get site of an SR protein allowing the definition of the new exon. In or -
der to elucidate the mechanisms involved in the aberrant splicing, we 
carried out hybrid minigene experiments. With these experiments, we 
demonstrate that the short nucleotide deletion in intron 6b is the cause 
of altered splicing as we found in the 2 CF patients at RNA level.
RNA-protein interaction studies are in progress to detect which protein 
interacts with the mutated allele.
P0700. Mapping and sequencing of the mouse Dac2j mutation, a 
model for human ectrodactyly SHFM3
M. Friedli1, F. Spitz2, R. Lyle3, S. Nikolaev1, M. Arcangeli1, D. Duboule4, S. E. 
Antonarakis1;  
1University of Geneva, Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, 
Geneva, Switzerland, 2EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Department of Medical 
Genetics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4University of Geneva, 
Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, Geneva, Switzerland.
SHFM3 is a congenital limb malformation affecting the hands and 
feet. It is caused by an ~500kb duplication at 10q24. Dactylaplasia is 
a similar inherited limb malformation in mice and is thus a model for 
human SHFM3. Sidow et al reported two alleles, Dac1J and Dac2J, 
mapping in the region syntenic with the duplication in SHFM3. Dac1J 
is an insertion of a transposon 10kb upstream of Fbxw4, while the 
exact molecular lesion in Dac2J has not yet been characterized. Here, 
we report mapping and sequencing of Dac2j by inverse PCR and show 
that it is caused by insertion of an transposon, similar to the Dac1j 
allele. Complete sequencing of the Dac2j and Dac1j insertions demon -
strated that both elements belong to the MusD family of retroelements. 
We constructed a phylogenetic tree including our sequences and all 
Blast matches. These MusD elements are close to each other, and 
they branch within the clade of other active young MusD elements 
from the mouse genome, suggesting that active MusD elements group 
together. Interestingly, Dac2j occurs within a highly conserved element 
that may represent a regulatory sequence. We tested for duplication of 
the region in Dac mice, since this is the mutation mechanism in human 
SHFM3. qPCR on genomic DNA failed to identify any copy number 
differences between either Dac mutant and wild-type littermates. Both 
the human and mouse phenotypes seem to be caused by a disruption 
in the normal gene expression patterning in limb bud development, but 
the mechanisms are not known.
P0701. Mutational analysis of the ATP2A2 gene in Darier’s 
Tunisian families
M. Bchetnia1,2, C. Charfeddine1, S. Kassar3,2, H. Zribi4, H. Ouragini1, S. Boubak -
er3, M. Mokni4,2, A. Dhahri-Ben Osman4, S. Abdelhak1;  
1Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases Research Unit (MIGOD) 
UR 26/04, Institut Pasteur de Tunis., Tunis, Tunisia, 2Study of Hereditary Keratini -
zation Disorders Research Unit (THK) UR 24/04, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis., Tu -
nis, Tunisia, 3Anatomo-Pathology Department, Institut Pasteur de Tunis., Tunis, 
Tunisia, 4Dermatology Department, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis., Tunis, Tunisia.
Darier’s disease (DD, MIM 124200) also known as keratosis follicu -
laris, is a rare autosomal dominant genodermatosis characterized by 
altered keratinisation of the epidermis, nails and mucous membrane. 
The typical clinical presentation includes keratotic papules and plaques 
in seborrheic regions, palmoplantar pits and nails dystrophy, with histo -
logical acantholysis and dyskeratosis. The disorder has an estimated 
prevalence of 1: 55 000. Several mutations within ATP2A2 gene have 
been identified as the cause of the disease. This gene encodes the 
sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase type 2 (SERCA2) involving 
in intracellular calcuim signalling.
We report here the first molecular investigation of DD in Maghrebian 
population. Mutations analyses were performed by direct sequencing 
of five Tunisian patients belonging to two unrelated families. Two pre -
viously reported heterozygous mutations were identified (R677X) and 
(D702N), within exon 14 and exon 15 of ATP2A2 gene respectively. 
Previous studies showed that R677X mutation resulted in the synthe -
sis of truncated protein and D702N completely abolished ATPase ac -
tivity. We compared clinical data of examined patients with phenotypic 
features described among patients from the literature, and found no 
obvious genotype-phenotype correlation. Phenotype variability was 
observed even among Tunisian patients sharing the same mutation 
suggesting that additional factors are important contributors to the 
clinical phenotype.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease10
P0702. Identification of reduced copy number of DAZ genes in a 
group of Romanian idiopathic infertile men
R. Cocoş1, F. Raicu2,3, D. Neagoş1;  
1Carol Davila”University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 2De-
partment of Clinical Sciences and Imaging G. D’Annunzio University Founda -
tion Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy, 3Aging Research Center (CESI) G’ D’Annunzio 
University Foundation Chieti, Chieti, Italy.
Male infertility is now a major reproductive health problem and the field 
has attracted considerable attention from scientists and clinicians. Ap -
proximately 15% of men with idiopathic infertility have microdeletions 
of the Y chromosome. The DAZ genes are candidate fertility factors 
that lie within the human Y chromosome’s AZFc region. AZFc deletions 
including all four members of DAZ gene family represent the most fre -
quent molecular cause of spermatogenic impairment. Besides com -
plete DAZ family deletions, partial deletions are also associated with 
impaired spermatogenesis. PCR digest assay is one of the methods 
that can distinguish among the different copies of the four DAZ genes 
using subtle sequence differences located in introns and among mem -
bers of the DAZ genes. These differences are termed sequence family 
variants (SFVs). We use this approach to determine the exact number 
of genes in a group of idiopathic infertile men. We screened the ge -
nomic DNA of 54 infertile males and 40 healthy fertile controls. Using 
PCR digest assay we determined that 2 patients of 54 had a deletion 
of two copies of DAZ (DAZ1 and DAZ2) showing that these deletions 
can be the cause for spermatogenic failure No deletions were detected 
in the control group. Initial molecular investigation by multiplex PCR 
was conducted according to European guidelines for the molecular 
diagnosis of Y chromosome microdeletions and all patients presented 
no deletions for DAZ genes. Our study, the first in a Romanian popula -
tion, suggest a cause and effect relationship between partial DAZ gene 
microdeletion and idiopathic infertility.
P0703. Growth factor-induced stem cell differentiation into inner 
ear hair cell precursors on two- and three- dimensional surfaces
M. Peverelli1,2, H. Dahl1,3, A. J. O’Connor4, A. Robertson1, M. G. de Silva1,5;  
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, 
Australia, 2Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Australia, 3Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Australia, 4De-
partment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia, 5Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, 
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Austria.
Sensorieural hearing loss is associated with damage and loss of inner 
ear hair cells. Although hair cells within the avian and reptile cochlea 
are able to undergo spontaneous regeneration following damage to 
the auditory system, mammalian hair cells do not possess this ability. 
The availability of stem cells has presented the opportunity to establish 
therapies based on replacing or regenerating damaged cells within the 
inner ear. To explore these therapies it is essential to understand the 
normal hair cell differentiation pathway. Our investigations focused on 
the ability of mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells to commit to hair cell 
lineage by identifying key cytokines involved in hair cell determina -
tion. ES cells were differentiated into embryoid and neurectodermal 
embryoid bodies and treated with different combinations of cytokines. 
Commitment to hair cell lineage was assessed by expression of hair 
cell markers via semi-quantitative RT-PCR and flow cytometry. Since 
terminally differentiated hair cells were not generated with high effi -
ciency on 2D tissue culture plates, a tissue engineering approach was 
undertaken using biodegradable polymers. The copolymer poly(lactic-
co-glyoclic acid) PLGA was formed into 3D constructs using thermally 
induced phase separation. Morphology of polymers mimicked key 
architectural features of the inner ear sensory epithelium to encour -
age growth and differentiation of cells into inner ear types. Taking the 
most promising culture conditions from 2D work, partially differentiated 
ES cells were successfully grown on PLGA scaffolds with cells co-
expressing hair cell markers. These approaches provide encouraging 
results for the possibility of differentiating inner ear hair cells in vitro .P0704. Diamond-Blackfan Anemia - Haploinsuffiency or RNA 
binding?
J. Schuster , J. Badhai, A. Fröjmark, E. Davey, P. Frisk, N. Dahl;  
University Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden.
Diamond-Blackfan-Anemia (DBA) is a congenital disorder with ab -
sence/decrease of erythroid precursors in the bone marrow. ~25% of 
DBA patients carry a mutation in the ribosomal protein S19 ( RPS19 ), 
~2% in the RPS24  gene. The molecular basis underlying DBA is yet 
unclear.
We investigated fibroblast from patients with RPS19 and RPS24 mu -
tations and found a significantly prolonged (P<0.05) generation time 
(41h and 37h) compared to controls (~25h). These results might reflect 
haploinsuffiency as a suggested mechanism in DBA. To investigate 
whether these mutations have an effect on ribosomal proteins (RPs), 
we measured relative amounts of several RPs in mutant fibroblasts. 
No consistent reduction of RP-levels could be detected. To clarify the 
regulation of RPS19 transcript and protein levels, we analyzed the 
RPS19 transcript and its interaction with protein more intensively. Us -
ing 5’RACE, we identified a surprising variation in the transcription start 
site. Over 10 previously unknown 5’UTR variants could be detected 
(up to 95 additional nucleotides at 5’ end compared to NM_0010122). 
The longer variants seem to be less abundant but highly structured. 
qRT/PCR revealed tissue specific expression patterns of these vari -
ants. Furthermore, we discovered that the RPS19 protein binds to the 
5’UTR of its own mRNA with a Kd of 28.5±2.9nM. Preliminary map -
ping of the binding site indicates binding of RPS19 protein close to 
the 5’TOP-sequence in the 5’UTR. Taken together, our data suggest a 
regulatory mechanism of RPS19  mRNA by the interaction with RPS19 
itself and, by a variety of transcript variants which differ in the highly 
structured 5’UTR.
P0705. A novel Titin mutation causing dilated cardiomyopathy 
was found in family from Galilee
G. Yoskovitz1,2, M. Gramlich, D. Freimark1, L. Thierfelder3, H. Lahat1, 
H. Reznik-Wolf2, M. S. Feinberg1, E. Pras2, M. Arad1, B. Gerull3; 1Heart Failure 
Service and Heart Institute, and 2Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, 
Sheba Medical Center and Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel 
Aviv, Israel, 3Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.
Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a major cause of heart 
failure and heart transplantation in young adults. In about 30% of the 
cases DCM is a familial disease. We studied a large Muslim-Arab kin -
dred from Galilee with familial DCM inherited as an autosomal domi -
nant trait.
We identified 13 affected individuals: 8 males and 5 females. Two were 
cardiac transplant recipients and 7 had symptomatic heart failure. 
None had skeletal myopathy.
Linkage analyses to candidate loci excluded the following established 
causes of DCM: MYH7, MYH6, SCN5A, DES, TNNT2, LMNA and 
SGCD. ACTC and PLN were excluded by direct sequencing.
Haplotype surrounding the titin (TTN) gene, was found in all of the 
affected individuals. LOD score calculation yielded a maximal score 
of 3.44.
During sequence analysis we identified an Adenine insertion at position 
59014 creating a stop codon 4 bp down stream, predicting a truncated 
protein. The mutation was not found in 400 normal chromosomes but 
was identified in 6 non-affected family members. The novel mutation 
was not found in 2 other Muslim-Arab families with DCM.
TTN, mapped to chromosome 2q31, encodes to a giant muscle protein 
with a key role in muscle assembly, force transmission and mainte -
nance of resting tension.
TTN is a structural protein required for sarcomere function, which has 
been considered a rare cause of DCM. Truncation at about 3/4 of the 
protein’s length is predicted to compromise titin’s binding to myosin 
(at the A-band) and its anchoring to the M-disk, thereby impairing the 
sarcomere’s structure and passive tension.
Identification of the mutation in asymptomatic family members should 
facilitate early diagnosis and therapy in pre-clinically affected individu -
als.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease11
P0706. MLPA assay as a screening tool for mutations in DMD/
BMD patients and their female relatives
E. M. Neagu1, G. Girbea1, A. Constantinescu1, C. Constantinescu1, D. Iancu1, 
E. Manole2, C. Matanie3, E. Ionica3, N. Butoianu4, S. Magureanu4, L. Barbarii1;  
1National Institute of Legal Medicine, Bucharest, Romania, 2Colentina Clinical 
Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 
4“Al. Obregia” Clinical Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.
Our study, part of a current national research program, aims to evalu -
ate the dystrophin gene mutational pattern for the Duchenne/Becker 
muscular dystrophies (DMD/BMD). Knowing the mutational pattern of 
these diseases is proved to be of prognostic value and major impor -
tance for genetic counseling. For this purpose we recently introduced 
the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) method 
to identify mutations on the dystrophin gene in a series of DMD/BMD 
patients and their female relatives. We report our one year results and 
experience with the MLPA DMD commercial kits, which allow scanning 
of all 79 dystrophin exons in two PCRs. The amplicons were analysed 
on a 3100 Avant ABI Genetic Analyzer. We investigated 102 DNA sam -
ples from: 52 male patients with clinical and muscular biopsy picture of 
DMD, 43 female relatives, one amniotic fluid sample from a possible 
affected fetus. We assessed the extent and location of deletions and 
duplication and ascertained frequency of de novo or familial mutations 
with major importance for genetic counselling. The MLPA screen re -
vealed mutations in 75% of cases: 85.72% deletions, 14.28% duplica -
tions and one non-contiguous deletion. The largest deletion detected 
involved almost half of the gene (exons 3-42), while the others were 
restricted to 2-5 exons, especially the exons 45 - 50. Because most the 
detected mutations encompassed more exons, no additional analysis 
was performed. The method proves to be easy to handle, accurate, 
highly reproducible. Our results recommend the MLPA assay as a rou -
tine screening tool for dystrophin mutations.
P0707. Identification of deletions and duplications of the DMD 
gene in Macedonian patients using Multiplex Ligation-dependent 
Probe Amplification (MLPA)
S. A. Kocheva1,2, S. Trivodalieva1, S. Vlaski-Jekic3, M. Kuturec2, G. D. Efre -
mov1;  
1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, MASA, Skopje, 
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2Pediatric Clinic, Medical Faculty, 
Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 3Department of Neurol -
ogy, Medical Faculty, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and Becker muscular dystrophy 
(BMD) are caused in the majority of cases by deletions of the DMD 
gene. Mutational analysis is complicated by the large size of the gene, 
which consists of 79 exons and 8 promoters spread over 2.2 million 
base pairs of genomic DNA. The majority of recognized mutations are 
however, copy number changes of individual exons, which tradition -
ally have been identified by three common multiplex polymerase chain 
reaction. Here we report the use of the newly developed quantitative 
assay multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) to de -
termine the copy number of each of the 79 DMD exons. The sensitivity 
and accuracy of MLPA were assessed and compared with multiplex 
PCR in total of 92 subjects with DMD or BMD. MLPA was able to de -
tect all previously detected deletions. In addition, we detected five new 
deletion and four duplications. The extend of the deletions and dupli -
cations could be more accurately defined which in turn facilitated a 
genotype - phenotype correlation.
P0708. Reduction of sperm DNA-fragmentation via Magnetic 
Assisted Cell Sorter (MACS)-system
T. Winkle1, F. Gagsteiger2, T. Paiss1, N. Ditzel1;  
1ReproGen- Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 2IVF-Zentrum Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
In the course of an ART and especially an ICSI the used spermatozoa 
are meticulously examined according to WHO-criteria, like concentra -
tion, motility and morphology. So a fragmentation or other deterioration 
of the DNA cannot be detected. The aim of our study is to determine 
and, if required, reduce the amount of spermatozoa with DNA-frag -
mentation ( DNA-Fragmentation Index, DFI) within the ejaculate.
Ejaculate samples of 55 patients were purified via the MACS-system. 
The native and the purified part of the sample were then measured in 
a cytometer. The purification was carried out with the help of magnetic 
marked Annexin V and an appropriate column (the MACS-System). 
The DNA was stained by 4´-6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). In each sample 20,000 cells were measured and the percentage of cells 
with DNA-fragmentation was determined. In comparison, samples of 
37 additional patients were analyzed as described above, both natively 
and according to density gradient centrifugation.
The average DFI was 17.6% in native ejaculate, while, after purifica -
tion by MACS, this percentage was reduced to 11.29%. By purifica -
tion via density gradient centrifugation a percentage of 11.83% was 
obtained, while the percentage in native ejaculate was 15.96%. So 
we obtained a reduction via MACS of 35.85% and via density gradient 
centrifugation of 25.88%.
On the basis of our results it has been found that by means of MACS 
the DFI can be reduced distinctly (35.85% vs. 25.88%). Furthermore, 
the high DFI in the samples purified by density gradient shows that 
DNA-fragmentation cannot be reduced by this common method.
P0709. Folate gene alteration: Dose it influence the chromosome 
21 nondisjunction in Down syndrome
S. Aleyasin , S. Rezaee, F. Jahanshad;  
National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Common polymorphisms in the MTHFR (C677T and A1298C) and 
MTRR (A66G) genes have been reported to be a maternal genetic risk 
factor for Down syndrome in some populations. However, considering 
parental origin of trisomy 21 in mother of Down syndromes has drawn 
less attention in previous studies. This may cause reduction in degree 
of associations of those maternal genetic risk factors and occurrences 
of chromosome 21 trisomy. In this study parental origin of chromosome 
21 were tested in 260 families of Down syndromes using five STR 
markers related to chromosome 21 (D21S11, D21S1414, D21S1440, 
D21S1411, D21S1412). Parental origins were determined successful -
ly for 226 of cases. Mothers have been categorized in maternal (198) 
and paternal (28) groups. All mothers of Down patients totalled 226 
individuals, and a normal control group contaned 176 mothers with 
halthy children. These were tested for common polymorphisms C677T, 
A1298C in the MTHFR and C66G in the MTRR gene. A significant 
association was detected between maternal derived chromosome 21 
mothers and A1298C of the MTHFR gene (P<0.002, χ2>12.06). This 
study has showed for the first time the importance of parental origin 
determination in the study of maternal genetic risk factor of Down syn -
drome. The significance of A1298C polymorphism of MTHFR gene as 
maternal genetic risk factor of Down syndrome in Iranian population 
increases the knowledge about etiology of Down syndrome and helps 
in better prevention of Down syndrome.
P0710. Homozygous Dubin-Johnson Syndrome. A Novel 
Mutation in MRP2 Gene in a Large Family from Slovakia
L. Barnincova1, J. Behunova2, P. Martasek1;  
1Department of Pediatrics and Center of Applied Genomics, 1st School of Medi -
cine, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Children´s Hospital, Kosice, Slovakia.
Hepatobiliary excretion of conjugated bilirubin is mediated by an ATP 
dependent canalicular transporter, the multidrug resistence associated 
protein 2 (MRP2/cMOAT). MRP2 is responsible for biliary excrection 
of glucuronide and glutathione conjugates of endogenous and exog -
enous compounds.
Dubin-Johnson syndrome (DJS) is an inherited autosomal recessive 
disorder characterised by the absence of functional protein MRP2 at 
the canalicular membrane of hepatocytes. Known mutations in this 
gene cause impaired maturation and trafficking of the mutated protein 
from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi complex.
As a result, conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, increased urinary excrec -
tion of coproporphyrinogen isomer I, and deposition of melanin-like 
pigment are found. Otherwise liver function is normal.
Here we present a study of a large Slovak family with unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinemia Dubin-Johnson type. These subjects were found to 
be homozygous for the novel mutation 1012delGT, which causes a 
frameshift.
Dubin-Johnson syndrome is very rare disorder, and the homozygous 
form of mutations has been reported only in unique cases.
Supported by MSMT 0021620806Molecular and biochemical basis of disease12
P0711. Investigation of mitochondrial tRNALys and ATPase 
6/8 genes mutation in Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy (DMD) 
patients
M. Zamanpoor1, M. Houshmand1, M. Dehghan Manshadi1, M. Shafa Shariat 
Panahi2;  
1Special Medical Centre, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of 
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is an X-linked recessive genetic 
disorder resulting from mutations in the dystrophin gene. About two-
thirds of the affected patients have large deletions or duplications, 
which occur in the 5′ and central region of the gene. The mitochondrial 
tRNAlys and ATPase6/8 genes mutations are the hot spots in mitochon -
drial disorders. We performed mutations screening of tRNALys gene 
and also ATPase6/8 genes in 20 patients who referred as DMD to eval -
uate probable role of mitochondrial mutations in DMD. Mitochondrial 
tRNALys gene and ATPase 6/8 genes were studied by PCR and auto -
mated DNA sequencing methods to find out any possible mitochon -
drial DNA (mtDNA) damage. We found 7 different mtDNA mutations in 
8 patients (40%) out of 20 cases including T8503C, G8697A, A8850G, 
G8697A, C8684T, G8584A, A8701G and C8574T, meanwhile 87.5% 
of the mutations were observed on MT-ATP6.
Also, our study showed that 4 patients (20%) had an 8.9kb deletion 
in mtDNA. This study suggests that mitochondrial mutations may be 
important in pathogenesis of DMD.
P0712. A case of Smith-McCort Syndrome caused by a new 
mutation in the Dymeclin  (FLJ2001 ) gene
M. R. Almeida1, H. C. Fernandes2, J. L. Nunes2, H. G. Santos1;  
1GenoMed, Institute of Molecular Medicine, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Centro Hospitalar 
do Funchal, Madeira, Portugal.
Dyggve-Melchior-Clausen (DMC) and Smith-McCort (SMC) are auto -
somal recessive allelic spondyloepimetaphyseal disorders caused by 
mutations in the Dymeclin / FLG20071  gene (Cohn et al.,  2003; El 
Ghouzzi  et al., 2003 ). Most DMC and SMC rare families described in 
the literature are from Middle East and North Africa. Clinical identical 
features of both disorders are short limbs and trunk, a barrel shaped 
chest, progressive kyphoscoliosis, varus and valgus deformity of the 
knees, limitation in joint movement and brachydactyly. The two os -
teochondrodysplasias are only distinguished by the presence in the 
DMC patients of important development delay or mental retardation 
(Spranger et al, 1976). Radiological features include platyspondyly, 
metaphyseal and epiphyseal irregularities and a patognomonic lacy 
appearance of the iliac crests. Here we describe a case of Smith-
McCort of a 6 years girl from a consanguineous family from Madeira 
Island. This affected girl presents the main clinical and radiological 
features of this disorder not revealing any development delay. Molecu -
lar analysis of the all entire coding region of Dymeclin gene was per -
formed. A novel missense variant was identified in exon 15, C542R, 
in homozygosity. In order to clarify its clinical significance, additional 
studies were carried out. The comparison of the Dymeclin  protein se -
quence and homologous proteins in other species showed that this 
amino acid residue is evolutionary conserved. This variant was also 
excluded in 50 Portuguese healthy individuals screened (100 chro -
mossomes), which strongly supporting a pathogenic role. Therefore, 
we believe that this homozygous C542R mutation is responsible for 
the Smith-McCort phenotype.
Study supported by FLAD .
P0713. Mutational spectrum of the DYSF  gene based on a large 
cohort of dysferlin deficient patients.
M. Krahn1, R. Bernard1, K. Nguyen1, V. Labelle1, G. Bassez2, D. Figarella-Bran -
ger3, J. Pouget4, E. Di Salvo1, E. Hammouda5, C. Béroud6, B. Eymard2, J. Urtiz -
berea7, F. Leturcq8, N. Lévy1,9, .. and the French Network on LGMD10;  
1Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d’enfants de la Timone, Mar -
seille, France, 2Institut de Myologie, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, 
France, 3Laboratoire d’Anatomopathologie, Hôpital Timone, Marseille, France, 
4Service de Neurologie, Hôpital Timone, Marseille, France, 5AFM et Généthon, 
Evry, France, 6Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de Génétique 
Humaine, Montpellier, France, 7Hopital Marin, APHP, Hendaye, France, 8Labo -
ratoire de Biochimie Génétique, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 9Inserm U491 : «Génétique Médicale et Développement», Marseille, France, 10., ., France.
Dysferlinopathies belong to the heterogeneous group of autosomal 
recessive muscular dystrophies. Mutations in the gene encoding dys -
ferlin ( DYSF ) lead to distinct phenotypes, mainly Limb Girdle Muscular 
Dystrophy type 2B (LGMD2B) and Miyoshi myopathy (MM).
Due to the clinical heterogeneity, initial dysferlin protein analysis on 
muscle biopsy samples is essential to orientate diagnosis. However, 
diagnosis should be confirmed by molecular analysis of the DYSF  
gene.
The large size of the DYSF  gene (> 150 kbp, 55 exons) makes this a 
challenging task on a routine basis. Methods for mutation screening 
are particularly useful in this regard.
Here, we report the results of mutational screening in the largest cohort 
reported to date. Altogether, 144 patients presenting dysferlin protein 
deficiency identified on muscle biopsy samples using immunohisto -
chemical or Western-blot analysis were included.
Genomic DNA was screened for DYSF  mutations using DHPLC analy -
sis, and subsequent sequencing of detected variants, in a routine di -
agnostic setting.
In 100 patients (70%), molecular analysis identified two disease-caus -
ing mutations, confirming the diagnosis of primary Dysferlinopathy on 
a genetic basis. Furthermore, one mutation was identified in 17 (12%) 
patients, without identification of a second deleterious allele. Among 
the identified mutations, 37 have not been reported before, which cor -
responds to more than 10% of all DYSF  mutations reported to date. 
Most of the identified mutations are predicted to produce a truncated 
protein or one amino-acid substitution, but we a report a high propor -
tion of nonsense mutations as compared to previous series.
P0714. A dominant negative form of the transcriptional factor C-
Jun alters the expression of two lipid metabolism related genes 
that result in opposite effects on mouse plasma lipid levels
K. Drosatos1,2, D. Sanoudou3, K. Kypreos4, D. Kardassis1,5, V. I. Zannis4,1;  
1University of Crete School of Medicine, Heraklion, Greece, 2Department of 
Biology, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece, 3Foundation for Biomedical Re -
search of the Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, 4Boston University School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA, United States, 5Institute for Molecular Biology & Biotech -
nology, Heraklion, Greece.
c-Jun (cellular Jun) is a transcription factor activated by phosphory -
lation by the SAPK (Stress Activated Protein Kinase) / JNK (c-Jun-
N-terminal-Kinase) pathway in response to extracellular signals and 
cytokines. We show that adenovirus mediated gene transfer of dn-
cJun (dominant negative form of c-Jun) in C57BL/6 mice increased 
greatly apoE (apolipoprotein-E) hepatic mRNA and plasma levels, 
which resulted in dyslipidemia characterized by elevated plasma lipid 
levels and accumualtion of discoidal HDL (High-Density-Lipoprotein). 
A similar but more severe phenotype was generated by overexpres -
sion of the mouse apoE in C57BL/6 mice, suggesting that the dyslipid -
emia induced by the dn-cJun can be attributed to the overexpression 
of apoE.
Unexpectedly, infection of apoE-/- mice with adenovirus expressing 
dn-cJun reduced by 70% plasma cholesterol, suggesting that the dn-
cJun influenced the expression of other genes that control plasma 
cholesterol levels. To identify these genes we performed whole ge -
nome expression analysis of livers from two groups of 5 apoE-/- mice, 
infected with adenoviruses expressing either the dn-cJun or the Green 
Fluorescence Protein. Bioinformatical analysis and Northern Blotting 
validation, revealed that dn-cJun increased greatly the apoE mRNA 
and reduced by 70% the Scd1 (Stearoyl-CoA-Desaturase 1) mRNA. 
The involvement of Scd-1 in lowering plasma cholesterol was con -
firmed by restoration of the high cholesterol levels of apoE-/- mice fol -
lowing coinfection with adenoviruses expressing dn-cJun and Scd-1.
Conclusively dn-cJun appears to trigger two opposing events in mice 
that affect plasma cholesterol and triglyceride levels: One results in 
apoE overexpression and triggers dyslipidemia and the other results in 
inhibition of Scd-1 and offsets dyslipidemia.
P0715. Functional studies of in silico predicted splicing 
regulatory elements in the dystrophin gene
O. Leroy1, S. Le Guédard1, M. Faburel2, D. Thorel2, C. Saquet2, D. Hamroun1,2, 
P. Khau van Kien1,2, C. Béroud1,2, M. Claustres1,2, S. Tuffery-Giraud1,3;  
1INSERM U 827, Montpellier, France, 2CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
3Université MONTPELLIER1, Montpellier, France.
The splicing of pre-mRNA is accomplished by the combinatorial rec -
ognition of multiple degenerate signals, resulting in a network of RNA-
protein interactions across an exon and/or intron. In addition to canoni -
cal sequence elements adjacent to splice junctions, more distant aux -
iliary regulatory elements such as exonic splicing enhancers (ESEs) 
and exonic splicing silencers (ESSs) play a crucial role in many RNAs 
for correct splicing. Identifying functional ESE or ESS sites is rather 
difficult due to the short and degenerate nature of these elements and 
the lack of understanding of their sequence context. Besides the iden -
tification of naturally occurring exonic mutations that cause splicing 
defects in patients and provide valuable tools to identify such auxiliary 
RNA cis-elements, we have developed a new strategy to identify splic -
ing signals in the dystrophin gene. This strategy is based on two com -
plementary approaches: (1) the bioinformatics prediction of putative 
splicing signals using the Splice Site Finder software (http://www.umd.
be/SSF), and (2) the experimental validation of the in silico  predicted 
sequences. Functional assay relies on an easy-to-use and reliable 
system based on fluorescent splicing reporter minigenes, allowing flow 
cytometry analyses, in which the level of fluorescence depends on the 
splicing of a tested exon. The characterization of functional cis-acting 
splicing sequences such as branch points and ESEs will contribute to 
the comprehensive knowledge of multiple signals that regulate splic -
ing of this huge gene. Also, the identified sequences could constitute 
therapeutic targets of the exon-skipping strategy to reverse the severe 
DMD phenotype into the milder BMD one.
P0716. Different profiles of SNPs association with high arterial 
pressure syndromes
O. A. Perevesentsev1, V. A. Bortnikova2, R. I. Strjuk2, A. V. Karpukhin1, V. F. 
Sitnikov3;  
1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Moskow, Russian Federation, 2Mos-
cow state medical-stomatology university, Moskow, Russian Federation, 3Rus-
sian state medical university, Moskow, Russian Federation.
There are a number of syndromes connected with high arterial pres -
sure that have genetic predisposition. This circimstanse arise a ques -
tion concerning of molecular bases of genetic predisposition and 
differentiation of the syndromes on association with different genes. 
We investigated a role of AGT, ACE, ADRB2 and APOE genes in es -
sential arterial hypertension (EAH), gestantional hypertension (GH) 
and preeclampsia. Different profiles of SNPs association with the syn -
dromes were revealed. The ADRB2 Arg16Arg variant was associated 
with EAH (OR=3,84, P=0,005). The association of APOE PI-22M/Q 
polymorphism with EAH was not significant. However an association 
of APOE 22QQ with ADRB2 Arg16Arg among patients with EAH that 
significantly increases a risk was found (OR=6,82, P=0,01). This may 
be due to a contribition of dysbolism of plasmatic lipids in EAH onset. 
Three genes (AGT, ACE, ADRB2) were significantly associated with 
GH (OR=2,87-3,91; P=0,01-0,005). An addition GAH was characteri -
sized by genetic interaction between ACE D/D and ADRB2 Arg16Arg 
with a risk increasing (OR=5,80, P=0,01). These results may be ex -
plained by increasing of RAAS system activity during a pregnancy. 
The AGT T235T variant was associated with preeclampsia (OR=3,2; 
P=0,01). The data suggest a possibility distinguish predisposition to 
the syndromes with high arterial pressure by different profiles of SNPs 
association.
P0717. Inventory of TOR1A mutation carriers in France.
S. Tuffery-Giraud1,2, F. Clot3,4, A. Durr3,5, A. Brice3,5, G. Lesca6,7, I. Vuillaume8,9, 
A. Calender6,7, B. Sablonnière8,9, T. Besnard1,2, C. Saquet10, D. Thorel10, L. Oze -
lius11, L. Hjermind12, A. Roubertie13, L. Cif14, M. Claustres1,10, M. Frederic1,2, G. 
Collod-Beroud1,2;  
1INSERM U 827, Montpellier, France, 2Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, 
France, 3INSERM U 679, Paris, France, 4Université Pierre and Marie Curie-
Paris 6, IFR70, UMR S679, Paris, France, 5AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-
Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique Cytogénétique et Embryologie, Paris, 
France, 6Hôpital Edouard-Herriot, Service de Génétique Moléculaire et Clini -
que, Lyon, France, 7Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Villeurbanne, France, 
8CHRU de Lille, Institut de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Lille, France, 
9INSERM U 837, Lille, France, 10CHU Montpellier, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneu -
ve, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, France, 11Department of 
Genetics and Genome Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, 
NY, United States, 12Department of Medical Genetics, The Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 13CHU Montpellier, Hôpital 
Saint Eloi, Service de Neuropédiatrie, Montpellier, France, 14CHU Montpellier, 
Hôpital Saint Eloi, Service de Neurochirurgie, Montpellier, France.
Dystonia is a neurological movement disorder characterized by invol -
untary movements or postures. The only currently identified primary 
Early-Onset Torsion Dystonia (EOTD) gene is TOR1A  that encodes 
the torsinA chaperon protein. The majority of cases from various ethnic 
groups are caused by a unique and recurrent autosomal dominantly 
inherited deletion: c.907delGAG. EOTD prevalence in the general Eu -
ropean population is estimated between 0.3 to 0.5:100,000, that would 
correspond to a calculated number of symptomatic carriers ranging 
from 184 to 307 in the French population. Collaborations have been 
established between the four French laboratories in charge of this di -
agnostic: 52 probands with EOTD of which 26 cases in a familial con -
text of the disease have been diagnosed with the mutation. Whenever 
possible, the presence of the deletion in each parent, the number of 
relatives carrying the mutation, and their phenotypic status (symptom -
atic or asymptomatic) has been investigated. Overall, 108 individuals 
were found to carry the mutation of which 20 were asymptomatic. This 
number of TOR1A  carriers, lower than expected, may be related to 
non exhaustive testing of these families and/or lower prevalence of 
TOR1A -linked dystonia in France.
Haplotypes with TOR1A  flanking microsatelites could be constructed in 
31 families. The common Ashkenazi Jewish (AJ) haplotype was found 
in two families and the second AJ haplotype previously reported (Lebre 
1999) has been found in two other families. Only one other recurrent 
haplotype has been characterized in two other families confirming the 
quasi absence of founder effect for the TOR1A  mutation in France.
P0718. Novel splice mutation in the EDAR  gene in a Lebanese 
female with an atypical form of anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia
C. Cluzeau1, H. Mégarbané2, E. Bal1, P. Guigue1, F. Stephan3, A. Munnich1, A. 
Mégarbané4, A. Smahi1;  
1U 781 INSERM, Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Mala -
des, Paris, France, 2Unité de Génétique Médicale, Laboratoire de Biologie 
Moléculaire et Cytogénétique, Faculté de Médecine, Université Saint-Joseph, 
Beyrouth, Lebanon, 3Service de dermatologie, Hôtel-Dieu de France, Beyrouth, 
Lebanon, 4Unité de Génétique Médicale, Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire 
et Cytogénétique, Faculté de Médecine, Université Saint-Joseph, Bayrouth, 
Lebanon.
More than 170 different pathological clinical conditions have been de -
fined as ectodermal dysplasia (ED). They all share as common feature 
abnormalities in hair, teeth, nails and sweat glands, but must be asso -
ciated with anomalies in other organs and systems. EDA is character -
ized by the triad of signs comprising sparse hair, abnormal or missing 
teeth and inability to sweat due to lack of sweat glands. Here we pres -
ent a 18-year-old woman, born to first cousin parents that belong to 
the Lebanese Shiite Muslim community. Behind the triad of features 
characteristics of EDA she presents an atypical association with vari -
ous clinical manifestations. Lacrimation was nearly absent and sali -
vary secretions reduced. The lips were thick and everted. The skin was 
dry and velvet. Absence of breasts and a rudimentary extranumerary 
areola and nipple on the left side were noted as well. She also had 
marked palmar and plantar hyperkeratosis. Light microscopy of skin 
biopsies showed orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis and absence of sweat 
glands. We identified a novel homozygous mutation (IVS9+1 G>A) in 
EDAR  gene. RT-PCR performed on patient skin biopsy RNA, showed 
that the mutation results in total absence of  EDAR  transcript and con -
sequently of the EDAR protein, which likely results in total abolition of 
Ectodysplasin mediated NF-kB signaling. NF-kB signaling is involved 
principally in early development of ectodermal appendages and in 
tooth development. It’s recent involvement in embryonic salivary gland 
development as well as EDAR expression in lacrimal, and mammary 
glands may explain the complex phenotype observed in our patient 
carrying EDAR  mutation.
P0719. Functional consequences of EDAR  mutations on NF-kB 
and Lef-1/β-catenin signalling
C. Cluzeau1, E. Bal1, N. Chassaing2, S. Hadj-Rabia3,1, C. Bodemer3,1, P. Cal -
vas2, M. C. Vincent2, A. Munnich1, A. Smahi1;  
1U 781 INSERM, Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 
Paris, France, 2Service de Génétique médicale, Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, 
France, 3Service de Dermatologie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
France.
Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (EDA) is an ectodermal differentia -
tion disorder characterized by sparse hair, abnormal or missing teeth 
and inability to sweat. X-linked EDA is caused by mutations in EDA 
gene, encoding ectodysplasin, a member of the TNF family. Autosomal 
forms of EDA, have been also described and are accounted for by 
two genes. EDAR,  encoding a TNF receptor and EDARADD  encoding 
EDARADD (for EDAR-Associated Death Domain). Recently, 17 novels 
mutations were described in EDAR  gene in both familial and sporadic 
cases of EDA. The six truncating mutations result probably in the ab -
sence of EDAR and consequently in total abolition of NF-kB signal -
ling. Among the 11 missense mutations, 5 are located in EDAR Death 
Domain, and are responsible for both dominant and recessive EDA. In 
order to determine the effect of these mutations on EDAR function and 
signalling involving EDAR, site-directed mutagenesis was performed 
and NF-kB activation was first assessed after HEK293T cells transfec -
tion. The recessive I418T, T403M and R375H mutations affect NF-kB 
activation without impairing the expression of the mutated proteins. 
Interestingly, the dominant L377F and T413P mutations resulted in the 
absence of EDAR expression leading to total abolition of NF-kB signal -
ling. Behind the central role of the Lef-1/β-catenin pathway in normal 
embryonic development and carcinogenesis, it also play important 
roles in ectodermal differentiation and hair follicle development and it 
was interestingly shown that EDAR represses the Lef-1/β-catenin-de -
pendent transcriptional activity, independently of its effect on the NF-
kB pathway. We are currently investigating the effect of our mutations 
on Lef-1/β-catenin pathway.
P0720. Polymorphism of IL4RA gene is associated with 
endometriosis
M. Kozlovskaya , G. Demin, M. Yarmolinskaya, T. Ivashchenko, V. Baranov;  
Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Endometriosis is a common multifactorial disease. Typical endome -
trioid cells are characterized by increased cytokine activity. Cytokine 
genes are highly polymorphic that results in synthesis of proteins with 
various functional activities. The goal of the study focuses on the role 
of allelic variants of IL4 and IL4RA genes in pathogenesis of endome -
triosis.
DNA samples from the patients with endometriosis (n=36) and control 
group of women without any gynecologic complications (n=69) were 
included in the study. Polymorphisms of IL4 (-590T>C) and IL4RA 
(1902A>G or Gln551Arg) were defined by PCR-RFLP assay.
The distribution of IL4 and IL4RA genotypes was in agreement with 
the HWE law (p>0.05). The frequencies of alleles and genotypes of 
IL4 gene did not differ between studied groups (p>0.05). However the 
frequency of Arg/Arg genotype of IL4RA gene was significantly higher 
in endometriosis patients (16.7%) if compared to the control group 
(1.4%, p<0.01).
The results of this pilot study demonstrate an association of IL4RA 
gene polymorphism with endometriosis. According to odds ratio value 
(OR=13.60; CI: 2.43-76.26) Arg551/Arg551 genotype could be re -
sponsible for 13-fold increase in the risk of endometriosis . Our data 
substantiate the conclusion that Gln551Arg polymorphism could be 
treated as prognostic geneic marker of endometriosis.
P0721. Genetic investigation of epidermodysplasia verruciformis 
in Tunisian patients: exclusion of Algerian mutations
O. Messaoud Ezzeddine1, H. Ouragini1, C. Charfeddine1, S. Kassar2, M. Mok -
ni3, S. Boubaker2, S. Abdelhak1, A. Ben Osman-Dhahri3;  
1UR 26/04 : Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases Research 
Unit (MIGOD), Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunisia., Tunis, Tunisia, 2Anatomo-
Pathology Department, Institut Pasteur de Tunis., Tunis, Tunisia, 3Dermatology 
Department, La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia.
Epidermodysplasia verruciformis (EV: MIM#226400) is a rare genoder -
matosis associated with a high risk of skin cancer. EV is inherited as 
an autosomal recessive trait. To date, 2 loci (EV1 and EV2) have been 
reported and 2 genes in EV1 locus, EVER1 and EVER2, have been 
identified. Mutations in these genes, encoding TMC6 (Transmembrane 
channel-like) and TMC8 respectively, are responsible for EV. Few pop -
ulations have been studied and for the two genes, so far six mutations 
have been reported. As for several genodermatosis, similar mutational 
spectrum has been identified among Algerian and Tunisian patients, 
EV Tunisian patients were screened for the “Algerian mutations” (280 CàT and 754 or 755 del T).
This study was carried out in four EV independent nuclear Tunisian 
families. Mutation analysis was performed by direct DNA sequenc -
ing. None of the two Algerian explored mutations was found, suggest -
ing that Tunisian patients do not share the same mutations as those 
described among Algerians. Three SNPs were identified: 1049C/T, 
IVS5+47A/G, and IVS5+26A/T, the last one being a novel sequence 
variation.
P0722. Autosomal recessive erythropoietic protoporphyria
J. M. Saraiva ;  
Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra and Faculdade de 
Medicina da Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
Erythropoietic protoporphyria (MIM 177000) results from deficiency of 
ferrochelatase (FECH)(EC 4.99.1.1.). It is a disorder of heme biosyn -
thesis in which most cases are autosomal dominant inherited. However 
its penetrance is reduced. Overt disease requires the presence of one 
of the almost one hundred mutations in the FECH  gene reported so far 
and the common allele in some populations IVS3-48C in trans. Less 
than 5% of the cases are classified as autosomal recessive forms. We 
describe one of such cases where the family studies also corroborate 
the relationship with disease manifestation of FECH mutations and the 
IVS3-48C allele.
The proband had skin photosensitivity since the age of 3 years old and 
colelithiasis at the age of 28. Her parents, brother and sister were all 
healthy adults. The family concern was the care of the first son of the 
proband, then 6 months old. In order to be able to assess the health 
care required genetic counselling was requested.
The molecular characterization of the FECH  gene identified two del -
eterious mutations in the proband: IVS1-23C>T and C411G. All the 
other five family members were classified as heterozygous, three for 
the mutation C411G and two for the IVS1-23C>T. Although the allele 
IVS3-48C was also present in two of the five heterozygous it was so 
in cis.
This family is one of the few examples reported of autosomal recessive 
inheritance of erythropoietic protoporphyria and is yet another exam -
ple of how a common allele modulates the penetrance of a dominant 
mutation.
P0723. Analysis of p as a candidate gene for bladder 
exstrophy
M. Ludwig1, H. Reutter2, C. Nauta3, Y. Lakshmanan4, J. P. Gearhart4, S. A. 
Boyadjiev3;  
1Dept. of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Dept. of 
Human Genetics University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Section of Genetics, 
Dept. of Pediatrics, University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA, United 
States, 4Dept. of Urology, The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, 
Baltimore, MD, United States.
The Bladder-Exstrophy-Epispadias-Complex (BEEC) represents a 
spectrum of urologic abnormalities in which part or all of the distal uri -
nary tract fail to close and are exposed on the outer abdominal wall. 
This rare congenital anomaly is thought to be a clinical spectrum rang -
ing from isolated epispadias (EP) to classic bladder exstrophy (CBE), 
to its most severe form - cloacal exstrophy (CE). P63, a homolog of 
the p53 tumor-suppressor gene, encodes multiple tissue-specific iso -
forms that act as transcription factors essential for proper embryologic 
development. Null p63 mice exhibit severe craniofacial, limb, and skin 
anomalies. In addition to these, bladder exstrophy was recently re -
ported in ΔNp63-/- mice. Human p63 mutations have been associated 
with at least five developmental phenotypes, some with anomalies of 
the urogenital system, but not BEEC. We have initiated p63 analysis 
in a cohort of BEEC patients. Direct sequencing of the entire coding 
region of p63 did not identify obvious mutations in genomic DNA of 15 
CBE and five CE patients. RT-PCR of cDNAs derived from normal and 
exstrophic human bladder and lymphoblast RNA is in progress. Sev -
eral previously unreported p63 isoforms were observed in both control 
and exstrophic samples. Furthermore, unusual RT-PCR band patterns 
were observed in some patients’ samples and are being currently char -
acterized. These data indicate that while genomic mutations of p63 
cannot explain BEEC in our study group, further studies of this BEEC 
candidate gene are warranted.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
P0724. Hereditary Multiple Exostoses: report of a case and a 
novel mutation in EXT1  in Iran
M. Noruzinia1,2, M. Akbari1,2;  
1Tarbiat Modares University, Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Akbari Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Tehran, Islamic Re -
public of Iran.
Hereditary multiple exostoses is an autosomal dominant disorder char -
acterized by multiple benign cartilaginous tumors at the juxta-epiphy -
seal regions growing outward from the metaphyses of long bones. We 
report a 28 years old man with hereditary multiple exostoses. He and 
his fiancée wanted to know the risk of transmission of theses bony 
overgrowth to their future infants. Clinical examination revealed mul -
tiple exostoses in humerus, femur, scapular and knee joints and short -
ening of metacarpals.
Molecular analysis of the genes EXT1 and EXT2 showed a novel mu -
tation in exon 8 of EXT1. This mutation occurred in nucleotide 1701 
(1701ins5) and produced a truncated protein in aminocid 620(L620X).
Two genes have been identified so far mapping to 8q23-q24 and 
11p11-p12, respectively. A third gene is supposed to be located on the 
short arm of chromosome 19 . About 90% of cases of Hereditary Mul -
tiple Exostoses are linked to these loci. The detection of this mutation 
has enabled us to provide appropriate genetic counseling concerning 
this complex situation. There has been no study on Iranian patients 
with HME. A national program to detect the genetic causes of HME 
in Iran can help to find novel mutations and to define proper mutation 
detection strategy.
P0725. Extralysosomal Localization of Globotriaosylceramide in 
Fabry Disease
H. Askari1, C. Kaneski1, C. Semino-Mora2, A. Ang3, B. A. Wustman4, R. Schiff -
mann1;  
1National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, MD, United 
States, 2Laboratory of Gastrointestinal and Liver Studies, Uniformed Services 
University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, United States, 3HistoRx,Inc., 
New Haven, CT, United States, 4Amicus Therapeutics, Inc., Cranbury, NJ, 
United States.
OBJECTIVE: To describe cellular and subcellular localization of glo -
botriaosylceramide in order to assess potential abnormal interactions 
of globotriaosylceramide leading to disease in Fabry patients. METH -
ODS:  We used an anti-globotriaosylceramide monoclonal antibody 
for immunogold electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry, and im -
munofluorescence studies of tissues from patients on long-term en -
zyme replacement therapy (ERT) and controls. RESULTS:  Immunore -
activity for globotriaosylceramide was present in heart, kidney, brain, 
intestines, adrenal gland, aorta, skin, liver and spleen in a variable 
pattern. In the brain, positive neuronal immunoreactivity was found 
only in the parahippocampal region. In all organs examined, globo -
triaosylceramide immunostaining was present in the cell membranes 
and cytoplasm of endothelial cells, even in the absence of lysosomal 
inclusions. Immunofluorescence immunolabeling of heart and kidney 
tissues from a Fabry patient showed colocalization of globotriaosylce -
ramide with lysosomal, ER, and nuclear markers. Immunogold elec -
tron microscopy confirmed the presence of globotriaosylceramide in 
the cell membrane, lysosomes, ER, nuclear membrane and nucleus 
of vascular endothelial cells and fibroblasts even in the absence of 
lysosomal inclusions. Cultured fibroblasts from patients showed simi -
lar findings. Immunolabeling of organ tissues and cultured fibroblasts 
from 3 unaffected controls was uniformly negative for globotriaosylce -
ramide by immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy. CONCLU -
SIONS:  A substantial amount globotriaosylceramide immunoreactivity 
remains in cells and tissues even after years of ERT in Fabry disease. 
For the first time we demonstrate the presence of accumulated globo -
triaosylceramide in extralysosomal cellular regions. These findings are 
crucial for the understanding of disease mechanism and suggest the 
use of immunostaining for globotriaosylceramide to assess response 
to novel specific therapies.
P0726. Diagnosis in Facio Scapulo Humeral dystrophy remains 
challenging: atypical molecular patterns in two families
J. Gallard1, C. Vo Van1, R. Bernard1, S. Attarian2, B. Chabrol3, K. Nguyen1, N. 
Lévy1,4;  
1Département de Génétique Médicale, APHM, Marseille, France, 2Service de 
Neurologie, centre de référence pour les maladies neuromusculaires, APHM, Marseille, France, 3Service de Pédiatrie et neuropédiatrie, APHM, Marseille, 
France, 4INSERM U491, Faculté de Médecine, Marseille, France.
Facio scapulo humeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is an autoso -
mal dominant disease associated with a contraction of the repeated 
D4Z4 sequence at the 4q35 subtelomeric region. Routine diagnosis 
of FSHD is based on pulsed-field-gel-electrophoresis using the D4Z4 
adjacent p13e11 probe. However, sequences homologous to D4Z4 ex -
ist in other chromosomal regions and cross hybridization might appear. 
Moreover, 4q subtelomeric region is subject to frequent translocations 
with the subtelomeric region 10q26, while D4Z4 contraction on 10q 
is not pathogenic. Towards clearing diagnosis procedures in FSHD, 
allele characterization is improved by the use of BlnI, cleaving only 
canonical 10q26 unit.
Here, we report two unrelated patients presenting typical FSHD fea -
tures (Asymetric weakness, wasting of the upper limb girdle and face) 
with a particular molecular pattern. While simple digestion by EcoRI 
evidenced only normal-sized, supposedly non-pathogenic, D4Z4 al -
leles, EcoRI/BlnI double digestion revealed a short D4Z4 repeat ar -
ray on chromosome 4, suggesting a complex rearrangement between 
4q35 and 10q26 within the D4Z4 repeat. This feature is shared by sev -
eral relatives, including one of the unaffected parents in each family.
Our knowledge of the FSHD pathophysiological processes is still in -
complete, and these observations raise questions on the validity of 
usual molecular diagnosis tests in FSHD as well as their use for ge -
netic counselling. Developing novel and/or complementary technical 
approaches, as for example competitive dosage analysis, is thus an 
absolute necessity to improve molecular diagnosis as well as for a 
better knowledge of the molecular structure of the region in affected 
patients.
P0727. Molecular characterization of hemophilia A in South East 
Bulgaria
E. Sukarova Stefanovska1, P. Tchacarova2, G. H. Petkov2, G. D. Efremov1;  
1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, MASA, Skopje, 
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2Pediatric Clinic, Medical Faculty, 
Stara Zagora, Bulgaria.
Hemophilia A is a common X-linked bleeding disorder affecting 1 in 
5,000 males worldwide. The most common molecular defect is intron 
22 inversion, while the rest of the mutations are single nucleotide sub -
stitutions in different parts of the gene. The knowledge of the causative 
gene defect has become an important tool in hemophilia care with 
respect to prediction of the patients’ clinical course and safe genetic 
counseling of relatives. The aim of this study was to determine the 
molecular defects underlying hemophilia A patients from South-East 
Bulgaria. The molecular characterization of fVIII gene was performed 
in 50 unrelated hemophilia A patients. Southern blot analysis was used 
for detection of inversions in intron 22, while PCR followed by SSCP 
or DGGE was performed for mutation screening. The molecular de -
fect was found in 33, or 66%, of analyzed patients. The most frequent 
molecular defect was inversion in intron 22, found in 18 (36%) of all 
studied patients. In one severely affected patient an Alu insert was 
found, in exon 14 at Cd.1224. Nucleotide substitutions were found 
in 14 (28%) patients. Using SSCP as a screening method, we have 
identified an Arg531→Cys missence mutation in exon 11 in six (12%) 
unrelated patients with mild to moderate hemophilia A. In two unre -
lated patients the same nonsense mutation was found (Cd-5; CGA→
TGA). Six missense mutations (Asn90→Thr; Arg372→His; Tyr473→
His; Glu456→Val; Arg1689→Cys; Arg2163→His) were private. Two of 
them were found for the first time.
P0728. Angelman syndrome caused by an identical familial 1487-
kb deletion
N. Matsumoto1,2, M. Iwakoshi3;  
1Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan, 2SORST, Japan Science and 
Technology Agency (JST), Kawaguchi, Japan, 3Nishinomiya Municipal Wakaba-
en, Nishinomiya, Japan.
Angelman syndrome (AS, OMIM#105830) is a neurodevelopmental 
disorder characterized by mental retardation, ataxia, hypotonia, epi -
lepsy, absence of speech, and specific facial features. At least four ma -
jor mechanisms causing AS were validated: i) an interstitial deletion of 
15q11-q13 (70-75%), ii) uniparental disomy (2-3%), iii) imprinting de -
fects (3-5%), iv) UBE3A  mutations (20%). Most deletions are similar in 
size (approximate 4 Mb) and occur de novo through maternal unequal Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
crossing over between low copy repeats (LCRs). Paternal occurrence 
of similar deletions, instead, results in Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS, 
OMIM#176270). In PWS no coding mutations have been found in con -
trast with UBE3A  mutations in AS, suggesting that PWS is caused by 
loss of function of multiple genes.
Different sized deletions associated with AS are very rare. To our 
knowledge, at least two familial atypical deletions were reported, and 
the microdeletions caused AS in maternal inheritance but no PWS fea -
tures in paternal inheritance, enabling differentiation of the PWS criti -
cal region (PWSCR) from the AS critical region (ASCR).
We encountered a similar family with an atypical microdeletion, con -
sisting of an AS boy later confirmed, and asymptomatic mother and 
maternal grandfather. All three had an atypical microdeletion. We 
could successfully determine deletion breakpoints of the family, and 
will discuss about genes responsible for PWS.
P0729. Familial Defective apo B-100 (FDB): founder effect in 
a population of the South of Europe and comparison with the 
Familial Hypercholestolaemia (FH).
I. Ejarque-Doménech , E. Milián, J. Real, F. Chaves, A. García-García, J. Asca -
so, R. Carmena;  
Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valencia, Valencia, Spain.
We have identified a large number of subjects (n=19) with FDB (OMIM 
= 144010) due to the R3500Q mutation at APOB gene in a population 
of the South of Europe and the 7th FDB homozygote in the world. This 
was possible through identification of the first FDB heterozygous in 
Spain. The study of his family and the population of the same geo -
graphic area allowed us to identify the rest of the FDB cohort.
We studied the lipoprotein phenotype of 19 FDBs, and compared it 
with the one of subjects with classic FH of the same geographic origin, 
taking in account the type of mutations at LDLR gene: null-mutations 
TC= 343.7 (69.6), missense mutations affecting binding 3-5 repeat re -
gion TC= 394.4 (47.9), and missense mutations not affecting that bind -
ing region TC= 335.2 (60.2). FDB subjects showed a milder clinical 
and lipoprotein phenotype TC= 286.5 (57.9).
We have also studied the founder effect of our FDBs and the history 
of that geographic area of the Valencian Region. The analysis of the 
haplotype of the gene APOB of our FDBs and historical records of that 
geographic zone leads us to conclude that their mutation originated 
7000 years ago in the Southwestern region of Germany, between Rhin 
and Main rivers.
TC = Total Cholesterol; data expressed in mg/dl with P<0.05 ANOVA.
P0730. A novel missense mutation in GALNT3 disrupts O-
glycosylation activity and causes familial tumoral calcinosis
A. Benet-Pagès1, K. Kato2, B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, J. B. Díaz López3, P. Blay 
Albors3, H. Clausen2, T. M. Strom1,4;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, GSF-Research Center, Munich, Germany, 2De-
partment of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Servicio de Metabolismo Osseo y Mineral, Hospital 
San Agustín, Oviedo, Spain, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University, 
Munich, Germany.
Familial tumoral calcinosis (FTC) is an autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by ectopic calcifications and elevated serum phosphate 
levels. FTC is caused by mutations in the GALNT3  gene, which en -
codes the UDP-N-acetyl-D-galactosamine:polypeptide N-acetylgalac -
tosaminyltransferase 3 (GalNAc-T3), or by mutations in the FGF23  
gene, which encodes the fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23). GalNAc-
T3 controls the initiation step of mucin-type O-glycosylation whereas 
FGF23 is a secreted phosphaturic factor involved in the regulation 
of phosphate homeostasis. Our previous studies demonstrated that 
FGF23 O-glycosylation by GalNAc-T3 is required for the secretion of 
functional intact FGF23. We performed a mutation analysis in a fam -
ily with two affected individuals who presented the clinical features of 
FTC. Sequencing of GALNT3  revealed a homozygous missense mu -
tation (c.985G>A) at the amino acid position p.G329R which is highly 
conserved within the 15 members of the human GalNAc transferase 
family and among species. This residue is situated in the linker re -
gion between the catalytic and the ricin-like domain of GalNAc-T3. In 
vitro analysis of FGF23 O-glycosylation by GalNAc-T3(G329R), per -
formed by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry, showed lack of GalNAc-
T3(G329R) activity. Previously reported GALNT3  mutations in FTC 
have been null mutations or compound heterozygous missense muta -tions in the catalytic domain. We conclude that the novel missense 
mutation of GalNAc-T3 causes FTC.
P0731. A study of FGFR3 gene mutations in brazilian patients 
with achondroplasia, hypochondroplasia and thanatophoric 
dysplasia
J. M. Pina-Neto , D. Ortolan, W. A. Silva-Jr;  
School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
We studied the FGFR3 mutations in 80 brazilian patients with achon -
droplasia , 22 with hypochondroplasia and 9 with thanatophoric dys -
plasia. The DNA methodology used was first the RFLP with restrition 
enzymes and, if the mutation was not detected, we used direct se -
quencing of all gene.
In Achondroplasia we detected 75 cases with the G1138A mutation, 2 
cases with the G1138C mutation, 1 case with the G1123T and 1 case 
with a C1150T mutation. When we studied the C1150T mutation in 50 
normal Brazilians from different ethinic origins we detected 1 person 
with this mutation, and concluded that this mutation is a polymorphism 
.We didn’t detected the pathologic mutation in two typical achondro -
plasia patients.
In Hypochondroplasia we found 14 patients with the C1620G mutation 
and 7 cases with the C1620A mutation . We didn’t detected the muta -
tion in one typical hypochondroplasia patient.
In Thanatophoric Dysplasia we had 7 patients with the type I, all of 
them presented the C742T mutation and, 2 cases of the type II, both 
presented the A1948G mutation.
This is the first study of a brazilian patients sample for FGFR3 mutations 
and we could concluded that the types and frequencies of FGFR3 mu -
tations detected are similar to that described in other regions studied. 
We could define that the C1150T mutation ( Trujillo et al., 2004) and 
detected by us in one achondroplasia patient is a polymorphic variant 
not related to diseases determined by mutations in FGFR3 gene.
P0732. MEFV Mutations in Turkish Patients Suffering From 
Familial Mediterranean Fever
M. Ozdemir1, O. Cilingir1, C. Korkmaz2, M. H. Muslumanoglu1, D. Uzun1, O. 
Kutlay1, S. Artan1;  
1Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genet -
ics, Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Eskisehir Osmangazi Universty Medical Faculty Depart -
ment of Rheumatology, Eskisehir, Turkey.
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive auto -
inflammatory periodic disorder characterized by febrile and painful at -
tacks due to inflammation involving the serosal membranes in the ab -
domen, chest or joints. Over 50 mutations have been identified in the 
MEFV gene responsible for FMF. AIM: To identify the distribution and 
the frequency of the MEFV gene mutations in Turkish FMF patients 
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study was carried out on 354 clinical -
ly diagnosed Turkish FMF patients. Mutation screening of the MEFV 
gene was performed by DNA sequencing of exon 10 in all patients 
and by FMF specific StripAssay (this assay is based on a Polymerase 
Chain Reaction-Reverse Hybridization technique) for E148Q, P369S 
and F479L mutations of exons 2,3, and 5, respectively in 88 patients. 
RESULTS: Of the 354 unrelated patients investigated, 179 (50.6%) 
had one or two mutations : 38 patients (10.7%) were homozygous; 44 
(12.4%) were compound-heterozygous; 97 (27.4%) heterozygote mu -
tations. Of the mutations, M694V (A>G), M680l (G>C), V726A, R761H 
accounted for 73.7, 18.4, 5.3, and 2.6 %, respectively. The E148Q, 
P369S and F479L mutations of exons 2, 3 and 5 were seen in one 
case each. One case was E148Q/M680I compound-heterozygous. 
CONCLUSION: Exon 10 is the most common site for FMF mutations 
in Turkish population is exon 10 whereas exons 2,3 and 5 accounts 
for about 4.5% of the cases. The commonest mutation among Turks 
is M694V (A>G). Morever, because of confirmed results, StripAssay 
for 12 common mutations might be used in routine mutation screening 
analysis.
P0733. Identification of two new alternatively spliced MEFV  
transcripts in human peripheral blood leukocytes
S. Grandemange1, C. Notarnicola2, I. Touitou1;  
1Institut de génétique humaine, Montpellier, France, 2INSERM, Montpellier, 
France.
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive dis -
ease characterized by recurrent attacks of fever and serositis. FMF is Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
caused by mutations in the MEFV  gene. MEFV , expressed in granulo -
cytes and monocytes, encodes marenostrin/pyrin (M/P), a presumed 
regulator of inflammation.
Recently, multiple alternatively spliced MEFV  transcripts were identi -
fied suggesting the existence of several proteins in vivo . The expres -
sion pattern of the native protein has poorly been investigated espe -
cially in cells physiologically expressing MEFV .
To address this issue, we performed RT-PCR analysis of MEFV  mRNA 
from human control peripheral blood leucocytes using exonic primers 
spanning exon 1 to 10. The PCR products were cloned and directly 
sequenced.
We identified two new transcripts due to alternative splicing events.
A complex transcript, MEFV -d2-9ext, resulted in an in-frame deletion 
of exon 2 and a 5’ 117 bp extension of exon 9 introducing a premature 
stop codon. The second transcript, MEFV -d2-3-4 was generated by 
removal of exon 2, 3 and 4, resulting in a frameshift that predicts a 
short protein corresponding to exon 1 only.
We raised polyclonal antibodies against 6 peptides designed from the 
MEFV  coding sequence, and detected by Western-blotting protein 
isoforms that we are currently characterizing. Previous data and ours 
strongly support that numerous MEFV  transcripts are produced by al -
ternative splicing. Because alteration of MEFV  expression regulation 
may be involved in FMF pathophysiology, we will analyze the pattern 
splicing of MEFV  transcripts, in FMF patients.
P0734. Heteregenous clinical profile of familial mediterranean 
fever associated to M680I (G/C) mutation in a Tunisian arab 
muslim family from Sfax
N. B. Abdelmoula1, N. Hmida2, F. Thonney3, T. Rebai1;  
1Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Private Sector, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Centre Hos -
pitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive disor -
der particularly common in Mediterranean population,characterised by 
recurring attacks of fever and serositis.
The cloning of the FMF gene on 16p13 and the subsequent finding 
that its tissue expression is limited to granulocytes, has helped to ex -
plain the dramatic accumulation of neutrophils at the symptomatic se -
rosal sites. The most frequent sequence alterations in MEFV gene are 
M694V, V726A, M680I, M694I and E148Q. The wide clinical variability 
of the disease has been related to MEFV allelic heterogeneity.
In this study, we report clinical profiles and molecular findings in a Tu -
nisian Arab Muslim family from Sfax town. Only two members of this 
large consanguineous family fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for FMF 
with typical acute and recurrent crises of fever and serosal inflamma -
tion, leading improperly to abdominal surgery. Other subjects mani -
fested a mild or atypical phenotype. All members underwent molecular 
genetic exploration to confirm diagnosis for some ones and establish 
carrier status for others. Mutations were investigated by PCR amplifi -
cation and digestion with appropriate enzymes made to distinguish the 
wild type from the mutant allele. Genetic analysis revealed a M680I 
(G/C) mutation in all members of the family. Heterozygote members 
were healthy but homozygotes were heterogeneously affected.
We discuss clinical presentations of FMF disease in this Arab Mus -
lim family and emphasize the role of genetic analysis.We conclude 
that specific MEFV mutations are probably not the sole determinants 
of phenotype, and that unknown environmental factors or modifying 
genes act as accomplices in this disease.
P0735. Different expression of the P369S mutation in the MEFV 
gene in the Armenian population
H. Hayrapetyan , T. Sarkisian, A. Egiazaryan, A. Arakelyan;  
Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia.
Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is the most prevalent hereditary 
inflammatory disorder with diverse clinical presentation. The identifica -
tion of MEFV gene mutations causing the disease have provided an 
important laboratory tool that helps in the diagnosis of FMF and per -
haps in understanding its heterogeneous clinical presentation.
Screening of healthy controls in Armenian population for MEFV muta -
tions compared with the distribution of the  mutations in the patients, 
has shown that P369S mutation is the most common in the normal 
population (4.9%) but is less frequently represented in the patients 
(0.1%). This suggests a reduced penetrance of P369S.
Among 250 controls we detected 10 genotypes with P369S complex alleles, 7 were not associated with clinical FMF, and 3 manifested only 
mild disease, suggesting that P369S might ameliorate the phenotypic 
effect of exon 10 mutations.
We detected 12 mutations in 2400 individuals with clinical signs sug -
gestive of FMF and found P369S rare mutation in 14 of them: 9 het -
erozygotes, 3 compound heterozygotes (1 with P369S/F479L and 2 
with P369S/E148Q), and 2 displayed complex alleles (P369S/E148Q/
R761H; P369S/E148Q/M694V). Evaluation of the phenotypic features 
of the patients with P369S mutation showed the presence of 8 as -
ymptomatic individuals. Four patients with P369S mutation, one - with 
P369S/E148Q and one - with P369S/E148Q/M694V had the FMF 
clinical picture.
On the basis of our results and recent data, we suggest that in some 
cases other factors along with MEFV genotype, such as environment 
or possibly other genetic factors play a role in the determination of the 
severity of the inflammatory attacks in FMF.
P0736. Disruption of conserved non-coding elements in a 
t(2;3)(q12;p13) de novo 
E. Engenheiro1, D. Goode2, A. Woolfe2, M. Pinto3, G. Soares3, Z. Tümer1, G. 
Elgar2, N. Tommerup1;  
1Wilhelm Johannsen Center for Functional Genome Research, Department of 
Medical Genetics, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Functional Genomics Group, School of 
Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End 
Road, London, United Kingdom, 3Instituto de Genética Médica Jacinto Magal -
hães, Porto, Portugal.
It was recently discovered that not only can disruption of important 
developmental genes cause disease, but so can disruption of the 
regulatory landscapes surrounding these genes, e.g. by translocations 
that remove regulatory elements from the gene they regulate. Here we 
present a balanced t(2;3)(q12.3;p13) de novo  in a patient with men -
tal retardation, speech defect and strabismus. The breakpoints were 
mapped by FISH using BAC clones to a gene empty region upstream 
of FOXP1 on chromosome 3p13 . The breakpoint on chromosome 3p13 
disrupts a cluster of conserved non-coding elements (CNEs) associ -
ated with FOXP1 . It has recently been shown that similar conserved 
elements probably function as tissue-specific enhancers and that they 
are important for the diverse spatio-temporal functions of the associ -
ated key developmental genes. The disrupted elements upstream of 
the breakpoint on chromosome 3p13 have been studied in vivo  by a 
functional assay using zebrafish. Several of these elements revealed 
GFP expression in the zebrafish central nervous system. Recently, 
FOXP2 , which encodes another member of the Forkhead box (Fox) 
family of proteins, has been identified as the gene underlying a human 
developmental language abnormality. Since FOXP1  is specifically co-
localized with FOXP2  in the bird and human brain, it is predicted to be 
related to speech disorders as well. The objectives of this study are to 
identify regulatory sequences related to the candidate gene associ -
ated with the 3p13 breakpoint in this translocation and contribute to the 
understanding of the etiology of speech defect associated with mental 
retardation and strabismus.
P0737. Frequency of FRAXA and FRAXE and polymorphism at 
FMR1 and FMR2 genes in Indian population
K. Lavanya1, B. Thelma2, V. Om Sai Ramesh3, V. Naga Rathna3, M. Ananda -
raj1;  
1Institute of Genetics & Hospital for Genetic Diseases, Hyderabad, India, 2De-
partment of Genetics, Delhi University, New Delhi, India, 3National Institute for 
Mentally Handicapped, Secunderabad, India.
Fragile X syndrome (FRAX) is one of the main causes of mental retar -
dation. It is caused mainly by dynamic expansions at FMR1 (FRAXA) 
and FMR2 (FRAXE) genes at Xq27.3 and Xq 28. In agreement with 
the polymorphism of the CGG/CCG repeats and the methylation sta -
tus of the gene, the FRAXA and FRAXE alleles can be divided into 
three categories; normal (2-60), premutation (60-200) and full mutation 
(>200).
A total of 203 individuals (194 males; 9 females) with MR of unknown 
etiology, were analyzed for the expansion and also for the polymor -
phism at FMR1 and FMR2 genes. Radioactive-PCR and southern 
blotting using Stb12.3 (for FRAXA) and Oxe20.0 (for FRAXE) were 
employed in analyzing the patients. 5 males did not show amplifica -
tion for FRAXA allele because of the full mutation. These were again Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
confirmed by southern blot analysis. Therefore, a total of 207 and 212 
X-chromosomes were analyzed for the CGG repeat number in FRAXA 
and GCC repeats in FRAXE respectively. The most frequent FRAXA 
allele size was 29 CGG repeats (25.6%). 28 repeat containing alleles 
were the next frequent (16.9 %) allele. A total of 25 FRAXA allelic 
variants from 11-45 CGG repeats were observed. The most frequent 
FRAXE allele size had 15 GCC repeats (24.1%) followed by allele con -
taining 18 repeats (18.3%). A total of 20 FRAXE allelic variants from 
4-31 GCC repeats were observed. Our study revealed frequency of 
FRAXA to be 2.5% and FRAXE to be 0% indicating the absence or 
rarity of FRAXE mutation in our population.
P0738. FRAXA  locus investigation of mentally retarded patients
Z. Daneberga1,2, Z. Krumina1, B. Lace1, D. Bauze1, N. Pronina1, R. Lugovska1;  
1Medical Genetic Clinic, University Children`s Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga 
Stradins University, Riga, Latvia.
Mutations at FRAXA locus on distal Xq may cause mental impairment. 
Most common mutation at FRAXA  locus is expansion of CGG triplet 
repeats located in the 5‘-untranslated region of the fragile X mental 
retardation-1  (FMR1 ) gene. The expanded CGG triplet repeats are hy -
permethylated and the expression of the FMR1  gene is repressed in 
patients with fragile X syndrome (FXS), which leads to the absence of 
FMR1 protein (FMRP) and subsequent mental retardation (MR). Nor -
mal alleles vary from 6 to 50 CGG repeats. Intermediate alleles 45 
- 55 repeats, premutation alleles 59 - 200 repeats, full mutation greater 
than approximately 200 repeats (methylated).
The group of 292 unrelated patients with MR referred from clinical ge -
neticists was screened by PCR for a normal allele. For 179 chromo -
somes CGG repeats number was detected by Applied Biosystems pro -
tocol on ABI Prism 310. The prevalence of 29, 30 and 31 CGG repeats 
were found. Five affected patients were detected (1.71%). The final 
diagnosis of FXS confirmed by Southern blotting. In four FXS families 
we found 4 females permutation carriers, 3 females with full mutation, 
3 affected males with full mutation, 1 affected mosaic male. All permu -
tated and mutated alleles in FXS families were associated with single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) ATL1 allele G.
105 chromosomes of patients with normal CGG repeats number were 
analyzed for ATL1 SNP. For 62% of analyzed chromosomes ATL1 al -
lele A was found.
The estimation of STR-based haplotype structure for further investiga -
tion of Latvian FXS patients and their families are in progress.
P0739. GAA repeat expansion-associated DNA methylation 
changes in Friedreich ataxia
S. Al-Mahdawi, O. Ismail, D. Varshney, S. Lymperi, R. Mouro Pinto, M. A. 
Pook ;  
Brunel University, Uxbridge, United Kingdom.
Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) is an autosomal recessive neurodegenera -
tive disorder that is primarily caused by a GAA repeat expansion mu -
tation within intron 1 of the FXN gene, leading to a decreased level 
of frataxin protein expression. The mechanism by which this mutation 
acts is currently unknown, but two models have been put forward. 
Firstly, it has been suggested that the GAA repeat expansion may 
adopt an abnormal triplex structure that interferes with FXN gene tran -
scription. Secondly, there is evidence that the GAA repeat expansion 
is associated with epigenetic changes, such as DNA methylation and 
modification of histones, producing a heterochromatin-mediated gene 
silencing effect.
In support of this second hypothesis, we have recently obtained data 
that shows increased DNA methylation of specific CpG sites immedi -
ately upstream of the expanded GAA repeat sequence in FRDA pa -
tient autopsied brain tissue, compared with non-GAA repeat expansion 
containing brain tissue. In contrast, no such changes were identified in 
the FXN promoter region.  We have also identified similar DNA methyl -
ation increases in brain and heart tissues from our recently established 
GAA repeat expansion-containing FXN YAC transgenic mouse model, 
compared with similar non-GAA repeat expansion FXN YAC transgen -
ic mice. These studies will be detailed, together with our more recent 
investigations to identify potential GAA repeat expansion-associated 
changes in methylation and acetylation of histones at the FXN locus. 
Such epigenetic studies to identify the potential GAA repeat expansion 
mechanism of action will provide valuable information for novel FRDA 
therapies.P0740. Investigation for point mutations on different parts of 
Mitochondrial DNA, relating to adjunct of pathogenesis of FRDA, 
on 20 Iranian patients with Friedreich‘s ataxia
S. EtemadAhari1, S. Kasraie1, M. Houshmand1, M. Moin2, M. Shafa Shariat 
Panahi1;  
1Department of Medical genetics, National Research Center of Genetic En -
gineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Im-
munology, Asthma & Allergy Research Institute, Tehran, Iran., Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Friedreich’s ataxia (FA,FRDA) is the most common inherited ataxia.
Clinically, FRDA is characterized by multiple symptoms including pro -
gressive gait and limb ataxia, dysarthria, diabetes mellitus, and hyper -
trophic cardiomyopathy. The gene defective in FRDA, encodes a mi -
tochondrial protein known as frataxin. A triplet repeat expansion within 
intron 1 of the FRDA gene results in a marked decrease in frataxin 
expression.There is much evidence to suggest that FRDA results from 
mitochondrial iron accumulation leading to cellular damage and death 
by the production of toxic free radicals by Fenton chemistry. Due to 
the important role of the mitochondria and considering the clinical 
symptoms of FRDA, failure in ATP production and presence of free 
radicals in mitochondria of patients with FRDA we are analyzing differ -
ent parts of mtDNA; MT-ATP8 , MT-ATP6, and highly mutative genes 
like; MT-LTI , MT-NDI, MT-COII, MT-TK, in 20 Iranian FRDA patients 
to find any probable point mutation by PCR method and automated 
DNA sequence that can be involved as an adjunct in the pathogenesis 
of FRDA
P0741. Hypomethylation is restricted to the D4Z4 repeat array in 
phenotypic FSHD
J. C. de Greef1, M. Wohlgemuth2, O. A. Chan1, K. B. Hansson3, D. Smeets4, R. 
R. Frants1, C. M. Weemaes5, G. W. Padberg2, S. M. van der Maarel1;  
1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Department of Neurology, Radboud University 
Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Clinical Cytogenetics 
Laboratory, LDGA, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 
4Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Cen -
ter, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 5Department of Pediatrics, Radboud University 
Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is an autosomal 
dominant myopathy affecting predominantly the muscles of the face, 
shoulder and upper arm. Most FSHD patients show a contraction of 
the D4Z4 repeat array in the subtelomere of chromosome 4q. This 
contraction is associated with significant allele-specific hypomethyl -
ation of the repeat, suggestive for a chromatin restructuring at 4qter in 
FSHD. Hypomethylation of D4Z4 is also observed in phenotypic FSHD 
patients without D4Z4 contraction and in patients suffering from the 
immunodeficiency, centromeric instability and facial anomalies (ICF) 
syndrome, an unrelated disorder that does not present with muscular 
dystrophy and is in part caused by mutations in the DNMT3B  gene. In 
order to identify the gene defect in phenotypic FSHD and to unravel 
the pathogenic epigenetic pathway in FSHD, we have aimed to iden -
tify the differences and commonalities in phenotypic FSHD and the 
ICF syndrome by (1) investigation of DNA methylation of non-D4Z4 re -
peat arrays, (2) analysis of mitogen-stimulated lymphocytes to detect 
pericentromeric abnormalities involving chromosomes 1, 9 and 16, (3) 
determination of IgA, IgG and IgM levels and (4) mutational analysis 
of candidate genes to identify a second disease locus involved in the 
pathogenesis of phenotypic FSHD. Our results do not show epigenetic 
or phenotypic commonalities between phenotypic FSHD and ICF other 
than the earlier observed D4Z4 hypomethylation, suggesting that phe -
notypic FSHD is not caused by a defect in the same molecular path -
way as ICF. We neither could identify any mutations in the candidate 
genes tested for.
P0742. Comprehensive mutation analysis in a clinically well 
defined cohort of patients with exudative vitreoretinopathy.
L. H. Hoefsloot1, C. E. van Nouhuys2, N. Boonstra3, J. Schuil3, I. J. de Wijs1, 
K. P. van der Donk1, K. Nikopoulos1, A. Mukhopadhyay1, H. Scheffer1, M. A. D. 
Tilanus4, F. P. M. Cremers1;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Cen -
tre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Canisius Wil -
helmina Hospital, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 3Bartimeus Institute for the Visu -
ally Impaired, Zeist, The Netherlands, 4Department of Ophthalmology, Radboud Molecular and biochemical basis of disease1
University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR) is a hereditary disorder 
characterized by vitroretinal pathology. Retinal exudates, retinal neo -
vascularisation, retinal folds and retinal detachment as well as vitre -
ous haemorrhage have been described to occur in the first decade of 
life. The disease is slowly progressive, with in the terminal stages of 
severely affected eyes a chronic retinal detachment, leading to total 
blindness. To date, 3 genes and 1 locus have been described. FZD4 
mutations were found in patients with autosomal dominant EVR. X-
linked EVR is caused by mutations in NDP, and LRP5  mutations can 
be inherited both automal dominant as well as autosomal recessive. 
The EVR3 (605750) locus maps to 11p12-p13. In a series of 30 spo -
radic patients and dominant families, we analysed the involvement of 
the NDP , FZD4  and LRP5  genes by sequence analysis. We found in 
one patient a mutation in the NDP  gene. Mutations in the FZD4  gene 
were found in approximately 30% of the patients and families, (9/30), 
with the c.957G>A (p.Trp319X) mutation as the most frequent muta -
tion (5/30). The analysis of LRP5  revealed a mutation in one family, 
and an alteration of unknown pathogenicity in another. Careful clinical 
evaluation of the patients will lead to determination of a possible rela -
tionship between phenotype and genotype in this cohort. Furthermore, 
families without a mutation in one of the known genes, will help to 
identify new loci for FEVR.
P0743. Molecular Identification of Mutations in G6PD Gene in 
Patients in Kerman and Yazd Provinces of Iran.
M. Noori-Daloii ;  
Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences Tehran,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Glucose- 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is a housekeeping en -
zyme and its gene is located on the Xq28 region of X chromosome. 
G6PD deficiency is one of the most common inherited disorders of 
mankind affecting more than 400 million people worldwide. The main 
clinical manifestations are neonatal jaundice and acute hemolytic. 
More than 130 mutations and 400 biochemical variants have been re -
ported. Since, the variants including Mediterranean, G6PDA- and Cha -
tham are reported in all over the world, and among them Mediterra -
nean variant is the most common, also in Arabic countries and Persian 
Gulf, in this study, we investigated Mediterranean, Chatham, Cozenza 
and A- mutations in the central areas of Iran. The extracted DNA from 
119 patients with history of favism was analyzed by polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) 
for above mutations. The results determined that, from the total 119 
samples, 41 samples from state of Kerman (63%) and 35 samples 
from state of Yazd (64%) hence a total of 63.86% had G6PD Mediter -
ranean and 2 from each states had G6PD Chatham (3.36%). Cosenza 
and A- mutation were not observed. G6PD Mediterranean was the 
commonest mutation in Iran and the most of other countries in tropi -
cal and subtropical areas. The frequency of Chatham was the second 
minimum in Central provinces in comparison with others in Iran. The 
Major ethnic groups in this region are Fars, Arab Turk and minorities of 
Kurd. For unknown samples other Methods such as SSCP and DNA 
sequencing are using to determine other mutations.
P0744. A new Vohwinkel-like disease is caused by a novel 
missense mutation in GJB2
M. A. M. Van Steensel1, E. de Zwart-Storm1, H. Hamm2, M. van Geel1;  
1University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2University of Würzburg, 
Würzburg, Germany.
Gap junctions are intercellular channels that mediate rapid intercel -
lular communication. They consist of connexins, small transmembrane 
proteins that belong to a large family found throughout the animal king -
dom. In the skin, several connexins are expressed and are involved in 
the regulation of epidermal growth and differentiation. The gap junction 
gene GJB2, that codes for the protein connexin26, is highly expressed 
in the epidermis and is associated with a wide variety of diseases, 
showing a strong genotype-phenotype correlation. Despite extensive 
research in the past few years, this phenomenon is poorly understood. 
The identification of novel diseases caused by mutations in GJB2 may 
help to shed light on its strong genotype-phenotype correlation and 
help elucidate the function of different parts of the protein. Here, we 
report on a novel GJB2 mutation that causes a syndrome of focal pal -
moplantar keratoderma with sensorineural deafness, a phenotype that is reminiscent of Vohwinkel’s disease. Using fluorescent fusion pro -
teins, we show that the mutation causes a transport defect similar to 
that found for the Vohwinkel syndrome mutation D66H.
P0745. Genetic polymorphism of glutathione-S-transferase T1 
and M1 in the newborns with neonatal syndromes in Ukrainian 
population
N. Gorovenko , Z. Rossokha, S. Podolskaya;  
National Medical Academy of Post-Graduate Education, Kyiv, Ukraine.
The more recent discovery suggested the physiological role glutathi -
one-S-transferases (GSTs) in protecting against chronic diseases that 
arise from oxidative tissue damage. The development of the neonatal 
syndromes are connected with perinatal hypoxia. The functional al -
lele of these genes may protect from hypoxia and the risk of neonatal 
syndromes.
Material and methods: We conducted a case-control study of 117 cas -
es of severe perinatal pathology with neonatal syndromes, such as: 
perinatal damage of the central nervous system, respiratory distress 
syndrome, necrotizing enterocolitis, neonatal jaundice and 70 control 
group (clinical healthy newborns). Genetic polymorphism of GSTT1  
and GSTM1  were detected by multiplex polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR). Differences in these groups were assessed by χ2 analyses.
Results: In our investigation an increased significant frequency of 
GSTT1“-“  genotypes among neonates with perinatal pathologies 
(29,91%) compared to  newborns in the control group (12,86%), χ2 
=6.17, P<0.05 was observed. There as no significant difference be -
tween the polymorphism of GSTM1 genotype in two groups. The rate 
of GSTT1“-“ / GSTM1“-“ allelic combination was also significantly in -
creased in the neonates with severe perinatal pathologies and neona -
tal syndromes (17,09%) compared to  newborns in the control group 
(2,86%), χ2 =7.24, P<0.01. Conclusion: Our investigations have shown 
associations between GSTT1  „-“ genotype, combination of GSTT1“-
“ / GSTM1“-“ genotypes in newborns and increased risk of perinatal 
pathologies in newborns. Thus determining the factors of inheritance 
predisposition in the neonates can allow to predict the risk of neonatal 
syndromes.
P0746. The -3440 C->A variant in the gtPBREM region of the 
UGT1A1 gene enhances gene expression.
M. Rosatelli1, D. Corda1, V. Faa’2, F. Incani1, G. Ibba1, M. Masala1, A. Cao2, A. 
Meloni2;  
1Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Cagliari, Italy, 2Istituto di 
Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, CNR, Cagliari, Italy.
Gilbert, Crigler-Najjar Type I and II Syndromes are characterized by 
unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia caused by molecular defects of the 
UGT1A1 gene codifying for the UGT1A1 enzyme. CN1 syndrome is 
the most severe form characterized by complete absence of UGT1A1 
enzyme activity and serum bilirubin levels of 540-850 μm/l. CN2 syn -
drome, less severe, presents intermediate levels of hyperbilirubinae -
mia and the UGT1A1 enzyme can be induced by Phenobarbital ad -
ministration. Mild hyperbilirubinaemia is associated with Gilbert Syn -
drome due to the presence of the TA7 or TA8 repeat at the promoter 
sequence A(TA)6TAA. Recently, the gtPBREM enhancer module of 
the human UGT1A1 was characterized, which is activated by nuclear 
receptors such as CAR and PXR in response to xenobiotics. A -3279 
T->G mutation in the gtPBREM region led to hyperbilirubinaemia. In 
this study, we analyzed a polymorphic variant located at position -3440 
C->A of the gtPBREM flanking the PXR binding site which is not com -
mon in the general population but highly frequent in Sardinia. To test 
the functional consequences of the -3440 variant, we quantified the 
transactivation activity of the variant in epatic cells. We also evaluated 
if the PXR receptor could bind to the consensus sequence after Rifam -
picine treatment. These experiments demonstrated that the -3440 vari -
ant does not modify PXR’s binding capacity and shows a prominent 
transactivation activity compared to the wild type sequence. The -3440 
variant could balance the reduced activity of UGT1A1 due to presence 
of the TA7 allele and would explain the asymptomatic phenotype of 
patients with the (TA)7/(TA)7 genotype.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease200
P0747. Functional analysis of 14 GLB1  mutant alleles found in 
GM1-gangliosidosis and Morquio B patients
R. Santamaria1,2, A. Chabás3,4, L. Vilageliu1,2, D. Grinberg1,2;  
1Dept. Genètica, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER, ISC 
III, IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, 3Institut de Bioquímica Clínica, Barcelona, Spain, 
4CIBERER, ISC III, Barcelona, Spain.
GM1-gangliosidosis and Morquio B disease are lysosomal storage 
disorders caused by β-galactosidase deficiency due to mutations in 
the GLB1  gene. Three major clinical forms of GM1-gangliosidosis 
have been established on the basis of age of onset and severity of 
symptoms: infantile, late infantile/juvenile and adult. All these subtypes 
share a different degree of psychomotor retardation with neurologi -
cal involvement and high amounts of ganglioside GM1 storage. On 
the other hand, Morquio B disease is characterized by progressive, 
generalized skeletal dysplasia without central nervous system involve -
ment and no clinical signs of storage disease in neuronal tissues. β-
galactosidase is a lysosomal enzyme that cleaves β-galactoses from 
different substrates such as ganglioside GM1, keratan sulfate or gly -
copeptides.
Our group had previously identified different GLB1  mutations in GM1-
gangliosidosis and Morquio B patients. In the present work some of 
these mutations were heterologously expressed and the resulting mu -
tated proteins characterized by residual enzyme activity and Western 
blot analysis. In vitro  expression was performed by transfecting COS-7 
cells with plasmids bearing the different mutant GLB1  cDNAs. Twelve 
mutations and 2 functional polymorphisms (p.R521C and p.S532G) 
were studied. Ten of these changes had not been expressed before. 
Mutations causing the infantile form of GM1-gangliosidosis resulted in 
the complete absence of the enzyme activity, whereas mutations asso -
ciated with the milder forms of the disease resulted in a great reduction 
of the enzyme activity. The two polymorphisms showed only a partial 
reduction of the activity. Therefore, in most cases a good correlation 
between residual activity and phenotype could be established.
P0748. PATCHED  mutations and the Nevoid Basal Cell 
Carcinoma Syndrome: clues to an active participation of dermal 
fibroblasts in the Basal Cell Carcinoma development
A. Valin1, S. Barnay-Verdier1, F. Brellier2, O. Chevallier-Lagente1, P. Gorry3, M. 
Avril4, T. Magnaldo1;  
1Laboratoire Génomes et Cancers - CNRS FRE 2939, Institut Gustave Roussy, 
France, 2Friederich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzer -
land, 3Laboratoire d’Oncologie Génétique, Institut Bergonié, France, 4Service 
de Dermatologie, Hopital Tarnier, France.
The Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS) or Gorlin syn -
drome is a rare autosomal dominant disorder due to germinal mutations 
in the PATCHED  tumor suppressor gene. NBCCS patients present de -
velopmental defects and a high predisposition to Basal Cell Carcinoma 
(BCC). BCC is the commonest cancer in adult human. Increasing evi -
dences have revealed the contribution of the stroma in tumorigenesis. 
Stromal dependency of BCC cells seems of particular interest provid -
ed the virtually null metastatic potential of this tumor and the incapac -
ity of BCC cells to grow in vitro . In order to define the influence of the 
stroma cells in the BCC proneness phenotype of NBBCS patients, we 
cultured primary fibroblasts and keratinocytes from NBCCS patients. 
Using these cells we set up a system of organotypic skin cultures, al -
lowing us to study the consequences of PATCHED  mutations in mes -
enchyme-epithelium interactions. The presence of NBCCS fibroblasts 
induced a delayed and reduced expression of epidermal differentia -
tion markers, while paradoxically, a decrease of the Ki67 proliferation 
marker was observed in overlaying normal and NBCCS keratinocytes. 
These observations strongly suggest that NBCCS fibroblasts alter 
the proliferation/differentiation balance of keratinocytes. To further 
document the implication of NBCCS dermal fibroblasts in mechanisms 
leading to BCC development, we performed a whole genome microar -
ray assay using mRNA from NBCCS and normal fibroblasts cultured 
in a tri-dimensional collagen dermal equivalent. Results of this screen, 
sustained by Q-RTPCR, WB and ELISA analyses, show that NBCCS 
fibroblasts over-express proteins involved in the tumorigenesis pro -
cess such as the pro-tumoral Matrix Metalloproteinase 3.P0749. The GP IIb gene expression, Ile843Ser GP IIb gene 
polymorphism, glycoprotein IIb-IIIa number and platelet 
aggregation in healthy donors
O. V. Sirotkina1, A. M. Zabotina1, E. L. Zheleznjak1, A. N. Stolyarova1, T. V. 
Vavilova2;  
1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute Russian Academy of Science, Saint-Pe -
tersburg, Russian Federation, 2Mechnikov State Medical Academy, Saint-Pe -
tersburg, Russian Federation.
Platelet hyperaggregation is a risk factor for coronary thrombosis and 
platelet GPIIb-IIIa receptor plays a key role in this process. It’s known 
that the Leu33Pro GPIIIa gene mutation and quantity of the GPIIb-
IIIa receptors are associated with high aggregation. In our study the 
GPIIb gene expression, Ile843Ser GPIIb gene polymorphism and their 
effect on the GPIIb-IIIa number or platelet activity were investigated. 
We formed a group of 57 volunteers (21-54 years) and analyzed the 
Ile843Ser GPIIb by PCR-RFLP technique, the GPIIb gene expression 
(level of mRNA from 10 donors) by RT-PCR using the TaqMan assay 
in ABI Prism 7000 Sequence detection System, cDNA prepared from 
total RNA isolated from platelets, ADP-induced platelet aggregation 
by photometric method and the GPIIb-IIIa number per platelet by flow 
cytometry with mAB. We revealed 17 carriers of IleIle genotype, 30 
carriers of IleSer genotype and 10 - SerSer genotype. The GPIIb-IIIa 
numbers varied from 40500 to 82700 per platelet and the GPIIb mRNA 
levels were widely varied too - from 1,6 to 15,6. However no correlation 
between these parameters was found may be because small analyz -
ing group. The Ile843Ser GPIIb gene polymorphism didn’t influence 
the GPIIb mRNA level. But the 843Ser allele was associated with high -
er velocity of aggregation - 56.8±6.4%/min vr. 39.2±3.2%/min in IleIle 
carriers (p=0.04). The platelet activity also depended on the GPIIb-IIIa 
number (Spearman correlation R from 0.4 to 0.5 for ADP 1.2μM and 
2.5μM, p<0.005). In conclusion, the impact of the GPIIb gene expres -
sion on platelet function deserves further investigation.
P0750. Functional characterization and proteome analysis of 
synaptic endings in the crv mouse, a spontaneous model for 
hereditary ataxia affecting metabotropic glutamate receptor 1.
V. Conti1,2, L. Musante2,3, V. Musante4, F. Piccardi5, J. L. Guenet6, G. Candiano3, 
R. Ravazzolo1,7, A. Pittaluga4, A. Puliti1,7;  
1Molecular Genetics and Cytogenetics Unit, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 
2RenalChild Foundation, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 3Laboratory on 
Pathophysiology of Uremia, Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 4Dept. of Experi -
mental Medicine, University of Genova, Genova, Italy, 5Animal Models Facility, 
Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genova, Italy, 6Pasteur Institute, 
Paris, France, 7Dept. of Pediatric Sciences “G. De Toni”, University of Genova, 
Genova, Italy.
A mouse mutant recently described by our group, crv4, carries an LTR 
intronic insertion which disrupts splicing of type 1 metabotropic gluta -
mate receptor ( Grm1 ) gene and causes absence of the protein. crv4 
homozygous mice present mainly with an ataxic phenotype. Hereditary 
ataxias may be caused by mutations in different genes and, although 
no Grm1  mutations have been reported in human so far, emerging evi -
dence indicate as glutamate signaling from Grm1  plays an important 
role in ataxia pathophysiology.
Grm1  is involved in synaptic plasticity, indeed it has been suggested to 
control presynaptic glutamate release thus modulating synaptic func -
tion.
We characterized the functional effects of Grm1  mutation in the crv4 
mice at presynaptic level and investigated expression profiles of pro -
teins in tissues (cerebral cortex, hippocampus and cerebellar cortex) 
critical for pathways involving Grm1 .
By using cortical synaptosomes in experimental conditions known to 
permit the selective activation of Grm1, we have confirmed the ex -
istence of presynaptic Grm1  in mouse cortical nerve endings whose 
activation potentiates the release of glutamate evoked by depolarizing 
stimuli.
Then, we have demonstrated that the crv4 mutation abolishes this pre -
synaptic positive control of glutamate release from synaptosomes. The 
loss of the auto−regulatory mechanism in crv4 mice may affect the 
glutamate amount in the biophase and glutamate−mediated regula -
tion of synaptic events contributing to the development of the affected 
phenotype.
Finally, we compared total synaptic proteins (proteome) obtained from 
synaptosomes of crv4 homozygous and control mice by the 2D-DIGE Molecular and biochemical basis of disease201
technique to define key molecules involved in Grm1  mediated synaptic 
activity.
P0751. Molecular studies on chromosome 9p haploinsufficiency 
and DMRT1  gene mutations in 46,XY patients with gonadal 
dysgenesis
M. P. De Mello1, F. B. Coeli1, J. G. Assumpção2, T. M. Castro1, A. T. Maciel-
Guerra3, A. P. Marques-de-Faria3, M. T. M. Baptista4, G. Guerra-Jr5;  
1Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética, Campinas, Brazil, 
2Centro Infantil Boldrini, Campinas, Brazil, 3Departamento de Genética Médica, 
Campinas, Brazil, 4Departamento de Clínca Médica, Campinas, Brazil, 5Centro 
de Investigação em Pediatria, Campinas, Brazil.
SRY gene is responsible for testis determining in mammals. Among 
patients with gonadal dysgenesis (GD), only 15-20% presents an in -
activating mutation in SRY coding region. It is well known that 9p chro -
mosomal deletion can cause sex reversal in 46,XY individuals. In the 
present study, 9p haploinsufficiency was invstigated using five different 
9p microsatellites: D9S1779, D9S1858, D9S143, D9S54, D9S1813. 
Were included thirty-three SRY-normal non-related  patients and seven 
46,XY individuals of a family, three with GD (one complete and two 
partial), the father and three normal siblings all of them bearing the 
R30I SRY mutation. Homo- or hemizygosis for five and four loci was 
observed in one and two patients, respectively. The three affected in -
dividuals of the family bore identical 9p genotype, which was different 
from normal individuals in the sibling.  DMRT1  gene maps to 9p24.3 
within the sex reversal region on 9p. The DMRT1  g.133T>A nucleotide 
change was observed in 24 T/T homozygous and in 9 T/A heterozy -
gous patients. This results in S45T mutation but is considered a neu -
tral SNP (rs3739583). Interestingly, the A allele is the most frequent in 
four out of five populations deposited in database, whereas this study 
showed frequencies of 76% and 23% for T and A, respectively. The 
g.52198T>C and g.52308C>T variations in exon 3 were detected in 
one patient; both are rare SNPs. Finally, a new 3’UTR g.126313insT 
was found in a heterozygous patient. The involvement of those SNPs 
on either function or expression of DMRT1  must be investigated to 
confirm them as causing DG.
P0752. Borate transporter SLC4A11 mutations cause both 
Harboyan syndrome and non-syndromic corneal endothelial 
dystrophy
J. Desir , G. Moya, O. Reish, N. Van Regemorter, H. Deconinck, K. L. David, F. 
M. Meire, M. Abramowicz;  
Medical Genetics Department, Hopital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium.
Harboyan syndrome (CDPD) consists of congenital corneal endothe -
lial dystrophy and progressive perceptive deafness and is transmit -
ted as an autosomal recessive trait. CDPD and autosomal recessive, 
non-syndromic congenital hereditary endothelial corneal dystrophy 
(CHED2) both map at overlapping loci at 20p13, and mutations of 
SLC4A11 were recently reported in CHED2. We here report genotype 
studies in six families with CDPD and one family with either CHED or 
CDPD, from various ethnic backgrounds (in the seventh families hear -
ing loss could not be assessed because of the proband’s young age). 
We found novel SLC4A11 mutations in all patients. Why some muta -
tions cause hearing loss in addition to corneal dystrophy is presently 
unclear. Our findings extend the implication of the SLC4A11 borate 
transporter beyond corneal dystrophy to perceptive deafness.
P0753. HAX-1 is a new interacting protein of phospholamban 
and a novel regulator of calcium homeostasis and cardiac cell 
survival
E. Vafiadaki1, D. Sanoudou1, D. A. Arvanitis1, D. H. Catino2, E. G. Kranias3,1, A. 
Kontrogianni-Konstantopoulos2;  
1Foundation for Biomedical Research, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Physi -
ology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, United States, 3Department of 
Pharmacology and Cell Biophysics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, 
United States.
Phospholamban (PLN), a 52 amino acid transmembrane protein of 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), is a key regulator of Ca2+-homeo -
stasis and contractility in the heart. Its regulatory effects are mediated 
through its interaction with the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase, 
(SERCA2a), resulting in alterations of its Ca2+-affinity. Impaired SR 
Ca2+ cycling is a characteristic of human heart failure and mutations 
in PLN have been associated with dilated cardiomyopathy. To iden -tify additional proteins that may interact and thus regulate PLN, we 
screened an adult human cardiac cDNA library using the yeast two-
hybrid system.
We identified HS-1 associated protein X-1 (HAX-1), a ubiquitously ex -
pressed mitochondrial protein with anti-apoptotic function, as a new 
PLN-binding partner. The minimal binding regions were mapped to 
amino acids 203-245 for HAX-1 and 16-22 for PLN. GST pull-down 
and in vitro  binding assays confirmed the direct interaction between 
PLN and HAX-1, while kinetic studies determined a KD of ~1μM as the 
binding affinity of the protein complex. The interaction was found to be 
modulated by PLN phosphorylation and changes in Ca2+ concentra -
tion. Moreover, SERCA2a was also detected in the pull down samples, 
suggesting that HAX-1 forms part of the PLN/SERCA2a complex. Im -
munofluorescence studies localized HAX-1 to the mitochondria. How -
ever, in the presence of PLN, HAX-1 redistributed and co-localized at 
the endoplasmic reticulum. Importantly, the anti-apoptotic function of 
HAX-1 was found to be enhanced in the presence of PLN, indicating 
an important role of the PLN/HAX-1 interaction in cell survival, pos -
sibly through the regulation of SR Ca2+-homeostasis and consequent 
mitochondrial Ca2+ redistribution.
P0754. Mutation analysis of the GJB2 gene in Latvian patients 
with nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss
O. Sterna1, N. Pronina1, I. Grinfelde1, S. Kuske2, A. Krumina3, R. Lugovska1;  
1Medical Genetics clinics, Latvian State Childrens` Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 22Lat-
vian Childrens` Hearing centre, Riga, Latvia, 3Riga Stradins University, Riga, 
Latvia.
Mutations in the GJB2 gene at the DFNB1 locus on chromosome 
13q11-q12 have been established to be the major cause of nonsyn -
dromic sensorineural hearing impairment (NSHI) in different popula -
tions. Up to date there are reported 110 different GJB2 mutations.One 
particular frame shift mutation named 35delG is the most prevalent in 
the populations of the Caucasian origin.
The aim of our work was to investigate the prevalence of the GJB2 
gene mutations within Latvian NSHI individuals from 41 families. All 
samples were screened for 35delG mutation using RFLP method. Re -
maining GJB2 mutations were identified by the direct sequencing.
Four different mutations in the GJB2 gene have been identified in Lat -
vian patients with nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss: 35delG, 
311-324del14, 235delC and M34T.
The most prevalent mutation in patients with NSHI in Latvia is 35delG 
(62% of all probands are homozygotes for this mutation). Frequency of 
311-324del14 mutation is 7%, but 235delC and M34T mutations were 
found in 2% of patients.
P0755. Integrated approach to the study of Congenital Heart 
Diseases
A. Baban1, M. Marini1, G. Trocchio2, M. Lerone1, M. Di Duca3, G. Gimelli1, M. 
Pelegrini4, G. Pongigliono4, R. Ravazzolo1;  
1Molecular Genetics and Cytogenetics Unit,, Genoa, Italy, 2Cardiology Unit, 
Genoa, Italy, 3Laboratory of Nephrology, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Genoa, 
Italy, 4Cardiology Unit, G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy.
This study is part of a research project financed by the European Com -
munity (Health-e-Child, Contract n°: IST-2004-027749), that involves 
three Pediatric European Centers. It foresees vertical integration of 
epidemiological, clinical, radiological, laboratory, biological, and ge -
netic data.
The study includes congenital heart diseases that lead to Right Ven -
tricular Overload (RVO): Atrial Septal Defects (ASD), Post-operative 
Tetralogy of Fallot (ToF) and Anomalous Pulmonary Venous Return 
(APVR). The study aims to collecting the following data :
-Clinical Evaluation: demographic information, personal and family his -
tory, family pedigree, and detailed physical examination.
-Instrumental Evaluation: Electrocardiogram (ECG), Holter ECG, Sig -
nal-Averaged ECG, Chest X-ray, 2D and 3D echocardiography, tissue 
doppler imaging, acoustic boundary detection, integrated backscatter, 
color kinesis, transesophageal echocardiography and magnetic reso -
nance imaging, cardiac catheterisation.
-Chromosomal analysis by standard karyotyping;
-In case of normal karyotype, screening of three candidate genes 
(GATA4, TBX5 e NKX2.5), known to be fundamental for normal car -
diac development and function.
-The negativity of the previously mentioned tests make the patient can -Molecular and biochemical basis of disease202
didate for CGH array.
During this initial phase of application of the diagnostic protocol, we 
have identified a mutation in the TBX5 gene in a patient who was previ -
ously considered to be affected with isolated ToF. The mutation leads 
to aminoacid substitution of arginine into a stop codon (R279X). Care -
ful physical examination of the patient showed subtle hand malforma -
tion in form of long first metacarpal, that can coincide with Holt Oram 
syndrome diagnosis. To the best of our knowledge this mutation has 
never been associated with ToF phenotype.
P0756. Purple and Yellow. Hereditary Coproporphyria and 
Gilbert’s Syndrome in Czech Family.
J. Prochazkova , L. Barnincova, M. Tomkova, J. Zeman, P. Martasek;  
Department of Pediatrics, 1st School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
Hereditary coproporphyria is a rare acute hepatic porphyria with auto -
somal dominant inheritance characterized by deficient activity of cop -
roporphyrinogen III oxidase (CPO). The gene encoding human CPO 
has been cloned and localized to chromosome 3q11.2. The CPO gene 
spans 14 kb and has a single promoter and seven exons. The cDNA 
encodes a protein containing 354 amino acids. The enzyme is active 
as a homodimer of 76 kDa.
Gilbert´s syndrome (GS) is a hereditary, autosomal recessive disorder 
with mild, unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. In Caucasian patients, Gil -
bert’s syndrome is linked primarily with a TA insertion in the TATA box 
promoter of the UGT1A1 gene, most frequently present as A(TA)7TAA 
rather than A(TA)6TAA.
In this study, we report on patient with hereditary coproporphyria asso -
ciated with Gilbert´s syndrome. Molecular diagnosis of the regulation 
region of the UGT1A1 gene showed a TA insertion in the promoter. 
Analysis of the CPO gene revealed a small deletion of 3 bp at nucleo -
tide 1168 (390delGly) in exon 5. This deletion removes glycine without 
altering the coding frame. Mutational analyses were carried out on six -
teen members of proband’s family.
Supported by MSMT 1M6837805002, MSMT 0021620806, GACR 
303/03/H065
P0757. Analysis of connexin 32 gene (GJB1, Cx32) in the 
hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN) patients from 
Bashkortostan
E. G. Latypova1, I. M. Hidiyatova1, N. B. Krupina2, R. V. Magjanov2, E. K. Khus -
nutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir 
State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN) or Charcot-Ma -
rie-Tooth (CMT) disease is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous 
disorder of peripheral nervous system. The HMSN frequency in Bash -
kortostan Republic (BR , Russia, the territory of the South Urals) is 
10,3:100000. HMSN type I is prevalent in BR. In 104 unrelated HMSN 
families gene PMP22 duplication screening was carried previously and 
obtained that this mutation frequency in BR is 20,63% for all types of 
HMSN and 45,0% - for HMSN type I.
In this investigation the searching of mutations in GJB1 gene in pa -
tients without PMP duplication (114 affected members from 77 un -
related families) was carried.Two mutations and one polymorphism 
- Pro87Ala, Arg22Gln and 45G>A we determined using SSCP analysis 
followed by sequencing of shifted samples. It turned out, that Pro87Ala 
mutation is frequent among HMSN patients from Bashkortostan, it was 
revealed in 13 unrelated families, that amount 12,03% for all types of 
HMSN and 20,63% - for HMSN type I. This mutation was the most fre -
quent in patients of Bashkir ethnic origin (35% in Basckir patients), less 
frequent - in Russian (10,8%) and Tatars (3,20%). Arg22Gln mutation 
was defined in three patients from two families of Tatar ethnic origin 
(2,77% for all patients from BR and 6,45% for Tatar patients without 
HMSN type differentiation. Both found mutations were described previ -
ously, they cause the dominant form of HMSN type I with relatively mild 
clinical features. The polymorphism 45G>A revealed in two unrelated 
patients of Mordvinian ethnic origin, it was not describe earlier.P0758. High throughput Genotyping: New Diagnostic 
Resequencing Microarray for Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia
C. Dufke1, R. Schüle2, A. Seibel2, M. Bonin3, S. Poths3, P. Bauer1, L. Schöls2;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Tübingen, Germany, 2Hertie-Institute für Klinische 
Hirnforschung, Tübingen, Germany, 3The Microarray Facility, Tübingen, Ger -
many.
Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia (HSP) is a heterogenous group of inher -
ited neurological disorders. Insidiously progressive spastic weakness 
of the lower extremities is the common criteria in all 33 forms described 
so far. Autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive and X-linked mode 
of inheritance have been described. Clinically HSP is differentiated into 
pure (uncomplicated) and complex (complicated) forms, depending on 
isolated impairment of corticospinal tracts or more wide spread affec -
tion of neuronal circuits or systemic involvement.
For proper diagnosis moleculargenetic analysis is fundamental since 
clinical parameters alone are not reliable in distinguishing HSP forms.
In order to establish high throughput genotyping, we designed a HSP 
resequencing microarray (Affymetrix platform) covering the coding ex -
ons and flanking intronic sequences of the HSP genes L1CAM (SPG1), 
PLP1 (SPG2), Atlastin (SPG3A),Spastin (SPG4), NIPA1 (SPG6), Para -
plegin (SPG7), KIF5A (SPG10), HSP60 (SPG13), BSCL2 (SPG17), 
Spartin (SPG20), Maspardin (SPG21),
(13 - 94kb, 5 - 28 coding exons), as well as the 59 most frequent small 
deletions, insertions and insertion/deletions in these genes.
We present data on microarray analysis of 20 autosomal dominant 
HSP index patients.
P0759. Elucidating the molecular function of Zfyve27, the gene 
mutated in hereditary spastic paraplegia (SPG33)
A. U. Mannan , K. Pantakani, W. Engel;  
Institute of Human Genetics, Goettingen, Germany.
Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) are a group of neurodegenera -
tive disorders, which are clinically characterized by progressive spastic 
paralysis of the legs, usually caused by a length-dependent distal de -
generation of the corticospinal tract axons. HSP are genetically hetero -
geneous and till now 35 loci have been identified. Recently, we report -
ed a mutation in a novel endosomal protein ZFYVE27 (SPG33) in a 
German family with autosomal dominant HSP. ZFYVE27 was identified 
as a spastin interacting protein and we have characterized the interac -
tion between these two proteins in mammalian cells. Moreover, our 
studies revealed that the mutated ZFYVE27 protein shows aberrant 
intracellular pattern in tubular structure of cells and its interaction with 
spastin is severely affected. Intracellular distribution studies revealed 
that ZFYVE27 is expressed in punctate vesicles which were both of 
endosomal and endoplasmic reticulum origin. Furthermore, overex -
pression of GFP-ZFYVE27 in fibroblast (NIH3T3) cell line, promoted 
neurite formation through directional membrane trafficking process. A 
comprehensive expression analysis of Zfyve27 through Western blot 
revealed high level of Zfyve27 primarily in the HSP affected tissues in 
mouse such as brain, cerebellum and spinal cord. To gain mechanis -
tic insights in murine Zfyve27 function, currently, generation of loss of 
function mouse models by using both gene-trap and knockout strategy 
are in progress.Conceivably the phenotype of these mouse models 
might mimic the pathological features of HSP, therefore will provide 
us with a valuable model system to elucidate the underlying cause for 
HSP etiology.
P0760. MLH1 promoter methylation in peripheral blood cells of 
12 patients clinically presenting HNPCC features
M. Grabowski1, H. K. Schackert2, N. Rahner3, M. Ebert4, C. Walldorf3, B. Roy -
er-Pokora5, B. Betz5, W. Schmiegel6, M. von Knebel-Doeberitz7, W. Dietmaier8, 
G. Keller9, B. Kerker1, G. Leitner10, E. Holinski-Feder11;  
1Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany, 2Department of 
Chirurgic Research, University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 3Institute of 
Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Hospital for Gastroen -
terology and Hepatology, Otto-von-Guericke-University, Magdeburg, Germany, 
5Institute of Human Genetics, University of Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, 
6Hospital of the University of Bochum, Bochum, Germany, 7Institute of Pathol -
ogy, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 8Institute of Pathology, 
University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 9Institute of Pathology, Uni -
versity of Technology, Munich, Germany, 10Center of Medical Genetics, Munich, 
Germany, 11Institute of Human Genetics, Ludwig-Maximilians-University/Center Molecular and biochemical basis of disease20
of Medical Genetics, Munich, Germany.
Germline mutations in mismatch repair genes, tumors with high mi -
crosatellite instability (MSI-H) and loss of protein expression are the 
hallmarks of HNPCC or Lynch-Syndrome respectively. While involve -
ment of somatic MLH1 promoter hypermethylation is accepted in tu -
morigenesis of defferent sporadic tumors, abnormal germline MLH1 
promoter methylation is controversly discussed as a disease-predis -
posing mechanism for HNPCC.
To clarify the MLH1 deficiency of 94 HNPCC suspected individuals 
with immunohistochemically MLH1-negative and MSI-H tumors but 
without germline mutation in MLH1 or other mismatch repair genes, 
we studied the methylation pattern in the MLH1 promoter region by 
bisulphite conversion, methylation-specific PCR, and sequencing.
MLH1 promoter methylation in peripheral blood cells was found for 
twelve patients displaying a HNPCC-phenotype with early-onset 
colorectal cancer and/or multiple neoplasias. The aberrant methyla -
tion was complete in all CpG dinucleotides analysed and displayed 
allele-specifity in seven cases with a heterozygous SNP. The causality 
between a new promoter mutation and methylation in-cis in one case 
can not be ruled out. Peripheral blood cells as well as normal colonic 
tissue, buccal mucosa, and tumor tissue available from three patients 
presented the epigenetic MLH1 defect. Expression analysis revealed 
monoallelic MLH1 expression and complete silencing in one case, in 
another case only partial silencing was found by signal reduction of 
one allele.
Our findings confirm that abnormal MLH1 promoter methylation in nor -
mal body cells mimics HNPCC. The identification of hypermethylation 
as a pathogenic pre-lesion has definitive implications on surveillance 
recommendations, while the heritability of methylation is questionable 
and was not found in offspring of methylation-carriers.
P0761. Hereditary Polyneuropathy with Liability to Pressure 
(HNPP). Report of a case.
P Vorgia 1, E. Papadopoulou1,2, G Amiridis 2, P Paspalaki 1, E Michailidou 1, 
M Kalmanti 1;  
1Pediatric Department University Hospital, Iraklion Crete, Greece, 2Neurophysi -
ology Laboratory University Hospital, Iraklion Crete, Greece.
An 11 year old girl was referred for a neuropediatric consultation by 
an orthopedist because of an acute right hand paresis after a minor 
traumatism while playing. The severity of the traumatism could not jus -
tify very well the paresis. The clinical evaluation revealed right ulnar 
and median nerve paresis and a milder left median nerve paresis as 
well. The rest of the neurological evaluation was normal. The girl was 
admitted in our pediatric department for further investigations. Stan -
dard hematological and biochemical control, VDRL, coagulation and 
immunological investigations were all normal. Antibodies for Borrelia, 
Mycoplasma, Rickettsias, and Hepatitis were normal. Only the title of 
IgGs antibodies of Bartonella was elevated. Cerebral and Cervical 
MRI were also normal, but the neurophysiological investigations were 
compatible for a polyneuropathy, especially for HNPP. HNPP is an 
autosomal dominant disorder characterized by recurrent entrapment 
neuropathies usually after minor traumatism. Her personal medical 
history was marked from an uncomplicated prematurity and asthma 
well controlled but her mother suffered from a polyneuropathy the last 
10 years. The clinical presentation of the patient, the positive family 
history and the results of the neurophysiological investigations were 
compatible for the diagnosis of HNPP. PCR analysis confirmed the 
diagnosis by showing loss of PMP-22 gene. PMP-22 gene is the hall -
mark of HNPP. The child has completely recovered with physiotherapy 
in a month. The point of this case report is that a first peripheral nerve 
paresis after a minor traumatism could hide a much more complicated 
diagnosis than a trivial traumatism.
P0762. Holoprosencephaly: 10 years of genetic study on 400 
patients
C. Dubourg1,2, L. Pasquier3, C. Bendavid1, C. Henry4, S. Jaillard4, I. Gicquel1, 
M. Durou2, V. David1,2, S. Odent1,3;  
1UMR6061 CNRS, Rennes, France, 2Génétique Moléculaire, CHU, Rennes, 
France, 3Génétique Médicale, CHU, Rennes, France, 4Cytogénétique, CHU, 
Rennes, France.
Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common brain malformation 
resulting from incomplete cleavage of the prosencephalon (1 out of 
16.000 live births; 1 out of 250 conceptuses). HPE is associated with a wide spectrum of craniofacial malformations ranging from lethal forms 
(alobar HPE with cyclopia) to less severe forms such as lobar HPE 
and normal face. The aetiology is very heterogeneous involving envi -
ronmental factors, chromosomal abnormalities and at least 7 genes. 
Since 1996, our team has started to work on the wide clinical and 
genetic variability of holoprosencephaly. Patient samples (foetuses 
or children with normal karyotype) and clinical data (from HPE to mi -
croforms) were collected from medical teams in France and Europe. 
Systematic mutation analysis and genomic rearrangements of the five 
main genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, TGIF, GLI2) were performed. About 
19%sequence changes were identified among 350 DNA samples. 
The familial cases confirmed an extreme clinical variability. Then, mi -
crorearrangements were detected by QMPSF, MLPA and CGH array 
(particularly in foetuses) improving the rate of molecular defects to a 
total of 30%. Several patients samples with 2 microdeletions and/or 
duplications were identified supporting multiple-hit hypothesis involv -
ing others genetics and/or environmental factors. We performed mo -
lecular prenatal diagnosis four times with foetal US scan and cerebral 
MRI screening. At last, we showed involvement of cerebral malforma -
tions as Aprosencephaly/Atelencephaly linked to SIX3 mutations and 
cerebellar hypoplasia to SHH gene. Pan-hypopituitarism and cleft lip/
palate were associated with GLI2. This work has improved molecular 
diagnosis in Holoprosencephaly and therefore genetic counselling.
P0763. Extented neonatal screening for homocystinuria in the 
Qatari population
T. I. M. M. Ben-Omran1, H. Gan-Schreier2, J. Fang-Hoffmann2, G. Abdoh1, 
N. Shahbek1, H. Al Rifai1, M. Lindner2, G. F. Hoffmann2, M. Kebbewar3, J. 
Zschocke3, J. Zschocke3, J. Zschocke3;  
1Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar, 2Department of Pediatrics & Insti -
tute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 32Ruprecht-Karls-University, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
Homocystinuria is an autosomal recessive disorder of methionine and 
homocysteine metabolism caused by a deficiency of cystathionine β-
synthase . We previously reported that homocystinuria due to cystathi -
onine β-synthase deficiency is common in Qatar with an incidence of 
approx. 1:3000. As determinations of methionine in dried blood spots 
(DBS) proved insensitive for neonatal screening, we developed a novel 
two-tear strategy. To measure total homocysteine (Hcy) in DBS, a ro -
bust, stable HPLC method with tandem mass spectrometry detection 
is described, including all practical details and analytical performance 
results. For mutation analysis, DNA was extracted from DBS and com -
mon mutations R336C and D234N in the CBS gene were tested for 
only native Qatari. Both methods are suitable for processing a large 
number of samples.
We have analyzed 6597 newborns from Qatar, of which 2586 were of 
Qatari origin. A total of 4 neonates with homocystinuria were identified. 
All showed highly elevated Hcy concentrations in DBS whilst methio -
nine was elevated in two neonates only. Three children were homozy -
gous for the common mutation R336C; follow-up sequence analysis 
in the fourth patient revealed homozygosity for mutation G347S, not 
previously observed in the Qatari population. Metabolic screening of 
t-HCY in DBS appears to have 100 % sensitivity for the detection of 
classical homocystinuria and support a very high incidence of homo -
cystinuria in Qatar, possibly reaching up to 1:600 and caused by a high 
degree of consanguinity. Molecular neonatal screening is feasible but 
metabolic screening appears to have a higher sensitivity for the detec -
tion of homocystinuria in Qatar.
P0764. Partial hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase 
deficiency as Lesch-Nyhan syndrome variant - the first case 
detected in Lithuania
J. Songailienė1,2, A. Matulevičienė1, J. Bierau3, V. Kučinskas1,2, L. Spaapen3;  
1Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariškių Clinics, 
Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Department of Biochemical 
Genetics, Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome is a rare, X-linked recessive inheritable dis -
order caused by a deficiency of the enzyme hypoxanthine-guanine 
phosphoribosyltransferase  (HPRT)  (OMIM #300322). HPRT gene has 
been mapped to Xq26-q27 and more than 200 mutations responsible 
for this disease have been characterised. Depending on the amount 
of residual enzyme activity the spectrum of the disease expression Molecular and biochemical basis of disease20
is wide: from isolated hyperuricemia and gout, to hyperuricemia with 
profound neurobehavioral dysfunction. Diagnosis could be made ac -
cording to clinical symptoms, biochemical blood and urine test results, 
enzyme activity and molecular genetic testing.
We present a patient with severe neurological symptoms and mild dys -
morphism of phenotype. Our patient is a one year and eight months 
old boy, first child of healthy non consanguineous parents. Pregnancy 
has been complicated .The genealogy of this family is uncomplicated. 
Patient’s development was normal till first five months. The phenotype 
is characterised by macrocephaly, thin upper lip and cryptorchism. 
Muscle hypotonia with psychomotoric development delay and indiffer -
ence to pain are observed. Clinical follow-up showed next findings: 
symptoms of frontal lobes atrophy and internal hydrocephaly (CT 
scan), kidney ultrasound results without pathology. Laboratory in -
vestigations revealed increased serum uric acid, 0.5 mmol/l (normal 
range 0.13-0.23 mmol/l) and urinary uric acid, 6.3 mmol/mmol creat. 
(ref. < 2.1 mmol/mmol creat.). Moreover, increased amounts of urinary 
hypoxanthine, xanthine and inosine (195; 109; 10 µmol/mmol creat.
were found, respectively. Subsequently severely decreased of HPRT 
activity - 0.10 μmol/mmol Hb/hr (ref range 0.92-4.37) was detected in 
lysed erythrocytes. This led to diagnosis of HPRT deficiency. Allopuri -
nol therapy is started.
P0765. Investigation of tRNALeu/Lys and ATPase 6 , 8 genes 
mutations in Iranian Huntington‘s Disease
S. Kasraie1, S. EtemadAhari1, M. Houshmand1, M. Moin2, M. Bahar3, M. Shafa 
Shariat Panahi1;  
1Department of Medical genetics, National Research Center of Genetic Engi -
neering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Immu -
nology, Asthma & Allergy Research Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
3Shahid Motahari Burns and Reconstruction Researech Center, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Huntington disease (HD) is a genetically dominant condition caused by 
expanded CAG repeats coding for glutamine in the HD gene product 
huntingtin. Huntingtin is expressed in almost all tissues, so abnormali -
ties outside the brain might be expected. Mitochondria dysfunction is 
reported in HD brains. Mitochondria are organelles that among other 
functions regulate apoptotic cell death. Involvement of nuclei and mito -
chondria in HD pathophysiology has been suggested. The tRNA gene 
mutations are one of hot spots that cause mitochondrial disorders. We 
performed mutation screenings of tRNA leu/lys genes and also ATPase 6 
genes in 20 patients with HD.
Mitochondrial tRNA leu/lys genes and ATPase 6,8 genes were studied 
by PCR method and automated DNA sequencing to evaluate any pos -
sible mtDNA damage. We found some mutations including an A8656G 
mutation in one patient. We propose that it may causal to the disease. 
Understanding the role of mitochondria in the pathogenesis of neuro -
degenerative diseases could potentially be important for the develop -
ment of therapeutic strategies in HD.
P0766. Pathogenic significance of the homozygous LMNA 
missense mutation p.Lys542Asn in patients with autosomal 
recessive Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome
M. Plasilova1, C. Chattopadhyay2,3, P. Pal2,4, A. Ghosh2, K. Heinimann1;  
1Research Group Human Genetics, Division of Medical Genetics UKBB, Center 
of Biomedicine DKBW, University Children’s Hospital, University of Basel, Swit -
zerland, 2Institute of Child Health, Calcutta, India, 3Calcutta Project Foundation, 
University of Basel, Switzerland, 4S.B. Devi Charity Home, Calcutta, India.
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) is an extremely rare 
genetic disorder with children displaying features reminiscent of pre -
mature senescence. Recurrent heterozygous de novo point mutations 
in the LMNA gene encoding lamin A/C, a component of the filamentous 
meshwork of the nuclear lamina, have been shown to cause sporadic, 
non-familial HGPS. Recently, we have provided molecular evidence 
for autosomal recessive inheritance of HGPS in a consanguineous In -
dian family. In this family all 4 affected children carry the homozygous 
missense mutation c.1626G>C (p.Lys542Asn) in LMNA, whereas their 
parents as well as a sister are healthy heterozygous mutation carriers. 
To assess the pathogenic consequences of the p.Lys542Asn muta -
tion, we investigated primary cultured skin fibroblasts from affected 
homozygous and healthy heterozygous mutation carriers for a) mor -
phological changes in the nuclear envelope, b) telomere length altera -
tions, and c) differences in gene expression using GeneChip® Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 2 arrays. Here we present initial results on the 
molecular pathogenesis of the p.Lys542Asn LMNA mutation.
P0767. A Fourth Phenotype for Autosomal Dominant 
Hypercholesterolemia
A. Marques , M. Abifadel, J. Bonneau, M. Devillers, D. Erlish, A. Munnich, C. 
Junien, J. Rabes, C. Boileau, M. Varret;  
INSERM U781, paris, France.
Autosomal Dominant Hypercholesterolemia (ADH), characterized by 
isolated elevation of LDL-cholesterol, is associated with high risk of 
premature cardiovascular disease. Three genes have already been 
implicated : LDLR (low density lipoprotein receptor), APOB (apolipo -
protein B-100) and PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtilysin kexin-like 
9). We now report a large French ADH family in which involvement of 
these three genes was excluded and named the pathology HCHOLA4. 
Our aim is to identify the new disease gene and to define the associated 
pathophysiology. A whole-genome scan, using 232 polymorphic micro -
satellite markers, located the HCHOLA4 gene at 16q22.1. Functional 
candidate genes in the critical interval were tested by sequencing but 
no causal mutation was detected. In vivo kinetics of apolipoprotein B-
100-containing lipoproteins, conducted in 2 affected members, mainly 
showed a decrease in LDL catabolism. Q-PCR analysis of LDLR ex -
pression in EBV-transformed lymphoblasts showed that cells of two 
affected subjects do not reply to cholesterol deprivation by activating 
LDLR expression contrary to controls in whom the expression rate in -
creases 2-fold. These results suggest that this novel form of ADH is 
due to an alteration, direct or not, in LDL receptor endocytosis or in -
tracellular traffic. Furthermore, we performed two-dimensional electro -
phoresis for cytosolic and membrane proteins from lymphoblasts and 
fibroblasts and observed different profiles for affected subjects when 
compared to non-affected relatives. Mass spectrometry for twenty of 
the more significatively different proteins is in process. We expect to 
identify one or more proteins for wich the coding gene is localized in 
the 16q22.1 interval of interest.
P0768. PCSK9, from gene to protein: a new protagonist 
implicated in autosomal dominant hypercholesterolemia
M. Abifadel , J. Bonneau, A. Marques, M. Devillers, D. Erlish, J. Rabes, C. 
Boileau, M. Varret;  
INSERM U781, paris, France.
Autosomal Dominant Hypercholesterolemia (ADH) is one of the most 
frequent human inherited disorders. Until 2003, mutations in two major 
genes had been clearly implicated : LDLR and APOB. We were the 
first to identify a third gene involved in ADH by analysis of non-LDLR/
non-APOB French families : PCSK9 (Proprotein Convertase Subtili -
sin Kexin 9). Several hypercholesterolemic mutations of PCSK9 have 
been reported: S127R, F216L, D374Y, R218S and R357H. Two non 
sense variations Y142X and C679X were associated with a reduction 
of LDL-cholesterol levels and of CHD. The R46L variation is associ -
ated with a reduction of LDL-cholesterol of 15% and 47% of CHD.
We studied the frequency of 2 variations in 600 Caucasians. R46L was 
found only in controls with a frequency of 2%. A443T was identified in 
a woman with mild hypercholesterolemia and was not found in 340 
French Caucasians controls. This variation turns out to be a rare poly -
morphism in whites, more frequent in blacks, associated with lower 
plasma levels of LDL-C but which has been found in both low and high 
LDL-C subjects in the Dallas Heart Study. Finally, the R237W that we 
had first described in a Canadian woman with hypercholesterolemia, 
but has been reported to be a hypocholesterolemic variation by Berge 
et al., seems to be found only in high-LDL-cholesterol subjects in the 
Dallas Study.
PCSK9 is an attractive therapeutic target for LDL-C lowering but fur -
ther investigations are required to understand its precise role in cho -
lesterol homeostasis and to identify its substrates and inhibitors.
P0769. Identification of a novel mutation of troponin-T gene 
causing malignant form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
L. Losonczi1, K. Kádár2, R. Sepp3, K. Németh1, C. Földesi2, M. Csanády3, G. 
Fekete1;  
12nd Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, 
Budapest, Hungary, 2Gottsegen György Hungarian Institute of Cardiology, 
Budapest, Hungary, 3Department of Internal Medicine and Cardiology Center, Molecular and biochemical basis of disease20
Faculty of Medicine, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
Objectives: Genetic origin is important in the development of hyper -
trophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) which is characterized by myocardial 
hypertrophy and rhythm disorders. The third most common mutated 
gene leading to HCM is the troponin-T ( TNNT2 ) gene with an inci -
dence of 2%. Our aim was to analyze mutations of the TNNT2  gene in 
children and young adults.
Patients and methods: DNA was isolated from peripheral blood of 26 
patients followed by PCR ( TNNT2  gene, exons 8,11,14,15,16). Mu -
tation analysis was performed using dHPLC and positive chromato -
grams were sequenced.
Results: One mutation was found in the patient cohort (3,8%). It is a 
novel mutation, a deletion of a glutamic acid in exon 11, at one of the 
amino acid positions between 165-168. This mutation has not been 
published in the literature so far. The patient is a 19 year-old girl, who 
had endured aborted sudden cardiac death (SCD) twice, so implanta -
tion of an implantable cardioverter defibrillator was necessary. Fam -
ily screening revealed that the patient’s mother also had HCM. Her 
disease was characterised by mild septal hypertrophy, pronounced 
fibrosis and an uncommon restrictive diastolic dysfunction. She had 
suffered malignant arrhythmias several times and died of progressive 
heart failure at the age of 30. In another patient, two polymorphisms 
were found in intron 14 (base 18497C>G, base 18585C>T).
Conclusion: We have identified a novel TNNT2  gene mutation which 
resulted in malignant ventricular arrhythmias and aborted SCD despite 
a mild myocardial hypertrophy. The phenotype was consistent with the 
previous data of TNNT2  gene mutations causing HCM published in the 
literature earlier.
P0770. An A8296G mutation in mitochondrial tRNALys gene in a 
patient with epilepsy; Pathogen or rare polymorphism?!
M. Ataei1, A. Ahadi2, M. Shafa Shariat Panahi1, M. Houshmand1, M. Sadeghiza -
deh2, K. Gharagozli3;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB), Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tarbiat Modaress University, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 3Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Repub -
lic of Iran.
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations are important cause of human 
diseases. A homoplasmic A8296G mutation was detected in a 24yr-old 
man with idiopathic generalized epilepsy. He experienced his first sei -
zure at age 13. He suffers from deafness. His seizures begin suddenly 
and without warning. He loses consciousness and experiences typical 
generalized tonic or tonic-clonic seizures listing 1-5 minute each. The 
A8296G mutation in the mitochondrial DNA tRNALys gene has been 
associated with severe mitochondrial diseases in a number of reports. 
The pathogenesis of this mutation or its association with a specific 
disease is unclear. This mutation has been reported alone as well as 
together with other mutations in trials in mtDNA. As in this case the 
mutation was homoplasmic and there were no clinical finding in other 
family members, we suggest that this mutation is rare polymorphism 
or it acts as pathogen in combination with other mutations inside or 
outside of the tRNALys.
P0771. Evaluation of MLPA in routine diagnostics for the 
detection of subtelomeric rearrangements in 1040 patients with 
idiopathic mental retardation
S. Drunat , A. Delahaye, A. Aboura, J. Rousseau, A. Verloes;  
Robert Debré Hospital, APHP, Paris, France.
We screened 1041 patients with idiopathic Mental Retardation for sub -
telomeric aberrations by a multi-step strategy consisting in 1) analysis 
with the P036 MLPA kit assay, 2) confirmation with the P070 kit, 3) 
verification by conventional FISH analysis.
79 rearrangements were detected by the P036 kit (7.6%). 48 (61%) of 
them were confirmed by the P070 probes panel. 30 of this confirmed 
rearrangements were verified by FISH analysis and 10 are still under 
cytogenetic investigations.
Then, we focused on discrepancies between the P036 and P070 or, 
MLPA and FISH results.
From the 31 rearrangements detected by the P036 kit, 13 could not 
be found in a second experiment with the same kit, showing non-
reproducibility of the technique in about 1% of cases. When the 2 
kits mapped the same locus and gave different results (11/31), the 
imbalance detected was considered as a false positive reflecting the sensitivity of the probe to a polymorphism. From the 48 imbalances 
detected by the P036 kit and confirmed by P070, 7 were not verified 
by FISH analysis. From the 7 FISH/MLPA and 7 P036/P070 discrep -
ancies, 6 imbalances were detected in one parent of the patient and 
therefore were not considered to be phenotype related. Real time PCR 
was performed on the 8 discordant samples left. Aberrant copy num -
ber detected by quantitative PCR confirmed MLPA analysis against 
FISH findings for 6 of them.
MLPA is a sensitive, cost-effective technique for screening mentally re -
tarded patients which results must be validate by another cytogenetic 
or molecular method.
P0772. Molecular Diagnosis of Immunodeficiencies Syndromes
A. Mori1, R. Gershoni-Baruch1,2;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Haifa, Israel, 2the Bruce Rappoport Faculty of 
Medicine, Technion-Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
Fourteen children with primary immunodeficiency diseases were in -
vestigated. Clinical and family history data was recorded. A molecu -
lar investigation, tailored to match the clinical diagnosis, was devised 
for each patient independently. Five candidate genes, namely, BTK, 
ITGB2, SLC35C1, UNG and WASP were screened in a multistep anal -
ysis, including, PCR, RFLPs, DHPLC (denaturating high performance 
liquid chromatography) and sequencing technology. Altogether, eleven 
mutations were identified in ten patients, including five new unreported 
mutations and six previously described.
Missense mutations detected in patients with LADI and LADII were 
restricted to conserved sequences, in line with those previously re -
ported. A deletion encompassing two exons in BTK, no doubt disrupt -
ing the structure of the protein caused a mild disease in our patient 
with XLA but was otherwise lethal to other family members who died in 
infancy. Two splicing mutations, which majorly disrupt the protein, were 
identified in two WAS patients. In two of the four patients in whom no 
mutations were detected, the diagnosis of HIGM syndrome was sub -
sequently revised. Genotype-phenotype correlation analyses in our 
patients support several concepts. The notion that genetic diseases 
and the immune response in particular, involve a complex interplay 
between environmental and genetic factors is sustained. The muta -
tions contributing to LADI and LADII were restricted to conserved re -
gions thereby implicating that variations located in other regions do not 
cause a disease. The view that the WAS phenotype, which may vary 
from isolated thrombocytopenia to severe classic lethal immunodefi -
ciency is “mutation” dependent is confirmed.
P0773. The functional polymorphism -703T/C in the promoter 
of the human IL gene is associated with atopic and non-atopic 
bronchial asthma, but not with atopic dermatitis
M. Freidin1, E. Bragina1, O. Fedorova2, E. Nemerov2, L. Ogorodova2, V. 
Puzyrev1;  
1Institute of Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Medi -
cal Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State Medical University, 
Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Analysis of association between -703T/C polymorphism in promoter 
of IL5 gene and atopic bronchial asthma (BA), non-atopic BA, and 
atopic dermatitis (AD) was carried out by case-control study. It was 
shown that -703C allele is associated with overexpression of the IL5 
gene, probably, because of moving off the binding site for negative 
regulator CLOX and therefore may predispose to atopic disease. Us -
ing logistic regression analysis we found significant association of the 
-703C allele both with atopic and non-atopic BA (p<0.0001), but not 
with AD (p=0.686). When AD patients were divided into two groups in 
respect to atopic BA developing within three years after first diagnosis 
(AD), we found a weak association between the -703C allele and BA 
in patients with AD (p=0.016), but again with not AD alone. Therefore, 
we found that -703T/C exhange in IL5 gene is a risk factor for bron -
choobstructive syndrome irrelatively of risk of atopy. This confirms that 
end-organ and systemic atopy-related genetic predisposing factors of 
atopic disease are different. This also suggests that the IL5 gene is an 
end-organ specificity candidate gene associated with BA itself rather 
than with atopy.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease20
P0774. IRF  gene’s nucleotide sequence changes in patients 
with nonsyndromic orofacial clefting from Lithuania
A. Morkūnienė1,2, L. Ambrozaitytė1, A. Utkus1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2;  
1Vilnius University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Human and Medical 
Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University 
Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania.
The hunt for the causes of nonsyndromic orofacial clefing (NS-OFC) 
is extremely complex, involving multiple techniques that have been 
used to identify numerous candidate genes in which disruption results 
in increased risk of clefting. In recent years, a number of independent 
groups have targeted for investigation the involvement of IRF6  (inter -
feron regulatory factor 6 gene). IRF6  is related to syndromic OFC - Van 
der Woude syndrome.
Our study was aimed to investigate whether mutations in the IRF6  
gene contribute to NS-OFC in the population of Lithuania.
Patients with NS-OFCs from Lithuania were tested for nucleotide se -
quence changes in the IRF6 gene (206 patients). DNA fragments cov -
ering exonic parts of the IRF6 gene were PCR-amplified and direct 
sequenced.
23 different nucleotide sequence changes were revealed in the IRF6 
gene by comparison of sequencing results with reference DNA se -
quences of the genes. Scanning IRF6  gene resulted in ten novel 
nucleotide sequence variants. Out of them, four were missense muta -
tions (p.S212I, p.L295P, p. Q340K, p.R400L), which, together with the 
p.A61G mutation found in the case of Van der Woude syndrome, might 
be related to the NS-OFC phenotype in the population of Lithuania.
Our study highlights the IRF6  gene sequence variability and supports 
the hypothesis that variation in this gene contributes to NS-OFC phe -
notype encouraging further investigations to test if IRF6  gene muta -
tions identified in the individuals from Lithuania are rare alleles caus -
ative for NS-OFC.
P0775. The R176C amino-acid change in hemojuvelin as a 
novel haemochromatosis mutation: phenotypic and functionanl 
evidences
C. Ka1, G. Le Gac1, E. Letocart1, I. Gourlaouen1, L. Bryckaert1, B. Martin2, C. 
Ferec1;  
1Inserm, U613; Univ Bretagne Occidentale; Etablissement Français du Sang, 
Brest, F-29200, France, 2Etablissement Français du Sang, Niort, F-79000, 
France.
Background: Juvenile haemochromatosis (JH) is an early-onset auto -
somal recessive condition of iron metabolism caused by mutations in 
either the hemojuvelin ( HJV) or the hepcidin-encoding gene ( HAMP ). 
The two JH gene products are implicated in a same physiologic pro -
cess, where hepcidin controls iron flow into plasma and hemojuvelin 
enhances hepcidin expression at the transcriptional level via the clas -
sical bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) cell signalling pathway. Aim 
of the study and results: In this study, we report a novel missense 
HJV mutation that leads to the replacement of arginine by a cysteine 
residue at position 176 (R176C). We associate homozygosity for this 
novel mutation with the iron overload phenotype observed in a 17-
year-old girl. We also show that the HJV 176C mutated protein fails 
to up-regulate the hepcidin promoter activity. Lastly, we suggest that, 
due to its nature and position, the R176C amino-acid change prevents 
an autocatalytic cleavage that normally occurs during HJV intracellular 
processing. Conclusion: Our results definitively demonstrate that the 
R176C substitution is a novel HJV loss-of-function mutation. They also 
highlight that rapid advances in comprehension of the HJV intracellular 
processing and function have paved the way for functional character -
izations.
P0776. Early age at onset is the major clinical feature in 
Parkinson disease related to PARK2  gene mutations
C. Cazeneuve1, C. San1, E. Lohmann2, S. Lesage2, E. Leguern1,2, A. Durr3,2, A. 
Brice4,2, the Parkinson Disease Genetics Group;  
1Dpt of Genetics, Neurogenetics laboratory, Hospital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, 
France, 2Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unit U679, 
Hospital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3Dpt of Genetics, Clinical Genetics, 
Paris, France, 4Dpt of Genetics, Hospital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
Autosomal recessive juvenile Parkinson disease (JPD) is character -
ized by rigidity, bradykinesia, rest tremor, age at onset before 40 years, 
good response to levodopa treatment, and slowly progressive disease. 
Mutations in the parkin  gene ( PARK2 ) are the major genetic cause of JPD.
To refine the clinical characteristics of the PARK2 -associated JPD, 
we investigated 77 patients referred to our diagnostic lab for PARK2  
analysis.
Searching for point mutations by sequencing and for large rearrange -
ments by Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA kits 
P051/P052, MRC-Holland) gave the following results:
Number 
of PARK2  
mutationsPresence of LRRK2  
p.Gly2019Ser 
mutation (detected 
by the MLPA kits)Number 
of pati -
entsType of PARK2  
mutations (P: point 
mutation, 
R: rearrangement)Age at onset 
: mean ± 
2SD (range) 
in yearsMolecular 
diagnosis 
of JPD
2 no 15 19 R + 11P24 ± 11 
(17-35)yes
1 no 2 2 P (35-51) no
0 no 5536 ± 21 
(3-53)no
1 yes 2 2 P(43-not 
available)no
0 yes 3 37-54 no
The distribution of PARK2  genotypes (2, 1 or 0 mutation) differed dra -
matically from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, strongly suggesting that, 
for most patients with no identified PARK2  mutation, the phenotype is 
independent from PARK2  gene rather than due to mutation in PARK2 
unexplored regions.
Onset of disease was younger than 36 years in all the patients with 
2 PARK2  mutations. However, PARK2 -related JPD was established 
in only 40% of patients with age at onset less than 36 years old. The 
LRRK2  G2019S mutation was found in cases significantly older than 
parkin  cases. Patients presenting with 2 PARK2  mutations were clini -
cally indistinguishable from the others, according to the frequency 
of rigidity, bradykinesia, tremor, positive response to levodopa, and 
asymmetric onset.
Altogether, these results show that early age at onset is the major clini -
cal criteria for PARK2  molecular diagnosis of Parkinson disease.
P0777. Lamellar ichtyosis caused by TGM1 DNA mutation in a 
Family from Azerbaijan
E. G. Okuneva , N. N. Vasserman, A. V. Polyakov;  
Medical Genetics Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation.
A case of autosomal recessive lamellar ichthyosis in two newborn 
male sibs from consanguineous Azerbaijan family is presented. The 
parents of the children are the first cousins. The first child was born in 
the 34-th week of the pregnancy and died on the third day. The second 
child was born in 37-th week and died on the first day. Both of them 
had got the same clinical sign : tight shiny covering, described as col -
lodion membrane and erythroderma. During the first hour of life the 
membrane is disrupted. They had got severe ectropion and eclabiun 
too. There is no any biological material from the sibs, but the pariens 
is caused by heterozygous mutations in 3-d exon of TGM1 gene P.142 
Arg>His. The mutation of TGM1 gene is known to be responsible for 
phenotypes of lamellar ichthyosis.
P0778. Spectrum of NPHP6 (CEP290) Mutations in Leber 
Congenital Amaurosis and Delineation of the Associated 
Phenotype
I. Perrault1, N. Delphin1, S. Hanein1, S. Gerber1, J. Dufier2, O. Roche2, H. Doll -
fus3, A. Munnich4, J. Kaplan4, J. Rozet4;  
1Unité de Recherches Génétique et Epigénétique des Maladies Métaboliques, 
Neurosensorielles et du Développement, INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2Ser-
vice d’Ophtalmologie, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France, 3Service de Génétique 
Médicale, Hôpital Haute-Pierre, Strasbourg, France, 4Unité de Recherches 
Génétique et Epigénétique des Maladies Métaboliques, Neurosensorielles et 
du Développement, INSERM U781, PARIS, France.
Mutations in the NPHP6 gene were shown to account for Joubert syn -
drome and Senior-Loken syndrome as well as Leber congenital amau -
rosis (LCA). All reported patients affected with LCA carried an intronic 
mutation resulting in an aberrantly spliced transcript and low levels of 
wild-type transcript that was believed to explain the absence of cer -
ebellar and renal involvement in LCA patients. The aim of the pres -
ent study was to give the survey of NPHP6 mutations in our series. 
192 unrelated LCA cases were screened for mutations. The natural 
history and ophthalmologic data were reviewed for all patients har -Molecular and biochemical basis of disease20
bouring NPHP6 mutations NPHP6 mutations were identified in 38/192 
LCA families of our series. The common NPHP6 intronic mutation ac -
counted for 33/76 of all disease alleles in our series. Twelve unrelated 
LCA cases did not carry this common intronic mutation, ten of which, at 
least, harboured two mutations expected to truncate the protein.
We confirm the high frequency of NPHP6 mutations in LCA (19.8%) as 
well as that of the c.2991+1655A>G mutation (43% of disease alleles). 
We also suggest that a significant fraction of LCA families segregate 
two NPHP6 null alleles questioning the relevance of the assumption 
according to which the retinal-restricted phenotype in LCA patient 
could be due to a residual NPHP6 activity. Indeed, Joubert syndrome 
was excluded by cerebral MRI in all patients presenting with devel -
opmental delay. Finally, we show that all patients of our series are af -
fected with the cone-rod subtype of the disease whatever their NPHP6 
genotype.
P0779. The mutation p.Phe128Ser (c.383T>C) in the TAZ (G. ) 
gene in a patient with left ventricular non-compaction
V. Lança1, R. Cerqueira1, N. C. Dias2, M. G. Varela2, H. Madeira2, H. Gabriel1, 
L. Lameiras1, P. Tavares1, A. R. Fernandes1;  
1CGC Centro Genética Clínica, Porto, Portugal, 2Serviço de Cardiologia, Hospi -
tal de Santa Maria, Lisbon, Portugal.
Left ventricular non-compaction (LVNC) is a rare cadiomyopathy of 
genetic origin, characterized by deep trabeculations in the ventricu -
lar wall. Clinically, is characterized by systolic and diastolic dysfunc -
tion, and associated at times with arrhythmias and systemic embolic 
events, and has a high mortality rate.
Mutations in the TAZ (G4.5 ) gene are mainly associated with Barth 
Syndrome, but may also be the cause of LVNC.
The finding of the mutation p.Phe128Ser (c.383T>C) of the TAZ (G4.5 ) 
gene in a 17 years old male, that suffered from LVNC, is presented. 
This mutation was previously referenced on a case of a child with 
Barth Syndrome [1].
The subject presented class III-IV progressive congestive heart fail -
ure according to the New York Heart Association functional classifi -
cation system. The diagnosis was obtained by echocardiography and 
magnetic resonance imaging. Complete sequencing of the TAZ (G4.5 ) 
gene was performed on an Applied Biosystems 3700 system.
The mutation c.383T>C is located within exon 5. Tazfarin, the protein 
encoded by TAZ, presents itself in 5 isoforms, 2 of witch containing 
the amino acid sequence encoded by exon 5. Our results are in ac -
cordance with other observations that indicate a relevant role for the 
isoforms containing exon 5.
Genetic analysis of the TAZ (G4.5 ) gene was helpful for establishing 
the precise diagnosis of LVNC and for adequate genetic counselling. 
This finding also underlines the variability of phenotype associated 
even with one sole mutation in the TAZ (G4.5 ) gene [2].
[1] http://www.barthsyndrome.org/english/View.asp?x=1357
[2] Gonzalez IL. Am J Med Genet.  2005, 134:409-14.
P0780. LMNA mutations and phenotypes in Russian families
G. E. Rudenskaya , S. M. Tverskaya, A. L. Chukhrova, E. V. Zaklyazminskaya, 
A. V. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
LMNA  gene (1q21.2-21.3) encodes two nuclear envelope proteins _ 
lamins A and C. Numerous mutations of the gene cause a wide spec -
trum of disorders called laminopathies. We performed a search of 
LMNA  mutations in a group of families with characteristic phenotypes. 
In 11 families, ten different mutations were found, namely Arg249Gln, 
Asp47His, Gly232Arg, del Lys261+ins15bp in 4 families with autoso -
mal dominant Emery_Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (AD EDMD); Arg -
249Gln, Arg377His in two families with limb girdle MD type 1B (LGMD 
1B); Arg541His, Ala350Pro, Gly635Asp, Leu52Pro in 4 families with 
autosomal dominant arrhythmic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCMP 1A), 
heterozygous Asn459Tyr in a family with autosomal recessive poly -
neuropathy (second mutation in this families was not detected). Muta -
tions Arg249Gln and Arg377His were reported previously, eight muta -
tions are novel. Seven cases are familial, four cases present mutations 
de novo, among them both Arg249Gln mutations. Since this mutation 
occurred de novo also in other reported cases, a mutational “hot point” 
is supposed. Three families show an overlap between DCMP 1A and 
MD’s. Along with common phenotypes, atypical variants were found 
out, i.e. (1) a severe Duchenne-like EDMD, (2) an infantile DCMP 1A, (3) a combination of LGMD 1B and histologically proven localized 
scleroderma (morphea), and (4) a severe infantile polyneuropathy in 
two sibs distinct from HMSN 2B1. The latter two may present novel 
phenotypes. In a subset of families with EDMD-like phenotypes we 
found neither emerin nor LMNA  mutations, which may indicate the ex -
istence of other genes producing similar disorders.
P0781. Bone remodeling in MADA disease: involvement of 
matrix metalloproteinases secretion
F. Lombardi , G. F. Fasciglione, R. Caruso, G. Monteleone, M. R. D’Apice, F. 
Pallone, S. Marini, G. Novelli;  
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
Mandibuloacral dysplasia type A [MADA; OMIM # 248370] is a rare 
multysistem disorder belonging to a heterogeneous group of diseases, 
collectively called Laminopathies. These disorders are caused by mu -
tations in the LMNA gene. Bone is one of the most involved tissues. 
The MADA patients are characterized by postnatal growth retardation 
along with typical skeletal abnormalities such as hypoplasia of the 
mandible and clavicles, acroosteolysis, delayed closure of the cranial 
sutures and joint contractures. Bone alterations are mediated by ex -
tracellular matrix (ECM) dysregulation which involve modification in 
the expression profile and activities of the matrix metalloproteinases 
(MMPs). We investigated the MMP production by TNF-α stimulation 
in MADA fibroblasts, as model in vitro , in order to mime the changing 
that could be occurred in an alterate homeostasis of bone and in the 
extracellular matrix remodeling.
Dermal fibroblasts from MADA and control patients were seeded in 
multi-well plates in complete media. Ninety percent confluent cells were 
treated with TNF- α (15ng/ml) for 48h in serum free media. Superna -
tants were assayed for some MMPs by western blot and zymography 
analysis. A significant decrease of some MMP protein levels in stimu -
lated MADA fibroblasts conditioned media was observed, suggesting a 
modification of the MMPs pathway that occurs in MADA disease.
P0782. Molecular diagnosis of congenital long-QT syndrome in 
Polish patients
M. Borucka-Mankiewicz , E. Popowska, P. Kowalski, D. Jurkiewicz, E. Ciara, 
D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, K. Bieganowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek;  
Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
Long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a cardiac disorder that causes sud -
den death from ventricular tachyarrhythmias, specifically torsade de 
pointes . The molecular basis of LQTS is associated with delayed re -
polarization of the myocardium increasing the QT interval measured 
on electrocardiogram. LQTS can be inherited as a more common au -
tosomal-dominant disorder (Romano-Ward syndrome, R-W type 1-6) 
or a rarer autosomal-recessive disorder associated with congenital 
neuronal deafness (Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome, JL-N type 
1-2). Mutations in a group of genes encoding cardiac ion channels 
(KCNQ1, KCNH2, KCNE1, KCNE2 and SCN5A ) are involved in the 
LQTS pathogenesis.
The aim of the study was to investigate the molecular basis of long QT 
syndrome, inheritance traits and type of the disease in Polish popula -
tion. Thirty-three patients suspected of having LQTS from 29 unrelated 
families treated at the Cardiology Department of the Children’s Memo -
rial Health Institute in Warsaw were screened. Genomic DNA was ex -
tracted from lymphocytes, and coding regions of three genes ( KCNQ1, 
KCNH2, KCNE1) were amplified and analyzed by SSCP and sequenc -
ing analyses. In 8 families pathogenic mutations in gene KCNQ1 
(p.Y171X, p.R243H, p.V254M, p.A341V, p.G306R, p.V416fsX462 and 
p.C445X) and gene KCNH2 (p.C108R, p.N633S and p.P1122L) were 
identified. Among them five families presented R-W syndrome type 1 
or 2, and three families JL-N syndrome (one family without hearing 
loss). In many patients several polymorphic nucleotide substitutions 
(p.G38S and p.D85N in gene KCNE1, p.F485F and p.S546S in gene 
KCNQ1,  and p.I489I and p.L564L in gene KCNH2 ) were found.
The study was supported by KBN Project 6P05E15021.
P0783. A new diagnostic service for lymphoedema: Screening of 
VEGFR (FLT ) and FOXC2
N. Williams1, R. Poh1, N. Elanko1, S. Cottrell1, P. Ostergaard2, S. Jeffery2, G. 
Brice3, S. Mansour3, R. Taylor1;  
1South West Thames Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, St Georges Hospital, 
London, United Kingdom, 2Medical Genetics Unit, St George’s University of Molecular and biochemical basis of disease20
London, London, United Kingdom, 3South West Thames, Regional Genetics 
Unit, St Georges Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
Lymphoedema is a chronic tissue swelling usually of the lower extremi -
ties caused by abnormal lymph drainage. There are 3 main clinical sub-
types of primary lymphoedema - Milroy disease (MD), Lymphoedema 
Distichiasis (LD) and Meige disease, all of these conditions exhibit au -
tosomal dominant inheritance. MD patients present with lymphoedema 
at birth or in early infancy. The penetrance of MD is estimated to be 
about 88%. LD presents with distichiasis (aberrant eyelashes arising 
on the inner eyelid) and lymphoedema in late childhood or puberty and 
is about 90% penetrant.
To date two genes have been identified; VEGFR3 (or FLT4) , associ -
ated with MD and FOXC2 , associated with LD. Mutations reported in 
the VEGFR3  gene are primarily missense and have to date only been 
found in exons 17-26 which encodes the highly conserved tyrosine 
kinase domain. Diagnostic testing has been developed for the 10 ex -
ons in the VEGFR3  gene using dHPLC on the Transgenomic WAVE 
Analyser and any variants observed are sequenced in both directions. 
The FOXC2  gene consists of a single 1.5kb exon encoding a fork-
head transcription factor. Bi-directional sequencing of 4 overlapping 
fragments of FOXC2  is employed as a screening technique. To date 
FOXC2  mutations found in the laboratory consisted only of small in -
sertions and deletions. However, missense and stop mutations have 
been previously reported. Screening of both these genes is offered as 
a clinical molecular diagnostic service.
P0784. Genetic screening for patients with non-obstructive 
infertility from Ukraine
O. Fesai ;  
Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics National Academy of Science of 
Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine.
Microdeletions of the long arm of the human Y-chromosome are asso -
ciated with spermatogenic failure and have been used to define three 
regions of Yq (AZFa, AZFb, AZFc) that are recurrently deleted in infer -
tile males. It was supposed that apart from cystic fibrosis, mutations 
in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) 
gene are involved in male infertility. Mutations in the CFTR gene cause 
congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD) in approxi -
mately 1% of the infertile males.
We have screened Y-chromosome microdeletions, mutations and poly-
T sequence of CFTR gene in 680 patiens (azoospermia and oligosper -
mia) and in 621 healthy valantiers by PCR-based methods. For each 
patient, multiplex PCR analyses were performed on DNA isolated from 
leukocytes derived from peripheral blood to screen 18 sY-sequences 
on Yq. Cytogenetic investigation was performed according to standard 
methods (GTG-banding). No chromosomal anomalies were found in 
men.
Microdeletions were detected in 2,79% infertile men. During patients 
research we have made a conclusions: a) damage of genes from AZFb 
region results in impairments of last stage spermatogenesis; b) dele -
tions in AZFc region are critical for early stage spermatogenesis.
The frequency of CFTR gene mutations carriers detected in 630 pa -
tients was statisticaly significant higer than in control group. 5T allele 
of CFTR gene associated with CBAVD was detected in 1,93% of pa -
tients. The obtained data produce the evidence of the possible invol -
ment of CFTR protein in spermatogenesis. The genetic consultation 
and preimplantation analysis were recommended for the couples with 
identified Y-chromosome deletions and CFTR gene mutations.
P0785. Expression profiling of human normal testis by 
microarray technology
F. Raicu1, V. Gatta2, A. Ferlin3, C. Foresta3, G. Palka2, L. Stuppia2;  
1Department of Clinical Sciences and Imaging, G. d’Annunzio University 
Foundation, Chieti-Pescara, Italy, 2Department of Biomedical Sciences, G. 
d’Annunzio University Foundation, Chieti-Pescara, Italy, 3Department of Medi -
cal and Surgical Sciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy.
Spermatogenesis is a complex process that demands several genes 
to action but the biological mechanisms underlying sperm production 
are still largely unknown. In this view, it is crucial to obtain a full picture 
of the global expression profile of normal testis.
In order to identify the list of testis up and down regulated genes direct -
ly linked to testis metabolism and function towards the human general 
metabolism, we start to analyse, using an 21,329 spotted oligonucle -otides microarray, global gene expression pattern of healthy testis bi -
opsies versus an home made RNA universal reference.
Our preliminary research revealed a group of 2.718 up-regulated and 
2.654 down-regulated annotated UniGene in testis as compared to the 
reference RNA pool. These annotated genes were grouped together 
using the EASE software, which allowed us to identify a list of biologi -
cal process. Among these the most abundant categories were those 
related to physiological processes and metabolism, which are very un -
specific classes, while less represented but more specific were those 
containing genes involved in fuction related to human testis, such as 
reproduction, meiosis, imprinting. Among these, of interest is the pres -
ence of genes mapped within the AZF loci of the Y chromosome such 
as DAZ, BPY, DBY, SMCY as well as DAZL autosomal homolog gene. 
Our results clearly demostrates that expression profiling using micro -
array technology is able to evidence genes specifically involved in tes -
ticular fuction, and to provide a general pattern of the human normal 
testis trascriptome, which could be certainly useful for understanding 
also the pathological pathway.
P0786. Gene expression studies in testicular tissue. 
Suitability of PBGD and HPRT as internal references genes for 
normalization
E. Terribas1, S. Bonache1, E. Guinó2, J. Sánchez3, E. Franco4, L. Bassas3, S. 
Larriba1;  
1Centre de Genètica Mèdica i Molecular-IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, 
Barcelona, Spain, 2Unitat de Bioinformàtica i Bioestadística-ICO-IDIBELL, 
L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 3Servei d’Andrologia-Fundació 
Puigvert, Barcelona, Spain, 4Servei d’Urologia-Hospital Universitari de Bell -
vitge, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
Semiquantitative gene expression experiments require normalization 
to compensate for differences in the amount and quality of biologi -
cal material and reverse transcription reaction efficiency in the tested 
samples. An extended strategy is to normalize to internal reference 
genes, which should show similar expression in the samples inves -
tigated.
We have assessed the suitability of PBGD  and HPRT  genes as can -
didates for gene normalization in both pathological and normal tes -
ticular tissue. We have analysed their expression levels in testicular 
biopsies of 13 non-obstructive infertile men, who showed either severe 
hypospermatogenesis or maturation arrest (patient group 1), 7 men 
diagnosed with germ-cell tumour (patient group 2) and 10 infertile men 
with obstructive azoospermia (control group). The quantitative real-
time PCR reactions were performed in a LightCycler® 1.5 Instrument 
(Roche), using SYBR Green I fluorescence dye. The Mann-Whitney 
U test was used to analyse gene expression differences in case and 
control patients.
Non-significant differences were observed in PBGD  expression levels 
in both patient groups 1 and 2 compared to controls (P= 0.077 and P= 
0.262, respectively) and in HPRT  expression profile between patient 
group 1 and control group (P= 0.515). Interestingly, HPRT  was found 
to be differently expressed in patient group 2 compared to controls (P= 
0.001) suggesting that HPRT  would not be a suitable reference gene 
to be used for normalization of target genes expression data in tes -
ticular malignant phenotype. Hence, while choosing reference genes, 
the testicular phenotype under study should be considered to avoid 
erroneous normalizations.
Supported by FIS (PI05/0759, CP03/00088, C03/07)
P0787. Microdeletions in AZF region of Y chromosome in 
infertile males, a study from Latvian population
A. Puzuka1, A. Krumina1, V. Baumanis2, N. Pronina3, V. Lejins4, J. Erenpreiss5, 
J. Bars6, I. Grinfelde3;  
1Riga Stradins University, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Riga, 
Latvia, 2Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia, 3Children 
University Hospital, Medical Genetics Clinic, Riga, Latvia, 4EGV Clinic, Riga, 
Latvia, 5Riga Stradins University, Laboratory of Andrology, Riga, Latvia, 6Clinic 
of Medical Genetics, Department of Prenatal Diagnostics, Riga, Latvia.
Male factor infertility accounts for about half the cases of couple in -
fertility in Latvia. The most common genetic cause of human Y-linked 
male infertility is partial or complete deletions of the AZF region on the 
Y chromosome. AZF region consists of three intervals, AZFa, AZFb, 
and AZFc, which are associated with different spermatogenic failure.
The aims were to introduce the molecular screening method of Y-Molecular and biochemical basis of disease20
chromosomal microdeletions in Latvia and to detect microdeletions in 
AZFa, AZFb, and AZFc gene families.
Objects for Y-chromosomal microdeletions and male infertility associa -
tion study were 55 individuals with different spermatogenic arrest such 
as azoospermia, severe oligozoospermia, oligo-astheno-terato-zoo -
spermia. All cases of spermatogenic failure resulting from endocrine 
or obstructive causes or with a cytogenetic abnormality were excluded 
from our study.
Microdeletions in AZF region were determined by two multiplex PCR 
amplifications using ten primer pairs. Two non-polymorphic STS loci 
were analyzed in each AZF region (sY84, sY86, sY127, sY134, s134, 
sY254, sY255). Internal PCR control (ZFX/ZFY) was used as well as 
DNA sample from a fertile male and from a female.
Out of 55 analyzed samples we have found three cases (5.5%) with 
microdeletions that were observed only in AZFc region at SY254 and 
SY255 STS loci in DAZ gene.  
The frequency  of Y-chromosomal microdeletions is low in Latvian pop -
ulation, however, Y chromosome microdeletion screening is important 
not only to define the aetiology of spermatogenic failure but also be -
cause it gives precious information for more appropriate clinical man -
agement of both the infertile male and his future male child.
P0788. Analysis of three Glycine substitutions in loop-regions 
of calcium-binding Epidermal Growth Factor-like domains of 
fibrillin-1: possible key positions for domain folding.
P. Khau van Kien , D. Baud, N. Pallares-Ruiz, M. Claustres;  
CHU Montpellier/INSERM U827, Montpellier, France.
Among the patients refered to our centre for molecular diagnosis of 
Marfan syndrome (MFS) we identified several novel heterozygous 
missense mutations of the FBN1 gene. Interestingly, three of them 
were predicted to result in Glycine substitutions that occur in a loop-
region of the corresponding calcium-binding Epidermal Growth Fac -
tor-like (cb-EGF-like) domains of fibrillin-1 : c.1753G>C (p.Gly585Arg 
in cb-EGF-like#5), c.4981G>A (p.Gly1661Arg in cb-EGF-like#24) and 
c.6418G>A (p.Gly2140Arg in cb-EGF-like#32). These mutations were 
identified in three probands with MFS (Ghent criteria fullfilled) or sus -
pected MFS (a criterium is missing). Familial investigations, molecular 
studies (DNA/RNA), in silico analyses (conservation, 3D modeling) 
coupled with data of the literature provide positive arguments for a 
crucial role of the corresponding Glycine position in cb-EGF-like type 1 
domain structure maintenance.
P0789. SIL1 and SARA2 mutations in a family with Marinesco-
Sjogren and Chylomicron Retention Diseases
G. Annesi1, P. Tarantino1, F. Annesi1, E. V. De Marco1, D. Civitelli1, A. Torroni2, 
A. Quattrone1,3;  
1National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 2Dipartimento di Ge -
netica e Microbiologia, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, 
University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy.
Marinesco-Sjogren Syndrome (MSS) is an autosomal recessive dis -
order, characterised by cataracts, ataxia, and mental retardation.Re -
cently, Anthonen identified the linkage of the MSS phenotype to 5q31 
chromosome in a Finnish family, and identified a mutation of the SIL1 
gene in all investigated MSS patients. Senderek using homozygos -
ity mapping in three small consanguineous families with typical MSS 
narrowed a critical region on 5q31. In the current study, we further 
investigated a small Italian pedigree. In this family, two brothers had 
MSS syndrome, with a very low serum concentration of vitamin E 
and absence of postprandial chylomicrons, a finding consistent with 
chylomicron retention disease (CMRD). On a subsequent study , we 
demonstrated that these two brothers carried a mutation in the SARA2 
gene belonging to the Sar1-ADP-ribosylation. On the basis of the re -
cent data on SIL1 in MSS, we analyzed the SIL1 gene in our patients 
with MSS and CMRD, in their healthy parents. Sequencing of the SIL1 
gene revealed a homozygous mutation at position 331 in exon 4 re -
sulting in a premature stop codon at amino acid 111 (R111X) in the af -
fected brothers, while both parents were heterozygous for the mutation 
. In our previous study , we hypothesized that both MSS and CRMD 
found in the two Calabrian brothers could be due to defects in a gene 
crucial to the assembly of the chylomicron particle.The present results, 
however, demonstrate that CMRD and MSS observed in our patients 
are distinct diseases due to defects in two different genes, SARA2 
and SIL1.P0790. Sequence analysis of multidrug resistance protein 
3 (MDR3) in Italian patients with intrahepatic cholestasis of 
pregnancy with raised serum γ-GT
D. Tavian1, D. Degiorgio2, C. Redaelli1, N. Roncaglia3, P. Vergani3, D. A. Covi -
ello2, R. Colombo1;  
1Laboratory of Human Molecular Biology and Genetics, Catholic University of 
the Sacred Heart, Milan, Italy, 2Laboratory of Medical Genetics Fondazione 
IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milan, 
Italy, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Milano-Bicocca, 
Monza, Italy.
Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) is characterized by intense 
pruritus and abnormalities of liver function tests and bile acids. Usually, 
serum gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase ( γ-GT) activity remains within 
normal limits. However, in some cases γ-GT is increased. Although 
the prognosis is generally favourable for the mother, ICP is associated 
with increased fetal risks, such as preterm delivery and fetal distress. 
Intrauterine fetal death has been reported in 0.8-1.6% of ICP cases. 
The cause of ICP is still unknown, but there are evidences that geneti -
cally disfunction MDR3 is associated to the development of ICP. MDR3 
P-glycoprotein is a canalicular phopholipid translocator involved in the 
biliary secretion of phospholipids. The aim of this study was to identify 
new disease-causing mutations in a specific group of Italian women 
suffering from ICP with raised serum γ-GT (>40 mg/dL). DNA sequence 
analysis of the MDR3 promoter and the 27 coding exons with their 
exon-intron boundaries was performed in 11 ICP patients with raised 
γ-GT levels and in 43 control women. Two heterozygous mutations 
were found in the ICP patients. One is a novel mutation consisting of 
A to G transition at the 3’ acceptor splice site of MDR3 intron 7 (IVS7[-
2]A→G); the second one is R590Q, a mutation previously reported in a 
patient with primary sclerosing cholangitis. The identification of MDR3 
mutations in 18% of the affected women supports the hypothesis that 
genomic variants of this gene play a pathogenetic role in the subset of 
ICP patients presenting with raised γ-GT values.
P0791. The first laboratory expierence of diagnostics of MEN2 
syndrome in KMUH (Lithuania)
L. Kucinskas1, L. Juodele1, D. Serapinas2, A. Vitkauskiene3, J. Jeroch4;  
1Kaunas Medical University Hospital, Kaunas, Lithuania, 2Kaunas Medical 
University Hospital Genetic Consultation, Kaunas, Lithuania, 3Kaunas Medical 
University Hospital Laboratory of Immnulogy and genetics, Kaunas, Lithuania, 
4Institute for Biomedical research, Kaunas Medicine University, Kaunas, Lithu -
ania.
MEN2 syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant syndrome with medul -
lary thyroid carcinoma and other tumours of endocrinological system. 
MEN2 syndrome has three subtypes: MEN2A (medullary thyroid carci -
noma, pheochromocitoma and primary hyperparathyroidism), MEN2B 
(medulary thyroid carcinoma, pheochromocitoma and typical pheno -
type - marphanoid constitution with ganglioneuromatosis) and FMTC 
(familiar medullary thyroid carcinoma). RET is the only gene known 
to be associated with MEN 2. In 2006 year the diagnostics of MEN2 
syndrome was performed for members of two families in Kaunas 
Medical University Hospital. The molecular genetics diagnostics was 
performed using two restrictions enzymes Fok I and Pag I. The first 
family was of medullary carcinoma patient and her 4 year old son. The 
mutation was pC618R in RET gene codon 618. The presymptomatic 
diagnostics was performed for the child of patient and results showed, 
that he has no mutation. Another family has the girl with medullary 
carcinoma. The girl was 8 years old when operation was performed. 
She had phenotypic signs of MEN2B syndrome: ganglioneuromatosis 
of tongue and lips. The mutation analysis using restriction enzymes 
confirmed the most typical mutation of MEN2B syndrome :p.M918T in 
exon 16 of RET gene.
The molecular diagnostics using restriction enzymes is cheap, fast and 
easy performed. This laboratory diagnosis can be used for confirma -
tory of diagnosis, presymptomatic diagnosis and corelation between 
mutation and disease prognosis.
P0792. Serine-arginine repressor protein, SRrp35, is disrupted 
by an inv(6)(p21.3q15) in a patient with mental retardation and 
obesity
J. G. Dauwerse1, K. B. M. Hansson1, D. J. Halley2, M. Kriek1, M. H. Breuning1, 
D. J. M. Peters1;  
1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Clinical Genetics Molecular and biochemical basis of disease210
Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Mental retardation (MR) is defined by an overall IQ score below 70 and 
deficits in adaptive behavior that are recognized in childhood. Genetic 
abnormalities frequently give rise to a MR phenotype.
Here, we present an obese, mentally retarded patient with a de novo  
pericentric inversion of chromosome 6, inv(6)(p21.3q15). FISH per -
formed with BAC and PAC clones revealed that RP11-355M6 (6p21.2) 
and RP11-63L7 (6q15) span the breakpoints. We could show that 
both breakpoints disrupt a gene, on 6p21.2 the C6orf128 gene and 
on 6q15 the SRrp35  gene. Mutation analysis for both genes, in 150 
Prader-Willi like MR patients, did not reveal any mutations. There are 
no strong indications for C6orf128  being a candidate gene for MR. No 
other 6p21 rearrangements in MR patients are known from the litera -
ture, the gene is ubiquitously expressed and its function is unknown. 
SRrp35 , however, is more indicative for being a good candidate, since 
12 MR patients have been reported with deletions of 6q15, the region 
SRrp35  is mapping. Furthermore, SRrp35  is predominantly expressed 
in fetal and adult brain and the SRrp35 protein is member of the group 
of proteins that are SR (serine-arginine) protein-like alternative splic -
ing regulators. Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) also has the phenotypic 
characteristics of obesity and MR. The PWS candidate gene SNRPN  
(SNURF-SNRPN ) is highly expressed in the brain and also has a role 
in mRNA processing. Therefore it has been postulated that mental re -
tardation may be caused by defects in mRNA processing.
P0793. Common allelic variants of APOA5 gene in the metabolic 
syndrome
P. Kisfali1, K. Hovatovich1, M. Mohás2, A. Maasz1, L. Markó2, V. Csöngei1, B. 
Faragó1, L. Járomi1, L. Magyari1, E. Sáfrány1, C. Sipeky1, I. Wittman2, B. Me -
legh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, 
Pécs, Hungary, 22nd Department of Medicine and Nephrological Center, Uni -
versity of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary.
The metabolic syndrome affects the 15-30 percent of the European 
population. It is characterized by hypertriglyceridaemia, hyperten -
sion, diabetes mellitus and obesity. Naturally occuring variants of the 
APOA5 gene associated with elevated triglyceride levels. The T-1131C 
variant has been found to associate with cardio- and cerebrovascular 
disorders like coronary artery disease and stroke.Relationship of the 
common four SNPs was examined using PCR/RFLP tests. 220 pa -
tients affected with metabolic syndrome and 140 apparently healthy 
controls were genotyped for T-1131C; IVS3 +G476A, T1259C and 
C56G variants of the APOA5 gene.The allele frequencies for metabolic 
syndrome patients/controls were as follows: 10.4/4.1 % for -1131C, 
8/2.5% for IVS3+ G476A, 8.2/7% for 1259C and 7.25/4% for 56G. 
We found increased serum triglyceride levels in carriers compared 
with non-carriers for three polymorphisms (T-1131C; IVS3+ G476A, 
T1259C, p<0.05 carriers vs. non carriers). The serum cholesterol lev -
els measured were similar in all subjects. The multiple logistic regres -
sion analyses adjusted for age, gender, total serum cholesterol, acut 
myocardial infarction and stroke revealed that -1131C and IVS3+ 476A 
variants confer a significantly increased risk for development of meta -
bolic syndrome (OR 2,874; 95% CI: 1.241-5.123; p=0.010; and OR 
3.529; 95% CI: 1.308-9.029; p=0.009). Further association studies are 
required to delineate the significance of the naturally existing haplo -
types in the development of metabolic syndrome.
P0794. Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene and the neural 
tube defects in Kazakh population
Z. Makhmutova , G. Svyatova;  
Scientific centre of obstetrics, gynaecology and perinatology, Almaty, Kazakh -
stan.
This study determined the frequencies of the C677T and A1298C 5,10-
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene’s mutations for 
30 neural tube defects (NTD) cases, 84 mothers, 39 fathers of NTD 
cases and 50 males and 100 females for the controls of Kazakh popu -
lation.
The frequency of homozygous TT genotype in mothers of NTD cases 
(8,3%) was statistically higher than their respective controls (1,0%, 
χ2=4,3; p<0,05). The fathers of NTD patients were heterozygous for 
the C677T variant allele (59,9%) at a higher rate than the males of 
control group (38,0%, χ2 =3,8; p<0,05). Kazakh NTD cases were ho -
mozygous (13,3%) and heterozygous (66,7%) for the C677T variant allele at a higher rate than their respective controls (42,0% and 1,3%, 
p<0,05).
The frequencies of genotypes of A1298C mutation were not signifi -
cantly different between parents of NTD cases and controls. The pa -
tients with NTD were homozygous (16,7%) and heterozygous (56,7%) 
for A1298C variant allele at a higher rate than the health control (34,0% 
and 8,0%, p<0,05). Our study provides evidence that the maternal 
C677T homozygous mutant genotype, the paternal heterozygous for 
the C677T variant allele and the patient’s TT, CT genotypes of C677T 
mutation, ac and cc genotypes of A1298C mutation are a possible risk 
factor for NTD in Kazakh population.
P0795. Mitochondrial abnormalities in murine models of Mut 
class methylmalonic acidemia
R. J. Chandler1, S. Shanske2, J. Sloan1, P. M. Zerfas3, V. Hoffmann3, S. Di -
Mauro2, C. P. Venditti1;  
1National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Department of Neurobiology Columbia Uni -
versity Medical Center, New York, NY, United States, 3Division of Veterinary 
Resources, Office of Research Services, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, 
MD, United States.
Mut class methylmalonic acidemia (mut-MMA) is an autosomal reces -
sive inborn error of metabolism caused by a defective activity of meth -
ylmalonyl-CoA mutase. Affected patients suffer from life-threatening 
intermittent metabolic decompensation, pancreatitis, and renal failure; 
the etiology of these alterations remains unknown. Current treatments 
include dietary restriction of precursors, alkali supplementation, and 
liver transplantation in the most severely affected patients. Mitochon -
drial dysfunction has been suggested as contributory to symptoms in 
the affected patients but never convincingly demonstrated. To assess 
the role of mitochondria in this disorder, murine models of mut-MMA 
were created and used to examine ultrastructural and energetic as -
pects of mitochondrial function. Megamitochondria in the hepatocytes 
of the mut-MMA animals were observed. Liver extracts displayed 
electron transport chain dysfunction, with a substantial decrease in 
cytochrome c oxidase activity in the mutant animals. Over time, the 
proximal tubules of the kidney and exocrine pancreas also developed 
abnormal mitochondria, which were enlarged with distorted cristae and 
contained inclusions and unusual lamellar structures whereas mito -
chondria were normal in the skeletal muscle and heart. Our findings in -
dicate a tissue specific response inherent to mut-MMA and for the first 
time, connect mitochondrial function to the etiology of organ system 
pathology in this disorder. Furthermore, these observations explain 
the protective effects of liver transplantation in methylmalonic acide -
mia and should guide the development and testing of new therapies 
for affected patients.
P0796. Feasible contribution of inherited thrombophilia factors 
in pregnancy miscarriage
O. Malysheva , O. Bespalova, T. Ivashenko, V. Baranov;  
Ott’s Institute of obstetrics and gynecology, St.Petersberg, Russian Federation.
To determine whether the inherited thrombophilia risk factors are asso -
ciated with spontaneous abortion (SA) of unexplained etiology, geno -
types distributions of the 2 mutations ( FV Leiden, PROT G20210A) 
and two gene polymorphisms ( FGBG-455A and MTHFR  C677T) were 
compared in 172 women with at least 1 SA before the 20th week of 
gestation and 108 women with the live birth and without a history of 
pregnancy loss. The analysis of anti-PL antibodies (APA) for 94/172 
patients with SA was provided retrospectively. No significant differenc -
es were observed between distributions of any studied genotypes both 
in the miscarriage and control groups. Meanwhile, in the subgroup 
women with with ≥3 SA the frequency of MTHFR 677 T/T genotype 
was significantly higher when compared to the control group (9/57, 
15,8% versus 5/108, 4,6%;  p<0,05). It was especially pronounced in 
the women with ≥3 SA and no live births in anamnesis (9/46, 19,6%; 
p<0,01). Patients with APA had ”thrombophilic genotypes” ( MTHFR 677 
T/T, FGBG-455 A/A and/or FV Leiden and PROT G20210A in hetero -
zygotes) more often than non-APA patients (17/49, 34,7% versus 7/45, 
15,5%; p<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: 1. Genotype MTHFR 677 T/T is as -
sociated with recurrent spontaneous abortions with ≥3 fetal loss. 2. 
Presence of inherited thrombophilia factors correlates with presence 
of APA in 69,6% (16/23) of cases. It could be speculated that both APA 
and inherited thrombophilia could be treated as cumulative risk-factors Molecular and biochemical basis of disease211
initiating SA or that thrombophilia itself plays a role of initial predisposi -
tion factor in production of APA.
P0797. Mitochondrial DNA haplogroups in infertile males
M. Houshmand1, M. Shafa Shariat Panahi1, F. M.A Mohammad2, L. Bastaki3, K. 
Naguib4, A. Olivieri5, B. Hooshiar Kashani1, V. Khalili1;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology(NIGEB), Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kuwait Medical Genetic Centre, Maternity Hospital, 
Kuwait, Kuwait, 3Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Kuwait University,, Kuwait, 
Kuwait, 4Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, Kuwait University, Kuwait, Kuwait, 
5Dipartimento di Genetica e Microbiologia, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
A variety of mtDNA mutations responsible for human diseases have 
been associated with molecular defects in the OXPHOS system. It has 
been proposed that mtDNA genetic alterations can also be responsi -
ble for sperm dysfunction. To investigate any possible association be -
tween infertility and mtDNA haplogroups (hg), the nucleotide sequence 
of the Hypervariable Segment I (HVS-I) of mtDNA was determined in 
99 unrelated Kuwaiti patients with infertility and 54 normal controls with 
the same ethnicity. DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood after 
having obtained informed consent. The nucleotide sequence of HVS-
I (np 16,024-16,383) was directly determined. High-resolution RFLP 
analysis and control-region sequencing revealed high proportion of 
haplogroup J and M in normal controls (64% and 20.3%) compared to 
infertile men (26.2% and 8.1%) respectively. (P= 0.002 for J and 0.03 
for M) Therefore, we hypothesize that individuals classified as hap -
logroup J and M demonstrate a significant decrease in risk of infertility 
in Kuwaiti population.
P0798. Mutational analysis of the mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR) gene 
in Tunisian patients with mitochondrial diseases
E. Mkaouar-Rebai1, A. Tlili1, S. Masmoudi1, N. Belguith1, I. Charfeddine2, M. 
Mnif3, C. Triki4, F. Fakhfakh1;  
1Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire humaine. Faculté de Médecine de Sfax, 
Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service d’O.R.L., C.H.U. Habib Bourguiba de Sfax, Tunisia, 
Sfax, Tunisia, 3Service d’endocrinologie, C.H.U. Habib Bourguiba de Sfax, Tu -
nisia., Sfax, Tunisia, 4Service de Neurologie, C.H.U. Habib Bourguiba de Sfax, 
Tunisia., Sfax, Tunisia.
The mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR) gene (MTTL) is a hot spot for patho -
genic mutations that are associated with mitochondrial diseases with 
various clinical features. Among these mutations, the A3243G muta -
tion was associated with various types of mitochondrial multisystem 
disorder, such as Mitochondrial Inherited Diabetes and Deafness 
(MIDD), Mitochondrial myopathy, Encephalopathy, Lactic Acidosis and 
Stroke like episodes (MELAS), Myoclonus Epilepsy with Ragged Red 
Fibres (MERRF), maternally inherited Progressive External Ophthal -
moplegia (PEO), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and a subtype of Leigh 
syndrome.
We screened 128 Tunisian patients presenting various mitochondrial 
diseases (MIDD, diabetes, hearing loss, Leigh Syndrome, cardiomy -
opathy, metabolic encephalopathy …) for the A3243G mutation in the 
mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR) gene. This screening was carried out using 
PCR-RFLP with the restriction endonuclease ApaI. None of the 128 
patients or the 100 controls tested were found to carry the mitochon -
drial A3243G mutation in the tRNALeu(UUR) gene in homoplasmic or het -
eroplasmic form. After direct sequencing of the entire mitochondrial 
tRNALeu(UUR) gene and a part of the mitochondrial NADH dehydroge -
nase 1, we found no mutations or polymorphisms in the MTTL1 gene 
in the tested patients and controls and we confirmed the absence of 
the A3243G mutation in this gene. We also found a T3396C mutations 
in the mitochondrial ND1 gene in one family with nonsyndromic hear -
ing loss. This substitution was absent in the other patients and in 100 
normal individuals. No polymorphisms or other mutations were found 
in the mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR) gene in the tested patients.
P0799. Aberrant splicing is a common mutational mechanism in 
MKS1, a key player in Meckel Gruber syndrome
V. Frank1, N. Ortiz Brüchle1, S. Mager1, S. G. M. Frints2, A. Bohring3, G. du 
Bois4, I. Debatin5, H. Seidel6, N. Besbas7, U. Todt8, C. Kubisch8, T. Grimm9, F. 
Teksen10, S. Balci11, K. Zerres1, C. Bergmann1;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Aachen, Germany, 2Department of Clini -
cal Genetics, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 3Department of Human Genetics, 
Muenster, Germany, 4Institute of Chromosomal Diagnostics and Genetic Coun -
selling, Böblingen, Germany, 5Department of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 6Department of Human Genetics, München, Germany, 7Department of Pediatric 
Nephrology, Ankara, Turkey, 8Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 
9Department of Human Genetics, Würzburg, Germany, 10Department of Basic 
Health Sciences and Biotechnology, Ankara, Turkey, 11Department of Clinical 
Genetics, Ankara, Turkey.
Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS) is an autosomal recessive, usually 
lethal multisystemic disorder characterized by early developmental 
anomalies of the central nervous system, cystic kidney dysplasia, hep -
atobiliary ductal plate malformation and postaxial polydactyly. Three 
MKS loci have been mapped and recently, two genes were identified: 
MKS1 on 17q22 in Caucasian kindreds and MKS3 on 8q22 in Omani 
and Pakistani families, putting MKS on the growing list of ciliary dis -
orders (“ciliopathies”). We performed linkage analysis for MKS1-3 in 
14 consanguineous and/or multiplex families of different ethnic origins 
with histologic diagnosis and at least three classic MKS manifestations 
in each kindred. Unexpectedly, only five families were linked to any of 
the known MKS loci, clearly indicating further locus heterogeneity. All 
five families showed homozygosity for MKS1 and, intriguingly, were 
of non-Caucasian origin. MKS1 sequencing revealed no mutation in 
two of these pedigrees, whereas different, novel splicing defects were 
identified in the three other families and an additional sporadic Ger -
man patient. Given that all of our mutations and two of the in total 
four known MKS1 changes cause aberrant splicing (while the other 
two known mutations were frameshift mutations), we hypothesize that 
splicing defects are a crucial mutational mechanism in MKS1 which 
apparently is one of the main loci and key players in MKS. Our results 
indicate that MKS1 mutations are not restricted to the Caucasian gene 
pool and suggest further genetic heterogeneity for MKS. Overall, our 
data have immediate implications for genetic counselling and testing 
approaches in MKS.
P0800. Multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) 
analysis of the dystrophin gene in Bulgarian patients with 
Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy (DMD/BMD)
A. Todorova1, T. Todorov1, M. Lukova1, B. Dworniczak2, V. Mitev1;  
1Sofia Medical University, Medical Faculty, Department of Chemistry and Biosh -
emistry, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Muenster, Germany.
MLPA is a quantitative method for detection of deletions/duplications 
of one or more exons of a gene.In more than 70% of the DMD/BMD 
cases the disease causing mutations are deletions or duplications in 
the dystrophin gene. The MLPA method provides a cheap and power -
ful tool to screen the whole dystrophin gene in two multiplex reactions.
We analyzed 24 unrelated DMD/BMD Bulgarian families without de -
letions in the dystrophin gene after multiplex PCR. We used SALSA 
PO34/PO35 kit specific for the dystrophin gene. In 19 families we 
found deletions or duplications. We found 12 deletions distributed in 
the main deletion hotspot of the gene. These deletions include exons 
42-45, 44 (2 times detected), 45-47, 45-50, 46-50, 46-52, 49-50, 53-
54, 55, 58, 79. In addition, 7 different duplications were detected, all 
but two starting in the 5’-end of the gene. Duplications include exons 
2-10, 2-33, 8-11, 8-13, 13-40, 48-50, 51. Carrier status was clarified 
in all females at risk. MLPA failed to detect deletions or duplications 
in five families where the disease causing mutation could be a point 
mutation or the clinical diagnosis might need reevaluation.The present 
work proved that MLPA is a powerful tool in clarifying the molecular de -
fects along the dystrophin gene. MLPA permits to detect carrier status 
of female relatives of affected boys. Moreover, this analysis is the only 
one which allows DNA testing in families where the index patient is no 
more available. MLPA became a method of choice for genetic analysis 
of Bulgarian DMD/BMD families.
P0801. Point mutation p.Tyr997X in exon 23 of the dystrophin 
gene detected by MLPA analysis in Bulgarian DMD family (case 
report)
T. Todorov1, A. Todorova1, M. Lukova1, B. Dworniczak2, V. Mitev1;  
1Sofia Medical University, Medical Faculty, Department of Chemistry and Biosh -
emistry, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Muenster, Germany.
We introduced and optimized for diagnostic purposes the new MLPA 
method. The SALSA PO34/PO35 kit specific for deletions/duplications 
detection along the dystrophin gene was applied to screen Bulgarian 
DMD/BMD patients. The mathematical calculations were performed 
with Excel program. In 19 Bulgarian families we found 11 different de -
letions and 7 different duplications in the dystrophin gene.In one of Molecular and biochemical basis of disease212
the tested families MLPA showed no pick for exon 23 on the electro -
phoregrams, whish supposed deletion of this exon. A single PCR am -
plification of exon 23 showed the exon presence in the patient. Further 
sequencing analysis revealed a point mutation generating stop codon 
in exon 23 - c.2991C>G, p.Tyr997X. The nucleotide change affects 
the place of hybridization of the exon 23 specific MLPA probe, which 
is the reason for absence of exon 23 on the electrophoregrams. The 
patient was severely affected by Duchenne-type muscular dystrophy. 
Both patient’s mother and sister were found to be carriers of the muta -
tion p.Tyr997X. Our experience in MLPA analysis stressed upon the 
fact that single exon deletions should be interpreted with caution and 
should be proved by alternative methods. In some cases it is possible 
to detect point mutations and polymorphisms by MLPA analysis.
P0802. Screening for subtelomeric abnormalities in patients with 
idiopahtic mental retardation by MLPA
D. S. Iancu1, C. Rusu2, E. Neagu1, G. Girbea1, A. Constantinescu1, C. Constan -
tinescu1, C. Scrypnik3, V. Bica4, L. Barbarii1;  
1National Institute of Legal Medicine, Bucharest, Romania, 2University of Medi -
cine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 3University of Medicine, Oradea, Romania, 
4“Alfred Rusescu” Children Hospital, Bucharest, Romania.
Recent studies ascertained that 5 to 10% of mental retardations are 
due to mutations in the subtelomeric regions. Knowing the mutational 
pattern is of major importance for genetic counseling. We have studied 
the subtelomeric rearrangements using a MLPA assay in a series of 
clinically selected patients with mental retardation and negative chro -
mosomal analysis. The study was initiated in the framework of a mul -
ticentric national research program. The MLPA probes included in the 
commercial kits allowed us to scan all the subtelomeric regions in two 
PCR reactions. The amplicons were analyzed on a 3100 Avant ABI 
Genetic Analyzer. We investigated 123 DNA samples and assessed 
the location of deletions and duplications. The MLPA screen revealed 
mutations in 6% of cases (on the short arms of chromosomes 1, 7 
and 18). Except one, all the mutations were deletions and no multiple 
deletions were detected. One case revealed a double subtelomeric 
mutational pattern, consisting of a 7q deletion associated with 9q du -
plication. The MLPA method proved to be easy to handle, accurate and 
highly reproducible. For the patients carrying subtelomeric rearrange -
ments, further investigations (FISH) are planned in order to confirm the 
mutation and DNA samples from their relative are collected.
P0803. First case of Gamma-Thalassemia
C. Badens1, K. Gonnet1, F. Merono1, N. Bonello1, N. Levy1, I. Thuret2;  
1Department of Genetics, Hospital La Timone, Marseille, France, 2Pediatric 
Hematology, Hospital La Timone, Marseille, France.
Numerous deletional Thalassemia have been reported, involving one 
or several globin genes in combination. However, deletions specifically 
targetted on the fetal β-like genes have never been reported so far, 
likely due to a fetal lethal phenotype induced by homozygous muta -
tions in these genes. By contrast, heterozygosity is likely clinically si -
lent. Here, we report on the observation of a fetal β-like genes deletion 
that we detected because it was located in Cis of a Sickle Cell β-globin 
gene.
The proband is a newborn diagnosed at birth as having Sickle Cell 
Anemia (SCA) in the course of neonatal screening. During the first 
consultation, at 6 weeks of age, haemoglobin analysis revealed the 
following Hb rates : HbF 55%, HbS 27% and HbA 15% . Molecular 
analysis of the β-globin gene showed, as a single defect, heterozygos -
ity for the prevalent sickle cell mutation. During the course of evolution, 
the level of HbA raised slowly to a normal value and, finally, a typical 
profile for HbS carrier was observed at 8 month of age.
In order to further explore this peculiar phenotype, the whole β-globin 
locus was explored by means of MLPA technical procedures and al -
lowed to evidence a heterozygous deletion of the fetal genes, A γ and 
G γ-globin. We conclude that a deletion of the fetal genes have led to a 
premature switch on the adult βS-gene and to SCA profile at birth. This 
is the first case of γ-thalassemia ever reported, representing a pitfall in 
neonatal screening of SCA.P0804. A Retrospective Analysis of Patients Previously 
Tested For Gene Polymorphisms Implicated In Influencing 
Susceptibility To Thrombosis In A Reference Center in Izmir/
Turkey
F. Ozkinay1,2, H. Onay1, G. Itirli1,3, C. Gunduz4, M. Kayikcioglu5, E. Kumral6, O. 
Cogulu1,2, H. Akin1, C. Ozkinay1;  
1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, 
Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, 
Turkey, 3Ege University, Department of Biotechnology, Izmir, Turkey, 4Ege Uni -
versity, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey, 5Ege 
University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Cardiology, Izmir, Turkey, 6Ege 
University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neurology, Izmir, Turkey.
Arterial and venous thromboembolism is one of the most common 
diseases affecting populations throughout the world. Recently the 
polymorphisms found in a number of genes which play a role in the 
thromboembolic processes have been reported to be risk factors for 
thromboembolism.
For two years our department has made use of a strip test (CVD Stri -
pAssay, ViennaLab, Austria) detecting the following gene polymor -
phisms. These polymorphisms ; FV R506Q(Leiden), FV H1299R, Pro -
thrombin G20210A, Factor XIII V34L, ß-Fibrinogen -455 G-A, PAI-1 
4G/5G, GPIIIa L33P(HPA-1), MTHFR C677T, MTHFR A1298C, ACE 
I/D, Apo B R3500Q,Apo E2/E3/E4.
In this study we retrospectively investigated the referral indications and 
the frequencies of the polymorphisms in the children and adult pa -
tients tested using this CVD stripassay at the Ege University Medical 
Genetics Department. The frequencies of the polymorphisms found in 
patients were compared to the frequencies of the liver transplantation 
donors who were routinely tested before transplantation.
During the two year period , 426 patients (146 children, 280 adults) 
were tested using the CVD strip test. The majority of patients in the 
adult group were referred to our department with indications of cardio -
vascular and/or cerebrovascular diseases from the cardiology, neurol -
ogy and internal medicine departments. The frequencies of Factor V 
(H1299R) beta fibrinogen(455G-A) and MTHFR (C677T) were found 
to be significantly higher in patients having cardiovascular and/or cere -
brovascular diseases compared to the frequencies found in control 
group (p<0.05).
As a conclusion Factor V (H1299R) β-fibrinogen (455G-A) and MTHFR 
(C677T) polymorphisms might play a role in susceptibility to thrombo -
sis in our population.
P0805. Targeted mutation reveals essential functions of the 
homeodomain transcription factor Shox2 in sinoatrial and 
pacemaking development.
R. J. Blaschke1, N. D. Hahurij2, S. Kuijper3, S. Just4, L. J. Wisse2, K. Deissler5, 
T. Maxelon1, K. Anastassiadis6, J. Spitzer1, S. E. Hardt4, H. Schöler7, H. Feits -
ma4, W. Rottbauer4, M. Blum5, F. Meijlink3, G. Rappold1, A. C. Gittenberger-de-
Groot2;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 
2Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands, 3Hubrecht Laboratory, The Netherlands Institute of 
Developmental Biology, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 4Department of Internal 
Medicine III, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 5Institute for 
Zoology, University Hohenheim, Stuttgart, Germany, 6Max-Planck-Institute for 
Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics MPI-CBG, Biotec,TU Dresden, Dresden, 
Germany, 7Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany.
Background: The identification of molecular pathways regulating the 
development of pacemaking and coordinated heartbeat is crucial for a 
comprehensive mechanistic understanding of arrhythmia related dis -
eases. Elucidation of these pathways has mainly been complicated by 
an insufficient definition of the developmental structures involved in 
these processes and the unavailability of animal models specifically 
targeting the relevant tissues. We here report on a highly restricted 
expression pattern of the homeodomain transcription factor Shox2  in 
the sinus venosus myocardium, including the sinoatrial nodal region 
and the venous valves. Methods: To investigate its function in vivo , we 
have generated mouse lines carrying a targeted mutation of the Shox2  
gene. While heterozygous animals did not exhibit obvious defects, ho -
mozygosity of the targeted allele led to embryonic lethality at 11.5 to 
13.5 dpc. Results: Shox2-/- embryos exhibited severe hypoplasia of the 
sinus venosus myocardium in the posterior heart field including the si -
noatrial nodal region and venous valves. We furthermore demonstrate Molecular and biochemical basis of disease21
aberrant expression of Connexin40 and Connexin43 and the transcrip -
tion factor Nkx2.5  in vivo  specifically within the sinoatrial nodal region, 
and show that Shox2  deficiency interferes with pacemaking function 
in Zebrafish embryos. Conclusion: From these results, we postulate a 
critical function of Shox2  in the recruitment of sinus venosus myocar -
dium comprising the sinoatrial nodal region.
P0806. Multiple sulfatase deficiency is due to hypomorphic 
mutations of the SUMF1 gene
I. Annunziata1, V. Bouchè1, L. Schlotawa2, T. Dierks2, A. Ballabio1;  
1TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 2Universitaet Bielefeld Universitaetsstr, Bielefeld, Ger -
many.
Sulfatases catalyze the hydrolysis of sulfate esters bonds from a wide 
variety of substrates. Several human inherited diseases are caused 
by the deficiency of individual sulfatases. Multiple sulfatase deficiency 
(MSD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by the 
simultaneous deficiency of all known sulfatases. MSD patients carry 
mutations of the Sulfatase Modifying Factor 1 ( SUMF1 ) gene encod -
ing the α-formylglycin generating enzyme (FGE) which is required for 
the post-translational modification of sulfatases. Residual sulfatase ac -
tivities are detectable, at variable levels, in all MSD patients. We have 
used a recently developed Sumf1  KO mouse line which completely 
devoid of all sulfatase activities to investigate on the nature of the re -
sidual sulfatase activities detected in MSD patients. Four mutations 
(i.e. S155P, R224W, R345C, R349W) found in homozygosis in MSD 
patients were over-expressed, using viral-mediated gene delivery, in 
Sumf1-/-  mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). The results obtained 
indicate that mutant SUMF1  cDNAs encode stable SUMF1 proteins 
which are of the appropriate molecular weight and are properly lo -
calized in the endoplasmic reticulum. Expression of these cDNAs in 
Sumf1-/-  MEFs results in low, albeit significant, FGE activity, and in 
partial rescue of sulfatase activities. These data indicate that MSD is 
due to hypomorphic SUMF1  mutations and suggest that a complete 
loss of SUMF1 function is likely to be lethal in humans.
P0807. Frequency of LHON mutations in mitochondrial disease 
phenotypes from Centre Portugal
M. M. Grazina1,2, J. M. Pratas2, S. Oliveira2, M. Oliveira2, L. Diogo3, P. Garcia3, 
C. Macário4, C. R. Oliveira1,2;  
1Faculty of Medicine, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Centre for Neuroscience and Cell 
Biology, Coimbra, Portugal, 3Paediatric Hospital, Coimbra, Portugal, 4University 
Hospitals, Coimbra, Portugal.
INTRODUCTION: Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) is a 
maternally mitochondrial disorder, characterized by bilateral visual 
loss, most frequently found in young males. Classical LHON is main -
ly associated to mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations G11778A, 
G3460A and T14484C, localized in the coding regions for ND4, ND1 
and ND6 (complex I subunits of mitochondrial respiratory chain), re -
spectively. Other mutations (secondary) have also been described in 
LHON cases.
METHODS: We have studied a total of 648 subjects, counting with 
46 healthy family members. The techniques employed included PCR, 
RFLP and sequencing analysis. We investigated 7 point mutations, 
described as primary (G3460A, G11778A, T14484C) or secondary 
(T4216C, A4917G, G13708A, G15257A), associated previously to 
LHON.
RESULTS: We have found 40 positive cases (6.2%), corresponding to 
the analysis of 52 tissues. Considering the total number of cases stud -
ied, the frequencies found were: 0.002; 0.012; 0.003; 0.034; 0.026; 
0.014 and 0.012, for mutations G3460A, G11778A, T14484C; T4216C, 
A4917G, G13708A and G15257A, respectively.
DISCUSSION: The most frequent mtDNA alterations found, among 
primary and secondary mutations studied, were G11778A and 
T4216C, respectively. The primary mutations were found only in LHON 
or LHON-plus cases. Secondary mutations were observed in a wide 
variety of phenotypes, as expected. On the other hand, the primary 
mutations were found isolated, whereas secondary mutations were 
frequently encountered in combinations.P0808. Mutations in mtDNA in Children with manifestations of 
mitochondrial encephalomyopaties
J. Pilch1, M. Asman2, E. Jamroz1, M. Kajor3, E. Kotrys-Puchalska4, M. Goss4, 
M. Krzak2, M. Tarnowski2, J. Witecka2, J. Gmiński4, A. L. Sieroń2, E. Marszał1;  
1Department of Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Po -
land, 2Department of General & Molecular Biology & Genetics, Medical Univer -
sity of Silesia, Katowice, Poland, 3Department of Anatomopathology, Medical 
University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland, 4Department of Biochemistry, Medical 
University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
Mitochondrial encephalomyopaties are composed disorders with wide 
range of clinical manifestations. Lack of specific correlation between 
genotype and phenotype makes the genetic diagnostic even more dif -
ficult. Particularly tedious is identification of mutations in mitochondrial 
DNA. In years 2004 to 2006 in Department of Child Neurology muscle 
biopsies were performed in a group of sick children with manifestations 
of mitochondrial encephalomyopaties. In the biopsies the biochemical, 
histopathological, and ultrastructural analyses have been conducted. 
The cellular respiratory chain enzymes activities were assayed in mus -
cles and skin fibroblasts. Based on clinical manifestations and results 
of enzymatic assays a group of 21 sick children was selected for fur -
ther molecular studies.
Aim of the study: The goal was to identify mutations in mitochondrial 
DNA isolated from muscle biopsies of affected children.
Material and methods: Molecular analysis performed in two steps for 
entire mitochondrial DNA. First step was to screen the mitochondrial 
DNA for any mismatches by heteroduplex analysis using endonucle -
ase SURVEYOR kit (Trangenomic, Inc., Omaha, NE, USA). DNA frag -
ments showing mismatches were subjected to DNA sequencing using 
ABI PRISM 310 DNA analyzer.
Results: The most common changes found in all analyzed fragments 
of mitochondrial DNA were polymorphisms. Mutations were detected 
in few genes e.g.: a) 16S rRNA (in 8 children); b) subunits ND2, ND4L, 
ND5, and ND6 of complex I (in 6); c) tRNA for leucine (in 1); and d) 
tRNA for proline (in 1). Further analysis is necessary for comparing 
genotypes with clinical phenotypes to final confirmation of pathogenic 
character of detected mutations.
P0809. Mutational analysis of the mitochondrial 12SrRNA and 
tRNASer(UCN) genes in patients with aminoglycoside-induced 
and nonsyndromic hearing loss from Volga-Ural region and 
Siberia (Russia)
L. U. Dzhemileva1, O. L. Posukh2, N. A. Barashkov3, A. M. Tazetdinov1, S. A. 
Fedorova3, N. R. Maximova3, E. E. Fedotova3, V. N. Tadinova4, E. K. Khusnut -
dinova1;  
1Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of 
Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Yakutsk Research Centre, Siberian Branch 
of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 4Re-
publican Altai Children’s Hospital, Gorno-Altaisk, Russian Federation.
Several mtDNA mutations have been found to be associated with 
nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss (NSHL). The m.1555G>A 
(12SrRNA) was confirmed as the main cause of aminoglycoside in -
duced deafness in different populations. The m.7445A>G, m.7472_
7473insC, m.7510T>C, m.7511T>C (tRNASer(UCN)) were reported to 
be associated with NSHL. Pathogenicity of some other variations in 
12SrRNA and tRNASer(UCN) genes associated with NSHL has not 
yet been confirmed (http://www.mitomap.org). We report here the re -
sults of mutational screening for 12S rRNA and tRNASer(UCN) genes 
among Cx26- and Cx30-negative deaf individuals of different ethnic -
ity from some regions of Russia. Previously, 301 unrelated patients 
(70 with aminoglycoside-induced deafness, and 231 with NSHL) from 
Volga-Ural region, 78 unrelated patients with NSHL from the Republic 
Sakha (Yakutia, northeastern Siberia), and 119 deaf patients (75 un -
related families) from the Republic Altai (south Siberia) were analyzed 
for Cx26 and Cx30 mutations. Different variations at the 961 position in 
12S rRNA gene have been found among deaf individuals from Volga-
Ural region. Four patients of Tatar ethnicity, one with m.961delTinsCn, 
and three with m.961delTinsC, two Russian patients, one with 
m.961T>G, and another with m.961T>A, were detected. Moreover, the 
m.7444G>A (tRNASer(UCN)) was found in one Russian patient with 
NSHL. The m.1555G>A (12S rRNA) was detected in one Yakut patient 
(Republic Sakha). Finally, m.7445G>C (tRNASer(UCN)) was found in 
two sibs of one Kazakh family (Altai region) in whom moderate sen -Molecular and biochemical basis of disease21
sorineural hearing loss was co-existed with goiter. Further studies are 
needed to confirm pathogenicity of some mtDNA variations associated 
with deafness in patients from some regions of Russia.
P0810. Common polymorphism of A1298C in MTHFR gene 
is associated with maternal meiosis I chromosome 21 
nondisjunction in Down syndrome
S. Rezaee , A. Aleyasin;  
National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Parental origin and stage of meiotic error of chromosome 21 nondis -
junction has been determined in 226 families with Down syndrome. 
Their mothers hav e been genotyped for common polymorphisms in 
the MTHFR (C677T and A1298C) and MTRR (A66G) genes to iden -
tify any specific association of these previously described maternal 
genetic risk factor to the etiology of chromosome 21 nondisjunction. 
Five STR markers related to chromosome 21 (D21S11, D21S1414, 
D21S1440, D21S1411, D21S1412) were used to determine the pa -
rental origins and stage of meiotic error successfully for 226 cases. 
In total, 140 cases showed a meiotic error in meiosis stage I, 58 in 
meiosis maternal meiosis stage II, 20 in paternal meiosis I and 8 in 
paternal meiosis II. All four groups of mother cases and a normal con -
trol group consisted of 176 normal mothers with at least one healthy 
child were tested for common polymorphisms of C677T, A1298C in 
the MTHFR and C66G in the MTRR genes. Significant association 
was detected between maternal meiosis I chromosome 21 nondisjunc -
tion and the A1298C polymorphism of the MTHFR gene (P<0.0014, 
χ2>11.13). This study has showed for the first time the importance of 
stage of meiotic nondisjunction in the study of maternal genetic risk 
factor of Down syndrome. The significant association of stage I meiotic 
nondisjunction and A1298C polymorphism of MTHFR gene in mother 
of Down syndrome presents the relationship of acid folic metabolism in 
the etiology of Down syndrome in Iranian cases.
P0811. Is the MTHFR C677T gene polymorphism a modifier 
factor in SMA?
P. Apostol1, D. Cimponeriu1, M. Stavarachi1, I. Radu1, L. Dan1, L. Cherry1, M. 
Toma1, N. Butoianu2, C. Burloiu2, S. Magureanu2, L. Gavrila1;  
1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Alexandru Obregia Hospital, Bu -
charest, Romania.
The methylation process is essential for the regulation of genes ex -
pression controlling the development and function of the neurons. The 
formation of SMN complex, responsible for motoneurons survive, is de -
pendent by the symmetric dimethylation of some component proteins. 
We speculated that this interaction could be affected by the MTHFR 
gene although any data regarding this association are not available. 
The MTHFR C677T polymorphism is strongly associated with the re -
duction of MTHFR activity. Based on this observation, we analyze a 
possible association of this polymorphism with the SMA severity in the 
Romanian patients.
Our study was carried out on 63 SMA clinically diagnosed patients, 
classified by ISMAC  criteria, 60 parents and 100 controls. The blood 
samples were obtained from Bucharest pediatric hospital. Informed 
oral consent was obtained from all subjects. The MTHFR C677T gene 
polymorphism was analyzed by PCR-RFLP method.
The highest frequency of TT genotype was observed in the SMA III 
group (21,05%) compared with SMA II (17,6%) and I (14,8%), and with 
parents (13,3%) and control (7%) groups. This genotype may increas -
es the risk for disease in SMA type I (OR = 2,31) and II (OR =2,84), 
while in SMA type III, only the presence of one T allele was associated 
with the disease.
We can not exclude the contribution of mutated allele to the SMA phe -
notypes because our lots are not very large.
MTHFR677CC MTHFR677CT MTHFR677TT
SMA 19 33 11
Parents 22 30 8
Control 48 45 7P0812. A66G polymorphism of methionine synthase reductase 
(MTRR) gene is associated with spontaneous abortions
O. N. Bespalova1, T. E. Ivaschenko1, N. I. Matveeva1, I. Y. Vasileva2, V. S. 
Baranov1;  
1Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Di-
agnostic medical genetical Center, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Spontaneous abortion (SA) is a frequent health problem of women of 
the reproductive age. A number of causes including uterine anoma -
lies, maternal\paternal balanced translocations, luteal phase defect, 
hyperhomocysteinaemia have been attributed to the origin of SA. 
MTRR is an enzyme essential for normal folate metabolism. A com -
mon polymorphism in this gene was recently found to be associated 
with increased risk of neural tube defects. It also might contribute to 
increased risk for SA.
The 66A\G polymorphism of the  MTRR gene was studied by PCR-
RFLP analysis in 108 women with one and more normal pregnancies 
and no SA in anamnesis (control group I) , in 78 nonpregnant women 
with a history of at least one SA (II group), in 75 patients with two recur -
rent SA (III group) and in 67 patients with numerous ( >- 3) recurrent 
SA(IV group).
The distribution of genotype frequencies for MTRR gene was signifi -
cantly different (p<0,01: df2) between 3 groups with SA and the control 
group (Table.I).
Table I. The frequencies of genotypes MTRR gene in 4 studied 
groups
genotype Igroup(n=108) IIgroup(n=78) IIIgroup(n=75) IVgroup(n=67)
A\A (23)21,3% (10)12,8% (10)13,3% (7)10,5%
A\G (61)56,5% (39)50% (38)50,7% (35)52,2%
G\G (24)22,2% (29)37,2% (27)36% (25)37,3%
Conclusions: Thus, the polymorphism A66G  of MTRR gene might be consid -
ered as a risk factor for spontaneous abortions.
P0813. A report of three cases affected with Mucolipidosis type II
F. Afroozan1, V. Hadavi1, N. Almadani1, R. Kariminejad1, H. Najmabadi1, J. G. 
Huijmans2, W. J. Kleijer2, O. van Diggelen2, M. H. Kariminejad1;  
1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Enzyme Laboratory, Department Clinical Genetics, 
Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands Antilles.
Mucolipidosis type II is a Hurler-like condition with severe clinical and 
radiologic features, peculiar fibroblast inclusions, and no excessive 
mucopolysacchariduria. It first was described in 1967 by Leroy and 
DeMars and named it I-cell disease. This disease is inherited as an 
autosomal recessive trait and both sexes are affected equally.
Here we report three cases affected with Mucolipidosis type II, who 
had short stature and microcephaly at birth. Growth and developmen -
tal retardation and hypotonia developed in the first year of life. They 
suffered from coarse facial features, prominent and thick upper lip, 
depressed nasal bridge, thick eyebrows, bulbous nose, sparse hair 
and died in the first year of life. CT scan revealed brain atrophy. En -
zyme analysis showed decreasing in fibroblast cultures and in contrast 
increases in plasma in all cases and confirmed Mucolipidosis type II.
P0814. Seventeen years experience of prenatal diagnosis of 
Mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) in Iran
M. H. Kariminejad1, F. Afroozan1, B. Bozorgmehr1, N. Almadani1, V. Hadavi1, O. 
P. Van Diggelen2, W. J. Kleijer2, J. G. Huijman2, R. Karimi-Nejad1;  
1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Enzyme Laboratory, Department Clinical Genetics, 
Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands 
Antilles.
Most of the metabolic disorders due to lysosomal storage disease in -
cluding MPS are fairly frequent in Iran, because of high frequency of 
intermarriage. Due to the lack of curable or beneficial symptomatic 
treatment, upon a scientific collaboration, families having affected off -
spring suspected for MPS disease have been enzymatically analyzed. 
In 82 families the deficit enzymes were detected. Seventy prenatal 
diagnoses for pareous at risk were performed, revealing 53 unaffected 
and 17 affected fetuses. All families with affected fetuses opted for 
pregnancy termination. The postnatal results of unaffected newborns 
confirmed the prenatal diagnosis findings. The summary of clinical 
findings and epidemiological distribution of MPS disorders and PND 
results are shown in the table.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease21
P0815. Multiple Sclerosis: Defect on GD3 synthase as a factor 
determining B-cell response
S. Husain1, M. Schwalb1, S. Cook1, E. Vitale1,2;  
1UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, United States, 2CNR Insti -
tute of Cybernetics, Pozzuoli (NA), Italy.
Cell surface gangliosides represent the major class of glycoconjugates 
on neurons and bear the majority of sialic acid within the central ner -
vous system (CNS). In a previous study we found that a variant in 
GD3 synthase (GD3S) was associated with a disruption of the ganglio -
side pathway in a unique pedigree segregating Multiple Sclerosis. The 
patients show a reduced expression of GD3 synthase enzyme which 
leads to a different co-localization of GD3 ganglioside (GD3G) on pe -
ripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and these could represent 
a foundation of the disease in this family. Here we present evidence 
that GD3S is mainly expressed on the B cell surface thus providing 
evidence of a potential role of B cells in this autoimmune disease
The ability to recognize self from non self components it is crucial for 
the immune system as this can lead to the disruption of the body’s own 
tissue. MS is the result of a complex interaction of genes and environ -
ment and the need to understand this complex mechanism is essential 
to establish the correct therapies. Although MS is considered to be 
mediated by T-helper 1 (Th1) cells, emerging evidence implicates B 
lymphocytes and their products in the pathogenesis of this disorder. 
Evidence from recent pathology studies has led to a renewed interest 
in the role that chronically activated B cells may play in the pathogen -
esis of MS, independent of antibody production.
P0816. Microsatellite Expansion in Myotonic Dystrophy Patients: 
The Search for Underlying Pattern
B. Veytsman1, L. Akhmadeeva2, F. Morales3,4, G. Hogg3, T. Ashizawa5, P. 
Cuenca4, G. del Valle4, R. Brian4, M. Sittenfeld4, A. Wilcox3, D. E. Wilcox3, D. G. 
Monckton3;  
1George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, United States, 2Bashkir State Medical 
University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United 
Kingdom, 4Universidad de Costa Rica, San Jose, Costa Rica, 5The University of 
Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, United States.
Microsatellite expansion is the cause of a number of severe diseases 
including fragile X, Huntington disease and myotonic dystrophy. An in -
teresting common feature of these disorders is the instability of the mu -
tation: once expanded, the number of repeat units continues to change 
in patient’s cells. An understanding of the mechanism and dynamics 
of microsatellite expansion will provide more informative genotype to 
phenotype relationships, which will in turn be of considerable utility 
in allowing patients and families to make more informed life and re -
productive choices, and facilitate the clinical management of disease. 
Recently (J. Theor. Biol., 242, 401-408 (2006)), a mathematical model 
was proposed to describe the dynamics of microsatellite expansion 
and the resulting distribution of repeat lengths in patient’s DNA. In this 
work, we compare the theoretical predictions with observed repeat 
length distributions in a large cohort of myotonic dystrophy type 1 pa -
tients. We find that the theoretical predictions agree fairly well with the 
clinical data with the observed distributions close to those predicted 
by the mathematical model. We also used the clinical data to estimate 
the theoretical parameters underlying the model: the rate of increase 
of the number of repeats and the rate of widening the distribution. We 
find that while these parameters have large individual variations, the 
average values give reasonable predictions for the development of 
mutations. These values can be used to estimate the initial mutation 
(the number of repeats in the progenitor allele) and to predict the de -
velopment of the disease.
P0817. Molecular-genetic diagnostic of Juvenile 
nephronophthisis.
A. Stepanova1, L. Prihodina2, A. Polyakov1;  
1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2The 
Moscow scientific research institute of pediatrics and children’s surgery, Mos -
cow, Russian Federation.
Juvenile nephronophthisis (NPHP) is an autosomal recessive cystic 
kidney disease, which leads to end-stage renal failure at an average 
age of 13 years following the initial symptoms of polyuria, polydipsia, 
renal salt loss, and secondary enuresis.
Juvenile nephronophtisis is most often caused by mutations in the 
NPHP1 gene, encoding nephrocystin. About 70% of cases of Juvenile nephronophtisis are caused by large deletions in the 2q13 region.
Two previously described markers (NPHP804/6 and NPHPC11) lo -
calised within the common NPHP1 deletion interval were amplified in 
multiplex PCR with control markers - exon 13 of the PAH gene, map -
ping outside the deleted region.
We have studied 6 unrelated patients. A homozygous deletion of the 
NPHP1 gene was found in 3 of 6 probands.
All patients with deletion had polyuria, polydipsia, isosthenuria and dif -
fusive ostepenia.
This work was partly supported by Russian President’s grand NSh-
5736.2006.7.
P0818. Missense alterations in the NF1 gene: how to make sense 
of them?
L. M. Messiaen , T. Callens, J. Williams, M. Herbst, B. R. Korf;  
Medical Genomics Laboratory, University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL, 
United States.
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), notorious for its phenotypic variability, 
is characterized by neurofibromas, skinfold freckling and café-au-lait 
spots. Recently, a relationship between a 3-bp inframe deletion in the 
NF1 gene and a specific phenotype, i.e. absence of cutaneous neuro -
fibromas, was found. This finding holds promise that other missense 
or 1-2 AA-deletions may exist that correlate a specific missense (or 
1-2 AA-deletion) to the expression of a specific clinical phenotype. As 
a first step, all putative  missense alterations need to be classified cor -
rectly.
We developed a comprehensive NF1 assay using RNA- and DNA-
based techniques including long-range RT-PCR, cDNA sequencing, 
FISH and MLPA and use this approach in a clinical setting. For all 
patients, the phenotype is recorded using a standardized checklist.
So far, we identified a pathogenic mutation in 1400 unrelated patients. 
All 172 different missense alterations, found in 299 patients, were fur -
ther analyzed for effect on splicing; presence/absence of another pos -
sible deleterious NF1 mutation; presence/absence in >1000 control al -
leles; evolutionary conservation; in silico  predicted effect by PolyPhen, 
SIFT and AGVGD; familial clinical and genetic assessment. Using this 
approach, we classified 17 different “missense“ alterations, present in 
46 patients, as splicing mutations, 19 novel alterations, residing in cis 
or trans of a clearly deleterious mutation, as rare benign variants and 
2 as variants of still unknown significance. The remaining 136 differ -
ent missense alterations were classified as pathogenic mutations. As 
30 of these mutations are recurrent in unrelated families, collection of 
phenotypic data of affected family members may provide additional 
genotype-phenotype correlations.
P0819. Functional analysis of splicing mutations in exon 7 of 
NF1 gene
I. Torrente1, I. Bottillo1, A. De Luca1,2, A. Schirinzi1, V. Guida1, S. Calvieri3, C. 
Gervasini4, L. Larizza4, A. Pizzuti1,2, B. Dallapiccola1,2;  
1CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Experimental Medicine 
and Pathology, University of Rome “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 3Department of 
Dermatology - Venereology and Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, University 
of Roma “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy, 4Division of Medical Genetics, San Paolo 
School of Medicine, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
Background. Neurofibromatosis type 1 is one of the most common au -
tosomal dominant disorders, affecting about 1:3,500 individuals. NF1 
exon 7 displays weakly defined exon-intron boundaries, and is particu -
larly prone to missplicing.
Methods. In this study we investigated the expression of exon 7 
transcripts using bioinformatic identification of splicing regulatory se -
quences, and functional minigene analysis of four sequence changes 
[c.910C>T (R304X), c.945G>A/c.946C>A (Q315Q/L316M), c.1005T>C 
(N335N)] identified in exon 7 of three different NF1 patients.
Results. We detected three exonic splicing enhancers (ESEs) and one 
putative exonic splicing silencer (ESS) element. The wild type minige -
ne assay resulted in three alternative isoforms, including a transcript 
lacking NF1 exon 7 (NF1ΔE7). Both the wild type and the mutated 
constructs shared NF1ΔE7 in addition to the complete messenger, but 
displayed a different ratio between the two transcripts. In the pres -
ence of R304X and Q315Q/L316M mutations, the relative proportion 
between the different isoforms is shifted toward the expression of 
NF1ΔE7, while in the presence of N335N variant, the NF1ΔE7 expres -
sion is abolished.Conclusions. It appears mandatory to investigate the Molecular and biochemical basis of disease21
role of each nucleotide change within the NF1 coding sequence, since 
a significant proportion of NF1 exon 7 mutations affects pre-mRNA 
splicing, by disrupting exonic splicing motifs and modifying the delicate 
balance between aberrantly and correctly spliced transcripts.
P0820. The role of Nonsence-mediated RNA decay (NMD) 
mechanism in modifying clinical course and mode of inheritance 
of cardiac arrhythmias
E. V. Zaklyazminskaya, A. V. Polyakov , M. Kurnikova;  
Russian Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Background : Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) is an mRNA 
quality-control mechanism that degrades aberrant mRNAs containing 
premature translation termination codons (PTCs). The PTC mutations 
in cardiac ion channels genes can realize through haploinsufficiency 
due to elimination of the mutant mRNA. Thus, these mutations lead 
to the presence only normal ion channel proteins on surface of the 
cardiomyocyte but in depressed amount.
Methods: Blood samples were collected from 85 unrelated Russian 
families with Long QT syndrome (LQTS) and from 14 Brugada syn -
drome (BrS) patients. Genomic DNA and total RNA were extracted 
from blood using standard methods. Mutation screening was performed 
using PCR-SSCP method and direct sequencing. Results: We identi -
fied 4 PTC mutations in 18 LQT1 patients (fifteen heterozygous and 3 
homozygous mutations), 1 PTC mutation in 5 related LQT2 patients 
and 3 PTC mutations in 3 BrS patients. All heterozygous carriers of 
PTC mutations in KCNQ1  had favorable clinical course of disease. Ho -
mozygous carriers of PTC mutations in KCNQ1  had extremely malig -
nant forms. Heterozygous patients with PTC mutations in KCNH2 and 
SCN5A had characterized by moderate clinical sings but SCD were 
recorded in these families. Conclusions: All heterozygous carriers of 
PTC mutations in KCNQ1  had mild clinical course of disease. Such 
mutations in KCNH2 and SCN5A were not so propitious. Homozygous 
LQT1 probands with two “favorable” mutations had unexpectedly fatal 
manifestations. We speculate that haploinsufficiency of IKr- and INa-
channel subunits have more serious consequences for repolarization 
than the same for IKs.
This work was partly supported by Russian President’s grants NSh-
5736.2006.7; RFFI-06-04-08363-ofi
P0821. Biochemical and structural characterization of Noonan 
syndrome-causing mutations affecting SHP-2’s phosphotyrosyl-
binding pockets
S. Martinelli1, P. Torreri1, G. Bocchinfuso2, L. Stella2, E. Flex1, A. Grottesi3, G. 
Chillemi3, M. Ceccarini1, A. Palleschi2, B. D. Gelb4, T. C. Petrucci1, M. Tartaglia1;  
1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 2Università “Tor Vergata”, Rome, Italy, 
3CASPUR, Rome, Italy, 4Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United 
States.
Missense mutations in PTPN11 cause Noonan syndrome (NS), a ge -
netically heterogeneous developmental disorder with a pleiomorphic 
phenotype. PTPN11 encodes SHP-2, an SH2 domain-containing pro -
tein tyrosine phosphatase that relays signals from activated cell-sur -
face receptors to RAS. NS-causing mutations promote SHP-2’s gain of 
function by either destabilizing its catalytically inactive conformation or 
increasing the affinity and/or specificity of the SH2 domains for phos -
photyrosyl ligands. While the identity of substitution does not seem to 
be critical in some cases, suggesting a crucial role in SHP-2’s function 
for the residue being replaced, an invariant amino acid change is fre -
quently observed, indicating a specific role for the introduced residue.
Here, we characterized functionally and structurally two invariant NS-
causing mutations, T42A and E139D, affecting residues placed in the 
N- and C-SH2 pockets which mediate SHP-2 binding to phosphoty -
rosyl-containing signaling partners. By analyzing in vitro biochemi -
cal behavior (basal and ligand-stimulated phosphatase activity, and 
ligand-binding properties assayed by surface plasmon resonance) of 
all possible substitutions arising from a single base change affecting 
codons 42 and 139, we show that T42A and E139D SHP-2 proteins 
are the only mutants exhibiting a significant increase in ligand-induced 
phosphatase activity and enhanced phophopeptide binding affinity. 
Molecular dynamics simulations performed on selected mutants pro -
vide structural insights of the effects generated by individual mutations 
on protein function. In conclusion, this study provides functional expla -
nation for the invariant occurrence of the T42A and E139D mutaions in 
NS as well as the molecular mechanism of their pathogenicity.P0822. Cancer or not cancer : differential impact of mutations 
in the XPD helicase in xeroderma pigmentosum and 
trichothiosdystrophy ?
T. Magnaldo , Valérie Bergoglio, Lydia Riou, Odile Chevalier-Lagente;  
CNRS, Villejuif, France.
Genetic alteration of the repair of UV-induced DNA lesions (cyclobu -
tane pyrimidine dimers, CPD, and 6-4 photoproducts, 6-4 PP) by nu -
cleotide excision (NER) may result in photo genodermatoses, such 
as the cancer prone xeroderma pigmentosum (XP) syndrome or, the 
cancer free trichothiodystrophie (TTD) syndrome. We aimed at com -
paring the impact of mutations in the XPD gene resulting in either the 
XP-D (R683W) or the TTD/XP-D (R112H) syndrome. We cultured pri -
mary fibroblasts and keratinocytes from small skin biopsies of XP-D 
and of TTD/XP-D patients. Comparative study of DNA repair kinet -
ics demonstrated faster and better DNA repair capacity of TTD/XP-D 
cells compared to XP-D cells and hence, a shorter P53 stabilisation in 
the former. In order to reproduce the 3D cutaneous architecture, we 
elaborated organotypic TTD/XP-D and XP-D skin cultures. Response 
to UVB (290_320 nm) irradiation in term of DNA repair and apoptosis, 
was also better in TTD/XP-D XP-D than in XP-D organotypic skins. 
We also assessed expression of markers of epidermal homeostatis 
and revealled alteration or extinction of some epidermal differentiation 
markers such as filaggrin in XP-D, but not in TTD/XP_D organotypic 
skin cultures.
Altogether these results indicated that the R112H XPD mutation result -
ing in the cancer-free TTD/XP-D syndrome are associated to a better 
vital prognostic of cutaneous cells compared to the XPD R683W muta -
tion characteristic of XP-D cancer-prone syndrome.
P0823. Investigation of plasma carnitine ester profiles in a family 
with homozygous and heterozygous OCTN2 deficiency
G. C. Talián1, K. Komlósi1, L. Magyari1, É. Nemes2, R. Káposzta2, G. Mogyor -
ósy2, K. Méhes1, B. Melegh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, 
Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Pediatrics, Medical and Health Science Center, 
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.
OCTN2 is the high affinity transporter protein for carnitine uptake into 
the cells. In the gene coding for this protein, slc22a5 , a homozygous 
844C deletion causing a V295X nonsense mutation was found in a 
three-year old male Roma patient with hepatopathy and cardiomyopa -
thy. This kind of mutation has already been described in another Hun -
garian Roma subject with primary systemic carnitine deficiency. We 
measured 20 short-, medium- and long-chain carnitine esters by ESI 
tandem mass spectrometry from plasma samples of the patient, his 
consanguineous parents (first cousins) and siblings. The free carnitine 
and all circulating carnitine esters were severely decreased in the pro -
band. The three heterozygous pediatric siblings in the family (2 males 
and 1 female) showed also reduced carnitines levels between the nor -
mal controls and the proband. The parents, who were also hetero -
zygotes, exhibited a highly similar pattern. Oral supplementation with 
50 mg/kg/day dose of L-carnitine normalized the hepatomegaly, el -
evated transaminases and the previous pathologic cardiac ultrasound 
parameters of the proband. In the plasma samples 2 and 13 months 
after the onset of carnitine treatment the free carnitine and many of 
the carnitine esters increased to about half-normal level in response 
to the therapy; however, some individual esters remained still much 
below the controls. The data presented here show severely affected 
carnitine ester metabolism besides the dramatic decrease of the free 
carnitine in primary systemic carnitine deficiency caused by deleteri -
ous slc22a5  mutations. The possible functional consequences of the 
reduced carnitine esters associated with the heterozygous genotype 
require further investigations.
P0824. Mutational analysis of OCA patients in Denmark
K. Grønskov , J. Ek, A. Sand, T. Rosenberg, K. Brøndum-Nielsen;  
Kennedy Institute - National Eye Clinic, Glostrup, Denmark.
Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a genetic heterogeneous disorder 
caused by hypopigmentation of the eyes, hair and skin. The hypopig -
mentation results from defects in melanin production. Lack of melanin 
in the eyes causes misrouting of the optic nerve fibers, resulting in 
nystagmus, foveal hypoplasia, strabismus, photophobia and greatly 
decreased visual acuity. Hypopigmentation of the skin results in en -
hanced sensitivity to light and increased risk of skin cancers.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease21
Clinical diagnosis of subtypes of OCA is difficult due to phenotypic 
variation and overlap between the different types of OCA, and genetic 
analysis is often necessary to establish the diagnosis. We investigat -
ed 58 patients with OCA for mutations in four genes known to cause 
OCA, namely TYR causing OCA1 (OCA1A and OCA1B), OCA2 caus -
ing OCA2, TYRP1 causing OCA3 and MATP causing OCA4. Overall, 
we found two mutations (homozygous or compound heterozygous) 
explaining the OCA in 44 % of the patients (26 patients of 58), and 
one mutation in 29 % (17 of 58). In the remaining 26 % (15 of 58) we 
found no mutations in any of the four genes. Of the 26 patients with 
two mutations, 62 % (16 of 26) had two mutations in TYR, 31 % (8 of 
26) had two mutations in OCA2 and 7 % (2 of 26) had two mutations in 
MATP. No mutations were found in TYRP1.
P0825. Skin changes in oculo-dento-digital dysplasia are 
correlated with truncating mutations in GJA1
M. Vreeburg, E. A. De Zwart-Storm, D. Markus-Soekarman, M. van Geel, M. A. 
Van Steensel ;  
University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
Oculo-dento-digital dysplasia (ODDD, OMIM no.164210) is a pleiotro -
pic disorder caused by mutations in the GJA1 gene that codes for the 
gap junction protein connexin43. While the gene is highly expressed 
in skin, ODDD is usually not associated with skin symptoms. We re -
cently described a family with ODDD and palmoplantar keratoderma. 
Interestingly, mutation carriers had a novel dinucleotide deletion in the 
GJA1 gene that resulted in truncation of part of the C-terminus. We 
speculated, that truncation of the C-terminus may be uniquely asso -
ciated with skin disease in ODDD. Here, we describe a patient with 
ODDD and palmar hyperkeratosis caused by a novel dinucleotide 
deletion that truncates most of the connexin43 C-terminus. Thus, our 
findings support the notion that such mutations are associated with the 
occurrence of skin symptoms in ODDD and provide the first evidence 
for the existence of a genotype-phenotype correlation.
P0826. Genotype-phenotype correlations in mitochondrial optic 
neuropathies
P. Amati-Bonneau1, M. Ferré1, C. Verny2, M. Barth1, V. Guillet1, A. Chevrollier1, 
Y. Malthièry1, D. Bonneau1, P. Reynier1;  
1Département de Biochimie et Génétique, CHU, Angers, France, 2Département 
de Neurologie, CHU, Angers, France.
Mitochondrial optic neuropathies include Autosomal Dominant Optic 
Atrophy (ADOA), Leber’s Hereditary Optic Neuropathy (LHON) and 
Autosomal Dominant Optic Atrophy and Cataract (ADOAC). ADOA 
generally starts in childhood, is characterized by progressive de -
crease in visual acuity and optic atrophy. Mutations in the optic atrophy 
1 (OPA1) gene are implicated in about 40% of the cases of ADOA. 
LHON, caused by mutations in mitochondrial DNA, is characterized by 
severe bilateral optic atrophy usually starting between the ages of 18 
and 35. ADOAC, a rare phenotype of optic atrophy and cataract, is due 
to mutations in a mitochondrial protein nuclear encoded (OPA3).
We report here a molecular study of 600 patients with optic atrophy 
referred to our center during the last three years. Of these, 60% were 
familial cases and 40% sporadic. The mutation responsible for the dis -
ease was identified in 290 patients (49%). Mitochondrial DNA muta -
tions were found in 90 patients (15%), OPA1 mutations in 186 patients 
(31%) and OPA3 mutations in 14 patients (2%). Several ADOA pa -
tients were affected by neurosensorial deafness or peripheral axonal 
neuropathy. A specific genotype-phenotype correlation was observed 
in patients harboring the R445H OPA1 mutation and optic atrophy as -
sociated to deafness. 10% of sporadic patients carried pathogenic mu -
tation in the OPA1 gene.Mitochondrial DNA and OPA1/3 gene analy -
ses allow diagnosing about 50% of the patients. Our results suggest 
that patients with hereditary optic neuropathies could greatly benefit 
from neurological investigations and that sporadic cases of optic atro -
phy need to be explored at the molecular level.P0827. Morphological abnormalities of the mitochondrial 
network in fibroblasts of patients affected with autosomal 
dominant and recessive optic neuropathies
S. Gerber , N. Khadom, A. Munnich, J. Kaplan, J. M. Rozet;  
Unité de Recherches Génétique et Epigénétique des Maladies Métaboliques, 
Neurosensorielles et du Développement, INSERM U781, Paris, France.
Inherited optic atrophies (OPA) are frequently inherited as an auto -
somal dominant trait. Most of them are related to mutations in the 
OPA1 gene. An other uncommon loci have been reported on 22q12.3 
(OPA5). Besides, autosomal recessive non syndromic OPA are rare. 
Only one locus has been reported on 8q23 (ROA1).
OPA1 and genes involved in syndromic forms of OA were shown to 
play a crucial role in the mitochondrial function. The purpose of this 
study was to investigate a possible involvement of mitochondria in 
autosomal dominant and recessive isolated OAs of unknown genetic 
origin.
Fibroblasts of 1 OPA1, 2 OPA5 and 2 ROA1 patients were labelled 
using MitoTracker RedCMXRos dye and compared to control fibro -
blasts.
Morphological abnormalities of the mitochondrial network were ob -
served in the five patients compared to the respective controls. The 
cellular distribution of mitochondria in fibroblasts of patients related to 
OPA5 and OPA1 was superimposable: the labelling of the MitoTracker 
appeared fragmented and highly concentrated around the nucleus of 
cells (ring-like aspect).
Interestingly, the distribution of mitochondria in the fibroblasts of the 
two ROA1 patients was also superimposable but different from that of 
other patients. The labelling of the MitoTracker was highly heteroge -
neous and testified a fragmentation of the mitochondrial network but 
no nuclear ring-like aspect was noted.
This study suggests that a selective vulnerability of the optic nerve to 
perturbations in mitochondrial function may help selecting candidate 
genes as genes encoding proteins with high mitochondrial targeting 
probability for both the OPA5 and ROA1 loci.
P0828. Molecular Analyses of OPN Gene in Urolithiasis Patients
B. Gogebakan1, A. Arslan1, Y. Igci1, M. Igci1, S. Oguzkan1, S. Erturhan2, H. 
Sen2;  
1Gaziantep University, Health Institution, Department of Medical Biology, Ga -
zantep, Turkey, 2Gaziantep University, Medical Biology, Urology, Gazantep, 
Turkey.
Urolithiasis, which is largely composed of calcium oxalate, is a common 
disease and urinary tract stone development has not been elucidated 
at the molecular level yet. Accumulating evidences suggest that uro -
lithiasisis a complex process including crystal nucleation, growth, ag -
gregation, and crystal retention within the renal tubules. Several model 
studies suggest that the protein constituents of stone matrix are the 
stone formation modulators. One of these proteins is osteopontin, an 
aspartic acid rich urinary protein and a potent inhibitor of CaOx stone 
formation. OPN gene is located on chromosome 4q21-25 and consists 
of 7 exons. OPN gene has a large promoter region site. We think that 
OPN gene promoter region may play an important role in the CaOx 
stone formation process. The upstream nucleotide sequence of OPN 
promoter region is between 111-2268 bp (D14813). In this study, three 
families having familial transmission (n=21), and sporadic urolithiasis 
patients (n=20), and control cases (n=20) were analyzed for OPN 
gene. OPN gene was analyzed by PCR-SSCP and DNA sequencing, 
respectively. We found two SNP’s in exon 7 (C6983A, T8274C) and 
three SNP’s in promoter (G-1748A, A-592T, G-155T). In this study, we 
demonstrated that new five SNP’s in OPN gene. Our preliminary work 
is the first study for investigating the role of OPN gene promoter region 
in urolithiasis. The results showed that SNP’s in promoter region of the 
OPN gene may be related to familial urolithiasis. We concluded that 
these new SNP’s need to be analyzed in large patients groups with 
urolithiasis in different populations.
P0829. Estrogen-related receptor gamma genotype influences 
bone mass in a healthy population of French-Canadian women.
F. Rousseau1,2, L. Elfassihi3, G. Cardinal3, S. Giroux3;  
1CanGeneTest consortium & Université Laval, Quebec, PQ, Canada, 2URGHM, 
Centre de recherche du Centre hospitalier universitaire de Québec, Québec, 
PQ, Canada, 3URGHM, Centre de recherche du Centre hospitalier universitaire Molecular and biochemical basis of disease21
de Québec, Quebec, PQ, Canada.
Background: The relationship between osteoporosis and decreasing 
estrogen levels at menopause has been known for 60 years. Some 
genes involved in the estrogen pathway, mainly estrogen receptor 1 
(ESR1), have been widely studied in association with bone density. 
Estrogen-related receptors (ESRRs) are orphan receptors identified 
on the basis of their sequence similarity to ESR1 and for which no 
natural ligand is identified to date. All three (ESRRalpha, ESRRbeta 
and ESRRgamma) were shown to interfere with estrogen signaling.
Methods: Given the cross-talk between ERs and ESRRs, we studied 
the association between their sequence variants and bone measure -
ments (heel QUS and DXA at femoral neck(FN) and lumbar spine(LS)) 
in 2481 French-Canadian women. Sixteen women were sequenced to 
identify polymorphisms that were then genotyped by high-throughput 
ASO-PCR.
Results: We report statistically-significant associations between a 
silent coding variant of ESRRgamma and LS, SOS, BUA and SI in 
women (p-values from 0.006-0.04). The association with FN was not 
significant (p=0.05). Given that this variant might be in linkage dis -
equilibrium with another unidentified polymorphism, we analyzed the 
linkage block containing this variant using TagSNPs selected from 
HapMap data. Eight SNPs were selected in a block of 20kb and were 
genotyped in a sample of 1340 premenopausal women with the Se -
quenom platform. Among those, two SNPs were more strongly associ -
ated than Ser319Ser with bone phenotypes in a large group of 5021 
women aged from 25 to 91 years, pre and postmenopausal. Conclu -
sion: ESRRgamma appears to be associated with bone density in 
women.
P0830. Further delineation of OTX2 as a causative gene for 
microphthalmia: use of LightScanner and MLPA for rapid 
mutation detection.
A. W. Wyatt1, D. Bunyan2, C. Ponting1, A. Martin1, A. Salt3, R. O. Collin3, D. 
Robinson2, N. K. Ragge1,3;  
1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Wessex Regional Genetics 
Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 3Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, 
United Kingdom.
Developmental eye anomalies, including anophthalmia and microph -
thalmia (AM), are a major cause of childhood visual impairment and af -
fect 1/3-4,000. We previously identified heterozygous mutations in the 
bicoid-type homeodomain gene, OTX2 (MIM 600037) in eight families 
with developmental eye anomalies, including twins. The principal fea -
tures were AM and retinal dystrophy in association with developmental 
delay, seizures and brain malformation. There was a high incidence of 
gonosomal mosaicism and complex inheritance patterns. We screened 
a further cohort of 60 individuals with developmental eye anomalies 
and identified six patients with heterozygous mutations or deletions of 
OTX2. One patient had a visible cytogenetic deletion of 14q22-q23 that 
included the OTX2 gene, four had novel mutations detected by High-
Res Melting™ in a Lightscanner™ machine, confirmed on sequencing, 
and one had a small deletion of the OTX2 gene detected by MLPA. 
The first mutation was c.85G>A (p.V29M) (unlikely to be causative 
since patient has distinctive Donnai-Barrow syndrome, and patient’s 
unaffected father also has mutation). The other mutations were: (1) 
c.93C>G (p.Y31X); (2) c.313C>T (p.Q105X) (patient also has a twin 
with a less severe phenotype); (3) c.395delAG (p.E132fs143X); and 
all cause premature truncation of the protein. The findings support a 
model of loss-of-function mutations in OTX2 causing microphthalmia. 
Furthermore, the presence of the mutations in some unaffected fam -
ily members supports our previous finding of incomplete penetrance 
of OTX2 mutations. The use of LightScanner™, MLPA and direct se -
quencing in tandem allowed rapid identification of these novel muta -
tions and their inheritance pattern.
P0831. The association of mutation in FSHR, INHα and FMR1 
genes with ovarian dysfunction.
G. Livshits1,2, A. Bychkova2, L. Livshits1;  
1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics (National Academy of Sciences of 
Ukraine), Kiev, Ukraine, 2Clinica “ISIDA”, Kiev, Ukraine.
Premature ovarian failure (POF) is a secondary gonadotrophic amen -
orrhoea affecting 1-3% of females. FSH (follicle stimulation hormone) 
and its receptor (FSHR) play a major role in the development of follicles 
and regulation of steriogenesis in ovary. Mutations in FSHR might the -oretically lead to an impaired signal transduction and diminished ovar -
ian reserve. Genes encoding three inhibin subunits can be proposed 
as candidates for POF due to its role in negative feedback control of 
FSH. POF was first noted as an unexpected phenotype among FMR1 
gene premutation carriers. The association of Asn680Ser transition in 
FSHR, Ala257Thr transition in INHα1 and CGG-repeats in 5’UTR re -
gion of FMR1 genes with POF and individual susceptibility to exogeno -
cal GT was studied. The frequencies of INHa1 Ala257Thr transition 
(7,8%) and mutant FSHR genotype Ser680Ser (23%) in women with 
clinical POF diagnosis (n=77) were higher (4,4% and 16%) than in 
control (n=183). The high risk alleles of FMR1 gene (> 40 CGG-re -
peats) were revealed in 3,9% of POF patients. 2,6% of patients, but 
nobody in control group, had Ala257Thr transition and high risk alleles 
of FMR1 gene. The quantity of oocytes after stimulation were signifi -
cantly lower in Ala257Thr transition carriers versus women without Al -
a257Thr transition. The frequency of Ser680Ser FSHR (32%) mutant 
genotype was statistically higher (16%) in “poor responders” group 
(n=28) than do normal-ovulatory controls (n=122). Our data demon -
strated that investigated mutation in genes encoding FSHR, INHa1 
and FMR1 proteins involved in POF-pathogenesis and altered ovarian 
sensitivity to exogenous FSH.
P0832. Mutational analysis of the p63 gene in EEC syndrome 
and related disorders
R. Bocciardi1, M. Divizia1, M. Lerone1, F. M. Senes2, M. Seri3, M. Priolo4, A. 
Adami5, F. Benedicenti6, R. Ravazzolo1,7;  
1G.Gaslini Institute, Molecular Genetics and Cytogenetics Unit, Genova, Italy, 
2G.Gaslini Institute, Orthopedics and Traumatology Unit, Genova, Italy, 3Dept of 
Internal Medicine, Cardioangiology and Epatology, University of Bologna, Bo -
logna, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Unit, Bianchi-Melacrino-Morelli Hospital, Reggio 
Calabria, Italy, 5Pediatrics and Neonatal Patology Unit, San Carlo Borromeo, 
Milano, Italy, 6Genetic Counselling Service, Central Hospital, Bolzano, Italy, 
7Dept of Pediatric Sciences G. de Toni, University of Genova, Genova, Italy.
The p63 (TP73L) gene codes for a protein belonging to the p53 family. 
Coding sequence consists of 16 exons generating several different 
transcripts. The protein contains two transactivation domains, a central 
DNA binding domain (DBD), an isomerization domain, a protein-pro -
tein interaction and an inhibitory domain. p63 plays a crucial role in the 
formation and maintenance of stratified epithelia, skin and its append -
ages, and limb development. Heterozygous mutations have been as -
sociated with syndromes affecting skin, ectodermal derivatives, limbs 
and cranio-facial district. Prototype of this family of syndromes is EEC, 
characterized by Ectrodactyly, Ectodermal displasia, Cleft lip-palate. 
p63 is mutated in the 98% of cases of EEC syndrome type 3, in other 
related disorders (AEC, LMS, ADULT, Rapp-Hodgkin) and in isolated 
ectrodactyly.
We describe 11 patients, 9 sporadic cases and a family with two af -
fected members. 4 individuals affected by EEC syndrome, 6 individu -
als with isolated ectrodactyly, and a single case with ectrodactyly/cleft 
lip-palate associated with complex phenotype. Mutational analysis of 
p63 coding exons allowed identification of 5 heterozygous variants: 4 
different mutations in the EEC patients and a polymorphic variant in 
a case with isolated ectrodactyly. In the EEC patients, we have found 
three different missense mutation leading to residue substitution in the 
DBD of the protein: R204W, S272T, R279C for which we propose func -
tional speculations. Moreover, we have found an intronic substitution 
resulting in aberrant splicing, as assessed on patient’s cDNA. Experi -
ments aimed to clarify the impact of this mutation on protein function 
will be described.
P0833. Paraoxonase PON1 gene polymorphisms, enzyme 
activity and lipid profile relationship in healthy volunteers
Y. Dahmani1,2, M. Lima1, J. Montoya2, M. López Pérez2, C. Dìez sánchez2;  
1Departamento do Biología, CIRN, Universidade dos Açores., Ponta Delgada. 
9501-801, Portugal, 2Departamento de Bioquímica Biología Molecular y Celu -
lar. University of Zaragoza, 50013 Zaragoza, Spain.
Human serum paraoxonase 1 (PON1), a high-density lipoprotein 
(HDL)-associated enzyme, has been shown to reduce the oxidation 
of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and HDL by degrading lipid perox -
ides. This property of PON1 accounts for its ability to protect against 
atherosclerosis. The gene encoding this enzyme PON1 shows two 
polymorphisms Q192R and L55M. Q/R alleles show high and low lipid 
peroxides hydrolysis ability, respectively. The aim of the present study Molecular and biochemical basis of disease21
was to investigate in healthy male volunteers (N= 89, 18-55 years) 
from Zaragoza (north centre of Spain) the relationship of the PON1 
Q192R and L55M polymorphisms with lipid profile parameters. PON1 
gene polymorphisms were checked by PCR/RFLPs, and serum para -
oxonase/arylesterse activities were measured spectrophotometrically 
by hydrolysis of paraoxon and phenylacetate respectively. Plasma lip -
ids: Triglycerides (TG), Cholesterol (Chol), HDLc, LDL were measured 
by routine enzymatic methods, and atherogenic indice (AI) was deter -
mined: Chol/HDLc.
The allelic frequencies of PON1 192/55 were: p(Q)=0.63, p(R)=0.37, 
p(L)=0.66, P(M)=0.34 and were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Re -
sults of activities paraoxonase and arylesterase were respectively 
118.9 ± 72.5 U/l and 95.4 ± 20.5 U/l; and ratio paraoxonase/aryles -
terase showed a good correlation with genotype as described in Cau -
casian population (p<0.0001). Also, this ratio was corrolationated sig -
nificatively with the AI which was higher in individual aged more than 
40 years and specially who’s carrying R allele (ANOVA P<0.0001). 
These results allow us to conclude that R allele from 192 PON1 poly -
morphism could represent an atherogenic risk factor associate to the 
age and lipid profile.
P0834. LRRK2 mutations and alpha-synuclein level in patients 
with familial Parkinson’s disease.
A. K. Emelianov1, A. E. Taraskina1, O. N. Ivanova2, E. Y. Smirnova1, A. V. Solo -
vieva1, A. F. Yakimovskii2, S. N. Pchelina1,2;  
1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Pavlov’s State Medical University of Saint-Petersburg, Saint-Petersburg, Rus -
sian Federation.
Parkinson disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenera -
tive disease in humans; its etiology is largely unknown. The increased 
level of alpha-synuclein (SNCA) is implicated in PD pathogenesis. The 
identification of causative mutations in several genes demonstrates the 
existence of monogenic forms of PD. PD caused by mutations in the 
leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene is the most frequent. We 
screened common mutations in the LRRK2 gene (G2019S, I2012T, 
I2020T, R1441C/G/H) in 222 PD patients (mean age 62,7±9,8 years) 
from the North-Western region of Russia. Three families bearing the 
G2019S mutation (3/63; 4.8%) were found. In addition, we found one 
patient with the G2019S mutation and one patient with the R1441C 
mutation among 159 patients with sporadic PD. The levels of SNCA 
mRNA in lymphocytes were estimated in nine familial PD patients 
(mean age 62.7±11.4 years) with unknown etiology of the disease 
and eighteen controls (mean age 62.6±16.3 years) using quantitative 
real-time PCR with TagMan probes. The level of G protein (GNB2L1) 
mRNA was used as internal control. The level of SNCA mRNA was 
higher in PD patients (2.1±0.67) than in controls (1.0±0.53) (p<0.0001). 
Our study showed the high frequency of the LRRK2 mutations among 
PD patients in Russia and demonstrated further support that elevated 
level of SNCA expression might be implicated in PD pathogenesis.
P0835. Analysis of the parkin gene (PARK2) exon 1-12 dosage in 
patients with sporadic Parkinson‘s disease from Russia
E. Semenova1, M. Shadrina1, G. Bagyeva2, M. Farkhiulina1, P. Slominsky1, S. 
Illarioshkin2, S. Limborska1;  
1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Rus -
sian Federation, 2Department of Neurogenetics, Institute of Neurology, Moscow, 
Russian Federation.
Most patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD) have sporadic form of the 
disease with a multifactorial etiology due to interactions between en -
vironmental conditions and the genetic constitution of the individuals. 
One of the causes of PD is homozygous or compound heterozygous 
mutations in the PARK2 gene. Deletions and duplications of single ex -
ons or exon groups account for a large proportion of the gene muta -
tions, therefore it becomes necessary to assess the frequency of these 
mutations in patients with sporadic PD. To detect these mutations, we 
developed and applied an effective technique based on the real-time 
TaqMan PCR system. We analyzed rearrangements in exons 1-12 of 
the PARK2 gene in 140 patients with early-onset Parkinson’s disease 
(EOPD, age of onset less than 50 years) and in 100 patients with clas -
sical sporadic Parkinson’s disease (age of onset more than 50 years). 
All the patients were from Russia. The frequency of these mutations in 
EOPD patients was 12%, in classical sporadic PD patients - 3%. Most 
frequent rearrangements were detected in exons 3 and 4. The results of our work let us conclude that exon rearrangements in the PARK2 
gene have a significant role in the pathogenesis of sporadic PD in 
patients from Russia and it is rational to start detection of these muta -
tions with the analysis of exons 3 and 4. Detection of exon rearrange -
ments in the PARK2 gene can be used for the diagnosis of Parkinson’s 
disease, symptomless stage included, which is very important for the 
effective treatment.
P0836. Analysis of the human periostin promoter and its 
polymorphic variants
F. Giacopelli , R. Marciano, A. Covone, R. Ravazzolo;  
Molecular Genetics, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy.
Periostin is a secreted protein that is highly expressed in early osteo -
blastic cells in vitro and periosteum, periodontal ligament tissues in 
vivo, as well as in the endocardial cushions and valves of the develop -
ing heart. It is known to support cellular adhesion and spreading in 
vitro of chondrocytes, fibroblasts, and a number of cancer cell lines. 
The mechanisms of transcriptional regulation of human periostin are 
poorly understood. With the objective to clarify the molecular basis of 
gene regulation, we have undertaken a characterization of the human 
Periostin regulatory region by transfection of promoter fragments, from 
-1790, -1000 and -500 to +1, fused to the luciferase reporter gene into 
the U20S osteosarcoma cell line. Transcriptional activity of all promot -
er constructs was well appreciable: the promoter construct containing 
region -1000/+1 showed the highest luciferase activity compared to the 
other constructs. DNA elements with negative effect on transcriptional 
activity were detectable between -1000 and -1790 and positive effect 
between -1000 and -500. Analysis of the periostin 5’ UTR revealed the 
presence of variants inside the promoter region. Genotyping of 100 
caucasian blood donors showed that there are three polymorphic sites 
in the first 2000 bp upstream of the ATG start codon: -1945 (MAF 0.22), 
-1658 (MAF 0.16), -941 (MAF 0.22). The effect and characterization of 
different combinantions of the above variants are discussed.
P0837. Based on allele-specific ligation reaction PCR-analysis 
for registration of the most frequent mutations in the PAH gene.
M. Sokolova , A. Stepanova, A. Polyakov;  
Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is the most common inborn error of amino acid 
metabolism in Europeans. It is caused by mutations in the phenylala -
nine hydroxylase ( PAH) gene (MIM# 261600). Up to date it is known 
more than 500 mutations. This disease is associated with a severe 
mental retardation.
For most frequent in Russian PKU-patients mutation screening 
(p.Arg408Trp, IVS12+1g>a, IVS10-11g>a, IVS4+5g>t, p.Arg252Trp, 
p.Arg261Gln, p.Arg158Gln, p.Pro281Leu) in exons 4, 5, 7, 11 and 12 
of the PAH gene the multiplex system based on allele-specific liga -
tion reaction PCR-analysis was created. This system applied to detect 
81,1% mutations in our patients.
The PAH probemix contains 24 different probes with amplification 
products between 83 and 139 bp. Length difference between consecu -
tive amplification products is 3 or 4 bp.
This work was partly supported by Russian President’s grand NSh-
5736.2006.7.
P0838. Phenotype-genotype correlations for patients with 
phenyketonuria in Latvia
N. Pronina1,2, R. Lugovska1, O. Sterna1, Z. Daneberga1;  
1Latvian State Children`s Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 2Rigas Stradins University, 
Riga, Latvia.
Deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) impairs hepatic hydrox -
ylation of phenylalanine to tyrosine and is the most common inborn 
error of amino-acid metabolism in Caucasians. Mutations of the PAH 
gene coding the hepatic enzyme result in various degrees of enzyme 
impairment, resulting in different metabolic and clinical outcome of hy -
perphenylketonuria (HPA). For diagnostic and therapeutic purposes is 
used the following phenotype classification: ,,classic”, ,,moderate” and 
,,mild” PKU and ,,mild hyperphenylalaninemia”.
The prevalence of the R408W mutation among Latvian PKU patients 
determines the severe clinical form for the disease. The R408W muta -
tion (c.1222C->T), a C to T transition in exon 12 of the PAH gene, re -
sults in the substitution of tryptophan for arginine at amino-acid residue 
408 and is a null mutation associated with < 0,3% of normal enzyme Molecular and biochemical basis of disease220
activity. In Latvian population the R408W mutation is associated with 
RFLP haplotype 2, the VNTR-3 allele, and the 238bp-STR allele with 
frequency 77% from all mutant chromosomes. Almost 56% of patients 
are homozygous for the R408W, 40% are compound heterozygous 
and 3,3% have no R408W mutation. According to the pre-treatment 
Phe blood level and Phe tolerance, 90,2% (55/61) patients are classi -
fied as having a classical PKU phenotype, 4,9% (3/61) patients - mod -
erate, and 4,9% (3/61) patients - mild.
Patients with moderate and mild PKU phenotype are compaund het -
erozygotes, five of them have R408W in one allele and G272X, A104D 
and E178G in other allele, two patients have an unidentified other 
allele and one patient has no R408W mutation. Final results are in 
progress.
P0839. PLP1 overexpression in PMD and PMLD patients: interest 
of fibroblasts analysis
M. Bonnet-Dupeyron1,2, P. Combes1, L. Ouchchane3, G. Giraud1, O. Boespflug-
Tanguy1,4, C. Vaurs-Barriere1;  
1INSERM, UMR384, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2CHU de Clermont-Ferrand, 
Cytogénétique Médicale, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 3CHU de Clermont-
Ferrand, Département de Santé Publique, Unité de Biostatistique, Télématique 
et Traitement d’Image, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 4CHU de Clermont-Ferrand, 
Génétique Médicale, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
The myelin proteolipid protein 1 (PLP1), which encodes for the main 
proteins of the CNS myelin, is implicated in the X-linked disorders of 
CNS myelination, Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease (PMD) and Spastic 
Paraplegia 2 (SPG2). Large duplications including the whole gene ac -
count for 60% of gene alterations. Transgenic mice with additional Plp 
gene copies are identically hypomyelinated and have demonstrated 
that Plp overexpression may act in a dominant negative effect on my -
elinating oligodendrocytes that enter into apoptosis.
By real time quantitative RT-PCR, we quantified PLP/DM20 mRNA 
levels in nerve biopsies (n=6) and primary cultured fibroblasts (n=14), 
from PMD patients carrying a PLP1 gene duplication. An overexpres -
sion of the PLP/DM20 transcripts was observed in all samples com -
pared to controls, suggesting that PLP1 expression in fibroblasts and 
in PNS may reflect PLP1 expression level in the CNS. Therefore, fi -
broblasts from 17 male PMD/SPG2 patients without identified PLP1 
or GJA12 abnormality (PMD Like, PMLD), were analyzed. Among 
them, 8 present with a PLP/DM20 mRNAs overexpression, implicat -
ing a PLP1 dysregulation due to mechanism(s) alternative to the gene 
duplication. All have a mild form of dysmyelination. Neither genomic 
mutations nor rearrangements have been found in the PLP1 promoter 
and in the ASE cis regulating elements. A mutation was observed for 
one patient in the 3’UTR. Its functional relevance on the mRNAs stabil -
ity is under evaluation.
In conclusion, fibroblasts represent a useful tool to quantify the PLP1 
gene expression level and have allowed us to demonstrate that the 
PLP1 gene may remain a candidate gene for PMLD patients.
P0840. Splicing abnormalities associated with different types of 
PLP1 mutations.
M. Bonnet-Dupeyron1, P. Combes1, O. Boespflug-Tanguy1,2, C. Vaurs-Bar -
riere1;  
1INSERM UMR384, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2CHU de Clermont-ferrand, 
Génétique Médicale, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
The myelin proteolipid protein 1 (PLP1) gene encodes, by alternative 
splicing of its exon 3, for the main proteins of the CNS myelin: PLP 
and DM20. Duplications of the gene and point mutations are impli -
cated in the X-linked disorder of CNS myelination: Pelizaeus-Merz -
bacher Disease and Spastic Paraplegia 2. To assess the functional 
consequences of different types of PLP1 mutations (7 exonic punctual 
mutations, 3 deletions of 1 nucleotide, 3 consensus splicing site and 1 
nucleotide substitution in intron 3 of unknown significance), PLP/DM20 
transcripts were sequenced from peripheral nerves and/or primary cul -
tured fibroblasts.
Transcripts analysis has shown that the intron 3 mutation leads to the 
intron retention, demonstrating its implication in the phenotype and 
suggesting the potential existence of an intron splicing regulatory ele -
ment in the surrounding sequence. Unexpectedly, one of the 7 exonic 
punctual mutations, initially thought to be a missense, was demon -
strated to impair the splicing by creating a new donor site exclusively 
used, at least in the fibroblasts, instead of the classical site. In addition, transcripts analysis has allowed to assess that mutations in the con -
sensus splicing sites are deleterious for PLP1 gene expression and to 
identify the different cryptic sites that are alternatively used.
This study demonstrates that splicing abnormalities can result from 
various types of mutations. Therefore, such approaches are useful to 
better evaluate the genotype-phenotype correlations and to identify in -
tronic or exonic splicing regulatory elements.
P0841. Polycystin-2 regulates cellular proliferation in a p21/
Cdk2-independent manner
K. N. Felekkis1, P. Koupepidou1, E. Kastanos1, N. Gretz2, C. Bai3, L. Tsiokas3, 
C. Deltas1;  
1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Medical Research Center, Klinikum 
Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 3Department of 
Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma, OK, 
United States.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is a com -
mon inherited disorder, characterized by progressive cyst formation 
and loss of kidney function. ADPKD is principally linked to two genes, 
PKD1 and PKD2. The pathogenesis is currently thought to involve 
dysregulated epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation, alteration 
in membrane proteins polarity and abnormal fluid accumulation. The 
molecular mechanism of cystogenesis has not been fully elucidated. 
A recent report implicated polycystin-2 in the regulation of epithelial 
cell proliferation. Specifically, the authors suggested that PC-2 over-
expression suppresses cell proliferation through inhibition of the p21/
Cdk2 pathway. To better understand the role of PC-2 in epithelial cell 
proliferation, we utilized various cellular models generated by stable 
expression of mutated (R742X and 1-702) and wild-type PKD2. In 
contrast to the previous data, over-expression of wild-type or mutated 
polycystin-2 in two different cell-lines does not affect cellular growth. 
On the contrary, electrophysiology experiments demonstrated that 
overexpression of wild-type PKD2 increases both inwards and out -
wards K+ currents in these cells. Interestingly, primary renal epithelial 
cells from transgenic rats generated by expression of the 1-702 PKD2 
have elevated levels of the proliferation marker, PCNA. However, in 
both primary cells and stable cell lines, wild -type or mutated PC-2 do 
not alter p21 levels and Cdk2 activity. Collectively, these data suggest 
that in our models, PC-2 regulates epithelial cell proliferation in a p21/
Cdk2-independent manner and that PC-2 inactivation by itself is not 
sufficient for abnormal cell proliferation. Experiments are underway to 
verify these data by genome-wide expression and pathway analysis.
P0842. Digenic/Triallelic inheritance in polycystic kidney disease 
suggests a new mutational mechanism with mutations in a 
transcription factor and its regulated gene
N. Ortiz Brüchle1, V. Frank1, K. Häffner2, K. Zerres1, C. Bergmann1;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Aachen, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics, 
Freiburg, Germany.
The transcription factor HNF1ß has been recently shown to be cru -
cial for kidney development, as demonstrated by in vivo experiments 
where Xenopus embryos microinjected with mutant HNF1ß RNA tran -
scripts had impaired pronephros development. HNF1ß binds specifi -
cally as homo- or heterodimer in concert with HNF1α to the proximal 
PKHD1 promoter and stimulates transcription of the gene responsible 
for autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). Recent 
studies revealed that mutations of the HNF1 binding site, expression 
of a dominant-negative HNF1ß mutant and mice with renal-specific 
inactivation of Hnf1ß exhibit a drastic defect in PKHD1 expression. 
Here we present a patient with polycystic kidney disease heterozy -
gote for the novel PKHD1 1-bp deletion c.1151delA (p.P383fs), while 
a second PKHD1 change was not identified. HNF1ß mutation analysis 
revealed the novel, non-conservative missense mutation c.244G>A 
(p.D82N) that affects an evolutionarily highly conserved residue and 
considerably disturbs the protein’s DNA binding domain. Further argu -
ments of its pathogenic character are the conservation of p.D82 in 
its counterpart HNF1α and that it was not present among 500 tested 
chromosomes. Reporter gene analysis is currently underway to further 
corroborate its functional significance. Beyond the first description of 
digenic and/or triallelic inheritance in polycystic kidney disease, our 
study is of general interest as it demonstrates an intriguing new regula -
tory mutational mechanism with mutations in a transcription factor and 
its activated gene.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease221
P0843. Classic Rett syndrome (RTT) and Preserved Speech 
Variant: new approaches to understand the genetic differences
E. Scala1, R. Caselli1, F. Papa1, F. Ottimo1, R. Artuso1, M. A. Mencarelli1, I. Me -
loni1, F. Mari1, M. Zappella2, G. Hayek2, F. Ariani1, A. Renieri1;  
1Dep. Molecular Biology, U.O. Genetica Medica, University of Siena, Siena, 
Italy, 2Infantile Neuropsychiatry, Siena General Hospital, Siena, Italy.
In classic RTT, the III stage is characterized by mild improvement of 
eye contact. At the same stage the Preserved Speech Variants (PSV) 
recover the ability to speak and to use hands. Both phenotypes are 
due to similar or identical de novo  mutations in MECP2 (http://www.
biobank.unisi.it and Sampieri, Hum Mut 2007). In order to under -
stand the genetic differences between the two phenotypes we have: i) 
searched for statistically significant differences in allele frequencies of 
polymorphisms in genes associated to a similar phenotype ( CDKL5 ), 
target genes ( BDNF ) or genes involved in neurodegeneration ( APOE ); 
ii) analysed differences in genomic variations by array-CGH in two 
sisters with discordant phenotypes, balanced XCI, and the same 
MECP2  partial deletion absent in parents. We have established that 
the p.Q791P CDKL5 polymorphism is not involved in the modulation 
of RTT phenotype. Array-CGH analysis on the above described RTT 
sisters showed a duplication of 390 Kb on chromosome 16 in the clas -
sic RTT girl inherited from the healthy father and absent in the PSV 
sister. The duplication includes 10 genes. Two are disease-genes: one 
related to a known myopathy and the other to a CNS disease. Our hy -
pothesis is that one or more duplicated genes could be dosage sensi -
tive and could act as modifiers of the phenotype generated by MECP2 . 
Understanding the genetic differences between classic RTT and PSV 
will help in designing therapeutic strategies.
P0844. Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia with normal axoneme 
ultrastructure caused by DNAH11 mutations
L. Bartoloni1, K. Hoffmann2, N. T. Loges3, D. Birker4, C. Rossier1, M. M. deSan -
ti5, H. Olbrich3, M. Fliegauf3, M. Failly1, U. Liebers2, M. Collura6, G. Gaedicke2, 
S. Mundlos2,4, U. Wahn2, J. L. Blouin1, B. Niggemann2, H. Omran3, S. E. An -
tonarakis1, G. C. Schwabe2;  
1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Charité University Hospital, 
Berlin, Germany, 3Albert Ludwigs University, Freiburg, Germany, 4Max Planck 
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 5University of Siena, Siena, 
Italy, 6Ospedale Civico, Palermo, Italy.
Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (PCD) is a disorder characterized by per -
turbed or absent beating of motile cilia and often associated with ran -
dom organ lateralization (Kartagener Syndrome, KS). We present 
a German family with five individuals affected by PCD and one with 
KS. Ciliary beating was reduced or absent in native respiratory cilia of 
the majority of affected individuals. Analysis using high-speed video 
microscopy revealed an abnormal hyperkinetic beating of respiratory 
cilia with a reduced bending capacity of the axonemes. The axonemal 
ultrastructure was normal and outer dynein arms were intact, as ana -
lyzed by electron microscopy and immunohistochemistry. Microsatel -
lite analysis indicated linkage to the dynein heavy chain DNAH11 on 
chromosome 7p15. All affected individuals were found to be compound 
heterozygotes for mutations c.12415C>G and c.13583_13639del. 
Both mutations are located in the C-terminal domain and result in a 
truncated DNAH11 protein (p.4128Y>X, p.A4518_A4523delinsQ). Our 
findings indicate that mutations in the DNAH11 gene indeed cause 
PCD and KS, and that the reported DNAH11 nonsense mutations are 
associated with a normal axonemal ultrastructure and are compatible 
with normal fertility.
P0845. Investigation of  PROX1  expression during human 
cardiogenesis and it‘s potential role in congenital heart defects.
S. R. Parsons , C. Spalluto, V. J. Phillips, H. Cox, A. P. Salmon, S. Diaper, N. A. 
Hanley, D. I. Wilson;  
University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom.
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) is a severe congenital heart 
defect characterised by hypoplasia of the left ventricle with aortic and 
mitral valve stenosis or atresia. HLHS is frequently associated with 
lymphoedema and maldevelopment of the lymphatic system.
The homeobox transcription factor, PROX1 , is located within 1q32, de -
letions of which are a cause of congenital heart defects and therefore 
a region critical to cardiac development. PROX1 has a role in organo -
genesis and cell type specification including budding and sprouting of 
the lymphatic system. Knockout mice lacking Prox1  die mid-gestation with multiple developmental anomalies. Prox1  is expressed in many 
organs including the heart.
This study assessed the candidacy of PROX1  as a cause for HLHS 
including expression in the human heart during cardiogenesis and in -
vestigation of children with HLHS for mutations within PROX1 .
Human embryonic and fetal tissue was obtained with informed consent 
and ethical permission. Hearts were available from fetuses aged be -
tween 7-11 weeks post conception (wpc). Using an antibody raised to 
the Prospero and homeodomains (Abcam), PROX1 immunoreactivity 
was detected in critical areas of the heart. These included the aortic 
valve, aortic wall, atria and lymphatic vessels. We therefore investi -
gated patients with HLHS for changes in the nucleotide sequence of 
coding exons and splice sites of PROX1 . The DNA from 12 patients 
was directly sequenced but no nucleotide changes were detected.
The localisation of PROX1 within the heart during cardiogenesis sup -
ports a role for PROX1 in normal development and as a strong candi -
date gene for HLHS.
P0846. Mutations in the gamma-carboxylase gene GGCX  cause a 
novel Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum-like disorder
O. M. Vanakker1,2, L. Martin3, D. Gheduzzi4, B. P. Leroy1, B. Loeys1, P. C. 
Coucke1, S. F. Terry5, L. J. Schurgers6, C. Vermeer6, I. Pasquali-Ronchetti4, A. 
De Paepe1;  
1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Re-
search assistant for the Fund for Scientific Research, Flanders, Belgium, 3De-
partment of Dermatology, Porte-Madeleine Hospital, Orléans, France, 4Biomed -
ical Sciences Department, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, 
Italy, 5PXE International, Washington, DC, United States, 6VitaK & CARIM, Dpt. 
of Biochemistry, University of Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
Aims: We recently described a novel autosomal recessive PXE-like 
disorder, characterized by a generalized increase of excessive, leath -
ery skin folds, a mild retinopathy with limited angioid streaks and 
preserved visual acuity and a deficiency of the vitamin K-dependent 
clotting factors. Ultrastructural analysis showed distinct differences in 
mineralization and fragmentation of dermal elastic fibres compared to 
PXE. Furthermore, no mutations in the ABCC6  gene, responsible for 
PXE, could be detected. This study aimed to unravel the molecular 
pathogenesis of this phenotype.
Methods: Using a candidate gene approach, we performed molecular 
analysis of the VKORC1  and GGCX  genes in 7 patients. Both candi -
date genes cause hereditary deficiency of the vitamin K-dependent 
clotting factors. Using conformation-specific ELISAs, the balance be -
tween carboxylated (functional) and non-carboxylated (inactive) serum 
osteocalcin and matrix gla protein (MGP) was assessed.
Results: Direct sequencing revealed missense and nonsense muta -
tions in GGCX  in 6 patients. The GGCX-enzyme is important for ac -
tivation (γ-carboxylation) of vitamin K-dependent proteins such as 
clotting factors but also known inhibitors of calcification (e.g. MGP, 
osteocalcin), thus explaining the combined phenotype. ELISA experi -
ments revealed imbalances in the ratios of active and inactive serum 
gla proteins, supporting the causality of the mutations and hence our 
pathogenetic hypothesis.
Conclusion: We have identified GGCX  as being the defective gene in 
a novel PXE-like syndrome. Interestingly, this enzyme has a critical 
function in pathways involved in inhibition of ectopic mineralization. 
Because of the clinical and histopathological resemblance with PXE, 
this rare disorder may give us valuable insights in the pathogenesis 
of PXE.
P0847. Pyridoxamine 5‘-phosphate oxidase deficiency: A new 
inherited lethal disorder causing neonatal seizures, treatable 
with pyridoxal phosphate.
M. Khayat1, P. Frankel1, S. H. Korrman2, Z. Weintraub3,4, S. Hershkovitz3, V. 
Shefer3, M. Ben Elisha3, R. A. Wevers5, T. C. Falik-zaccai1,4;  
1Istitute of Medical genetics, Western Galilee Hospital, Naharia, Israel, 2Meta -
bolic Diseases Unit, Haddassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, 
Israel, 3Department of Neonatology, Western Galilee Hospital, Naharia, Israel, 
4Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion- Israel Institue of Technology, Haifa, 
Israel, 5Laboratory of Pediatrics and Neurology, Radboud University Nijmegen 
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands Antilles.
Neonatal seizures present a serious diagnostic dilemma. A compre -
hensive workup and immediate treatment are essential.
We present a female infant born who suffered severe seizures few Molecular and biochemical basis of disease222
hours after birth, did not respond to a wide range of anticonvulsant 
drugs, and died at the age of 6 weeks.
Metabolic investigations showed elevated glycine and threonine con -
centrations in plasma and CSF, and elevated Homovanillic acid and 
Vanillactic acid in the urine and CSF. This biochemical profile indicates 
a possible deficiency of pyridoxine 5’-phosphate oxidase (PNPO), the 
enzyme that converts pyridoxamine to its active form pyridoxal phos -
phate (PLP). PLP acts as an important coenzyme for more than 100 
enzymes.
The biochemical findings in our patient were suggestive of a defect in 
PNPO activity.
Sequence analysis of the PNPO  gene revealed a homozygous G>A 
transition at nucleotide 284 in exon 3 (c.284 G>A) resulting in a R95H 
missense mutation. Expression studies in CHO cells, using mutated 
PNPO, showed that the c.284 G>A mutation reduced the enzymatic 
activity of PNPO to 18% relative to wild-type. PNPO deficiency is a 
recently described rare and lethal autosomal recessive disorder that 
has been reported in less then 15 patients worldwide. This potentially 
treatable entity should be considered in the differential diagnosis of 
neonatal seizures. Molecular and biochemical diagnosis is feasible 
and will provide tools for comprehensive genetic counseling and PND 
to interested couples, as well as screening of couples at risk for this 
devastating disorder.
P0848. Q6NUR6 gene is overexpressed in an autistic patient with 
a translocation (7,16) de novo.
R. M‘rad1, N. Bayou1, A. Belhaj2, S. Briault3, L. Ben jemaa1, H. Daoud3, R. 
Zemni4, M. Chaabouni1, F. Maazoul5, M. Hélayem2, H. Chaabouni1;  
1department of human genetics, faculty of medicine Tunis, Tunisia, 2department 
of child psychiatry, Razi Hospital La Manouba, Tunisia, 3unité INSERM U619, 
faculty of medicine Tours, France, 4department of human genetics, faculty of 
medicine Sousse, Tunisia, 5department of human genetics, Charles Nicolle 
hospital Tunis, Tunisia.
Based on the hypothesis that the autism has an important genetic 
component, our goal is to map and identify the gene (or genes) that 
predispose to autism. The proposed strategy is to test candidate re -
gions identified by cytogenetic studies.
We describe a 10 years old child with autistic disorder and a de novo 
balanced (7,16) (p22.1,p16.2) translocation. G-banded chromosomes 
and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) were used to examine the 
patient’s karyotype as well as his parents’. FISH with specific RP11-
BAC clones mapping near 7p22.1 and 16p11.2 were used to refine the 
location of the breakpoint
The breakpoint’s spanning clone on 7p22.1 fully overlaps a human 
known protein coding sequence corresponding to the Q6NUR6 gene 
which was analyzed by TaqMan. The study demonstrated a signifi -
cant overexpression of this gene in the patient. We postulate that the 
rearrangement is responsible for the patient’s phenotype and for his 
Q6NUR6 gene overexpression.
P0849. The study of CYP1A1, GSTM1, GSTT1, GSTP1 and NAT2 
polymorphisms genes and possible role in recurrent pregnancy 
loss
P. Tatarskyy1, L. Livshits1, K. Khazhilenko2;  
1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics (National Academy of Sciences of 
Ukraine) Department of Human Genomics., Kiev, Ukraine, 2ISIDA clinic, Kiev, 
Ukraine.
The aetiology of recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) remains largely un -
clear. Epidemiological studies have suggested that the risk of sponta -
neous abortions associated with exposure to endogenous or exoge -
nous substances may be modified by the genetic variation in individual 
metabolic detoxification activities, thus in the phase I/phase II balance. 
Glutathione S-transferase (GST) catalyses the binding of a large va -
riety of electrophils to the sulphydryl group of glutathione, they are 
involved in the detoxification of free radicals and have main function 
in binding and transport of a wide variety of harmful compounds. GST 
are present in large amounts in many tissues including those of the 
genital tract and placenta. The aim of this study was to investigate the 
role of CYP1A1, GSTM1, GSTT1, GSTP1 and NAT2 polymorphisms 
in the pathogenesis of RPL. After informed consent we have studied 
the polymorphic variants of genes encoding enzymes in 49 women 
(case group) with recurrent pregnancy loss and in 169 women (con -
trol group) with an uncomplicated obstetric history. The frequency of GSTM1 0/0 genotype in case group (0.77) was significantly (p=0.018) 
higher than in control group (0.50). The frequency of GSTT1 0/0 
genotype in the case group (0.25) was higher than in control group 
(0.19) but this difference was not significant. The frequencies of NAT2, 
CYP1A1 and GSTP1 “slow alleles” were practically identical in both 
analysed groups. It had been shown that GSTM 0/0 variant really can 
be involved in process recurrent pregnancy loss, which may be con -
nected with changes in steroid hormones level.
P0850. Mechanisms of apoptosis mediated by dependence 
receptors: The model of Ret
D. Fusco1, M. Vargiolu1, E. Bonora1, R. Baumeister2, G. Romeo1;  
1U.O. Genetica Medica, Bologna, Italy, 2Bio3/Bioinformatics and Molecular 
Genetics, Freiburg, Germany.
Dependence Receptors constitute a newly described family of func -
tionally-related receptors which transduce a positive signal leading 
to survival, differentiation or migration in the presence of their ligand, 
whilst in its absence, a proapoptotic fragment which initiates a nega -
tive signal for apoptosis, is generated by caspases cleavage.
One member of this family is the proto-oncogene RET (rearranged 
during transfection), a classical tyrosine kinase receptor spliced in two 
main alternative forms: RET9 and RET51.
Mutations in RET proto-oncogene have been associated with both 
neoplasia (MEN2A, MEN2B and FMTC) and a congenital neural crest 
defect (Hirschsprung disease).
Hitherto, the positive signal transduced by RET has been well studied, 
while less is known about the signal transduction leading to apopto -
sis.
To shed light on new proteins involved in this latter pathway, we 
planned to use a modified yeast two hybrid method named “split ubiq -
uitin system” employing as baits RET51 against a human brain expres -
sion library.
We identified ten proteins potentially interacting with RET51. The inter -
action between four of these and RET51 has been confirmed through 
co-immunoprecipitation analysis and co-localization assay, while one 
of these proteins (GSTP1, an enzyme belonging to the family of the 
glutathione-S-transferase) appears to be a false positive interactor.
Currently, we are verifying the role of such interactors (as modifiers 
of RET associated diseases in patients) and the interaction between 
RET-51 and the remaining proteins.
Furthermore, the “split ubiquitin system” is going to be used employing 
also RET9 and RET (708-1017) as baits.
P0851. An oncogenic mutation in exon 27 of the RB1 gene
D. Mitter , I. Nowak, B. Ansperger-Rescher, D. R. Lohmann;  
Institut für Humangenetik, Essen, Germany.
Retinoblastoma (Rb) is initiated by mutational inactivation of the RB1 
gene, a tumour suppressor composed of 27 exons. The spectrum of 
point mutations (1900 mutation events) is dominated by nonsense 
(44%) and frameshift (23%) mutations, which result in premature ter -
mination codons located > 55bp upstream of the last exon-exon junc -
tion. Therefore, the mutant mRNA is likely to be subject to nonsense 
mediated decay. No mutation was identified in exons 26 and 27 so 
far. We have performed mutational analysis of the RB1 gene in more 
than 900 patients. In view of the mutation spectrum, we suspended 
direct sequencing of exons 26 and 27 recently. However, we now iden -
tified a frameshift mutation in exon 27 of the RB1 gene (RBg.177098_
177099dup) by quantitative multiplex PCR in a boy with sporadic uni -
lateral Rb. His father is a heterozygous carrier of this mutation. We 
showed that the mutation occurred de novo. The mutant +2bp tran -
script was detected by RT-PCR on RNA prepared from peripheral 
blood cells. We performed sequencing of exons 26 and 27 in patients 
(8, 13, and 8 patients with familial, isolated unilateral, and bilateral Rb, 
respectively) in whom we had not identified an oncogenic mutation 
previously. None of these 29 patients showed a mutation.Our results 
indicate that a frameshift mutation in the terminal exon of the RB1 
gene can be oncogenic. In view of the phenotypes associated with the 
mutant allele in the reported family it can be expected that mutations in 
this region will be associated with milder phenotypic expression.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease22
P0852. Mutations in the MECP2 gene in patients of Slavonic 
origin with Rett syndrome
D. Zahorakova1, A. Baxova2, J. Zeman1, P. Martasek1;  
1Department of Pediatrics, First School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, 
Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Clinical Genetics, General University 
Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.
Rett syndrome is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental disorder 
affecting almost exclusively females. It has an incidence of 1:10,000 
female births and is characterized by apparently normal development 
for the first 6-18 months of life followed by the loss of acquired motor 
and language skills, autistic features, and development of stereotypic 
hand movements. Rett syndrome is caused primarily by de novo mu -
tations in the methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 gene (MECP2). Methyl-
CpG-binding protein 2 plays important roles in the regulation of gene 
expression and RNA splicing. Here we report the mutational analysis 
of the MECP2 gene in 95 patients from the Czech and Slovak Repub -
lics and the Ukraine with classical Rett syndrome. The patients, all 
girls, were screened for mutations by DNA sequencing of the entire 
coding sequence and the exon/intron boundaries of the MECP2 gene. 
RFLP analysis was performed to confirm the mutations that cause the 
creation or abolition of the restriction site. Mutation-negative cases 
were subsequently examined by multiple ligation-dependent probe 
amplification (MLPA) to identify large deletions. Sequencing analysis 
revealed 33 different mutations in 74 patients, and MLPA analysis re -
vealed large deletions in two patients. The detection rate was 78%. 
One mutation in exon 1 (c.48_55del8) has not been published yet. Our 
results confirm the high frequency of MECP2 mutations in females with 
Rett syndrome and provide data concerning the mutation heterogene -
ity in the Slavonic population. The project was supported by grants 
MSM0021620849 and IGA 8355-3.
P0853. Large genomic rearrangements in the MECP2 gene in 
Polish patients with Rett syndrome
E. Popowska , D. Jurkiewicz, E. Ciara, M. Borucka - Mankiewicz, P. Kowalski, 
D. Piekutowska - Abramczuk, M. Gajdulewicz, K. Spodar, K. Chrzanowska, A. 
Tylki - Szymanska, M. Krajewska - Walasek;  
The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
Rett syndrome (RTT, MIM#312750) is a neurodevelopmental disor -
der affecting almost exclusively females with prevalence estimated to 
be 1 in 10000-15000 live births. In affected girls a period of appar -
ently normal development is followed by mental retardation, loss of 
acquired skills, stereotypical hand movements, seizures, scoliosis and 
autonomic dysfunction. The disease is caused by mutations in the X-
linked MECP2 gene encoding methyl CpG binding protein (MeCP2). 
The gene contains four exons and produces two transcripts consisting 
of exons 2, 3 and 4 (MeCP2A isoform) or exons 1, 3 and 4 (MeCP2B 
isoform). To date, more than 370 various MECP2 mutations have been 
found. Of 140 Polish patients with classic form and variants of RTT, 57 
harbor point mutations and small deletions or insertions in MECP2 ex-
ons 3 and 4. Recently, several patients with mutations involving exon 
1 have been reported.
The aim of our study was to identify large genomic rearrangements 
in the MECP2 gene in Polish RTT patients. Molecular analysis was 
performed in forty-six patients, who had been tested negative for muta -
tions by SSCP and sequencing of MECP2 exons 2, 3 and 4. Patients’ 
genomic DNAs were screened for large deletions/duplications by mul -
tiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) using SALSA 
P015C kit (MRC-Holland). Large deletions including promoter region 
and exon 1 were identified in three patients, and deletions covering 
exon 4 and, probably, exon 3 in two patients. Besides, partial deletion 
of exon 4 was observed in one RTT girl.
The study was supported by MNiI Project 2P05A12129.
P0854. Monosomy of the X chromosome in primary and 
overlapping autoimmune diseases.
O. M. Mutchinick , Y. Svyryd, G. Hernández, N. Monroy, J. Sánchez;  
Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, México, 
Mexico.
The significant female predominance of autoimmune diseases (AID) 
has been associated to acquired X-chromosome monosomy (XCM) 
and foetal cell microchimerism (MC). However, this characteristic was 
not investigated in overlapping AID like Reynolds syndrome (RS). Ra -
tionale: RS show higher rate of XCM than single AID. To address this hypothesis we studied women with RS (12), CREST syndrome (13), 
Primary Biliary Cirrhosis (PBC) (12) and a control group paired by sex 
and age (24).
Methods: after signed consent, information on male pregnancies, 
transfusions, abortions and older brothers in the sibship of index 
cases, 5 ml of whole blood was obtained for lymphocytes cultures, 
FISH studies in interphase nuclei (IN) and DNA extraction for Q-PCR 
of SRY gene sequences. CEP-X spectrum green probe was used for 
MX analysis, and CEP-15 spectrum orange as control. Samples were 
blindly assessed and 500 IN were analysed in each subject.
Results: Median ages in the different groups were quite similar (59-
61). Proportion of MX IN were 14% (13.1-14.8); 11.5% (10.5-12.1); 
11.3% (10.7-12.3) and 7.2% (6.8-7.7) for RS, CREST, PBC and con -
trols respectively. Chi-square comparisons of the amount of MX cells, 
showed significant statistical differences (SSD) between each AID and 
controls, between RS and CREST, and RS and CBP. Q-PCR of SRY 
sequences discarded MQ as a confounding factor.
Conclusions: Our results confirm that MX is significantly increased in 
AID respect healthy controls, that MQ is not an associated cause and 
that probably an additive effect could explain the SSD between RS and 
the other two AID.
P0855. A real time PCR assay to detect causative mutations of 
the ryanodine receptor gene
I. Valášková1, E. Flodrová1, R. Gaillyová1, Š. Prášilová1, P. Kuglík1,2;  
1University Hospital Brno, Department of Medical Genetics, Brno, Czech Re -
public, 2Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Department of Genetics and 
Molecular Biology, Brno, Czech Republic.
The ryanodine receptor (RYR1) is an essential component of the cal -
cium homeostasis of the muscle in mammals. Defects in the RYR1 
gene in humans (chromosome 19q13.1) are associated with malig -
nant hyperthermia (MH), life-threatening and frequently fatal disorder 
triggered by commonly used anesthetics. Susceptibility to MH (MHS), 
dominantly inherited predisposition to MH, is diagnosed by using an 
invasive diagnostics test on excised muscle bundles, the in vitro con -
tracture test (IVCT). This test is based on the differential contractile 
response of normal and MH muscle to caffeine and halothane.
Molecular genetic screening plays an integral role in the diagnosis of 
MHS. Genetic data provide additional diagnostic information or con -
tribute information independent of IVCT. Genetic screening is very dif -
ficult due to low incidence of each mutation and the vatness of the 
RYR1. Until now, 23 RYR1 mutations causing MH have been listed by 
European MH Group. A detection MH causative RYR1 mutations can 
be used in predictive genetic testing. We describe an assay that allows 
analysis of RYR1 genotypes using real time PCR. We provide a test 
based on melting point analysis of fluorscently labelled probes after 
high speed PCR amplification. After nucleic acid extraction from the 
white blood cells, or muscle cells RYR1 mutation can be detected in 
less than 1hour. This assay is cheaper and faster than traditional one 
used to date. Our RYR1 mutation analysis protocol currently screens 
for the most common RYR1 mutations in Czech population. Our aim is 
to develop analysis test for all published MH causative mutations.
P0856. Characterization of COX16, a novel human COX 
assembly gene
L. Salviati1, E. Trevisson1, A. Casarin1, M. Doimo1, S. Sacconi2;  
1Dept. of Pediatrics, Padova, Italy, 2Dept. of Neurology, University of Nice, 
France.
COX16 is a gene essential for cytochrome c oxidase (COX) biosyn -
thesis in yeast.. We have now cloned and characterised its human 
homologue.
The human gene was identified in the expressed sequence tags (EST) 
database using a cyberscreening method.. Human COX16 is com -
prised of 4 exons on chromosome 14 and encodes a 106 aa protein 
with a N-terminal putative transmembrane domain and a C-terminal 
hydrophilic domain, with no homology to any known family of proteins. 
The gene is expressed ubiquitously with highest levels in muscle, 
heart, and liver. We found multiple transcription initiation sites, the 
most upstream of which is located 100 bp from the ATG.
Cox16 protein is located in mitochondria, presumably in the mitochon -
drial inner membrane.
Silencing of the COX16 transcript by siRNA caused a significant reduc -
tion of COX activity after 48 hours in transfected cells.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease22
The precise function of COX16 is unknown. Its small size suggests 
that it doesn’t have a catalytic role, but rather that it could act by sta -
bilizing nascent COX subcomplexes in analogy to PET100. The effect 
of COX16 silencing on COX activity is striking, suggesting that COX16 
may play an important role in the regulation of the COX assembly pro -
cess.
The role of COX16 in COX deficiency has yet to be determined. A 
previous study failed to detect mutations in patients with isolated COX 
deficiency, we are now screening a novel cohort of patients for muta -
tions in this gene.
P0857. Investigation of the Spinocerebellar ataxia type 10 
mutation in the Cypriot population
C. Votsi , A. Georghiou, T. Kyriakides, M. Pantzaris, S. Papacostas, E. Zamba-
Papanicolaou, K. Christodoulou;  
The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 10 belongs to the group of neurodegener -
ative diseases known as autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxias. Ge -
netic studies in patients with SCA so far revealed 12 genes responsible 
for ADSCA and 12 mapped loci without gene identification. SCA10 is 
characterized by progressive ataxia and seizures. The underlying mu -
tation is a large expansion of an ATTCT repeat in intron 9 of the SCA10 
gene. Our aim is to determine the relative frequency of SCA10 in Cy -
prus, which constitutes part of our wider effort to identify the genetic 
defects of the Cypriot SCA sporadic patients and families, which prove 
to be exceptional in comparison with other populations. We analyzed 
the ATTCT repeats in 37 SCA patients, previously excluded from other 
genes (FRDA, SCA1-3, SCA6-8, SCA12, SCA17 and DRPLA). We 
also determined the size of repeats in 57 normal controls from the 
Cypriot polulation. The repeat lengths were analyzed by polymerase 
chain reaction followed by fragment analysis. Southern blot analysis 
is currently performed for samples with one allele detected, in order 
to confirm homozygosity or presence of a SCA10 expansion. Normal 
control sample repeat lengths ranged from 11 to 20 with 82,5% het -
erozygosity and the 14 repeats allele is more frequent (38%) in the 
Cypriot population. In the patient group, repeats ranged from 12 to18 
with 73% heterozygosity. Three patients have already been confirmed 
to be homozygous for a normal range allele. In conclusion, our results 
agree with other studies demonstrating that SCA10 is rare in polula -
tions other than the Mexican.
P0858. SCA17 transgenic mice exhibit a neurodegenerative 
phenotype
H. Nguyen , C. Bauer, T. Ott, T. Hennek, O. Riess, P. Bauer;  
Department of Medical Genetics, Tübingen, Germany.
SCA17 is a progressive neurodegenerative disease leading to cer -
ebellar ataxia and dementia. Several accessorial symptoms such as 
Parkinsonism, dystonia, and psychiatric disturbances commonly ag -
gravate the disease course. Genetically, a CAG/CAA expansion in the 
TATA binding protein (TBP) is expanded in SCA17 patients, leading to 
an expanded polyglutamine chain in this ubiquitously expressed tran -
scription factor.
We have generated transgenic mice overexpressing a 64 CAG/CAA 
repeats containing human TBP (Q64TBP) gene under the control of 
the truncated human prion protein promoter (PrP).
Transgene protein expression throughout different brain regions (cor -
tex, basal ganglia, cerebellum, and brain stem) was clearly demon -
strable. Onset of motor dysfunction (Accellerod) started by 20 weeks 
and the life span of transgenic animals was reduced.
We present detailed morphological and phenotypical data for this ro -
dent model of SCA17, which enables us to further study the pathogen -
esis of this progressive neurodegenerative disease.
P0859. SOST gene mutation in two Brazilian families with 
sclerosteosis
C. A. Kim1, R. S. Honjo1, D. R. Bertola1, L. M. J. Albano1, L. A. N. Oliveira1, S. 
M. C. P. Jales1, J. T. T. Siqueira1, W. Balemans2, E. Piters2, K. Jennes2, W. van 
Hul2;  
1Instituto da Criança, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Ant -
werpen, Belgium.
Sclerosteosis is a rare, autosomal recessive disease characterized by 
a progressive craniotubular hyperostosis. The main features are: high 
stature, nail dysplasia, cutaneous syndactyly of some fingers, signifi -cant sclerosis of the long bones, ribs, pelvis and skull, leading to facial 
distortion and entrapment of cranial nerves. The sclerosteosis gene 
has been mapped to 17q12-21 and is known as the SOST gene en -
coding sclerostin protein. We report on one familial and one sporadic 
case with clinical and molecular diagnosis of sclerosteosis.
Case 1: 34-year-old male, with difficulty in opening mouth, hemifacial 
and tongue pain, gustatory hyperlacrimation and hypoacusis. Four 
sisters had similar clinical complaints, three of whom had cutaneous 
syndactyly of some fingers. Physical examination: macrocephaly, long 
face and widely spaced teeth. Radiological studies: poor development 
of the mandible angle, asymmetric face, sclerosis of the skull and cra -
niofacial bones, hyperostosis of the ribs, pelvis and long bones.
Case 2: 6-year-old girl, presented with recurrent facial paralysis. There 
was no significant facial dysmorfism. Cutaneous syndactyly of the in -
dex and middle fingers was present. Radiological studies: sclerosis of 
the skull, spine, pelvis and long bones.
The clinical diagnosis of sclerosteosis in both cases was confirmed 
by analysis of the SOST gene showing the same mutation (Trp124X). 
We reported this mutation previously in other Brazilian patients. Curi -
ously, both families were from the same state in Brazil, but they denied 
familial relationship.
In conclusion, these patients confirm the clinical picture as found in 
other cases with a loss of function mutation in the SOST gene.
P0860. Determining the expression of the human SPP2 in 
lymphocytes, endothelial cells and monocytes and the effect of 
TNF-α and LPS on the expression using RT-PCR method
H. Khorram Khorshid1, R. Dalgleish2;  
1Genetic Research Centre, The Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences 
University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Genetics, Univer -
sity of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom.
Secreted phosphoprotein 24 (spp24) is a member of the cystatin su -
perfamily and was first identified in cattle as a minor component of 
cortical bone. Subsequently it was recognised as a component of the 
fetuin-mineral complex. In the original study, the expression of the 
gene encoding spp24 ( Spp2 ) was demonstrated in bovine bone peri -
osteum and liver and it was later demonstrated that Spp2  is expressed 
in chicken and mouse T-cells and also in the mouse thymus. Hence, it 
was decided to investigate the expression pattern of the human spp24 
gene ( SPP2 ) in peripheral white blood cells.
Mononuclear lymphocytes and monocytes were isolated from whole 
fresh human blood and endothelial cells were prepared from the um -
bilical cord of a neonate. PCR amplification of reverse-transcribed 
mRNA indicated that SPP2  is expressed in human lymphocytes and 
endothelial cells, but not in monocytes.
The effects of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and tumour necrosis factor 
alpha (TNFα) on the expression of the human SPP2  gene were stud -
ied by their addition to cultures of monocytes, mononuclear cells and 
endothelial cells for up to 24 hours. Under standard culture conditions, 
which included bovine serum albumin (BSA) in the culture medium, 
there is expression of SPP2  in mononuclear lymphocytes and in en -
dothelial cells at 16 hours, but not in monocytes. The addition of either 
LPS or TNFα down-regulates SPP2  expression in lymphocytes in a 
time-dependent fashion. However, the down-regulation effect of TNFα 
on endothelial cells is, by comparison, only modest. These findings 
may help us understand the function of spp24.
P0861. Mitochondrial DNA instability and recessive POLG  
mutations in patients with isolated adult-onset sensory ataxic 
neuropathy
S. Bannwarth1,2, K. Fragaki1,2, J. Pouget3, D. Figarella-Branger4, V. Paquis-
Flucklinger1,2;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Nice, France, 2UMR CNRS 6543, Nice, 
France, 3Department of Neurology, Marseille, France, 4Department of Anatomo -
pathology, Marseille, France.
Nuclear gene defects affecting mtDNA stability include the mtDNA 
polymerase ( POLG ), the adenine nucleotide transporter (ANT1) and 
the Twinkle helicase. There is a considerable variability in the phe -
notype associated with POLG  mutations which are responsible for 
autosomal dominant and recessive progressive external ophtalmople -
gia (PEO), Alpers syndrome, a sensory ataxic neuropathy, dysarthria 
and ophtalmoparesis (SANDO) and a mitochondrial recessive ataxic 
syndrome. Nevertheless, patients with POLG  mutations and sensory Molecular and biochemical basis of disease22
ataxic neuropathy always presented with associated muscular and/or 
central neurological system features. The aim of our study was to test 
whether POLG  mutations can be responsible for isolated sensory atax -
ic neuropathy. We screened 15 patients by direct sequencing. Seven 
patients were men and the median age of the population was 57 years. 
The presenting and only feature was ataxia caused by axonal sen -
sory neuropathy. A 50 year-old woman was found to be a compound 
heterozygous carrying the c.1391T>C mutation (M464T) in combina -
tion with the c.2302A>G substitution (K768E). No POLG  mutation was 
found in other patients. Nevertheless, a muscle biopsy was performed 
in two cases. Ragged-red and COX negative fibers were found in one 
patient, with multiple mtDNA deletions by both long range PCR and 
Southern blot analysis. The patient was a 67 year-old man who de -
velopped ataxic symptoms at the age of 47. ENMG revealed normal 
motor potentials and absent sensory potentials in the four limbs. No 
mutations were detected in ANT1  or Twinkle.
In conclusion, mitochondrial disease has to be considered as a cause 
of isolated adult-onset sensory ataxic neuropathy.
P0862. Sepsis and mitochondrial DNA
A. Pyle1, S. V. Baudouin2, P. F. Chinnery1;  
1Mitochondrial Research Group, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Surgi -
cal and Reproductive Sciences, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
Sepsis-induced multiple organ failure is the major cause of mortality 
and morbidity in critically ill patients. However, the precise mecha -
nisms of this dysfunction are largely unknown. Genetic studies sug -
gest a strong genetic component to both the risk of developing sepsis 
and the subsequent outcome in terms of survival.
The failure of cellular oxygen use appears to be important in the devel -
opment of multiple organ dysfunction in severe sepsis. Mitochondria 
are small membrane-bound intracellular organelles. They are involved 
in multiple cellular processes such as energy metabolism, apoptosis 
and generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS).
Impaired mitochondrial function in septic patients is associated with 
poor clinical outcome. Epidemiological studies indicate that premature 
death from infection has a strong inherited component and natural 
genetic variation in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) provides a potential 
explanation.
Human mtDNA is maternally inherited. The population can be divided 
into several mtDNA haplogroups on the basis of specific single nucleo -
tide polymorphisms (SNPs) scattered throughout the mitochondrial 
genome, indicating that mutations accumulated by a discrete maternal 
lineage during evolution. The SNPs that define the mtDNA haplogroups 
are markers of a particular maternal lineage of mtDNA. The majority 
of Europeans belong to one of nine haplogroups with haplogroup H 
being the most common (44%). Our group found an improved sur -
vival in septic patients with haplogroup H. MtDNA copy number was 
measured in 59 haplogroup H patients and 34 control samples. Differ -
ences in mtDNA copy number were observed between survivors and 
non-survivors.
P0863. Histidine-Rich Calcium Binding Protein Interacts with 
SERCA2 in a Ca-Dependent Manner
D. A. Arvanitis1, E. Vafiadaki1, B. A. Mitton2, K. N. Gregory2, F. Del Monte3, A. 
Kontrogianni-Konstantopoulos4, E. G. Kranias2,1, D. Sanoudou1;  
1Molecular Biology Division, Foundation for Biomedical Research, Academy of 
Athens, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Pharmacology and Cell Biophysics, 
College of Medicine, University of Cincinnnati, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 
3Department of Cardiology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Boston, MA, United States, 4Department of Physiology, 
School of Medicine, University of Maryland Baltimore, Baltimore, Baltimore, 
MD, United States.
Deregulation of Ca cycling by the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) in the 
cardiomyocyte has been associated with depressed cardiac function 
which may progress to heart failure. The histidine-rich calcium binding 
protein (HRC) is a low affinity, high capacity Ca-handling SR protein 
that binds to triadin. Through this interaction HRC may affect Ca re -
lease by the ryanodine receptor. HRC overexpression in transgenic 
mouse hearts was associated with decreased rates of SR Ca uptake 
and delayed relaxation, which progressed to hypertrophy upon aging. 
Using a combination of in vivo  co-immunoprecipitations and pull-down 
assays in human and mouse cardiac homogenates, and in vitro  blot 
overlay experiments with GST and MBP recombinant proteins, we identified the direct binding of HRC to SERCA2 in cardiac muscle. This 
interaction involves the histidine and glutamic acid-rich domain of HRC 
(320-460 aa) and part of the N-terminal cation transporter domain of 
SERCA2 (74-90 aa), which projects into the SR lumen. The SERCA2 
binding domain is upstream from the triadin binding region in human 
HRC (609-699 aa). Ca-titration experiments indicated that the binding 
of HRC to SERCA2 was reduced by 75%, when the Ca concentration 
as raised from 0.1 to 100 μM. Increasing Ca-concentrations had op -
posite effects on the HRC binding to triadin. Collectively, our data sug -
gest that HRC may be involved in the regulation of SR Ca-cycling by its 
direct interaction with SERCA2 and triadin, which may be affected by 
local Ca changes. Thus, HRC may mediate a fine cross-talk between 
SR Ca uptake and release.
P0864. Mutation spectrum of IL2RG  gene in Russian families 
with X-linked combined immunodeficiency.
I. G. Sermyagina1, S. M. Tverskaya1, A. V. Polyakov1, I. V. Kondratenko2;  
1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian 
Children’s Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation.
X chromosome-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (X-SCID) 
is a rare disease of serious imbalance cellular and humoral immune 
function. X-SCID results from a mutation in the gene encoding the 
gamma subunit of the interleukin-2 receptor ( IL2RG ), a component 
of several IL receptors. IL2RG gene contains 8 exons and has been 
mapped to the Xq13.1 region.
Direct DNA sequencing of all exons and exon-intron junctions and 
PCR-RFLP performed a search of IL2RG  gene mutations.
We have detected 8 mutations in 9 unrelated families with X-SCID. In 
this molecular investigation we identified 6 novel mutations, the others 
have been reported.
In exon 2 and exon 3 of IL2RG  gene we show three missence muta -
tions: reported - p.Glu68Lys, p.Tyr105Cys and novel - p.Cys72Trp. We 
identified a new missense mutations (p.Cys182Ser) and (p.Cys182Tyr) 
in exon 4 of IL2RG  gene in a two affected probands with X-SCID. In a 
two patients with X-linked combined immunodeficiency in our Center 
we found two unicue splice mutations (IVS 5 as-2nt a->g) and (IVS 5 
as-1nt g->a) in intron 5 of IL2RG  gene. One insertion (c.837ins9bp) we 
identified in a boy with X-SCID in exon 6 of IL2RG  gene.
The mothers of all patients were heterozygous for the mutation. Also, 
three prenatal diagnostics of X-SCID were made.
In this molecular investigation of nine familys with X-linked combined 
immunodeficiency we have detected different mutations in exon 2, 3, 
4, 6 and intron 5. We supposed two “hot spots” in exon 4 and in intron 
5 of IL2RG  gene.
P0865. Identification of small genomic deletions flanking the 
human SHOX gene
S. Thomas , K. Baker, D. Bunyan, J. Harvey;  
Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom.
In addition to point mutations and gene deletions, haploinsufficiency of 
the human SHOX gene can also result from deletions 3’ of the gene. 
These are generally 80 to 500 kb in size, with a 29kb minimal deleted 
region, that exert a position effect. These classes of mutation account 
for only 70% of Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) patients. There -
fore we have used the MRC-Holland SHOX MLPA kit supplemented 
with additional probes to screen for novel types of SHOX mutation 
in 73 cases in whom no mutation was previously identified (16 with 
LWD, 12 with short stature and 45 with undefined skeletal dysplasia). 
Upstream of SHOX we identified two deletions, of maximum size 73kb 
and 160kb, each in a single patient. Neither deletion was present in 88 
normal controls. Downstream (3’) of SHOX we identified two deletion 
classes: 12 of the 73 patients (16%) carried an approximately 10kb 
deletion and two LWD patients (3%) were compound heterozygotes for 
the 10kb deletion and a larger overlapping deletion of up to 60kb. The 
larger deletion was absent among the 88 controls, but there were 13 
carriers of the 10kb deletion (15%). Among 12 LWD mutation positive 
cases, there were two 10kb deletions (17%) and one larger deletion 
(8%). In summary additional types of SHOX mutation are likely to ex -
ist, although it will be difficult to assess their functional significance. 
The deletions identified in this study do not appear to cause classical 
SHOX haploinsufficiency, however it is possible they may act to modify 
phenotypic expression.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease22
P0866. Bisulfite based methylation analysis of the 6th CTCF 
target site within the IGF2/H19 imprinting centre region 1 (ICR1) 
has a higher sensitivity compared to Southernblot analysis of 
the 3rd CTCF target site
M. Zeschnigk1, B. Albrecht1, K. Buiting1, T. Eggermann2, J. Gromoll3, S. Kaya-
Westerloh1, S. Seeland1, B. Horsthemke1;  
1Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 2Insti-
tut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Aachen, Aachen, Germany, 3Institut 
für Reproduktionsmedizin, Universität Münster, Münster, Germany.
Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a clinically and genetically hetero -
geneous syndrome characterized by severe pre- and postnatal growth 
retardation, body asymmetry and a typical facial phenotype including 
triangular face and relative macrocephaly. Apart from rare families, 
most patients are sporadic. Approximately 10 % of patients have ma -
ternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 7. In another 30 % of pa -
tients, the differentially methylated IGF2/H19  imprinting centre region 
(ICR) at 11p15 is hypomethylated. This region contains seven CTCF 
target sites (CTSs). In previous studies methylation of a HpaII restric -
tion site close to CTS3  was analysed by Southern-blotting (Gicquel et 
al., 2005). Using bisulfite treatment and a real time PCR based meth -
ylation assay (QAMA), we determined the methylation at CTS6  in 15 
patients who showed a normal CTS3 methylation by  Southern analy -
sis. We observed CTS6 hypomethylation in 6 patients. The degree of 
methylation ranged from 4 - 16 %. By Multiplex Ligation-dependent 
Probe Amplification (MLPA) we extended the methylation analysis to 
four additional ICR  loci located between 300bp upstream and 2150bp 
downstream of CTS6 and found similar degrees of hypomethylation in 
all of the six patients . As transmission of SRS has been observed, we 
analysed the degree of methylation in spermatozoa from one patient 
and found complete methylation of CTS6 , which is consistent with a 
normal methylation pattern.
P0867. Heterogeneity of NSD1  alterations in 116 patients with 
Sotos syndrome
P. Saugier-Veber1, C. Bonnet1, A. Afenjar2,3, V. Drouin-Garraud1, C. Coubes4, 
S. Ferenbach1, M. Holder-Espinasse5, J. Roume6, V. Malan7, N. Jeanne7, C. 
Baumann8, D. Héron9, A. David10, M. Gérard8, D. Bonneau11, D. Lacombe12, V. 
Cormier-Daire13, T. Billette de Villemeur2, T. Frebourg1, L. Burglen7;  
1Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital and Inserm U614, Institute 
for Biomedical Research, Rouen, France, 2Department of Neuropediatrics, 
Trousseau University Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 3Centre de référence des 
anomalies du développement embryonnaire, Trousseau University Hospital, 
AP-HP, Paris, France, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Montpellier University 
Hospital, Montpellier, France, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Lille University 
Hospital, Lille, France, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Poissy-Saint Germain 
en Laye Hospital, Poissy, France, 7Department of Genetics, Trousseau Univer -
sity Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 8Department of Genetics, Robert Debré 
University Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 9Department of Genetics, Pitié-
Salpêtrière University Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 10Department of Medical 
Genetics, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France, 11Department of Medical 
Genetics, Angers University Hospital, Angers, France, 12Department of Medical 
Genetics, Bordeaux University Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 13Department of 
Medical Genetics, Necker University Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France.
Sotos syndrome is an overgrowth syndrome characterized by distinc -
tive facial features, learning difficulties and macrocephaly with frequent 
pre- and postnatal overgrowth with advanced bone age. Here we re -
port on our experience in the molecular diagnosis of Sotos syndrome 
on 116 patients. Using direct sequencing and a QMPSF-based assay 
allowing accurate detection of both total and partial NSD1  deletions, 
we identified NSD1  abnormalities in 104 patients corresponding to 102 
Sotos families (90 %). NSD1  point mutations were detected in 80 % 
of the index cases, large deletions removing entirely the NSD1  gene 
in 14 % and intragenic NSD1  rearrangements in 6 %. Among the 69 
detected distinct point mutations, 48 were novel. The QMPSF assay 
detected an exonic duplication and a mosaic partial deletion. QMPSF 
mapping of the 15 large deletions revealed the heterogeneity of the 
deletions which size varies from 1 to 4.5 Mb. Clinical features of NSD1 -
positive Sotos patients revealed that the phenotype in patients with 
non-truncating mutations was less severe that in patients with truncat -
ing mutations. This study confirms the heterogeneity of NSD1  altera -
tions in Sotos syndrome and therefore the need to complete sequenc -
ing analysis by the screening for partial deletions and duplications in 
order to ensure an accurate molecular diagnosis of this syndrome.P0868. Molecular analysis of SPG and SPGA mutations in 
families with hereditary spastic paraplegia
C. Thieleke-Matos1, L. Miller-Fleming1, P. Magalhães1, P. Coutinho2, J. Se -
queiros1,3, I. Silveira1, J. Loureiro1,2;  
1IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2Hospital S.Sebastião, Santa Maria da Feira, Portugal, 
3ICBAS, Porto, Portugal.
Autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegias (AD-HSPs) are a 
genetically and clinically heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative 
disorders, characterized mainly by progressive weakness and spastic -
ity of the lower limbs. Overall, SPG4  and SPG3A  mutations account 
for about half of all AD-HSP cases.  SPG4 encodes spastin , and is 
associated with a pure phenotype, with no predictable age-at-onset, 
whereas  SPG3A encodes atlastin, being also associated with a pure 
phenotype, but particularly distinguishable by its early onset and a 
slower progression of symptoms. Recent data suggested that spastin, 
an ATPase from the AAA protein family, and atlastin, an oligomeric 
GTPase, are binding partners and function in the same biochemical 
pathway. To genetically characterize Portuguese families with HSP, 
80 unrelated patients, 61 with AD-HSP and 19 isolated cases were 
analysed. Mutational analysis was performed by DHPLC followed by 
sequencing. Twelve mutations in SPG4,  nine of which novel ones, as 
well as one novel mutation in SPG3A  have been identified, so far. The 
SPG3A  mutation was a novel frameshift causing early onset (< 10 
years) and a pure phenotype; all the patients presenting SPG4  muta -
tions had a pure phenotype; p.G370R was the only recurrent mutation 
in Portuguese HSP patients. In conclusion, we genetically identified 
21% of all AD-HSP in our group of Portuguese families. SPG4  mu-
tations had a frequency of 20%; together with the five other SPG4  
families previously described, SPG4  accounts for approximately 28% 
of known AD-HSP Portuguese cases.
P0869. SMN1 mutation analysis in 803 Spanish spinal muscular 
atrophy patients.
L. Alias1, M. J. Barceló1, C. Hernández Chico2, J. M. Millán3, S. Alcover1, 
I. Cuscó1, E. Also1, Y. Martín2, L. Sáez2, E. Aller3, E. Galán4, S. López5, M. 
Fernández Burriel6, M. Baiget1, E. F. Tizzano1;  
1Hospital St. Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 
3Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 4Hospital Materno Infantil, Badajoz, Spain, 
5Hospital Virgen de la Candelaria, Tenerife, Spain, 6Hospital de Mérida, Bada -
joz, Spain.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive disease 
characterised by degeneration of the anterior horn cells of the spinal 
cord and caused by mutations in the SMN1 gene. We present the re -
sults of a systematic SMN1 gene analysis in 803 unrelated Spanish 
SMA patients.
In 729 patients (91%) the molecular defect was absence of the 
SMN1 gene and in 41 cases (5%) it was the presence of SMN hy -
brid genes. We detected 24 subtle mutations (3%), 14 of which were 
c.399delAGAG (representing 1.7% of the total Spanish SMA cases). 
Two of these cases were homozygous for the mutation. By quantita -
tive PCR techniques, the remaining patients were heterozygous for 
the SMN1 gene deletion. In the other allele we identified the following 
mutations: p.Y272C (one case), p.T274I (one case) and 813ins/dup11 
(two cases) described in other populations and p.I116F, p.Q136E, 
c.738-740insC and c.867+2T>G described to date only in Spanish 
SMA patients. Furthermore, two novel mutations, c.311-312insA (exon 
3) and p.W190X (exon 4) were identified. In the remaining 9 patients 
no changes were detected in the sequence of the codifying regions 
and exon intron boundaries. mRNA was available in two of these pa -
tients and no SMN1 transcripts were detected. Novel variants were 
found in the promoter region of these patients. However, it is not pos -
sible to ascribe these variants to the SMN1 or SMN2 promoter.
Employing this systematic approach, the SMN1 genotypes of the vast 
majority of the Spanish SMA patients were characterised, including the 
existence of non-functional SMN genes. FIS 05-2416.
P0870. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF): mRNA 
expression in rat brain focal ischemia under the treatment with 
neuropeptides Semax and PGP
V. G. Dmitrieva1, L. V. Dergunova1, I. V. Vlasova1, O. V. Povarova2, V. I. 
Skvortsova2, S. A. Limborska1;  
1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Molecular and biochemical basis of disease22
Stroke RSMU, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Consisting of a fragment of ACTH4-7 and C-terminal PGP tripeptide 
neuroprotective polypeptide Semax is used for acute therapy of stroke. 
To investigate Bdnf mRNA expression after treatment either with sa -
line, Semax or PGP the brains of male Wistar rats were analyzed at 
three time points following permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion 
(pMCAO): 3, 24 and 72 hours. The intraperitoneal injection of solutions 
were done at 15 min, 1 h, 4 h after the occlusion and then after every 
4 hours. The last injection was done at 56 h after operation. Real-time 
reverse transcription and polimerase chain reaction has been used to 
measure changes in Bdnf expression in the ipsilateral and contralat -
eral frontoparietal cortex and subcortex of rat brains. Gapdh  was used 
as the internal control.
In the lesioned cortex Bdnf mRNA expression was increased at 24 
h post-MCAO and returned to control level after 72 h. Decreasing of 
Bdnf mRNA expression in contralateral hemisphere 3 h after operation 
is probably concerned with depolarization expansion and neuroplastic -
ity. Under Semax treatment in ischemic cortex such increasing of  Bdnf 
mRNA expression was detected at 3 h after operation and the level of 
Bdnf mRNA was high at 24 and 72 h post-MCAO. Thus Semax sup -
ports earlier increasing of Bdnf expression in the ischemic tissue and 
helps to retain high level of Bdnf mRNA to the point of 72 h after occlu -
sion. C-terminal PGP tripeptide also increases Bdnf mRNA expression 
3 h after ischemia but then Bdnf expression returned to control level.
P0871. A microdeletion on chromosome 1q21 is required but 
not sufficient for development of thrombocytopenia-absent radii 
(TAR) syndrome
E. Klopocki1, H. Schulze2, C. Ott1, F. Trotier1, G. Strauss2, H. Ropers3, R. Ull -
mann3, D. Horn1, S. Mundlos1,3;  
1Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Institute of Medical Genetics, Berlin, Ger -
many, 2Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Klinik für Allgemeine Pädiatrie, Ber -
lin, Germany, 3Max Planck Institute of Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
Thrombocytopenia-absent-radius (TAR) syndrome is a rare congenital 
disorder with an incident of 1-2 in a million. TAR syndrome is charac -
terized by hypomegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia and bilateral radial 
aplasia in the presence of both thumbs. Other frequent associations 
are congenital heart disease and a high incidence of cow’s milk intoler -
ance. The molecular basis as well as the inheritance pattern for this 
disorder is still ill-defined.
Here, we present evidence that a microdeletion of about 200 kb on 
chromosome 1q21 encompassing about 11 annotated genes is essen -
tial for developing TAR syndrome. We tested 32 individuals affected by 
TAR syndrome from 30 unrelated families by submegabase microarray-
based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH), fluorescence 
in situ-hybridization (FISH), or quantitative RT-PCR and detected the 
microdeletion in all samples tested. The absence of this deletion in a 
cohort of control individuals argues for a specific role of the microdele -
tion in the pathogenesis of TAR syndrome. The microdeletion occurred 
de novo  in about 25% of pedigrees analyzed. Intriguingly, in the other 
pedigrees inheritance of the deletion along the maternal as well as 
the paternal line was observed. The deletion was also present in ad -
ditional unaffected family members spanning up to three generations. 
Thus, it is obvious that the occurrence of the microdeletion is required 
but not sufficient to cause TAR syndrome. We therefore conclude that 
TAR-syndrome has to be considered a genetically complex disorder 
rather than a monogenic disorder, suggesting the presence of a yet to 
be identified modifier of TAR (mTAR).
P0872. The  tau H2 haplotype contribute to susceptibility to 
Parkinson disease in a Southern Italy population.
D. Civitelli , P. Tarantino, E. V. De Marco, F. Annesi, S. Carrideo, I. C. Cirò Can -
diano, F. E. Rocca, G. Annesi;  
National Research Council, Mangone, Italy.
There are many evidences that tau protein is involved in common neu -
rodegenerative pathways, and a number of association studies have 
been conducted to clarify the role of the  tau gene in neurodegenerative 
diseases, including Parkinson’s disease (PD). A contribution of the H1 
haplotype to PD susceptibility was suggested. Several polymorphisms 
localized along the entire tau gene length are inherited in complete 
linkage disequilibrium as 2 distinct extended haplotypes designated 
H1 and H2, respectively. Here, we investigated the distribution of tau 
haplotypes in a group of 262 sporadic PD patients from Southern Italy compared with 197 healthy controls from the same area.
We reconstructed tau haplotypes genotyping 3 SNPs (BanII in exon 
3, MspI in exon 9, AluI in exon 11) and a dinucleotide polymorphism 
in intron 9. Of interest, we found a significant overrepresentation of 
the H2 haplotype in PD patients ( OD 2.26 - 95% CI 1.64-3.18), sug -
gesting that the H2 haplotype is a risk factor for parkinsonism in our 
sample. Southern Italy population appears different from most of other 
Caucasian populations in which, on the contrary, the tau H1 haplotype 
contribute to susceptibility to Parkinson’s disease.
P0873. Genetic screening for beta-thalassemia point mutations 
using two-steps effective approach
L. Dan1, R. Talmaci2,1, L. Cherry1, D. Coriu2,3, M. Dogaru3, D. Cimponeriu1, A. 
Pompilia1, D. Uşurelu1, L. Gavrilă1;  
1Institute of Genetics, University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2University 
of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania, 3Fundeni Clinical 
Institute, Bucharest, Romania.
The occurrence of β-thalassemia in Romania is not so common. Taking 
into account that thalassemia demography is in continuous changing, 
a developing country should handle with its prevention. A first stage 
to this objective is to characterize the molecular spectrum of β-globin 
gene mutation in the respective population. One hundred and twenty 
eight β-thalassemic chromosomes derived from ninety-four β-thalas -
semia carrier and seventeen homozygous patients were investigated 
for their β-globin mutations. Molecular screening approach was per -
formed in two steps: indirect scanning by DGGE followed by direct 
PCR based methods - ARMS and PCR-RFLP. Applying this effective 
approach, we were able to find a total of 12 mutations: IVS I-110 (G-A)-
43 chr., IVS I-6 (T-C)-21 chr., Cd 39 (C-T)-17 chr., IVS II-745 (C-G)-15 
chr., IVS I-1 (G-A)-9 chr., Cd 6 (-A)-5 chr., -87 (C-G)-4 chr., Cd 8 (-AA)-
4 chr., Cd 5 (-CT)-3 chr., +22(G-A)-1 chr., Poly A (A-G)-1 chr., Cd 51 
(-C)-1 chr. Besides these mutations, DGGE reveals four uncharacter -
ized mutations which remain to be sequenced. All the identified muta -
tions, less cd 51 (-C), are of Mediterranean origin which demonstrates 
a gene flow from that area.
Funding from the European Commission for the “eInfrastructure for 
Thalassaemia Research Network”, Coordination Action - Contract no 
026539 - for which this study was partially funded is gratefully acknowl -
edged.
P0874. Genetic Polymorphism in Deep Vein Thrombosis
H. Samli1, M. Emmiler2, C. U. Kocogullari2, A. Ozgoz1, M. Solak1, A. Cekird -
ekci2;  
1Afyonkarahisar Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Department of 
Medical Biology, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Afyonkarahisar Kocatepe University, 
School of Medicine, Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Afyonkarahisar, 
Turkey.
A deep vein thrombosis (DVT) is a blood clot (thrombus) that develops 
in a deep vein, usually in the lower leg. Factor V Leiden (FV Leiden) 
(G1691A) mutation is one of the most important genetic factors causes 
deep vein thrombosis. Another genetic thrombosis reason thought 
to cause venous thrombosis tendency is Prothrombin Factor II (FII) 
(G20210A) mutation. Some study reports on hyperhomosisteinemia 
being a risk factor in DVT, made us think searching Methylenetetra -
hydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) (C677T) gene polymorphism in this 
patient group might be significant.
In our study 27 patients diagnosed to be DVT by Cardiovascular Sur -
gery experts and 31 healthy controls were investigated. In all cases 
FV Leiden, FII and MTHFR gene polymorphism investigations were 
performed by PCR-ELISA method.
Even though the result of genetic analysis performed for the frequency 
of FV Leiden mutation and MTHFR gene polymorphism were detected 
to be high in the patient group, it was not found to be statistically mean -
ingful (p>0,05). FII mutation was found to be significantly high in the 
patient group (p<0,05).
Generally genetic predisposition for thrombosis is clinically silent unless 
additional environmental factors interfere. In this study it was aimed to 
evaluate distrubution of genetic venous thrombosis in patients with DVT. 
In the performed genetic investigation, no significant association were 
detected between DVT and FV Leiden mutation and MTHFR gene poly -
morphism, whereas prothrombin mutation detected to show a positive 
association.These data are the first results of the planned comprehen -
sive study, and were evaluated with the similar studies in the literature.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease22
P0875. Frequency and forms of thrombophilies at patients with 
syndrome of loss of fetus in Kazakh population
G. K. Rapilbekova , G. S. Svyatova;  
The Scientific Centre of obstetric, gynecology and perinatology, Almaty, Ka -
zakhstan.
The aim of this research is the determine the frequency and forms of 
the genetically forms of thrombophilies at patients with syndrome of 
loss of fetus in Kazakh population.
We investigated the genotype’s frequencies of C677T mutation of 
MTHFR gene, G20210A mutation of prothrombin gene and Leiden 
mutation at 100 kazakh patients with loss of fetus in anamnesis and 
100 healthy female for controls. The genetically forms of thrombophi -
lies was founded at 53% patients. Thus C677T mutation was founded 
at 41% patients, from them a 37% women has a heterozygous forms 
and 4% patients has a homozygous forms. The isolated form of this 
mutation was founded at 28% patients and in combination with other 
mutations -at 13%. The C677T mutation was founded at 24% patients 
of control group, from them at 23% are heterozygous forms and at 1% 
patients are homozygous forms. The Leiden mutation was founded 
at 9% patients and all causes were heterozygous of these mutations. 
The isolated form was founded at 4% patients and in combination with 
other mutations -at 5%. Leiden mutation was founded at 3% patients 
of controls. The G20210A mutation of prothrombin gene was founded 
at 4% patients, and all causes were heterozygous. The isolated form 
was founded at 2% patients and in combination with other mutations 
-at 2%. In controls this mutation was not founded. The combinations 
two and even of three defects of thrombophilies was founded at 18% 
patients and in control group was founded only isolated forms.
P0876. Functional characterization of a novel mutation in TITF-1 
in a patient with Benign Hereditary Chorea
L. Veneziano1, C. Provenzano1, E. Mantuano1, S. Guida1, R. Appleton2, M. 
Frontali1, D. Civitareale1;  
1Istituto di Neurobiologia e Medicina Molecolare. CNR, Rome, Italy, 2Royal 
Liverpool Children’s Hospital Eaton Rd, Liverpool L12-2AP, United Kingdom.
Benign hereditary chorea (BHC) is an autosomal dominant disorder of 
early onset characterised by non progressive choreic movements with 
normal cognitive function occasionally associated with hypothyroidism 
and respiratory problems. Numerous pieces of evidence links BHC 
with TITF-1/NKX2.1 gene mutations. We studied a patient with a famil -
ial Benign Hereditary Chorea and normal thyroid and respiratory func -
tion. Sequence analysis of TITF-1 exon 1, 2 and 3 of proband’s DNA 
revealed the presence of a heterozygous C>T variation resulting in a 
substitution of a highly conserved aminoacid for a stop codon in the 
protein homeodomain. A functional analysis shows that the mutated 
TTF-1 neither binds DNA, nor activates a canonical thyroid target gene 
promoter and does not interfere with the ability of wildtype TTF-1 to 
activate transcription. In addition, the mutated protein is predominantly 
cytoplasmic, rather than nuclear as occurs with the wildtype TTF-1. 
The results show that the mutation leads to a haploinsufficiency of 
TITF-1 and opens the question of genotype/phenotype correlation.
P0877. Molecular studies on the titinopathies TMD/LGMD2J
J. Sarparanta1,2, A. Vihola1,3, I. Richard4, P. Hackman1,3, B. Udd1;  
1FolkhÃ¤lsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Helsinki Graduate School 
in Biotechnology and Molecular Biology, Helsinki, Finland, 3University of Hel -
sinki, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 4Généthon, Evry, France.
Tibial muscular dystrophy (TMD) is a dominant late onset distal my -
opathy, caused by mutations in the C-terminal (M-line) part of the sar -
comeric protein titin. In homozygotes, the same mutations lead to the 
different, more severe limb-girdle muscular dystrophy 2J (LGMD2J). In 
Finland, TMD/LGMD2J is caused by the FINmaj mutation, exchanging 
4 amino acids in the titin M10 domain. Other missense and nonsense 
mutations in M-line titin cause TMD/LGMD2J outside the Finnish pop -
ulation.
The molecular pathways behind TMD/LGMD2J are unknown, but mus -
cle selectivity and normal sarcomere ultrastructure suggest a defect in 
signalling functions of titin rather than structural disruption of the sarco -
meres. Loss of protein interactions of C-terminal titin is likely, caused by 
direct disruption of the binding or by cleavage of the entire titin C-termi -
nus. Our aim is to elucidate the molecular pathomechanism of TMD/LG -
MD2J by identifying the protein interactions disrupted and by determin -
ing the effect of the mutations on the stability of C-terminal titin.In a yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) screen, myospryn (CMYA5) and phos -
phoglucomutase 1 (PGM1) among others were identified as potential 
ligands of the M10 domain. Further two-hybrid and protein chemical 
studies have been performed to confirm the interactions. At least the 
titin-myospryn interaction seems genuine, as it is disrupted in the Y2H 
system by the FINmaj mutation, but conclusive evidence from protein 
chemical studies is still pending.
Several lines of evidence support that proteolytic processing of C-ter -
minal titin is altered in TMD/LGMD2J, potentially extending the effect 
of the disease mutations to a larger region in M-line titin.
P0878. Investigating Factor V Leiden, Prothrombin mutations 
and Methylenetetrahydrofolate Reductase gene polymorphism 
in newborns
U. Yigit1, A. Bukulmez1, H. Samli2, R. Koken1, A. Ozgoz2, M. Solak2;  
1Afyonkarahisar Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Department of Pedi -
atrics, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Afyonkarahisar Kocatepe University, School of 
Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey.
Among childhood age groups, the term trombosis most frequently seen 
is newborn term. Trombosis is multifactorial. In this study it is aimed 
to evaluate distrubution of genetic venous thrombosis risk factors in 
newborns with Intrauterine Growth Retardation and in premature new -
borns. Due to this, Factor V Leiden (FV Leiden) (G1691A), Prothrom -
bin (FII) (G20210A) mutations and Methylenetetrahydrofolate reduc -
tase (MTHFR) (C677T) gene polymorphism were investigated.
96 newborn babies were included in our study. Babies included in the 
study were divided into four groups. These groups were as following: 
1.Term and IUGR (n=10), 2. Preterm and IUGR (n=15), 3. Preterm and 
AGA (n=29), 4. Term and AGA (control group) (n=42). In all groups, FV 
Leiden, FII mutations and MTHFR gene polymorphism investigations 
were performed by PCR-ELISA method.
When the genetic investigation results of the groups were evaluated, 
highest muation frequencies were detected to be for FV Leiden muta -
tion in group III, for FII mutation in group IV and for MTHFR (C677T) 
gene polymorphism in group I.
The control group and the three case groups were compared for  FV 
Leiden and FII gene mutations and no significant differences were 
found (p>0.05), whereas among the control group and the three case 
groups  statistically significant difference was found for MTHFR gene 
polymorphism (p<0.05). These data are the first results of the planned 
comprehensive study, and were evaluated with the similar studies in 
the literature.
P0879. Sequence analysis of TSPY repetitive gene in male with 
impaired fertility and patients with seminoma
R. Vrtel1, R. Vodicka1, V. Svacinova1, L. Dusek2, J. Sanatavy1;  
1University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Repub -
lic, 2CBA Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
The human TSPY gene family is situated in the MSY region on the 
Y chromosome. The role of the TSPY gene in spermatogenesis and 
tumourogenesis has recently being intensively investigated.
The aim of this study (supported by IGA MZ CR NR/7821-3) was TSPY 
gene sequence comparison in DNA from patients with testicular tu -
mour, infertile patients and controls.
Genomic DNA samples from 51 infertile patients, 6 seminomas and 10 
controls were sequenced in whole gene.
There were found statistically significant differences in both the infertile 
group and the patients with tumour.
Comparision of infertile patients to controls: p < 0.001
Breakdown Table of Descriptive Statistics N=61
(No missing data in dep. var. list)
Infertility Mean N SE
0 3.412669 10 0.251166
1 2.064455 51 0.149818
All Grps 2.285473 61 0.146088
Comparision of patients with seminoma to controls: p < 0.001
Breakdown Table of Descriptive Statistics N=16
(No missing data in dep.           var. list)
Seminoma Mean N SE
0 3.412669 10 0.251166
1 1.666862 6 0.249400
All Grps 2.757991 16 0.281166
Sequence analyses surprisingly revealed generally higher occurrence of SNPs in Molecular and biochemical basis of disease22
controls, which supports the hypothesis on possible emergence of particular lineages 
with reduced function, which affects fertility and tumour genesis. The number of SNPs 
alone has obviously no influence on pathogenesis. Surely there could play a great 
role particular representation and combination of SNPs. It is important to realize, that 
the male lineage haplotype structure is changing rarely except for natural genome 
mutability.
P0880. Abnormal cortical lamination with brain stem and vermis 
hypoplasia resulting from TUBA  mutations
A. Goldenberg1, A. Laquerrière2, K. Poirier3, S. Marret4, V. Drouin-Garraud1, E. 
Verspyck5, D. Eurin6, P. Saugier-Veber1, T. Frebourg1, J. Chelly3;  
1Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital and Inserm U614, Institute 
for Biomedical Research, Rouen, France, 2Department of Pathology, Rouen 
University Hospital, Rouen, France, 3Inserm U567, Cochin University Hospital, 
Paris, France, 4Department of Neonatology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, 
France, 5Department of Obstetric and Gynecology, Rouen, France, 6Depart -
ment of Pediatric Radiology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.
Developmental defects of cortical lamination are severe brain malfor -
mations characterized by abnormal gyral pattern ranging from focal 
cortical dysgenesia to agyria-pachygyria. These malformations can re -
sult from abnormal neuronal migration related to mutations within sev -
eral genes, namely LIS1, DCX, ARX, RELN  and VLDLR . The TUBA3  
gene encoding the α-Tubulin has recently been shown to be involved 
in two patients presenting with agyria-pachygyria associated to partial 
corpus callosum  agenesis and pontocerebellar hypoplasia. We report 
here two additional unrelated cases with TUBA3  mutations. The first 
case is a 30 months old girl presenting with severe mental retardation, 
early onset seizures and bilateral ptosis. MRI revealed partial corpus 
callosum  agenesis, periventricular laminar heterotopia, brain stem and 
vermis hypoplasia. In the second case, foetal ultrasonography at 34 
WG showed microcephaly with complete agyria, severe ventricular 
dilatation in addition to brain stem and vermis hypoplasia. Medical ter -
mination of the pregnancy was performed at 36 WG according to the 
French law. Neuropathological examination revealed absence of corti -
cal lamination combined with severe hypoplasia and disorganisation 
of basal ganglia. Brain stem nuclei were absent. The cerebellum was 
strongly dysplastic with failure of Purkinje cells migration. Screening 
of the entire coding region of the TUBA3  gene lead to the identifica -
tion of two de novo  missense mutations, c.562A>C (p.Ile188Leu) and 
c.908T>G (p.Val303Gly) in case 1 and case 2, respectively. These two 
new cases suggest that the presence of TUBA3  mutations should be 
considered in abnormal cortical lamination associated with brain stem 
and cerebellum hypo-dysplasia.
P0881. Evaluation of p16INK4A, Cytokeratins and HPV-mRNA as 
potential markers for lymph node micrometastases and occult 
tumor cells
A. Fishta1, A. Berndt2, E. Schulze2, N. Häfner1, M. Duerst1;  
1Gynäkologische Molekular Biologie, Friedrich Schiller University, Jena, Ger -
many, 2Institut für Pathologie, Klinikum der Friedrich-Schiller-Universität, Jena, 
Germany.
In patients with cervical cancer, lymph nodes metastases represent 
the most important prognostic factor for recurrence. However, 15% of 
patients suffer from recurrent disease although their lymph nodes were 
free from histologically evident metastases (pN0). The role of occult 
tumour cells in cervical lymph nodes is still unknown and is currently 
being addressed in several studies. We have assessed an immun -
histochemical approach (IHC) and reverse transcription nested PCR 
(RT-PCR) for the detection of metastatic tumour cells in sentinel lymph 
nodes (SLN). IHC was done with a pan-reactive antibody against cy -
tokeratins (AE1/3), an antibody against CK19 and an antibody against 
p16INK4A. The latter protein is invariably upregulated in cervical can -
cers and is a surrogate marker of viral oncogene activity. Viral onco -
gene activity (HPV-mRNA) was also directly detected by RT-PCR. A 
total of 120 SLN from 48 patients were analysed. There was perfect 
agreement among all IHC markers, except CK19, for the detection 
of metastases and micrometastases. However, considerable discor -
dance was observed for all markers for the detection of tumour cell 
clusters (<0.2mm), multiple tumour cells and isolated tumour cells. As 
expected, disagreement was most evident at the single cell level. Dis -
cordance was also observed when comparing IHC with RT-PCR. This 
pilot study clearly shows that a single marker is not specific enough for 
the reliable detection of occult tumour cells. Moreover, the non-random distribution of tumour cells in lymph nodes requires multiple sectioning 
to achieve high sensitivity. In this regard molecular markers detected 
at the RNA level provide an obvious advantage.
P0882. Tumor necrosis factor-α promotor polymorphisms and 
type 1 diabetes mellitus
T. Zemunik , V. Boraska, V. Skrabic;  
Faculty of Medicine, Split, Croatia.
Aim: Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) is complex, heterogenous dis -
ease initiated by an autoimmune response against pancreatic β cells 
and followed by progressive defect of insulin secretion from β cells. Tu -
mor necrosis factor (TNF-α) is a potent cytokine, with a wide range of 
proinflamatory activities that has been implicated in the pathogenesis 
of many kinds of inflammatory or autoimmune diseases. Therefore we 
tested an association of two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in 
promoter region of TNF-α gene with the susceptibility to T1DM in the 
Dalmatian population.
Materials and methods: 229 T1DM patients and 445 controls were 
genotyped for G-238A and G-308A promoter variants of TNF-α gene. 
The PCR products were digested with MspI  to detect TNF-α -238A al -
lele and NcoI to detect TNF-α -308A allele. Haplotype analysis of these 
two SNPs was made using the statistical program EH+. Genotype and 
haplotype association and susceptibility to T1DM was further analyzed 
using chi-square test.
Results: A genotype distribution of G-238A and G-308A TNF-α promot -
er variants did not differ between the T1DM patients and the controls 
(p=0.147, p=0.119, respectively). However the TNF-α -238A minor al -
lele was significantly more frequent in the controls (p=0.046). Further -
more, a specific haplotype (-238G, -308A) was observed more often 
but not quite significantly in the T1DM patients (p=0.069) indicating its 
possible role as a risk factor.
Conclusions: Our findings indicate that haplotype combination (-238G, 
-308A) of TNF-α gene may contribute to the susceptibility to T1DM in 
the Dalmatian population.
P0883. Determination of the pathogenicity of USH2A and MYO7A 
genes variations.
S. Le Guédard1, O. Leroy1, L. Larrieu2, D. Baux2, M. Faburel2, M. Claustres1,2, 
A. Roux1,2, S. Tuffery-Giraud1,3;  
1INSERM, U 827, Montpellier, France, 2CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 
3Université Montpellier1, Montpellier, France.
Abnormalities of pre-mRNA splicing are increasingly recognized as an 
important mechanism through which gene mutations cause disease. It 
has been shown that intronic or exonic enhancer (ISE/ESE) or silencer 
(ISS/ESS) cis-regulatory elements are required for splice site (ss) rec -
ognition. Consequently, nonsense, missense and even silent mutations 
could be a novel form of splicing mutations. Numerous intronic and ex -
onic variations for which the pathogenic effect is not well established 
were found in the MYO7A  and USH2A  genes responsible for Usher 
syndrome. In this study, the putative effect on splicing of some of these 
variations was determined. As specific transcripts analysis was not 
possible in these patients, we use a splicing reporter minigene system. 
We first concentrated on intronic variations localized inside or outside 
the canonical splice sites. Several mutations revealed a splicing altera -
tion. For instance, a mutation localized in position -14 and predicted to 
create a novel 3’ss, was found to activate a downstream exonic cryptic 
splice site. Another one, localized in position +3 and not predicted to 
alter the splicing by in silico  tools, induces an exon skipping. Secondly, 
we evaluated the effect of missense or silent mutations predicted to 
alter ESE sequences, in particular SF2/ASF sites, by measuring the 
ability of these predicted ESE to rescue splicing of an enhancer-de -
pendent exon using a fluorescent reporter minigene. These results are 
of great help to assess the pathogenicity of unclassified variants and 
will also contribute to a better understanding of the splicing regulatory 
mechanisms in genes involved in Usher syndrome.
P0884. Genetic screening of 1500 warfarin receiving patients
L. Chen1, J. Lindh2, N. Eriksson3, M. Wadelius4, R. McGinnis1, A. Rane2, P. 
Deloukas1;  
1The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Division of 
Clinical Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Uppsala 
Clinical Research Center, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Department of Medical Sciences, Molecular and biochemical basis of disease20
Clinical Pharmacology, University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.
Warfarin (Coumadin, Marevan, Waran) is the most widely prescribed 
anticoagulant drug but is very difficult to administer because of its 
high inter-individual dose variation and its narrow therapeutic range. 
Moreover, warfarin treatment may lead to bleeding, an adverse drug 
response in around 5% patients.
In a cohort study with 201 Swedish patients, we examined 850 single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 30 genes involving warfarin ac -
tion and metabolism. Common variants in VKORC1, CYP2C9, PROC,  
age, bodyweight, diagnosis and other medications were used in a 
regression model that could explain 62% of the variance in warfarin 
dose. However, our results suggested that GGCX , EPHX1 , and ORM1  
may be additional predictors but their contribution needed replication 
in an independent as well as larger cohort.
We selected to test 29 genes on 1518 warfarin receiving patients who 
were recruited in the National WARG (Warfarin Genetics) project in 
Sweden (http://www.druggene.org/), and type a total of 201 tag SNPs. 
Most patients had been monitored for at least 3 months, and the aver -
age weekly warfarin dose ranged from 7mg to 82mg.
Among the 29 genes tested, VKORC1  demonstrated the strongest cor -
relation with warfarin dose with the most significant SNP located in the 
extended promoter region. The study also replicated the effect of the 
CYP2C9 *2 and CYP2C9 *3 alleles and their role in poor metabolising 
patients. We are currently accessing the impact from the other genetic 
and non-genetic factors which will be presented at the meeting.
P0885. Molecular pathology of Menkes and Wilson diseases in 
Czech Republic
L. Pospisilova1, L. Kralik1, Z. Marecek2, R. Bruha2, P. Fruhauf3, E. Flachsova3, 
H. Hansikova1, J. Zeman1,3, P. Martasek1,3;  
1Department of Pediatrics and Center of Applied Genomics,1st School of Medi -
cine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Internal Medicine 4, 1st 
School of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Faculty Gen -
eral Hospital, Department of Pediatrics, Prague, Czech Republic.
Copper plays an essential role in biology as a cofactor for many en -
zymes. There are two intracellular copper binding P-ATPases in hu -
mans: ATP7A, connected with X linked Menkes disease, and ATP7B, 
connected with autosomally recessive inherited Wilson disease. Here 
we report the mutational analysis of the ATP7A and ATP7B genes of 
3 patients with Menkes disease and 101 patients with Wilson disease 
from the Czech Republic.
Genomic DNA was used to amplify 23 exons of ATP7A gene and 21 
exons of ATP7B gene. PCR products were examined by RFLP and 
automatically sequenced.
Molecular analysis revealed 3 mutations in ATP7A gene, two of which 
have not been previously published (Q724X and E1249X), and 14 mu -
tations in the ATP7B gene (including the H1069Q mutation, prevalent 
in Central Europe, and the newly found A1135T mutation ).
Molecular analysis of the ATP7A gene allows for genetic counsel -
ing and prenatal diagnosis in families affected by Menkes disease. 
Screening of the prevalent H1069Q mutation in ATP7B gene shows, 
that the frequency- 36,6% of analysed alleles- is in accordance with its 
occurrence in Central Europe.
Supported by Grants MSMT 1M6837805002, GAUK 109/06 and IGA 
MZ NR/9215-3 
P0886. Another side on Wilson disease
B. Lace1, I. Micule1, A. Zarina1, J. Keiss2, V. Sondore2, A. Krumina1;  
1Dept. of Med.Biology and Genetics, Riga, Latvia, 2Infectology centre of Latvia, 
Riga, Latvia.
Wilson disease is an inherited disorder of copper metabolism, charac -
terized by liver cirrhosis and CNS involvement. DNA analysis of Wilson 
disease (WD) gene ATP7B  had numerous advantages to clinical con -
firmation of the diagnosis. Since 2004 sixty four patients were referred 
for the DNA analysis with WD suggestive symptoms. The most com -
mon mutation H1069Q of ATP7B  gene was tested for all of them. Gene 
sequencing was performed for ten patients, who were heterozygous 
carriers for mutation H1069Q or WD point score exceeded 3. Twelve 
patients were confirmed homozygous carriers of H1069Q mutation, 
one was compound heterozygous H1069Q/ 3106G>A. Cascade 
screening revealed 11 heterozygous carriers of H1069Q mutation. In a 
very short period of time diagnosis of Wilson disease was confirmed in 
13 patients of Latvia, thus indirectly leading to conclusion about more common H1069Q mutation presence in Eastern Europe.
From the identified patients, pre-symptomatic diagnosis was con -
firmed in one patient, thus preserving the patient from irreversible liver 
of brain damage.
On the basis of clinical information from patients with confirmed di -
agnosis by DNA analysis, Wilson disease diagnostics criteria were 
re-evaluated and more impact was addressed towards diagnosing 
disease at an early stage for the better therapeutic effect. From WD 
scoring system the most valuable information comes from ceruplasmin 
level in blood and copper level in 24 hour urine.
There were no patients observed with Kayser-Flesischer ring and neu -
rological symptoms were not suggestive.
P0887. Extremely skewed X-chromosome inactivation in juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis
E. Uz1, R. Topaloglu2, C. A. Mustafa1, Y. Bilginer2, O. Kasapcopur3, A. Dursun2, 
S. Ozen2, N. Besbas2, A. Bakkaloglu2, T. H. Ozcelik1;  
1Bilkent University, Faculty of Science, Department of Molecular Biology and 
Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University, I. Dogramaci Children’s Hospi -
tal, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa 
Medical School, Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul, Turkey.
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is the most common childhood rheu -
matic disease with an incidence between 7-21/100,000. The genetic 
basis of JIA is unknown. It rarely manifests familial recurrence. But the 
monozygotic twin data suggest that there is a considerable genetic 
basis, which is likely to involve multiple epigenetic events ( Autoimmun 
Rev, 5:279, 2006). We identified an association between extremely 
skewed X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) and female predisposition to 
autoimmunity ( Arth&Rheum , 52:1564, 2005 ; Eur J Hum Gene t 14:791, 
2006). Since JIA is thought to have an autoimmune etiology, we stud -
ied the XCI patterns of 72 female patients diagnosed with JIA and 183 
female controls. The control group comprised of newborns (n=91) and 
children with no history of an autoimmune condition (n=92). To deter -
mine XCI status, androgen receptor locus was analyzed by methyla -
tion sensitive Hpa II digestion followed by PCR. A male control (46, XY) 
was used for complete digestion. Extremely skewed (>90% skewing) 
XCI was observed in DNA from the peripheral blood cells in 9 of 56 in -
formative patients (16.1%), and in 4 of 124 informative controls (3.2%, 
P=0.0039). When patients and controls with 80-89 percent skewing 
were also included in the analysis, 14 patients (25.0%) and 12 con -
trols (9.7%, P=0.0108) displayed skewed XCI. These results show that 
there is a significant association (odds ration 16.9, 95% confidence 
interval 6.2-45.8) between extremely skewed XCI and JIA. “Loss of 
mosaicism” for X-linked gene expression could be considered as a 
potential mechanism in break-down of self tolerance. Supported by 
grants from TUBITAK-SBAG 3334, ICGEB-CRP/TUR04-01.
P0888. Transcriptional effects of mutations in the XLMR gene 
JARID1C
L. R. Jensen1, B. Lipkowitz1, C. Moraine2, J. Fryns3, J. Chelly4, H. van Bok -
hoven5, B. Hamel5, J. Gecz6, H. Ropers1, A. W. Kuss1;  
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Services de 
Génétique (INSERM), Tours, France, 3University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium, 4Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, Paris, France, 5Radboud 
University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 6University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia.
Moderate to severe X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) affects ap -
proximately 2 in 10.000 males. Non-syndromic XLMR (NS-XLMR) 
in which mental retardation is the only clinically consistent feature is 
genetically heterogeneous and mutations have been found in >20 dif -
ferent genes. One of these is the transcription factor JARID1C, where 
mutations have been found in 13 families, 12 of which belong to the 
cohort of the Euro-MRX Consortium. In order to investigate transcrip -
tional effects of JARID1C deficiency we first performed genome-wide 
expression analysis of mRNA from a patient cell line with a prema -
ture termination codon in JARID1C and 3 controls, using a Sentrix 
Human-6 Expression Beadchip together with the BeadStudio analysis 
software (Illumina). This investigation revealed consistent differential 
expression between the JARID1C deficient cell line and each of the 
3 controls in 55 genes. In a second set of experiments we were able 
to verify the expression pattern for 25 genes by quantitative RT-PCR 
or Northern blot analysis using RNA from all 12 Euro-MRX patient cell 
lines and 5 controls. Our results revealed among others up-regulation Molecular and biochemical basis of disease21
of MYC and MKNK2 and down-regulation of TNFSF4, and show that 
JARID1C missense changes and nonsense mutations had an equal 
impact on transcription. Therefore our results suggest that RNA ex -
pression profiling in XLMR mutation carriers might be a tool for the 
identification of putative pathways which play a role in cognition. 
Furthermore they show that this approach could in general be useful 
for refining the molecular diagnosis of patients with disorders where 
mRNA expression is affected.
P0889. Comprehensive survey of mutations in RP2 and RPGR 
in patients affected with distinct retinal dystrophies: Genotype-
phenotype correlations and impact for genetic counselling
V. Pelletier1, M. Jambou1, N. Delphin1, E. Zinovieva1, M. Stum1, N. Gigarel1, H. 
Dollfus2, C. Hamel3, A. Toutain4, J. Dufier5, O. Roche5, A. Munnich1, J. Bonne -
font1, J. Kaplan1, J. Rozet1;  
1Unité de Recherches Génétique et Epigénétique des Maladies Métaboliques, 
Neurosensorielles et du Développement, INSERM U781, PARIS, France, 2Ser-
vice de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Haute-Pierre, Strasbourg, France, 3Unité 
de Recherches INSERM U583, Montpellier, France, 4Service de Génétique 
Médicale, CHU de Tours, Tours, France, 5Service d’Ophtalmologie, Hôpital 
Necker, Paris, France.
X-linked forms of RP (XLRP) account for 10-20 % of families with 
RP and are mainly accounted for by mutations in the RP2 or RPGR 
genes. The purpose of this study was to give a comprehensive survey 
of mutations in these two genes in 93 familial cases of RP suggesting 
X-linked inheritance (48/93 families with expression in females but no 
male to male transmission), 7 male sibships of RP, 25 sporadic male 
cases of RP and 2 cone dystrophies (COD).
RP2 and RPGR mutations were identified in 15.9% and 74.8% of fa -
milial cases of RP suggestive of X-linked transmission, respectively. 
These frequencies are in accordance to that reported previously (RP2: 
6-20 %; RPGR: 55-90%). Interestingly, while more than 99% of women 
harbouring RP2 mutations do not develop RP, in 40.6% of families 
segregating RPGR mutations, at least one carrier woman was affected 
with a severe form of the disease.
RP2 or RPGR mutationsWe show that about 30% of male sporadic 
cases and 30% of male sibships of RP carried , confirming the per -
tinence of the genetic screening of XLRP genes in male patients af -
fected with RP commencing in the first decade and leading to profound 
visual impairment before the age of 30.These data along with i) the respective frequencies of mutations in the 
RP2 and RPGR (exon1-14 and ORF15) genes and ii) the identification 
of highly recurrent mutations, allowed the drawing of a decision-mak -
ing flowchart for the molecular diagnosis in families segregating RP .
P0890. Duplication of the MECP2  gene region is a frequent 
cause of mental retardation in males.
M. M. Nawara1,2, M. Smyk1, B. Nowakowska1, K. Szczaluba1, E. Obersztyn1, T. 
Chilarska3, P. Stankiewicz1, E. Bocian1, J. Bal1, T. Mazurczak1;  
1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Postgraduate School of Molec -
ular Medicine, Warsaw, Poland, 3Polish Mother’s Memorial Hospital- Research 
Institute, Lodz, Poland.
X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) is a very heterogenous disorder. 
Until recently mutations in large number of genes have been identified 
to cause XLMR. One of these genes is MECP2, its mutations and large 
deletions are responsible for most of the Rett syndrome cases among 
females.  The phenotypes resulting from MECP2  mutations in males 
are variable and depend on the mutation severity (from lethal neonatal 
encephalopathy to mild MR). The search for microdeletions and mi -
croduplications on X chromosome by array-CGH led to identification 
of the whole MECP2  region duplications in males with severe MR and 
neurological symptomes.
We decided to screen for MECP2  duplications in mentaly retarded pa -
tients with additonal clinical findings. Dosage analysis of the MECP2  
gene and flanking regions was performed by multiplex ligation-depen -
dent probe amplification (MLPA) method.
In a preliminary study we have analysed 33 patients and identified 2 
duplications. In patient 1 the duplication involves also  IRAK1 gene. In 
patient 2 the duplication is larger and encompasses IRAK1 , L1CAM, 
IDH3G and SLC6A8  (11Kb, 160 Kb, 236Kb and 507 Kb upstream to 
MECP2 respectively). We also included in the group of MECP2  dupli -
cated patients a third patient identified by array-CGH. In patient 3 the 
duplication involves IRAK1  and L1CAM .
Our results suggest the high frequency of MECP2  duplication among 
mentally retarded males. However, the clinical phenotype is not simi -
lar. The only common feature is severe MR. After finishing the studies 
in a larger group of patients we are planning to include this analysis in 
routine diagnostics of MR.Molecular and biochemical basis of disease22
Po06. Genetic analysis, linkage, and 
association
P0892. Application of the 2-locus TDT for testing NOD1 and 
NOD2 effects on Crohn’s disease
S. Kotti1,2, C. Jung3, J. P. Hugot3, F. Clerget-Darpoux1,2;  
1University Paris-Sud, UMR-S535, Villejuif, France, 2Inserm U535, Villejuif, 
France, 3Inserm Avenir U458, Paris, France.
Crohn’s disease (CD) is a multifactorial disease caused by the inter -
play of multiple genetic and environment factors. The NOD proteins: 
NOD1 (encoded by CARD4 ) located on 7p14 and NOD2 (encoded by 
CARD15 ) located on 16q21, are very similar in composition and both 
activate the nuclear factor kappa B pathway and cell death in response 
to bacterial lipopolysaccharide.
Up to date, only NOD2 has been definitively associated with CD. How -
ever, the involvement of NOD1 in CD remains controversial and uncer -
tain. In the absence of noticeable main effect of NOD1 and considering 
the fact that the two genes are recognized as key elements of the 
metabolic pathway involved in the CD pathogenesis, we propose to 
apply the 2-locus TDT for NOD1 and NOD2 genes.
In fact, we have recently developed a new method: the 2-locus TDT for 
detecting susceptibility genes with weak or no marginal effect. In such 
a situation, we have shown that our method is particularly powerful for 
detecting the effect of two genes through their interaction.
A total of 1252 individuals (390 CD families composed of 308 trios and 
82 ASP) were genotyped for NOD1 rs 2075822 and 3 SNPs (R675W, 
G881R and 980fs) on NOD2 by TaqMan and direct sequencing. The 2-
locus TDT is achieved in two steps. First, we estimate the penetrances 
using the transmitted and non-transmitted parent gametes. Secondly, 
we test the fit of these estimates to an independent effect of the two 
loci. Results will be presented at the meeting.
P0893. Novel mutation in CUL  in Yakut patients with 3-M 
syndrome
N. R. Maksimova1, K. Hara2, I. A. Nikolaeva1, A. N. Nogovicina3, A. L. Sukho -
myasova3, O. Onodera2;  
1Yakutsk Scientific Center of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences and the 
Government of the RS(Y), Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Brain Research 
Institute, Niigata University, Niigata, Japan, 3Republican Hospital N1-National 
Center, Yakutsk, Russian Federation.
We identified 37 families with short stature prevalent in the Republic 
of Sakha (Yakutia) in Russia. Clinical features are resembles a rare 
autosomal recessive disorder 3-M syndrome characterized by sever 
pre-and postnatal growth retardation, facial dysmorphism, normal in -
telligence, and characteristic radiological findings (MIM 273750). We 
compared with clinical presentation of 3-M syndrome described so 
far, Yakut families had a distinct feature, that is 41.9% of patients had 
severe respiratory distress at birth. A genome-wide linkage analysis 
for these families revealed linkage to region 6p21.1 with the highest 
multipoint LOD score of 24.6 at  D6S282 . In the critical region of 3.1 
cM between D6S1552 and D6S451, we found CUL7 , that has just 
been identified as a causative gene for 3-M syndrome and 25 muta -
tions in CUL7  have been identified in 29 families with 3-M syndrome 
originated from Tunisia, Morocco, France, Algeria, Syria, Portugal, Sri 
Lanka, Turkey, Germany, Austria, Italy, Surinam, India, and Brazil (Hu -
ber et al., 2005). Mutational analysis revealed a novel homozygous 
mutation 4582 ins T in exon 25 in CUL7 , resulting in a frameshift and 
subsequent premature stop codon at 1533 (Q1533X) in all 43 patients. 
Haplotype analysis revealed a strong linkage disequilibrium spanning 
623kb, suggesting a strong founder effect in Yakut patients with 3-M 
syndrome.
P0894. The influence of the ACE gene polymorphism on 
personality traits of athletes
V. A. Shleptsova1, M. A. Timofeeva2, N. V. Maluchenko3;  
1Faculty of basic medicine, Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federa -
tion, 2Biological faculty , Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federa -
tion, 3Biological faculty, Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
It is well known that a I/D polymorphism of the human angiotensin-1-
converting enzyme (ACE) gene is associated with ACE activity and 
endurance. The I allele is low active and traditionally is connected with 
high endurance during physical performance. Recently it is occurred publications about influence of the ACE polymorphism on other physi -
ological features, and -the most intriguing- on emotional spheres. It 
was shown that ACE has influence on personality characteristics (nov -
elty seeking) in females.
The present study examined the possibility ACE I/D functional polymor -
phism might be associated with particular personality traits of athletes. 
In current investigation 204 athletes (synchronized swimming, swim -
mers, footballers, hockey players, and skiers) participated. All persons 
have the sports category from the first sports up to the master of the 
international class. Control group consisting of non-trained persons 
(N=105). Firstly we study I -and D-alleles distribution in various groups 
and discovered the considerable differences in allele frequency. Part of 
persons was tested with psychological questioner (Buss-Durkee Hos -
tility Inventory) to determine the level of different forms of aggression. 
Our findings are that the ACE I/D polymorphism of synchronized swim -
ming (females) is clearly associated with the physical aggression.
P0895. No Association Between the DAT1 10-Repeat Allele and 
ADHD in the Iranian Population
M. M. Banoei1, T. Majidizadeh1, E. Shirazi2, M. Narges3, H. Najmabadi3, M. 
Ohadi3;  
1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Mental Health Research Center, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetics Research Center, Univer -
sity of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran.
Association studies between attention deficit hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD) and the 10-repeat allele of a polymorphism (a 40 bp variable 
number of tandem repeats) in the dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) 
have resulted in mixed findings in different populations. We performed 
a case/control study to clarify the contribution of this allele with ADHD in 
the Iranian population. No association was observed between the 10-
allele and disease (Chi 2 = 0.081, p<0.9). Furthermore, no significant 
difference was observed in the homozygosity of this allele between 
the case and control groups (Chi 2 = 0.022, p<0.9). Implication of the 
dopamine transporter gene in the pathophysiology of ADHD warrants 
investigation of other functional polymorphisms within this gene in the 
Iranian ADHD patients.
P0896. Increasing the mutation detection rate for Autosomal 
Dominant Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia: screening SPGa , 
NIPA1 , and REEP1 .
D. J. Moore , S. Abbs;  
Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a heterogeneous group of dis -
orders characterised by progressive lower limb spasticity, hyperreflex -
ia and weakness. The autosomal dominant form of the disease (AD-
HSP) accounts for approximately 70-80% of HSP families and by se -
quencing SPG4 we currently detect a mutation in approximately 29% 
of families (58 in 202). Mutations detected include novel missense, 
nonsense, small insertions, deletions and duplications. One mutation 
has been found in 6 apparently unrelated individuals, suggesting a 
possible founder effect, and in one case a modifying mutation acted in 
concert with a truncating mutation to lead to early onset in a patient.
To increase the mutation detection rate, we have implemented MLPA 
for SPG4  and SPG3a  and have screened 36 patients, finding an exon 
1 deletion and three aberrations due to mutations in the probe binding 
sites. We are now offering sequencing of the Atlastin ( SPG3a ), NIPA1  
(SPG6) and REEP1  (SPG31) genes. Atlastin has been reported to ac -
count for 20-30% of AD-HSP cases and a high percentage of early on -
set cases (we have detected SPG3a  mutations in two families). NIPA1  
and REEP1  have not been extensively studied to date and both are 
small genes with 5 and 7 exons respectively. A UK family has been 
shown to harbour a NIPA1  mutation (Reed et al 2005) and mutations 
in REEP1  have been shown to account for around 6.5% of cases of 
AD-HSP (Zuchner et al., 2006).
After implementation of these services, we hope to increase our detec -
tion rate for AD-HSP to around 70%.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
P0897. Role of HLA in Anti-Endothelial Cell antibody positive 
Indian SLE patients
U. Shankarkumar , V. Pradhan, M. Patwardhan, A. Pawar, K. Ghosh;  
Institute of Immunohaematology, Mumbai, India.
Anti-endothelial cell antibodies (AECA) are heterogeneous group of 
antibodies against a variety of antigenic determinants of endothelial 
cells (EC). AECA plays an immunopathogenic role in triggering EC ac -
tivation leading to vascular damage. The presence and the strength 
of AECA have been found to correlate with disease activity in various 
systemic vasculitic diseases like systemic lupus erythematosus. To as -
sess the involvement of HLA alleles in AECA production, 45 clinically 
and histopathologically proven cases of class IV lupus nephritis were 
studied for their HLA A and HLA B alleles by standard NIH microlym -
phocytotoxicity assay. All patients fulfilled ARA classification criteria for 
SLE. AECA were detected by indirect immunofluorescence using cul -
tured human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). Forty percent 
of the SLE patients possessed the AECA antibodies. The HLA alleles 
A9 (24) (OR=2.90, EF=0.29,p value 0.08) and B21 (OR=74, EF= 0.11, 
p value 0.038) were significantly increased while HLA A1 (OR=0.27, 
PF= 0.35, p value 0.039) and B40 (OR= 0.29, PF= 0.25, p value 0.076) 
were significantly reduced among AECA positive SLE patients when 
compared with AECA Negative patients. Further two-locus haplotype 
analysis revealed that A19-B35, A3-B21, and A28-B21 were observed 
with significant T value among AECA positive patients. The common 
clinical symptoms among the AECA positive patients observed were 
lupus nephritis (84%), involvement of skin (22%), involvement of 
joints (17%) and CNS as well as hematological involvement (11%). 
Our findings suggest that immunogenetic mechanism may be involved 
in AECA antibody production leading to the immunopathogeneis in a 
subset of SLE patients.
P0898. The association of regulatory genes‘ polymorphisms with 
aerobic and anaerobic performance of athletes
I. A. Mozhayskaya1, I. I. Ahmetov1, D. V. Popov2, S. S. Missina2, O. L. Vinogra -
dova2, I. V. Astratenkova1, V. A. Rogozkin1;  
1St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2SRC Institute for Biomedical Problems of the Russian Acad. Sci., 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
The aim of the study was to investigate an allelic distribution of PPA-
RA (G/C polymorphism), PPARG (Pro/Ala), PPARD  (+294T/C) and 
PGC1A  (Gly482Ser) genes in rowers ( n=205) and controls ( n=659), 
and to find correlation between genotypes and physiological param -
eters. Genotyping was performed by restriction fragment length poly -
morphism analysis. Physiological parameters were evaluated by PM 
3 Rower Ergometer and MetaMax 3B Gas Analyzer. The frequencies 
of PPARA  G (90.1% vs 83.6%) and PPARG  Ala (23.1% vs 16.2%) al -
leles in elite athletes, and of PPARD  C (19.1% vs 10.5%) and PGC1A  
Gly (75.4% vs 66.5%) alleles in sub-elite athletes were significantly 
higher than in controls. Furthermore, PPARA  G (when oxygen pulse 
was measured) and PGC1A  Gly (when maximal aerobic power and 
anaerobic threshold (%) of VO2max were measured) alleles were as -
sociated with high values of aerobic performance. Thus, PPARA  G, 
PPARG  Ala, PPARD  C and PGC1A  Gly alleles can be considered as 
genetic markers associated with enhanced physical performance.
P0899. Polymorphism of paraoxonases and catalase genes in 
connection with age gradation in Tatars from Russia.
V. V. Pauk , T. R. Nasibullin, I. A. Tuktarova, L. P. Zueva, O. E. Mustafina;  
Institute of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
It was generally recognized that toxic effect of lipid metabolism and 
respiration by-products contributes to aging. Gene polymorphic struc -
ture may influence composition and activity of protein production. The 
aim was to investigate genes polymorphisms of paraoxonase 1 (PON1, 
Q192R), paraoxonase 2 (PON2, C311S) and catalase (CAT, -262C/T) 
in different age groups in Tatars from Bashkortostan (Russia).
We examined 1627 healthy persons: young (1-20 years), maturity (21-
55 years), elderly (56-74 years), senile (75-89 years) and long-livers 
(90-109 years). Genotyping was performed using PCR-RFLP. Fisher’s 
two-tailed exact rest (Statistica v. 6.0) was used for age groups com -
parison.
PON1*Q/*Q genotype frequency was lower in group of long-livers then 
among maturity (P=0.039), elderly (P=0.035) and senile (P=0.021). 
PON1*R/*R genotype frequency was raised among long-livers than in senile (P=0.014). PON1*R allele frequency was higher among long-
livers in comparison with other age groups, excluding young (P<0.05). 
PON2*C/*C genotype frequency was lower among senile in compari -
son with young (P=0.006) and elderly (P=0.011). Using CHAID algo -
rithm from SPSS (v. 13.0) we found that in group of 43-52 years old 
persons frequencies of CAT*C/*T genotype (P<0.001) and CAT*T al -
lele (P<0.05) were reduced in comparison with groups of 1-42 and 
53-109 years old persons.
Thus, we have demonstrated diversity of PON1, PON2 and CAT genes 
polymorphisms genotypes and alleles frequencies between different 
age groups. Possibly, the same polymorphic variant plays a protective 
role for an organism at its different age stages.
P0900. Alcoholism candidate gene polymorphisms and 
Alexithymia in alcoholic outpatients
P. Levy1, M. Bicho1, S. Pombo2, A. Barbosa2, F. Ismail2, J. Neves Cardoso2;  
1Genetic Laboratory, Medical School, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 
2NETER, Psychiatric Department, S. Maria Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal.
Candidate gene polymorphisms that changes alcoholism-related in -
termediate phenotypes include dopaminergic system polymorphic 
variants (DRD2 and DAT), 5-HTT gene promoter polymorphisms, 
Catechol-O-Methyltransferase (COMT), and monoamine oxidase A 
(MAO A). A recent study indicates a possible association between the 
COMT Val108/158Met gene polymorphism and alexithymia (Ham et 
al., 2005).
Alexithymia (disability to identify and to describe emotions) is an use -
ful construct in the understanding and treatment of alcohol dependent 
patients. Patients with alexithymia show significant differences in psy -
chological, behavioral and biochemical features. Alexithymia associ -
ated with depression and work problems delimited an alcoholic thy -
mophatic subtype (Cardoso et al., 2006) in our alcoholism research 
unit (NETER).
Males at high genetic risk for alcoholism are more alexithymic and data 
suggest that MAO-A polymorphism moderates the development of 
psychopathology and influences vulnerability to environmental stress 
(Kim-Cohen et al., 2006)
The aim of the study is to investigate the relationship between alcohol -
ism candidate gene polymorphisms and alexithymia.
Our sample (N=95) of sequential alcohol-dependent patients submit -
ted to an outpatient therapeutical program integrated in the alcoholism 
unit of Santa Maria General Hospital were tested using TAS-20 scale. 
They were genotyped using polymerase chain reaction for 5HTLPR, 
5-HTVNTR, COMT, DRD2, DAT and MAO-A polymorphisms.
We found an significant association between MAO-A polymorphism 
and alexithymia (factor 1 and 2 of TAS-20) indicating that alcoholic 
patients carrying the 4 allele tend to have a more disability in the affec -
tive-emotional process.
This data may suggest a linkage between MAO-A polymorphism and 
the thymophatic subtype of our clinical typology of alcohol dependent 
patients.
P0901. Detection of novel mutations in Alexander disease using 
DHPLC analysis of GFAP  gene.
M. Cardoso-Ferreira1, G. Blanquier1, F. Gauthier-Barichard2, O. Boespflug-Tan -
guy3, I. Creveaux1;  
1CHU Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2INSERM UMR 384, Cler -
mont-Ferrand, France, 3CHU Clermont-Ferrand, INSERM UMR 384, Clermont-
Ferrand, France.
Alexander Disease (AXD) is a severe neurological disorder, charac -
terized by a leukodystrophy associated with Rosenthal Fibers (RFs, 
eosinophilic inclusions within astrocytes). This autosomal dominant 
disease is caused by de novo  mutations in Glial Fibrillary Acidic Pro -
tein (GFAP ) gene. Mutations seem to induce a toxic gain of function 
resulting in GFAP aggregation in astrocytes (RFs) and subsequent 
white matter suffering.
In infantile and juvenile classical forms of AXD, brain MRI criteria have 
been defined in order to screen patients for GFAP  mutations. This 
molecular screening is usually performed by exons amplification and 
direct sequencing. However, numerous GFAP  mutated patients with 
atypical brain imaging and unusual clinical symptoms have been de -
scribed. To improve the rapidity of this screening for a larger number 
of patients, we developed a new protocol based on DHPLC analysis of 
PCR products and selective sequencing of abnormal profiles.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
During the last 2 years, 67 patients (29 index cases, sporadic and 
some familial forms) were entirely tested by DHPLC. 20 index cas -
es were found mutated with 13 different mutations, 8 of which being 
previously reported. DHPLC detected 5 novel mutations believed to 
generate AXD as: mutations arose de novo , were absent from healthy 
relatives and from 100 control chromosomes, affected a conserved 
amino-acid and a functionally important domain, and no other change 
was detected. Several prenatal diagnosis have been already carried 
out. DHPLC screening for GFAP  mutations is confirmed to be a rapid, 
sensitive and reliable, cost-effective and high-throughput method for 
AXD diagnosis.
P0902. The analysis of Eotaxin (CCL11) gene single nucleotide 
polymorphisms in allergic rhinitis patients and healthy donors 
from Volga-Ural region of Russia
A. Khuzina1, A. Karunas1, A. Biktasheva2, A. Yuldasheva3, E. Etkina2, E. Khus -
nutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir 
Medical State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Pediatric polyclinic N1, Ufa, 
Russian Federation.
Allergic rhinitis (AR) is an inflammatory disease of the nasal mucosa 
that is characterized by sneezing, nasal congestion, and watery rhinor -
rhea. It is the most common form of atopic disease, affecting about 
20% population in the world. Eotaxin is believed to play an important 
role in AR as a potent chemoattractant and activator of eosinophils and 
Th2 lymphocytes.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the allele and genotype 
frequencies of two polymorphisms (−384A>G and 67G>A) of the gene 
in AR patients and in controls.
The patient group consisted of 285 individuals with allergic rhinitis, the 
control group included 169 unrelated non-allergic individuals. Genomic 
DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes by standard phe -
nol/chloroform method. Genotyping was performed by PCR followed 
by restriction digestion.
No significant difference was observed in allele or genotype frequen -
cies of any SNP between AR patients and controls. The most common 
genotype of −384A>G polymorphism was AG, revealed in 48,16% of 
patients and in 53,13% of control group . The frequency of GG geno -
type was insignificant higher in patient (29%) than in healthy donors 
(23%). The GG genotype of 67G>A polymorphism was prevalent in 
both groups (65,96% - in the patient, 69,82% - in the control).
Thus, the data of this study has revealed negligible differences in the 
distribution of polymorphic alleles and genotypes of the CCL11 gene 
between compared groups, but not detected significantly association 
of single nucleotide polymorphisms of Eotaxin gene with AR in Volga-
Ural region of Russia .
P0903. Whole-genome association study of Alzheimer’s Disease 
using DNA pooling with microarrays
G. Kirov , N. Norton, L. Georgieva, R. Abrams, A. Morgan, V. Moskvina, I. Niko -
lov, P. Hollingworth, P. Holmans, M. O’Donovan, J. Williams, M. Owen;  
Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Late-onset Alzheimer’s Disease (LOAD) has a strong genetic compo -
nent but the only susceptibility gene definitively identified to date is 
APOE. We wanted to identify further susceptibility genes by perform -
ing a whole-genome association study. In order to reduce the cost, 
we used a DNA pooling approach. We constructed pools of 1000 
LOAD cases and 1200 age- and gender-matched controls. We used 
Affymetrix 250K Sty and Nsp SNP genotyping arrays, as well as Illu -
mina HH300 and HH240S arrays. These assay a total of over 1 million 
SNPs, of which 80,000 are represented on both platforms. Depending 
on the cost and quality of the hybridisations, we replicated each pool 
between 4 and 15 times on each array, and used between 3 and 8 high 
quality replicates of each array for analysis. In order to prove that our 
experiment is capable of detecting true genetic association, we exam -
ined whether we were able to detect the known association at APOE . 7 
SNPs close to APOE showed differences in allele frequencies of >6%, 
of which 4 were >10%. This work demonstrated the accuracy of our 
pooling method and indicates that we would have easily detected the 
association with APOE , in spite of the fact that neither of the two SNPs 
that determine the ApoE4 genotype is on the arrays. Two of the four 
arrays detected the effect, probably due to the different SNP coverage 
and low LD in this region, showing the potential benefit of using all ar -rays. We are individually genotyping the other promising loci.
P0904. Association of Long Polyglycine Tracts (GGN repeats) in 
Exon 1 of the Androgen Receptor Gene with Cryptorchidism and 
Penile Hypospadias in Iranian Patients
R. Radpour1, M. Rezaee2, A. Tavasoly3, S. Solati3;  
1Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center of Royan Institute, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Avesina Research Institute, Beheshti University, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Biomedical Research Center of Military University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Hypospadias and cryptorchidism are the two most common congeni -
tal malformations in males affecting 0.3-0.7% and 2-4%, respectively, 
at birth. To study the association of CAG/GGN trinucleotide repeats 
in the androgen receptor gene (AR gene) with cryptorchidism and 
hypospadias in Iranian population, we performed a comprehensive 
case-control study of 76 cryptorchid and 92 hypospadiac (divided into 
subgroups of glanular, penile, and penoscrotal hypospadias) Iranian 
males. The length of the CAG/GGN repeat segment was evaluated 
by using PCR-sequencing in exon 1 of AR gene. To eliminate other 
mutations in the AR gene, exons 2-8 of AR gene were screened by 
PCR-SSCP. Exclusion of known causes of male infertility was done 
by karyotype analysis, Y chromosome microdeletion analysis, cystic 
fibrosis transmembrane regulator gene (CFTR) mutation analysis, and 
INSL3/LGR8 gene mutation analysis. There were no significant dif -
ferences in CAG lengths between the cases and controls but GGN 
numbers were found to be significantly higher (median 24 vs. 22) 
among both subjects with penile hypospadias ( P = 0.018) and those 
with a history of cryptorchidism ( P = 0.001), compared with controls. In 
addition, the GGN numbers among subjects with penile hypospadias 
were significantly different, compared with the two other subgroups of 
hypospadias ( P = 0.001). We were able to identify 12 different CAG 
alleles and 8 different GGN alleles in the cryptorchid group. Although 
further studies are needed to elucidate the possible role of specific 
CAG/GGC combinations, our data suggested the possible association 
between polyglycin tract polymorphism in androgen receptor gene and 
cryptorchidism.
P0905. Allelic variants of APOA5 and its transcription factor 
USF1 predispose to atherogenic dyslipidemia
P. P. Laurila1, J. Naukkarinen1, P. J. Barter2, C. Ehnholm1, L. Peltonen1,3;  
1National Public Health Institute of Finland and Department of Medical Genet -
ics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2The Heart Research Institute, 
Sydney, Australia, 3The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Boston, MA, United 
States.
Atherogenic dyslipidemia (AD) is a component of the metabolic syn -
drome, a well-known cluster of risk-factors for type 2 diabetes. AD is 
characterized by abnormally high serum triglyceride and low HDL-cho -
lesterol levels.
The USF1 transcription factor and apolipoprotein A5 (APOA5) are key 
players in lipid metabolism. The two genes operate on the same path -
ways with USF1 known to be a major regulator of APOA5. We recently 
reported the association of USF1 with FCHL, a common dyslipidemia 
predisposing to cardiovascular disease (Pajukanta 2004) and also es -
tablished the significance of USF1 in prospective population cohorts 
(Komulainen 2006). Multiple studies link plasma levels of APOA5 and 
the allelic variants of this gene with elevated plasma triglycerides.
Here we show for the first time that allelic variants of APOA5 (S19W, 
-1131T>C, -1464T>C) associate with AD (p=0.009) as well as its 
component traits, changes in plasma triglycerides (p=0.00001) and 
HDL-cholesterol (p=0.0001) in 130 Australian AD families (n=533). We 
observed a dose-dependent association of a common APOA5 hap -
lotype with elevated triglycerides and decreased HDL-cholesterol. A 
protective haplotype was also observed. Conditioning for the carrier -
ship of the APOA5 risk allele, a risk haplotype of USF1 was identified, 
in agreement with previous studies. Importantly, individuals carrying 
risk haplotypes for both genes had even higher plasma triglyceride 
levels than those carrying either APOA5 or USF1 risk haplotype alone 
(p=0.001).
We thus hypothesize that the joint effect of risk alleles of APOA5 and 
its regulator, USF1, contribute to the pathogenesis of AD and poten -
tially also to the metabolic syndrome.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
P0906. Apolipoprotein A5 gene T1259C polymorphism 
associated with elevated circulating triglyceride levels but does 
not confer susceptibility for ischaemic stroke
L. Járomi1, A. Maász1, Z. Szolnoki2, P. Kisfali1, K. Horvatovich1, L. Magyari1, E. 
Sáfrány1, V. Csöngei1, C. Sipeky1, B. Melegh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, 
Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Neurology and Neurophysiology, Pándy Kálmán 
County Hospital, Gyula, Hungary.
Objectives : The common apolipoprotein A5 (ApoA5) gene variants, the 
T1131C, T1259C, IVS3+476G→A and S19W are subjects of extensive 
investigations due to the central role of the ApoA5 in the triglyceride 
metabolism. We examined the possible pathogenic role of the T1259C 
in triglyceride metabolism and in development of ischaemic stroke. 
Methods and results : A total of 399 patients who had stroke events 
were categorized into three stroke subgroups (small-vessel, large-ves -
sel and mixed groups), 182 healthy subjects served as controls. The 
ApoA5 T1259C variant was determined by PCR-RFLP test. We found 
elevated triglyceride levels in patients bearing 1259C allele in each 
subgroup. However, the serum cholesterol levels showed no difference 
between subjects carrying C allele and subjects with TT genotype in 
either group. The 1259C allele frequencies were similar in each stroke 
subgroups and in controls (small-vessel: 11.6; mixed: 13.4; large-ves -
sel: 11.5; overall: 12 vs. 10.2%; p<0.05). Using logistic regression anal -
yses adjusted for differences in age, gender, total serum cholesterol 
levels, ischaemic heart disease, bmi, hypertension, diabetes, smoke, 
drink and triglyceride levels we did not find direct association between 
carrying C allele and development of stroke. Conclusions : Our results 
suggest that bearing 1259C allele elevates triglyceride levels, but does 
not confer risk factor for stroke. Further investigations are needed to 
clarify the possible significance of the 1259C and the associated hap -
lotypes in the development of ischaemic stroke.
P0907. Autozygosity mapping in a large Iranian pedigree with 
autosomal recessive mental retardation reveals linkage to the 
CC2D1A locus on Chromosome 19
M. Garshasbi1, Y. Heshmati2, M. Fakhri2, P. Pop Ristova1, K. Kahrizi2, F. Be -
hjati2, S. S. Abedini2, S. Ghasemi Firoozabadi2, L. Abasi Moheb1, A. Tzschach1, 
H. H. Ropers1, H. Najmabadi2, A. W. Kuss1;  
1Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Genetics Re -
search Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Teh -
ran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Little is known about the molecular basis of non-syndromic autosomal 
recessive mental retardation (NS-ARMR). This is partly due to insuf -
ficient family sizes and lack of consanguinity, which hinder successful 
mapping and identification of candidate loci in western societies. Up 
to now, only three genes have been found for NS-ARMR: PRSS12 
(neurotrypsin1), CRBN (Cereblon) and CC2D1A (Coiled-coil and C2 
Domain-containing 1A). By identifying 8 new loci for NS-ARMR we 
have recently provided evidence for the considerable genetic hetero -
geneity of this disorder, which is in keeping with the fact that so far only 
one mutation was found for each known gene.
During the course of our ongoing efforts in elucidating the genetic 
causes of ARMR we have now identified the first locus overlapping 
a known NS-ARMR gene. Through array based SNP genotyping (Il -
lumina IVb panel) and linkage analysis in a large consanguineous 
family from Iran we observed a 14 MB linkage interval with a para -
metric LOD score of 3.4 on Chr19 (Chr19p12-p13.3). This locus en -
compasses the previously described CC2D1A gene, which encodes a 
putative signal transducer involved in the NF-κB pathway, and we are 
presently screening the coding region and exon-intron boundaries for 
mutations.
The possible finding of a sequence change in CC2D1A would enable 
us to report the first recurrence of an ARMR gene, while the detection 
of sequence integrity for this gene would indicate the presence of a 
causative mutation in a different gene and thus provide further evi -
dence for the genetic heterogeneity of NS-ARMR.
P0908. Association study of SNPs in the PHF11 gene in Italian 
families with allergic asthma
C. Bombieri , P. Zorzi, G. Malerba, L. Xumerle, P. Pignatti;  
Sec Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
In an our previous genome wide scan for asthma in 123 Italian fami -
lies, phenotyped for clinical asthma and rhinitis, skin prick test positiv -ity to common aeroallergens, total serum IgE levels (IgE), bronchial 
hyperresponsiveness to methacholine, linkage on chromosome 13q14 
has been detected for elevated IgE. Association of the PHF11 gene 
with IgE and atopic dermatitis (AD) was found in two recent studies 
(Nat Genet 34:181;2003; Genes Immun 6:264;2005).
We have now performed a linkage and association study of the PHF11 
gene polymorphisms in a subset of 24 families (144 subjects) which 
have shown positive linkage for IgE. The following SNPs located in -
side the gene and reported to be associated with IgE and AD in the 
above mentioned studies were selected and analysed: b7_2 (intron1); 
rs2031532 (ex2); rs2247119 (intron3); rs2274276 (intron4); b4_2 (in -
tron5); b5_2 (intron9); rs1046295 (3’UTR). These SNPs were geno -
typed by minisequencing (SNaPShot Multiplex kit, Applera, on ABI -
PRISM 310 sequencer using Genescan software) or by enzymatic 
restriction.
Linkage analysis was perfomed using MERLIN software and associa -
tion study was performed by Transmission Disequilibrium Test (TDT) 
using the unphased software: http://www.mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk/personal/
frank/software/unphased/. A correction for multiple test of the obtained 
data was applied.
Statistical analysis results confirmed our previous findings of linkage 
of this chromosomal region to IgE in allergic asthma, but did not show 
significant association of the PHF11 gene SNPs with any of the stud -
ied phenotype. In our population, association might be due to other 
polymorphisms of the PHF11 gene or in other genes located in this 
chromosomal region.
P0909. Asthma and atopy in Italian families: a genome-wide 
linkage analysis
C. Patuzzo1, G. Malerba1, L. Xumerle1, E. Trabetti1, M. Biscuola1, R. Galavotti1, 
L. Pescollderungg2, A. L. Boner1, P. F. Pignatti1;  
1Department of Mother and Child and Biology-Genetics, Verona, Italy, 2Institute 
of Paediatrics, Hospital of Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy.
To identify genetic susceptibility regions for asthma, atopy and inter -
mediate phenotypes, 123 Italian families with at least two affected sib -
lings were previously screened with 396 DNA microsatellite markers 
(Malerba G et al., Clin Exp Allergy 1999; 29 Suppl 4:27-30). Affected 
sib pairs (numbers in parentheses) for the following phenotypes have 
been studied: atopy (170), bronchial hyper responsiveness to metha -
choline (BHR, 95), clinical asthma (56), elevated total serum IgE (77), 
rhinitis (79), skin prick test reactivity to common aeroallergens (144) 
and dust mite (69). Nonparametric linkage analysis has indicated sug -
gestive linkage (nominal p-value <0.001) with at least one phenotype 
on 4q, 5p, 9p, 13q, and 22p chromosomal regions.
With explorative purposes we investigated the presence of linkage 
and gene-gene interaction by Maximized LOD score (MOD score) and 
conditional analysis. Parametric linkage analysis, based on optimized 
models, accounted also for imprinting effects. The analysis indicated 
possible paternal imprinting on chromosome 9p for mite sensitivity (in -
creased MOD from 3.16 to 5.32 inferring imprinting effect).
Gene-gene interaction analysis was performed selecting the families 
having LOD ≥ 0 for the regions showing a LOD peak ≥ 1 in the main 
nonparametric linkage analysis: increased allele sharing in 16p and 7p 
chromosomal regions for the high level IgE phenotype has been found 
(LOD = 2.19).
The results suggested that complementary linkage methods might help 
in disclosing possible epigenetic or interactive genetic effects, unde -
tectable when standard nonparametric linkage analysis are applied.
P0910. ALOX5 promoter polymorphism and response to 
leukotriene inhibitors in asthmatic patients
J. J. Telleria1, A. Blanco-Quirós1, D. Varillas1, A. Armentia2, I. Fernández1, M. J. 
Alonso1, I. Díez3;  
1Universidad de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital Pío del Río Hortega, 
Valladolid, Spain, 3Hospital Txagorritxu, Vitoria, Spain.
Leukotrienes are a family of polyinsaturated eicosatetraeoic acids de -
rived from the arachidonic acid. They show multiple farmacologic and 
physiological effects and seem to play a critical role in the pathogen -
esis of asthma.
Drugs that modify the action of leukotrienes have demontrated to be 
useful in order to control mild and moderate asthma.
In leukocytes, 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) catalyses the conversion of ara -
chidonic acid into leukotriene which afterwards is transformed to leu -Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
kotrienes B4→E4.
5-LO is coded by gene ALOX5 which has a VNTR polymorphism within 
the transcription factor binding region at position -147 to -176 in its 
promoter. In human cells in vitro, the cell lines containing other than 
the 5 tandem repeats allele in the promoter region of ALOX5 show 
diminished reporter gene transcripition
We have studied 61 patients with mild and moderate persistent asth -
ma and previously untreated with leukotriene receptor inhibitors, the 
correlation between the VNTR. This patients recieved treatment with 
Montelukast during 6 months. The response to therapy was measured 
by means of the variation in FEV1, number of exacerbations during 
the last month and number of beta2 agonists puffs per day during the 
last month.
There were not differences between groups defined by the genotype 
before therapy; Nevertheless, after it, we found statistical differences 
for every parameter at the end of the study. Z score value of FEV1 
of patients homozygous for the allele 4 obtained a p=0.0002 when 
compared to 5 allele homozygous, p=0.0098 for the demand of beta2 
agonists and 0.0086 for the nr. Of exacerbations within the last month. 
Heterozygous patients showed values similar to those of the 5 homo -
zygous, with the exeption the FEV1 that showed intermediate values.
P0911. Evidence for association between HTR1B and males with 
Autism Spectrum Disorders.
G. M. Orabona1,2, K. G. Oliveira1,2, E. Vadasz3, E. S. Moreira4, V. N. O. Taka -
hashi1, P. Otto1,2, S. R. Matioli2, M. R. Passos Bueno1,2;  
1Centro de Estudos do Genoma Humano, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Instituto de Bio -
logia, São Paulo, Brazil, 3Hospital das Clínicas, São Paulo, Brazil, 4Instituto 
Fleury, São Paulo, Brazil.
Autism is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by 
qualitative impairments in communication, social interaction, and 
restricted and repetitive patterns of interests or behaviors. Onset is 
generally before 3 years of age and results in life-long disabilities for 
affected children. From early 1960s, when hyperserotonemia was first 
reported in autistic children, to the modeling of serotonergic deficits 
seen in ASD using animal models, several different alterations in pro -
cesses involving serotonergic innervation was found in ASD patients. 
However, the role of serotonin receptors in its pathophisiology still re -
mains poorly understood. In this study, we present results from a case-
control association study within 14 polymorphisms in five serotonin 
receptors genes (HTR1A, HTR1B, HTR1D, HTR2A, HTR2C).  Positive 
results were found for HTR1B  haplotypes (p=0,0448) in a sample of 
242 ASD patients. Transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) was then 
performed for HTR1B , which shown evidence for transmission disequi -
librium (p=0,0415) in a sample of 163 trios. A sex-specific analysis 
showed an increased effect in our male sample (p=0,0015, table 1), 
and no effect in the female sample (p=0,3). Our results confirm previ -
ous publications describing a sex-specific genetic contribution in the 
etiology of ASD. FAPESP
Table1- Transmition disequilibrium test for HTR1B gene in a male 
sample.
Haplotypes* Transmited Non transmited TDT
C-A-C-G 14 20
G-T-C-G 42 29
T-A-C-C 35 33
T-A-C-G 39 33
Others 2 17
Total 132 132 Gl  obal p=0,0015
*NCBI id-rs11568817-rs130058-rs130057-rs6296
P0912. DNA analysis in families with autosomal dominant 
polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) in Czech Republic
J. Štekrová1, J. Reiterová2, S. Svobodová1,3, M. Merta2, J. Židovská1, M. Ko -
houtová1;  
1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics,General Teaching Hospital and 1st 
Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department 
of Nephrology,General Teaching Hospital and 1st Medical Faculty, Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Faculty of Science, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease is the most common 
hereditary renal disease. ADPKD is a systemic disorder, with cysts and 
connective tissue abnormalities involving many organs. The disease is 
caused by mutations of PKD1 (MIM 601313; affecting roughly 85 % of 
ADPKD patients) and PKD2 (MIM 173910; 14 % of ADPKD patients) 
genes. In the Human Mutation Database (HGMD) have been reported 
270 different germline mutations of the PKD1 gene and 73 different 
germline mutations of the PKD2 gene.
Presymptomatic DNA diagnosis using highly polymorphic microsatel -
lite markers for DNA linkage analysis was performed in 280 unrelated 
ADPKD families.
The direct detection of mutations in the non-duplicated region of the 
PKD1 gene was performed in 90 nonrelated families. An affected 
member from each family was analyzed using denaturing gradient gel 
electrophoresis and by sequencing. We detected 19 different muta -
tions in 21 families. 16 mutations are unique. We identified 8 nonsense 
mutations, 6 missense mutations, 2 frameshifting mutations and 3 mu -
tations in splice site.
The direct detection of PKD2 mutation was performed in 147 nonre -
lated families. An affected member from each family was analyzed by 
heteroduplex analysis and by sequencing. We detected 14 different 
mutations in 30 families. 11 different mutations are unique. We iden -
tified frameshifting mutation c.203dupC (p.Pro68fsX23) in 10 nonre -
lated families and the nonsense mutation c.478C>T (p.Gln160X) in 5 
nonrelated families.
The identification of new mutations in both PKD genes could help to 
find the functional important areas of both polycystins.
Supported by the grant projects IGA NR/9427-3 and VZ0021620806
P0913. High frequency of AZFc microrearrangements in infertile 
and normozoospermic French population
V. Roze1, J. L. Bresson1,2, F. Fellmann3;  
1EA MENRT 3185 Génétique et Reproduction - IFR133 IBCT, besancon, Fran -
ce, 2Service de Génétique - Histologie – BDR and CECOS, CHU, Besancon, 
France, 3Service de Génétique Médicale CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland.
The Azoospermia factor c  (AZFc) region on the Y chromosome long 
arm consists essentially of multiple palindromes prone to rearrange -
ments. The impact of the various types of deletions (gr-gr, b1-b3, b2-
b3), duplications or deletions followed by duplications on male fertility 
is discussed. The most studied genes in AZFc are DAZ and CDY1 , 
present in 4 and 2 copies respectively. We screened 344 infertile and 
136 control men for AZFc deletions and duplications. PCR analyses of 
specific AZFc STS (sY1192, sY1291, sY1197), DAZ SNV sY587 and 
quantitative dosage of sY255 and sY586 for DAZ genes were used to 
detect AZFc microrearrangements. CDY1 gene dosage used RT-PCR 
with sY639 and PCR-digestion assay of CDY7750. All patients were 
haplotyped for YAP, 12f2, and 92R7 polymorphisms, and individuals 
with AZFc rearrangements also for the Tat, M9, and SRY-4064 SNPs, 
defining altogether five haplogroups (Yhg): E, J, K(xN3,P), N3 and P, 
and one paragroup Y*(xD,E,J,K).
Forty-two (8.7%) rearrangements were identified representing a high 
frequency of chromosomal recombinations, with similar frequencies 
of deletions and duplications in infertile and control populations. The 
analysis of DAZ and CDY1 SNVs and dosage of CDY1 copies by RT-
PCR allowed to better characterise these rearrangements and their 
mechanisms. Complex rearrangements (deletion / duplication) were 
found in infertile patients only, including 2 from Yhg-N3 and 2 from 
Yhg-J. This study brings complementary data about AZFc rearrange -
ments and their potential impact on male infertility.
P0914. A case of Y chromosome microdeletion transmission 
from a father to his azoospermic sons
A. Hatzaki1, L. Klentzeris2, D. Apostolopoulou1, S. Christopoulou1, C. Makatso -
ris1, C. Mourtzakis2, V. Velissariou1;  
1Mitera Maternity and Surgical Center, Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology 
lab, Athens, Greece, 2Mitera Maternity & Surgical Center, IVF and Fertility Unit, 
Athens, Greece.
Y chromosome microdeletions especially in the AZF regions which in -
clude DAZ genes are usually de novo  deletions associated with prima -
ry oligo- and azoospermia. It has been evaluated that 5-15% of men 
with spermatogenic failure harbour microdeletions of Yq. The present 
study refers to the investigation of azoospermia in two brothers and Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
their father.
We received DNA samples from blood of all 3 individuals and sample 
from testicular biopsy from the younger brother. Cytogenetic analysis 
(GTG-high resolution) was performed in both brothers. Y microdele -
tion analysis was carried out including SRY gene (Yp) and 23 STS 
(Yq) in AZFa, AZFb, AZFc regions. We investigated also DAZ-like gene 
(3p24) polymorphisms in exons 2 and 3. CFTR gene mutation screen -
ing and IVS8-polyT polymorphism was also performed.
Cytogenetic analysis was normal in all 3 members of the family and 
also in testicular tissue sample of the younger brother. A Y microde -
letion was detected, encompassing 10 STS and DAZ gene copies, 
identical in the fertile father and the two azoospermic sons. No poly -
morphism in exons 2 (nt 260) and 3 (nt 386) of DAZL gene was de -
tected. CFTR screening was negative. This study provides additional 
evidence that the clinical phenotype of azoospermia can neither be 
attributed to the Y microdeletion itself, nor to probable expansion of the 
deletion during the vertical transmission from the father to his two sons 
as it has been reported previously. It is likely that azoospermia in these 
two cases is probably due to other environmental and genetic factors 
involved in spermatogenesis.
P0915. Balkan endemic nephropathy (BEN) - impact of 
Cytochrome P450, GSTs and NAT2 gene polymorphisms in its 
etiology
R. B. Saraeva1, I. E. Andonova1, J. A. Genova1, A. D. Horvath1, V. A. Sime -
onov2, P. S. Dimitrov3,4, E. A. Petropoulos4, C. B. Eap5, V. S. Ganev1,4;  
1Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 
2Nephrology Unit, Vratza`s Hospital, Vratza, Bulgaria, 3National Center of Pro -
tection of Public Health, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Institute of International Health, Michi -
gan State University, East Lasting, MI, United States, 5Unit of Biochemistry and 
Clinical Psychopharmacology, Hopital de Cery, Lausanne, Switzerland.
BEN is a chronic, noninflamatory kidney disease spread among the 
rural population of alluvial valley regions along tributaries of the Dan -
ube River in Bulgaria, Bosnia, Croatia, Romania and Serbia. Although 
the etiology of BEN is still unclear, it was supposed that the disease 
may develop in genetically susceptible individuals exposed for a long 
time to multiple environmental toxins. To evaluate this hypothesis we 
launched case-control study, focused on the identification of common 
variants in genes, coding for proteins participating in the metabolism 
and transport of xenobiotics and their association with BEN.
Genomic DNA from 58 BEN patients and 104 healthy individuals from 
Vratza`s district of Bulgaria was used. PCR-RFLP ( CYP1A1 , CYP1A2 , 
CYP2E1 , CYP3A4 , GSTP1, NAT2 variants ), tetra-primer PCR (CY -
P2D6*4 allele 1934G>A), triplex PCR (simultaneously detection of the 
null deletions in GSTM1  and GSTT1 ) and TaqMan assay ( CYP2C19 , 
CYP2D6 , CYP3A5 , MDR1  polymorphisms) were performed.
Fourteen of the studied variants did not show statistically significant 
genotype distribution between the explored groups. The polymorphic 
variant 4889A>G in CYP1A1  and the deletion allele CYP2D6*5 were 
prevalent in BEN patients (p=0.036 and 0.020). Conversely, carriers of 
at least one GSTM1 wild type allele were more common among BEN 
patients compared to controls (p=0.005). Combined genotype distri -
butions demonstrated statistically significance for the combinations: 
CYP1A1/CYP2D6*5 (p=0.021), CYP1A1/CYP3A4*1B (p=0.017), 
CYP1A1/CYP3A5*3 (p=0.051), GSTM1/CYP1A1 (p=0.007), GSTM1/
CYP2D6*3 (p=0.046), GSTM1/CYP2D6*5 (p=0.008), GSTM1/CY -
P2E1 (p=0.001), GSTM1/CYP3A4*1B (p=0.023), GSTM1/CYP3A5*3 
(p=0.025) .
Conclusion: The genetic heterogeneity in xenobiotic metabolizing en -
zymes CYP1A1, CYP2D5 and GSTM1 alone or in combination with 
other Phase I enzymes associates with BEN.
P0917. The molecular basis of bitter taste genetics: a study in 
genetically isolated populations
C. Lanzara1,2, A. d’Adamo1, A. Ferrara1, S. Ulivi1, L. Esposito1, U. Hladnik3, I. 
Koelliker4, B. Tepper4, P. Gasparini1;  
1IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”, Università di Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Latemar Re -
searcher, Trieste, Italy, 3B.I.R.D. Europe Foundation Onlus, Vicenza, Italy, 
4Dept. of Food Science, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, United States.
Some individuals are taste blind to bitter compounds having the thio -
urea moiety (-N-C=S), such as phenylthiocarbamide (PTC) and 6-n-
propylthiouracil (PROP). Taste sensitivity to PTC/PROP is bimodally 
distributed: nontasters make up approximately 30% of the adult Cau -casian population and tasters make up the remaining 70%. Tasters 
can be further divided into 2 sub-groups, medium- and super-tasters. 
These percentages can vary, depending on geographic location and 
ethnic origin.
Evidence suggests that the expression of phenotype reflects the inter -
action between the TAS2R38 gene and enviromental factors.
In this study, we determined the PROP phenotype distribution and the 
correlation between taster status and TAS2R38 genotype in two dif -
ferent genetically and geographically isolated populations: Carlantino 
(Southern Italy) and Stoccareddo (Northern Italy).
A sample of 696 adults, from 15 to 89 years old of age, was recruited 
from the two villages.
Our data showed that the percentage of PROP non-tasters was com -
parable to other Caucasian populations, although the percentage of 
super-tasters in Stoccareddo was very low.
The contribution of TAS2R38 alleles to the phenotype was lower in 
Carlantino (64%), compared to Stoccareddo (76%). For this reason 
we analyzed, only in Carlantino, three additional bitter taste receptor 
genes (TAS2R16, TAS2R4, TAS2R14) and BDNF gene. Linear regres -
sion and stepwise algorithms were used to determine the influence of 
the selected genes on the PROP/PTC phenotype.
Preliminary results showed no correlation between the PROP/PTC 
phenotype and these genes. A whole linkage analysis will be per -
formed to identify other genes or genetic determinants that might con -
tribute to this phenotype.
P0918. Quantitative trait genetic linkage analysis of Body-
Mass Index in familial coronary artery disease using a variance 
component approach and a regression-based procedure.
S. Barlera1, C. Specchia2,1, E. Nicolis1, M. Farrall3, B. Chiodini1,4, M. Franzosi1, 
PROCARDIS Consortium;  
1Istituto Mario Negri, Milan, Italy, 2University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 3Univer -
sity of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Guy’s, King’s, and St. Thomas’ School 
of Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
Body mass index (BMI) is one of the most reproducible and commonly 
used proxy for obesity and is known to be influenced by many environ -
mental causes as well as genetic factors.
No susceptibility genes for BMI regulation have been unequivocally 
identified. Reasons for these controversial results are both method -
ological and related to obesity aetiology.
A genome-wide linkage analysis was performed to localise QTLs in -
fluencing BMI levels in a large cohort collected in the PROCARDIS 
coronary heart disease study consisted of 1812 informative families. 
Multipoint linkage analysis for BMI was conducted using both a vari -
ance component approach and a model-free regression method im -
plemented by MERLIN and the resulting LOD-scores were compared. 
Maximum LOD-score was detected on chromosomes 13 (LOD 1.6). 
Other regions showing a LOD-score greater than 1 were observed on 
chromosomes 3, 5, 11, 12 and 15. Results were mainly confirmed by 
the three different approaches used in the analysis.
Our study did not find any locus strongly supporting evidence for link -
age to BMI even in such a large sample which could provide a power 
equal to 80% in detecting a putative QTL. Nevertheless our results 
seem to confirm the substantial genetic heterogeneity influencing BMI 
regulation emerged from the majority of genome scans so far pub -
lished.
P0919. Retrospective analysis of genetic polymorphisms and 
prospective genetic testing in atopic bronchial asthma (ABA) 
patients
V. S. Baranov1, T. E. Ivaschenko1, O. V. Lavrova2, G. B. Fedoseev3;  
1Ott’s Institute Obstetrics & Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion, 2Pavlov’s State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
3Pavlov’s State Medical Universitygy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
100 pregnant women affected with ABA and their 100 newborns were 
tested for genetic polymorphisms of 7 genes such as GSTT1 (del), 
GSTM1(del) CCR16 (G38A), TNFA (-238G/A;-308 G/A), IL4 (C590T), 
IL4R (Q576R) and NOS1 ( AAT repeats in intron 20 GSTM1 0/0 geno -
type was recorded in 57% ABA women compared to 39% in the control.
Respective figures for GSTT10/0 genotype were even more impres -
sive -40% in ABA and 21% in the control. Homozygotes for GSTM1 
or GSTT1 deletions were registered in 70% of ABA patients while the 
number of double homozygotes (GSTM10/0;GSTT1 0/0) in the ABA Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
women group more than 5 times exceeded these ones in the con -
trol (30% and 6,5% respectively). Alleles and genotypes frequences 
for polymorphisms of CC16, NOS1, IL4 & IL4R in ABA group were 
found within control limits. 22% of newborns from ABA women had no 
adverse genotypes or alleles for GSTM1,GSTT1,IL-4 or IL4R(Q576), 
(C590), while 43% of newborns possessed at least 3-4 unfavorable ( 
ABA predictive) genotypes or alleles and they were enrolled in ABA- 
prone group. So far chronic atopic dermatites and other manifestations 
of allergy were registered in 83% and 50% respectively of newborns 
from the ABA high-risk group and these complications were twice more 
often in this group when compared to the ABA-mother born childs with -
out obvious genetic predisposition. Genetic testing of childs or could 
be now efficiently implemented for more sophisticated presymptomatic 
selection of individuals with elevated inborn risk of ABA.
P0920. Impact of ACE (Ins/Del), ApoB (R3500Q) and ApoE (E2/
E3/E4) polymorphisms on myocardial perfusion: correlation 
with myocardial single photon emission computed tomographic 
imaging
G. Wozniak1,2, M. Samara2, P. Georgoulias1, I. Chiotoglou2, A. Kontos1, V. Valo -
tassiou1, P. Kollia2;  
1Department of Nuclear Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Thessaly, 
Larissa, Greece, 2Laboratory of Medical Genetics and Cytogenetics, School of 
Medicine, University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece.
Coronary artery disease (CAD) is associated with multiple genetic and 
environmental risk factors, whose cumulative effects have been the fo -
cus of intensive research. Several studies have shown an association 
between CAD and polymorphisms in genes implicated in the control of 
blood pressure and lipid metabolism. We studied 182 CAD patients with 
exercise-rest Tc-99m tetrofosmin myocardial perfusion single photon 
emission computed tomography (SPECT) and calculated the summed 
stress score (SSS), summed rest score (SRS) and summed differ -
ence score (SDS) indexes. Genetic analysis for ACE (Ins/Del), ApoB 
(R3500Q) and ApoE (E2/E3/E4) polymorphisms were determined by 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and RFLP analysis on agarose gel 
electrophoresis. A significant correlation (p<0.001) was found between 
ACE, Apo E, ACE +ApoE (SUM) and SSS, SDS SPECT indexes, while 
no association was found between ApoB (R3500Q) and either SSS or 
SDS. Patients with a low SUM score (≤ 2) had significantly better myo -
cardial SPECT studies (p<0.001) and a generally better performance 
during exercise testing compared to patients with a SUM score ≥ 5. 
Only one of sixty patients with a normal SPECT study had a genetic 
SUM score ≥ 5, while 39 patients had a SUM score ≤ 2. Furthermore, 
only two patients with abnormal myocardial SPECT had a SUM value 
≤ 2. These data provide the first evidence for an association of ACE 
and ApoE polymorphisms with SPECT studies and suggest that the 
proposed effect of ACE and ApoE polymorphisms in the process of 
CAD may be modified by the ACE and ApoE genotype.
P0921. A Polymorphic Purine-Rich Sequence at the 1.5 kb 
Downstream Region of the Human Caveolin-1 Gene
Y. Heshmati , h. Khoramkhorshid, M. Eslami, M. Gilanipor, M. Etminan, A. Mira -
bzadeh, N. Moghimi, M. Ohadi;  
University of Social Walfare and Rehabilitation, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran.
Caveolins are a family of proteins that coat the cytoplasmic face of 
caveolae, vesicular invaginations of the plasma membrane. Aberrant 
expression of the CAV1 gene is implicated in the pathogenesis of a 
wide variety of disease phenotypes. Mechanisms of gene expression 
and regulation in this gene may shed light on the pathophysiology of 
the related disorders. We report a novel polymorphic purine stretch 
containing GGAA tetranucleotide repeats in the 1.5kb downstream re -
gion of the human CAV1 gene with likely effect on the expression of 
the respective gene. The allele length of this polymorphic locus ranges 
from 40 to 134 bp, and contains motifs for the Ets transcription factor 
family members. The effect of this polymorphic purine stretch on the 
expression of CAV1 and possible association of the alleles of this re -
gion with disease phenotypes remain to be clarified.P0922. Polymorphic Purine-Rich Complex Located at the 
Enhancer Regions of the Human Caveolin-1 Gene
Y. Heshmati , h. Khoram Khorshid, M. Ghadiri, M. Eslami, M. Etminan, M. Gi -
lanipour, A. Mirabzadeh, N. Moghimi, M. Ohadi;  
University of Social Walfare and Rehabilitation, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran.
Caveolin-1 (CAV1) is the principal structural protein of caveolae mem -
branes that are found in most cell types. Aberrant expression and mu -
tation of this gene are associated with a wide range of disorders includ -
ing neurodegenerative disorders, various cancers and autoimmunity. 
We report a novel polymorphic purine complex located at between
-1698bp to -1549bp of the enhancer region of the human CAV1 gene. 
This region contains GGAA and GAAA motifs, the consensus binding 
sites for the Ets and IRF family transcription factors, respectively, and 
is highly conserved in distantly-related non-human primates in respect 
with location and motif sequence. The effect of this complex sequence 
on the expression of CAV1 and possible association of the haplotypes 
of these regions with disease phenotypes remain to be clarified.
P0923. A whole-genome scan reveals significant linkage of 
celiac disease to 6q21-22 and 22q13 in extended pedigrees from 
Hungary and Finland
E. Einarsdottir1, L. Koskinen1, I. Korponay-Szabo2, K. Mustalahti3, K. Kurppa3, 
J. Partanen4, M. Mäki3, J. Kere1,5, P. Holopainen1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Heim Pal Children’s Hos -
pital and University of Debrecen, Budapest, Hungary, 3University of Tampere 
and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 4Finnish Red Cross Blood 
Service, Helsinki, Finland, 5Karolinska Institute, Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.
Celiac disease is a complex genetic disorder caused by inflamma -
tory responses to gluten. Apart from the known susceptibility genes at 
HLA-DQ locus, the search for additional risk genes continues. We per -
formed a whole-genome linkage scan in two extended four-generation 
pedigrees consisting of multiple individuals with celiac disease. Our 
aim was to identify genomic regions shared by the affected individu -
als within the pedigrees, regions harbouring genetic factors influencing 
susceptibility to celiac disease.
Approximately fifty thousand single-nucleotide polymorphisms were 
genotyped with the Affymetrix 50K microarray system and analysed by 
affecteds-only non-parametric linkage analysis. We selected individu -
als separated by as many meiosis as possible in order to minimise ran -
dom sharing of genomic segments and to narrow down the disease-
linked genetic regions. Our material consisted of one pedigree from 
central Hungary and one from Finland. Six patients from the Finnish 
family were genotyped and seven from the Hungarian family.
In addition to the well known HLA-DQ risk genes, we identified link -
age in both families to a locus on chromosome 6q21-22 (LOD= 2,01 
p=0.0012). The Finnish family also showed linkage to a locus on chro -
mosome 22q13 (LOD= 1,29, p=0.007).
These regions have previously been suggested to be involved in celiac 
disease in European populations, but the primary risk genes at these 
loci remain unknown. Further finemapping in our larger independent 
family materials will be performed to narrow down the linked region 
and to identify the disease-associated gene(s). Characterization of 
novel genetic factors in celiac disease will help us understand the 
pathogenesis of this complex disorder.
P0924. Linkage and association study of the CELIAC2  locus 
(5q31-33) in Hungarian and Finnish families with celiac disease
L. Koskinen1, I. Korponay-Szabo2,3, K. Mustalahti4, K. Kurppa4, K. Kaukinen4, 
E. Einarsdottir1, M. Mäki4, J. Partanen5, J. Kere1,6, P. Holopainen1;  
1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Heim Pal Children’s Hospital, Buda -
pest, Hungary, 3University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 4University of Tam -
pere and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 5Finnish Red Cross 
Blood Service, Helsinki, Finland, 6Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden.
Celiac disease is an autoimmune inflammation of small intestinal mu -
cosa. It is triggered by dietary gluten in genetically predisposed indi -
viduals and it affects approximately 1% of the Caucasian population. 
The only known genetic risk factors, HLA-DQ2  and - DQ8 on chromo -
some 6p21.3 ( CELIAC1 ), are necessary but not sufficient alone for the 
disease onset. The search for other risk genes in several candidate 
regions continues. The most promising risk locus for celiac disease af -
ter the HLA locus is on chromosome 5q31-33 ( CELIAC2 ). However, no 
risk genes have been identified from this region yet. This region har -Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
bours several genes that have an immunological function, and which 
could therefore have a putative role in celiac disease.
41 single-nucleotide polymorphisms that tag 17 immunologically rel -
evant genes in a region spanning nearly 20 Mb (130.7-150.0 Mb) at 
the CELIAC2  locus were selected for this study. They were genotyped 
in a total of 541 Hungarian and Finnish affected sib-pair and trio pedi -
grees.
The analysed region showed linkage to celiac disease in the com -
bined Finnish and Hungarian material (p=0.0015) and in the Finnish 
population alone (p=0.004). Borderline significant linkage values were 
observed in the Hungarian population (p=0.03). Several genes and 
haplotype blocks showed suggestive association with celiac disease.
More finemapping will be needed to identify the gene or genes pos -
sibly associated with celiac disease in the region. Functional studies of 
the associated genes will also be required to confirm their role in the 
pathogenesis of celiac disease.
P0925. Gene expression variability of immunologicaly important 
genes in blood and intestine of celiac patients: a comparative 
study
S. Adamovic1, E. Hanson1, A. Gudjόnsdόttir2, H. Ascher3, S. Nilsson4,5, J. Wahl -
ström1, Å. Torinsson Naluai1,6;  
1Institution of Biomedicin, Göteborg, Sweden, 2Department of Paediatrics, 
The Queen Silvia Children’s Hospital, Sahlgrenska University Hospital / Östra, 
Göteborg, Sweden, 3The Nordic School of Public Health, Göteborg, Sweden, 
4Chalmers University of Technolog, Göteborg, Sweden, 5Bioinformatics Core 
Facility, Göteborg, Sweden, 6Genomics Core Facility, Göteborg, Sweden.
Is it possible to estimate the extent of inflammation in the intestine 
of a celiac patient by monitoring changes in gene expression in the 
peripheral blood? We are trying to find an answer to that question by 
comparing the expression of 94 relevant immune genes between in -
flamed tissue and blood in two celiac cases and two controls. Among 
genes we are testing there are cytokines, chemokines, growth factors, 
immune regulators, apoptosis markers, ischemia markers, tissue-spe -
cific markers, and other genes taking part in immunological responses. 
For this purpose we are using pre-designed Low Density Arrays based 
on TaqMan® technology. Blood samples and biopsies from the duo -
denum and small intestine are taken at the same occasion in all indi -
viduals.Our preliminary results are showing that a number of genes 
expressed in the intestine are not measurable in blood. On the other 
hand, the altered expression of several genes in the intestine corre -
sponds to an altered expression of the same genes in the peripheral 
blood, which makes them potential markers for inflammation. Our aim 
is to investigate if some of those genes may co-act in a distinct inflam -
matory pathways and whether measuring expression of one gene can 
predict the expression level of other genes. Moreover, we are trying to 
establish a method to correlate changes in gene expression in periph -
eral blood to a level of intestinal damage in celiac cases.
P0926. Demyelinating Autosomal Recessive Charcot-Marie-
Tooth disease (ARCMT1): Estimation of loci frequencies in 34 
consanguineous families originated from the Mediterranean 
basin and middle Est
C. Verny1,2, H. Azzedine1,2, E. Mikesova1, A. Thiam3, P. Latour4, M. A. M. Salih5, 
M. Tazir6, M. Hamri7, M. Sifi7, N. Birouk8, N. Ravise1, M. Mayer9, O. Dubourg1,10, 
A. Brice1,11, E. Leguern1,11;  
1INSERM, U679, Paris, France, 2INSERM, U694, Angers, France, 3Service de 
Neurologie, CHU de Dakar, Dakar, Senegal, 4Laboratoire de Biochimie Pedi -
atrique, Hopital Debrousse, Lyon, France, 5Department of Paediatrics College 
of Medecine, Ryadh, Saudi Arabia, 6CHU Mustapha, service de neurologie, 
Algiers, Algeria, 7Service de Neurologie, CHU de Canstantine, Canstantine, 
Algeria, 8Service de neurophysiologie, Hôpital des spécialités, Rabat, Morocco, 
9Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 10Laboratory of 
Neuropathology, Escourolle, La pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 11Lab-
oratory of neurogenetics, Department of Genetics, Cytogenetics and Enmbryol -
ogy, la Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France.
CMT is a pathological and genetic heterogeneous group of heredi -
tary motor and sensory neuropathies. Two major types have been 
distinguished on neuropathological and electrophysiological grounds: 
demyelinating and axonal CMT. Nine loci have been reported and 7 
genes identified in demyelinating ARCMT.  We selected 34 consan -
guineous families in whom 62 subjects presented ARCMT1 in a total 
of 156 individuals. These families are originated from the Mediterra -nean basin and middle Est. All the individuals were screened for 54 
microsatellites markers covering the 9 known loci. PCR products were 
resolved in an ABI-Prism 3100 automated sequencer and analyzed 
with Genescan and Genotyper software (ABITM). Assignment of the 
families to each locus was established by homozygocity mapping and 
linkage analysis using Allegro1.2. When a linkage was suspected the 
coding sequences of the corresponding gene were sequenced. The 
fragments were analyzed with sequencing analysis and SeqScape 
software (ABI).  We identified 14 families (41%) with linkage to one 
of the known loci. CMT4B1 ( MTMR2 ) and CMT4C ( SH3TC2 ) are the 
most frequent (14.9% each). They represent about 30% of the known 
loci, in our series and are found in families originated from Algeria, 
Bosnia, France, Morocco, and Saudi Arabia. CMT4D ( NDRG1 ) is less 
frequent (5.9%). CMT4A ( GDAP1 ) represents 2.8% of the known loci. 
CMT4A and 4D were found only in Italian families. CMT4B2 ( MTMR13 ) 
and CMT4F ( PRX) were suspected in one Tunisian family (2.8%). Se -
quencing of the corresponding genes is in progress. 59% of families 
were not associated with the known loci, demonstrating further genetic 
heterogeneity.
P0927. A molecular genetic study of Charcot-Marie-Tooth Type 1 
in Turkey
E. Battaloglu1, B. Bilir1, I. Baris1, B. Senergin1, I. Akat1, O. N. Maracı1, Y. Par -
man2;  
1Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
Charcot-Marie-Tooth Type 1 (CMT1) is a genetically heterogeneous 
neuropathy that is associated with PNS demyelination. It is character -
ized with reduced NCV values (<38m/s) and segmental demyelination 
on nerve biopsies.
The PMP22, MPZ, and LITAF genes have been associated with auto -
somal dominant CMT1 and Cx32  is responsible for the X-linked form 
of the disease. About 60-70% of CMT1 patients have duplications on 
chromosome 17p11-11.2 that contains the PMP22 gene.
In this study, the molecular basis of demyelinating dominant CMT in 
the Turkish population was investigated in a total of 140 patients. 
The CMT1A duplication was identified in 46 CMT1 patients (32.8%) 
screened by STR analysis. Consanguineous marriages were ob -
served among parents of 45 patients raising the possibility of reces -
sive inheritance. Thus, the duplication frequency was recalculated and 
found to be 48.4% (46/95) that was still a low value compared to that of 
other populations. Twenty-five of the duplications were familial muta -
tions and eleven were sporadic. Pedigrees were not available for ten 
cases.
Patients negative for the duplication were further investigated for mu -
tations in the PMP22, MPZ,  Cx32 , and LITAF  using SSCP and subse -
quent sequencing analyses. Six Cx32, five MPZ, four PMP22, and two 
LITAF mutations were identified in heterozygous condition. The phe -
notypes of the mutated patients were in accordance with the identified 
genotypes with respect to the site and type of the mutations.
Autosomal dominant inheritance and low NCV values among 32 cases 
(33.6%) for which mutations could not be identified suggests further 
genetic heterogeneity of CMT1 disease.
P0928. Relationship between MTHFR C677T and A1298C and 
maternal risk for having a child with chromosomal aneuploidy
S. Trivodalieva , G. D. Efremov, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska;  
Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Centre for Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, The former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia.
Maternal impairments in folate metabolism due to polymorphisms in 
5, 10- methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene have been 
suggested as a risk factor for having an offspring with chromosomal 
aneuploidy. Two common polymorphisms in the MTHFR gene, C677T 
and A1298C, are known to reduce the activity of this enzyme, which can 
lead to DNA hypomethylation and abnormal chromosomal segregation 
during meiosis (non-disjunction). Contradictory results are published 
in recent studies concerning the relationship between chromosomal 
nondisjunction and MTHFR polymorphisms. In this study we examined 
the C677T and A1298C polymorphisms in the MTHFR gene by single 
base extension reaction using SNaPshot multiplex kit and subsequent 
analysis on ABI 310 genetic analyzer. We analyzed 47 women; 24 with 
a child with Down syndrome and 23 with a prenatally diagnosed fe -
tus with aneuploidy (10 with trisomy 21, seven with trisomy 18, three Genetic analysis, linkage, and association20
with trisomy 13, two with Turner syndrome and one with Klinefelter 
syndrome). The MTHFR C677T allele (C-57,4% and T- 42,6%) and 
genotype frequencies (C/C-36,2%, C/T-42,5%, T/T- 21,3%), as well 
as the MTHFR A1298C allele (A-68,5% and C-31,5%) and genotype 
frequencies (A/A-52,2%, A/C-32,6%, C/C-15,2%) among women with 
a child with chromosomal aneuploidy did not differ from the frequen -
cies observed in the general population in the Republic of Macedonia. 
Our results failed to support the relationship between MTHFR C677T 
and A1298C polymorphisms and the risk of having a child with aneu -
ploidy.
P0929. Genetic factors determining predisposition to chronic 
course of virus hepatitis and fibrosis in liver
I. A. Goncharova1, E. V. Beloborodova2, M. B. Friedin1, E. I. Beloborodova2, V. 
P. Puzyrev1;  
1Scientific Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 
2Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Polymorphic variants in IL4 (C-590T),  IL4RA  (I50V), TNFα  (G-308A) 
genes were studied for association with chronic viral hepatitis (HCV 
or HBV) and extent of the disease chronization which is marked by 
hepatic fibrosis stage. Association study was performed for levels of 
interleukins 4, 10, 12, tumor necrosis factor - α, fibronectin, collage -
nase, protease inhibitors, macroglobulines, elastases, free and pro -
tein-bound hydroxiproline.
It has been found that Val/Val genotype of IL4RA  (I50V) polymorphism 
is associated with HBV: in the patients, this genotype was registered 
with frequency of 3.08% whereas in control group and in patients with 
HCV frequency of Val/Val genotype was 15.6% and 15.3%, corre -
spondingly. In the group of patients with weak fibrosis, a higher fre -
quency of “A” allele of TNFα  (G-308A) was found (24,5%), comparing 
to the population sample (11.2%). Decreasing of “A” allele frequency 
was observed from patients with weak fibrosis to patients with cirrhosis 
(8.7%). “CT” genotype of IL4 (C-590T) was more frequent in patients 
with cirrhosis (68,2%) than in patients with moderate fibrosis (39,1%).
It has been shown that “A” allele of TNFα (G-308A) polymorphism is 
associated with decreased TNF-α, increased IL-4 and IL-12, as well 
as with low level of protein-bound hydroxiproline. In addition, associa -
tion of “CT” genotype of IL4 (C-590T) polymorphism and high level of 
protein-bound hydroxiproline has been identified.
The results suggest that “A” allele of TNFα (G-308A) polymorphism is 
associated with favourable course of chronic viral hepatitis, and “CT” 
genotype of IL4 (C-590T) polymorphism is associated with severe 
course of the disease.
P0930. BCL3 gene association analysis with nonsyndromic cleft 
lip and/or cleft palate in Latvia
I. Prane1, B. Lace1, L. Piekuse1, B. Barkane2, I. Akota2, A. Krumina1;  
1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Riga Stradins University, Riga, 
Latvia, 2Department of Oral and and Maxillofacial Surgery, Institute of Stomatol -
ogy, Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia.
Background: Nonsyndromic cleft lip and/or cleft palate (CL+/-CP) is 
one of the most common congenital malformations with multifactorial 
trait. The incidence of CL+/-CP is in the range of 1/700-1/1000, the 
disease frequency in Latvia is 1 in 700 newborns,
The BCL3 ( B-cell leukemia/lymphoma-3 ) gene has been considered a 
susceptibility locus for nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft pal -
ate, based on association and linkage studies in some populations.
Matherials and methods: Four SNPs (rs10401176, rs7257231, 
rs8103315 and rs2927456) in the BCL3 gene were analysed with 
MALDI-TOFF technique for allelic association with the nonsyndromic 
CL+/-CP in 75 families (proband with both parents) from Latvia. Ob -
served data analysed with transmission disequilibrium test (TDT).
Results: Significant association of BCL3 gene in patients with CL+/-CP 
had been found with rs10401176 (P = 0.0001, df 1) and rs7257231 (P 
= 0.0046, df 1). Borderline association of BCL3 gene in patients with 
CL+/-CP had been found with rs8103315 (P = 0.045, df 1). Association 
was not found with rs2927456 (P = 0.317, df 1).
Conclusion: BCL3 gene plays a role in development of CL+/-CP.P0931. Founder effect in CMT-families with mutations in GJB1  
gene from different regions of Russia
T. B. Tiburkova1, O. A. Schagina1, E. L. Dadali1, V. P. Fedotov2, A. V. 
Polyakov1;  
1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Vorone -
zhskaya medical genetics consultation, Voronezh, Russian Federation.
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT), as known as hereditary motor 
and sensory neuropathies (HMSN), that is characterized by symmetri -
cal distal mussel weakness and atrophy, sensory and tendon reflexes 
depressed, fridrich’s foot deformation, typical change of gait, ataxia, 
tremor. The X-linked dominant form of CMT (CMTX1) is associated 
with mutations in gap junction B1 (GJB1) gene. We analyzed four 
families with Arg142Trp mutation, five families with Arg164Gln muta -
tion and three families with Val181Met mutation. We performed hap -
lotype analysis of mutant chromosomes by PCR-AFLP method using 
eight microsatellite markers from Xq13 region: DXS1275, DXS8040, 
DXS1216, DXS8111, DXS983, DXS8107, DXS8052, DXS8060. We 
find out that all families with Val181Met mutation have common hap -
lotype for all markers. In two families with Arg142Trp mutation we re -
vealed common haplotype in all markers too. In all families with muta -
tion Arg164Gln common haplotype was not detected. Existence of a 
common haplotypes of chromosomes with Val181Met mutation allows 
us to speculate on the existence of founder effect. Common haplotype 
chromosomes with mutation Arg142Trp also indicate the founder ef -
fect. In families with mutation Arg164Gln the founder effect doesn’t 
exist, and probably codon 164 is a “hot spot” in GJB1 gene.
P0932. Copynumber alterations of TEKT in Charcot-Marie-Tooth 
disease
M. A. J. Weterman1, F. van Ruissen1, M. de Wissel1, L. Bordewijk1, J. E. 
Hoogendijk2, J. Samijn3, F. Meggouh1, F. Baas1;  
1AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2UMC, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 3MCRZ, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
The most frequent form of demyelinating CMT (CMT1a) is linked to 
chromosome 17p11.2. Intrachromosomal duplications, mainly of a 
1.5Mb region harboring the  PMP22  gene, or mutations in this gene are 
found in the majority of CMT1a patients.
Here we describe an aberrant chromosome 17 duplication proximal of 
the PMP22  gene in several CMT1 patients. In these patients mutations 
in the coding region of PMP22  or the non-coding first exons of the two 
alternative transcripts were absent. This rare copy number polymor -
phism (CNP), starting approximately 33 kb centromeric of PMP22,  en-
compasses the entire TEKT3  gene, in addition to the uncharacterized 
transcript CDRT4 /LOC653497  and co-segregates with the disease in 
two affected families that were studied. The duplication is 186 kb in 
size and identical in nine different individuals from five different fami -
lies. Sequence analysis and microarray CGH both show that this dupli -
cation fully maps within the commonly seen 1.5 Mb duplication and de -
viates from it at both ends. This CNP was not detected in 2124 normal 
chromosomes nor in 40 patients with CIDP. We therefore propose that 
this rare variant is the cause of CMT in these patients and most prob -
ably results in the disease through effects on expression of PMP22 . Of 
note, most diagnostic tests for CMT will not detect this CNP.
P0933. Quantitative fluorescent PCR in the detection of 
duplication/deletion of the PMP22 gene in Belarussian patients 
with CMT1A and NHPP.
K. Mosse , T. Osadchuk, N. Rumyantseva;  
Scientific-Practical Center “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus.
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1A (CMT1A) accounts for 70-80% 
of CMT1 cases and is most frequently caused by the duplication of a 
1.4-Mb genomic fragment on chromosome 17p12 containing PMP22 
gene. For molecular diagnosis of CMT1A, based on quantitative PCR 
analysis of short tandem repeats (STRs), we used 5 markers locat -
ed within the duplicated region. D17S2218, D17S2220, D17S2223, 
D17S2226 and D17S2229 were analysed in two multiplex PCR reac -
tions followed by automated capillary electrophoresis on the ABI Prism 
310. Heterozygosity values of the selected STRs in Belarus population 
are 81.2%, 94.5%, 72%, 77,6% and 84,3% respectively. Using this 
panel we genotyped 130 unrelated individuals with presumable clinical 
diagnoses of CMT neuropathy and 130 their family members. 36 dupli -
cations of the PMP22 gene in affected individuals from 17 families, and 
3 gene deletions responsible for hereditary neuropathy with liability to Genetic analysis, linkage, and association21
pressure palsy (HNPP) in one family were identified. The duplication 
detection rate for D17S2218 is 15/36, D17S2220 - 28/36, D17S2223 
- 17/36, D17S2226 - 11/36 and D17S2229 - 15/36. The high detection 
rate of D17S2220 can be explained by the complex structure of the 
polymorphic marker, which have not only tetra but also dinucleotide 
repeat inside. No individual marker was informative in every patient. 
However, in all positive cases we were able to detect three different 
alleles of at least one STR. The described analysis is fast simple and 
reliable for pre- and postnatal diagnosis of CMT1A and NHPP in Be -
larussian families.
P0934. A coeliac disease genome-wide association study 
identifies a novel susceptibility locus
D. A. van Heel1, L. Franke2, K. A. Hunt1, R. Gwilliam3, A. Zhernakova2, M. In -
ouye3, W. McClaren3, R. McManus4, R. McGinnis3, L. Cardon5, P. Deloukas3, C. 
Wijmenga6,2;  
1Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom, 2University Medi -
cal Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Trinity Centre for Health Science, Dublin, Ireland, 
5University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6Genetics Department, Gronin -
gen, The Netherlands.
Coeliac disease is a common (1% prevalence) chronic inflammatory 
disease of the small intestine, caused by an immune response to di -
etary wheat, rye and barley. HLA-DQ2 (present in 95% of coeliacs) is 
necessary to present wheat epitopes to CD4 T cells, but not sufficient 
for disease (present in 30% of the population). Previously, linkage 
studies were the only cost-effective way to map and isolate non-HLA 
genes contributing to coeliac disease. We have performed a genome-
wide association study and genotyped 310,605 SNPs with minor al -
lele frequency >1% in 778 coeliac cases and 1422 population controls 
from the UK using the Illumina HumanHap300 BeadChip. Overall SNP 
call rate was 99.87%. An extended region of highly significant associa -
tion was seen around the HLA locus (Ï‡2=769.1, P<10-19, OR 7.04 
[95% CI 6.08 - 8.15]). Excluding the HLA region, we observed one 
other SNP that remained significant after permutation testing (P=2.0 x 
10-7, empirical genome-wide significance P=0.045). This finding was 
independently confirmed in Dutch and Irish collections (meta-analysis 
P=3.8 x 10-11, OR 0.66 [95% CI 0.58 - 0.74]). This SNP maps around 
a biologically plausible candidate gene and genetic variation in this 
gene may predispose coeliac patients towards unwanted immune re -
sponses to cereal antigens. In addition to the replicated SNP, a greater 
number of significant SNPs were observed than expected by chance: 
P<10-6 (2 vs 0.3 expected) and P<10-5 (12 vs 3 expected). All SNPs 
with P<0.005 are currently followed in multiple independent cohorts.
P0935. A genome-wide linkage scan in an extended Maltese 
family with a high incidence of coeliac disease
C. Vidal1, J. Borg1, A. E. Felice1, A. Xuereb-Anastasi2,3, C. Scerri1;  
1Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, Msida, Malta, 2Department of 
Pathology, Msida, Malta, 3Institute of Health Care, Msida, Malta.
Gluten-sensitive enteropathy, or coeliac disease, is an autoimmune 
disorder characterized by inflammation, villous atrophy and hyperpla -
sia of the small intestinal mucosa. Coeliac disease is caused by both 
environmental and inherited factors. A small number of family based 
linkage studies were performed so far, where the HLA locus and other 
chromosomal regions were linked with the disease. In this study, link -
age analysis was performed in a Maltese family with a high incidence 
of coeliac.
A whole genome linkage scan using 400 microsatellite markers was 
performed in seventeen family members, four of whom where diag -
nosed as coeliac by biopsy and another two were symptomatic but 
were following a gluten free diet. Multipoint parametric and non-para -
metric linkage analyses were performed by EasyLinkage v4.01 using 
GENEHUNTER v2.1, assuming dominant and recessive modes of in -
heritance with variable penetrance. Disease allele frequency was as -
sumed to be 0.001.
Highest NPL (5.27; p=0.0039) and LOD (1.46) scores were observed to 
marker D10S1731. NPL and LOD scores of 4.12 (p=0.0313) and 1.46, 
respectively, were observed to another marker on chromosome 11p12. 
These results were confirmed after fine mapping at these regions. No 
evidence of linkage was observed to the HLA region on chromosome 
6, where sequencing of HLA-DQA1, DQB1 genes confirmed that nei -
ther DQ2 nor DQ8 HLA heterodimers were found in this family.These results suggest that non-HLA genes might be responsible for 
the onset of coeliac disease in this Maltese family. Further investiga -
tions of the indicated loci are going to be performed by sequencing of 
candidate genes.
P0936. COL4A3/COL4A4 mutations in Cypriot families explain 
the recurrent hematuria-thin basement membrane nephropathy 
that progresses to focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and 
occasionally to end stage renal failure. Extended founder effect 
phenomena and mutation dating
K. Voskarides1, L. Damianou2, V. Neocleous3, I. Zouvani4, S. Christodoulidou2, 
V. Hadjiconstantinou2, K. Ioannou5, Y. Athanasiou5, C. Patsias6, E. Alexopou -
los7, A. Pierides5, K. Kyriakou3, C. Deltas1,3;  
1Department of Biological Sciences, University of Cyprus, Lefkosia, Cyprus, 
2Department of Nephrology, Evangelismos Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3The 
Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Lefkosia, Cyprus, 4Department 
of Histopathology, Lefkosia General Hospital, Lefkosia, Cyprus, 5Department 
of Nephrology, Lefkosia General Hospital, Lefkosia, Cyprus, 6Department of 
Nephrology, Larnaca General Hospital, Larnaca, Cyprus, 77Nephrology Clinic, 
Faculty of Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
Focal Segmental Glomerular Sclerosis is a frequent histological finding 
of heterogeneous aetiology caused by primary and secondary clinical 
conditions. In 11 families with autosomal dominant inheritance of FSGS 
and microscopic hematuria, 372 patients and healthy relatives were 
investigated. Linkage analysis was performed with markers around four 
chromosome regions and screening for mutations was accomplished 
by the SURVEYOR plant endonuclease, followed by automated DNA 
sequencing. For locus 2q36 the total LOD score was 7.75, clearly impli -
cating mutations in either the COL4A3  or COL4A4  gene. DNA sequenc -
ing revealed two COL4A3  and one COL4A4  mutations in 90 patients. In 
one family there was compound heterozygosity and cosegregation of 
two mutations in COL4A3  while two individuals had inherited both muta -
tions and developed the Alport syndrome. Mutation COL4A3  - G1334E 
was found in eight families that share a common COL4A3  haplotype, 
from three geographic locations of Cyprus. Five are from Kaimakli, a 
city near Nicosia, thereby documenting a founder effect. This finding 
may prove to explain a high frequency of patient referrals with chronic 
renal failure from Kaimakli. Mutation dating suggested that this muta -
tion is about 300 years old. This is the first detailed investigation of 
Cypriot families with COL4 pathology with Thin Basement Membrane 
and FSGS as a prominent feature. Our data enhance the observation 
that isolated microscopic hematuria is not always a benign condition. 
Further epidemiological studies are needed in the Cypriot population 
for investigating additional founder phenomena and providing proper 
genetic counselling in concerned families and practicing physicians.
P0937. The association of a polymorphism within the COL5A1 
gene an Achilles tendon injury in a second Caucasian 
population
A. V. September1, J. Cook2, C. Handley2, M. Schwellnus1, M. Collins1,3;  
1UCT/MRC unit for Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, Department of Hu -
man Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 2La Trobe 
University, Victoria, Australia, 3Medical Research Council, Cape Town, South 
Africa.
As many as 30-50% of sports injuries are tendon injuries of which a 
large proportion are Achilles tendon injuries (ATI). The exact mecha -
nisms underlying ATI are poorly understood, however it is widely ac -
cepted that ATI is a multifactorial condition caused by the interaction 
of both intrinsic, which includes a genetic component, and extrinsic 
risk factors. Our group has reported an association between polymor -
phisms within the COL5A1 gene with ATI in a physically active Cauca -
sian population. COL5A1 codes for a polypeptide component of type V 
collagen which is involved in the regulation of fibrillogenesis. The aim 
of this study was therefore to repeat this previous association study 
within a second Caucasian population.
The study comprised 152 Caucasian individuals from Australia, of 
whom 91 were diagnosed with ATI and 61 asymptomatic control (CON) 
individuals. The BstUI restriction fragment length polymorphism was 
used to genotype all the individuals for the C>T transition at nucleotide 
414 of exon 66 of COL5A1 (rs12722).
There was a significant difference in the allele frequencies of the CO -
L5A1 BstUI RFLP between the ATI and CON subjects (p<0.001). The 
frequency of the TC genotype was significantly higher in the ATI group Genetic analysis, linkage, and association22
(69.2%) than in the CON group (36.1%) (odds ratio of 4.0; 95% CI 
2.0-7.9; p<0.001).
These findings provide additional evidence that the COL5A1 BstUI 
RFLP is associated with Achilles tendon injuries.
P0938. COL5A1 genotype effects on range of motion 
measurements
M. Collins1,2, G. G. Mokone1, A. V. September1, L. van der Merwe3, M. P. 
Schwellnus1;  
1UCT/MRC unit for Exercise Science and Sports Medicine, Department of Hu -
man Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa, 2South African 
Medical Research Council, Cape Town, South Africa, 3Biostatistics Research 
unit, South African Medical Research Council, Cape Town, South Africa.
A reduced joint range of motion (ROM) has traditionally been postu -
lated to increase the risk of musculo-tendinous, including Achilles ten -
don, injuries during exercise. There is, however, conflicting evidence 
with regard to the role of musculo-tendinous flexibility in Achilles ten -
don injuries (ATI). We have recently shown that the BstUI restriction 
fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) within the COL5A1 gene is as -
sociated with ATI. Mutations within this gene have been implicated in 
Ehlers Danlos syndrome which is characterised by joint hypermobility. 
The aim of this study therefore was to investigate the possible asso -
ciation of the BstUI RFLP within the COL5A1 gene and musculo-ten -
dinous flexibility in subjects with Achilles tendon injuries and asymp -
tomatic control subjects. Lower limb ROM measurements, including 
the sit and reach (SR) test and the passive straight leg raise (SLR), 
were conducted on 118 physically active Caucasian subjects, which 
comprised 50 subjects with chronic Achilles tendinopathies and 34 
with acute Achilles tendon ruptures, and 34 asymptomatic control sub -
jects. The BstUI RFLP was used to genotype all these individuals for 
the C>T transition at nucleotide 414 of exon 66 of COL5A1 (rs12722). 
Gender, age and the COL5A1 BstUI RFLP genotype contributed signif -
icantly to the optimal SLR model. The factors contributing significantly 
to SR were weight, age and the COL5A1 BstUI RFLP genotype. This 
data suggests that the COL5A1 gene may be associated with lower 
limb flexibility.
P0939. Analysis of a functional catechol-O-methyltransferase 
gene polymorphism in healthy females: association with 
aggressive behavior
M. Kulikova , N. Maluchenko, A. Tonevitsky;  
Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Several lines of research have reported that functional polymorphism 
in the catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene that is responsible 
for substantial variability in COMT enzymatic activity is associated with 
aggression and impulsivity. The most of recent researches have been 
conducted on males therefore we suggest that it is important to inves -
tigate an association of aggression with COMT genotypes in females. 
A common low-activity variant of the enzyme contains a Met residue 
at amino acid 158 of COMT whereas the common high activity variant 
has a Val at this site. Considering the role of COMT in dopamine me -
tabolism and the involvement of dopaminergic pathways in the forma -
tion of aggression, we screened athletes (78 females) and non-trained 
control group (83 females) to determine whether a behavioral associa -
tion with the COMT polymorphism exists or not. Case-control analyses 
suggested a strong association between the ValVal genotype in both 
groups and high aggressive and dangerous behavior (P < 0.04). Also 
we have found that allele distribution is different in the groups and it 
could be the evidence of genetic propensity in sports.
P0940. Congenital cataract - a national wide study in Denmark
L. Hansen1,2, H. Eiberg1, K. Kjaer1,2, T. Rosenberg3;  
1Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2The Wilhelm Johannsen 
Centre for Functional Genome Research, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3, Kennedy 
Institute-National Eye Clinic, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Inherited congenital cataract leads in most cases to loss of vision if it 
not treated. Congenital cataract is present at or develops shortly after 
birth. Mutations in more than 20 human genes have now been associ -
ated with congenital cataract and mainly in combination with autoso -
mal dominant inheritance.
A study of 30 Danish families with inherited congenital cataract has 
been initiated in order to identify the disease causing mutations. Muta -
tions were found in 16 families and analyses of the remaining fami -lies are in progress. Mutations have been identified in seven different 
genes revealing both known and novel mutations.
The methods include genome wide linkage analyses, locus specific 
STS marker analyses of cataract loci or direct DNA sequencing of 
cataract genes. The analysis comprises all known congenital cataract-
associated genes and the analyses may be applied for medical genetic 
counseling in the future.
The results from the first 16 families demonstrated mutations in the al -
pha-, beta- and gamma- crystallin gene families, the alpha gap junction 
gene family, the heat shock factor genes and in regulatory genes.
Several of the families represent distinct cataract phenotypes as the 
ant-egg-cataract (1) and the combination of microcornea and cataract. 
The results, the geno-/phenotypic relations and the structural and func -
tional consequences of the mutations will be presented at the meeting.
1) Hansen L, Yao W, Eiberg H, Funding M, Riise R, Kjaer KW, He -
jtmancik JF, Rosenberg T. The congenital “ant-egg” cataract pheno -
type is caused by a missense mutation in connexin46. Mol Vis. 2006; 
12:1033-1039.
P0941. Linkage screening in a large Iranian family with 
congenital motor nystagmus (CMN)
A. Kian Mehr1, Y. Shafeghati1, H. R. Khorram Khorshid1, H. Ebrahimi1, Y. Hesh -
mati1, M. Karimlou2;  
1Genetic Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sci -
ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Biostatistics department, University of 
Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Idiopathic congenital motor nystagmus (CMN) is a genetic disorder 
characterized by bilateral ocular movements that start within early 
months of life. To date different typs of inheritance patterns have been 
reported for CMN, but no causative gene has been determined for 
CMN so far. This Iranian pedigree shows a typical X-linked dominant 
pattern with reduced penetrance (about30%) among obligate carrier 
females. There is no male to male transmission. Investigations have 
been done so far indicated five out of six families with X-linked CMN to 
be linked to a nearly distinct area in long arm of chromosome X . We 
designed linkage screening for some microsatellite markers previously 
confirmed for linkage on chromosome X. Linkage study was performed 
on Xp by DXS993 ruled out linkage to this locus. The second marker 
on Xq,DXS1047 , was not informative in our Iranian population. Our 
study on other markers on Xq is under way.
P0942. Insertion/deletion polymorphism of Angiotensin 
Converting Enzyme (ACE) gene in children with connective 
tissue dysplasia.
I. A. Kostik1, M. L. Chukhlovina2, V. I. Larionova2, T. I. Kadurina1;  
1Medical Academy Postgradute Studies, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Connective tissue dysplasia (CTD) is a group of geterogenous diseas -
es with hereditary and inborn collagen synthesis disturbance. These 
patients have different neurological complaints, such as, headache, 
weakness, fatigue, dizziness, syncope, lypothymia, associated with 
cerebral hemodynamic disturbance. Previous studies have suggested 
an influence of ACE gene alleles on cerebrovascular disorders (CVD) 
in adults and children.
The aim of our study was to investigate the relationship between ACE 
gene polymorphism and cerebrovascular disorders in these children.
One hundred and three CTD children (36 girls, 68 boys) were included 
in our study. The mean age of patients was 12.97 ±3.93 years, 61,0% 
had CVD. Total genomic DNA was extracted by a standard method 
and ACE genotypes were determined using polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) followed by analysis of PCR products by agarose gel electro -
phoresis in 41 children.
We have revealed the next genotypes and alleles distribution in these 
children: II-31,7%, ID-39,0%, DD-29,3%; I-51,2% and D-48,8%. We 
have no significant differences in ACE genotypes and alleles distribu -
tion between boys and girls. The incidence of homozygous deletion 
(DD) genotype in children with CVD was 37,5% compared to 25,0% 
in children without CVD. Children with II genotype had CVD only in 
16,7% cases, but children with ID genotype had CVD in 42,9% cases 
and children, carriers of DD genotype had CVD in 50,0% cases.
Conclusion: the role of ACE gene insertion/deletion polymorphism in 
cerebrovascular disorders in children with connective tissue dysplasia 
still needs to be determined.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
P0943. Ignoring intermarker linkage disequilibrium induces 
false-positive evidence of linkage for consanguineous pedigrees 
when genotype data is missing for any pedigree member
B. Li, S. M. Leal ;  
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States.
Missing genotype data can increase false-positive evidence for linkage 
when either parametric or nonparametric analysis is carried out ignor -
ing intermarker linkage disequilibrium (LD). Previously it was demon -
strated by Huang et al (2005) that no bias occurs in this situation for 
affected sib-pairs with unrelated parents when either both parents are 
genotyped or genotype data is available for two additional unaffected 
siblings when parental genotypes are missing. However, this is not 
the case for consanguineous pedigrees, where missing genotype data 
for any pedigree member within a consanguinity loop can increase 
false-positive evidence of linkage. The false-positive evidence for link -
age is further increased when cryptic consanguinity is present. The 
amount of false-positive evidence for linkage is highly dependent on 
which family members are genotyped. When parental genotype data 
is available, the false-positive evidence for linkage is usually not as 
strong as when parental genotype data is unavailable. Which family 
members will aid in the reduction of false-positive evidence of linkage 
is highly dependent on which other family members are genotyped. 
For a pedigree with an affected proband whose first-cousin parents 
have been genotyped, further reduction in the false-positive evidence 
of linkage can be obtained by including genotype data from additional 
affected siblings of the proband or genotype data from the proband’s 
sibling-grandparents. When parental genotypes are not available, 
false-positive evidence for linkage can be reduced by including in the 
analysis genotype data from either unaffected siblings of the proband 
or the proband’s married-in-grandparents.
P0944. Polymorphism of cytokines genes in COPD patients from 
Russia
G. F. Korytina , D. Ksenya, Y. Dily, V. Tatyana;  
Institut of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the possible roles of the 
cytokines genes in the development of chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). Polymorphisms in the genes encoding IL1b, IL-
1RN, TNFA , LTA, IL6, IL8 & IL10 were investigated in COPD patients 
(N=319) and healthy individuals (N=403) living in Ufa, the Republic of 
Bashkortostan.
We observed that IL1RN *2/IL1RN *2 genotype of  IL1RN gene was as -
sociated with susceptibility for COPD (9.8% vs 4.67%; χ2=5.45, df=1, 
p=0.02;  OR=2.21). Analysis of the LTA gene polymorphic locus 252A/
G showed that in patients with COPD, the frequency of the GG  geno -
type was significantly higher than that in the control group (7.84% vs 
3.72%; χ2=5.00,  df=1, p=0.025). The increase of this genotype was 
significant in case of IV stage of COPD (11.18% vs 4.79%; χ2=3.075, 
df=1, p=0.07). Frequency of genotype combination TNFA -308 G/G 
and LTA252 A/A significantly decreased in COPD group (38.55% vs 
46.93% in control group; χ2=8.82, df=1, p=0.0039). The frequency of 
GG genotype of the IL6 gene  was higher in the patients with IV stage 
of COPD (43.75% vs 31.54%, χ2=4.14, P=0.041).
Our results indicate that the genotype frequency of the -511 T/C, 3953 
T/C of IL1B, -308G/A of TNFA , -174G/C of IL6, -251A/T of IL8 and 
- 627C/A of IL10 genes polymorphisms was similar in COPD and 
healthy control groups.
P0945. Alleles of the Toll-Like-Receptor signaling pathway in 
Coronary Heart Disease patients
A. S. Schaefer1, N. E. Mokhtari2, M. Nothnagel3, R. Simon2, H. Katus4, S. S. 
Schreiber1;  
1Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, 
Kiel, Germany, 2Clinic of Cardiology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, 
Kiel, Germany, 3Institute for Medical Informatics and Statistics, University Hos -
pital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany, 4Cardiology, Angiology, Pneumology, 
University Hospital Heidelberg, Germany.
Atherosclerosis is characterized by signs of chronic inflammation and 
systemic immune responses. Bacterial infection and inflammation 
have been implicated in the pathogenesis of coronary heart disease 
(CHD). Toll Like Receptors (TLRs) are the initial sensors of invading 
microbes, and interact with endogenous ligands such as oxLDL. They 
activate multiple pathogen-specific immune responses, e.g. cytokine expression.
To elucidate CHD predisposing genotypes of the TLR pathway, we an -
alysed the complete haplotype information of 16 genes within this path -
way, encoding for receptors, ligands, and signal transducers (TLR1, 
TLR2, TLR4, TLR5, CD14, CD36, MyD88, TOLIP, Traf6, TAB1, TBK1, 
TAK1, TRAM, TIRAP, IRAK1 and IRAK4). In a large scale case-control 
association study (1103 early-onset CHD patients and 736 controls), 
136 tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (tSNPs) were genotyped 
using the high-through-put SNPlexTM technology. To adjust for all con -
ventional CHD environmental risk factors, multiple logistic regression 
analysis was performed with stepwise selection (Wald). Before and af -
ter adjustment, polymorphisms of TLR4 and TLR5 showed significant 
p-values. The tSNPs of TLR4 and TLR5, showing significant p-values 
after stratification for environmental factors (p=0.029 and 0.018, re -
spectively) were replicated with a second population of further 2206 
CHD patients and controls. Genotyping was performed using the Taq -
ManTM technology, and associations were adjusted by logistic regres -
sion. Before and after adjustment, no evidence for associations with 
CHD was detected for the replicated tSNPs at both, the allele and 
genotype level.
Thus, the study does not indicate any association of a TLR-pathway 
specific allele with an increased risk of CHD susceptibility in the Cau -
casian population.
P0946. Functional gene variants in the regulatory regions 
of COX-2 gene and non-melanoma skin cancer after organ 
transplantation.
M. Gomez Lira1, S. Mazzola1, G. Tessari2, L. Naldi3, A. Forni4, C. Rugiu5, S. 
Piaserico6, G. Girolomoni2, A. Turco1;  
1Department of Mother and Child Care, Section Biology and Genetics, Univer -
sity of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Department of Biomedical and Surgical Sciences 
– Section of Dermatology and Venereal, Verona, Italy, 3Centro Studi Gruppo 
Italiano di Studi Epidemiologici in Dermatologia., Verona, Italy, 4Kidney Trans -
plantation Center. University of Verona, Verona;, Verona, Italy, 5Division of 
Cardiac Surgery. University of Verona. Verona, Verona, Italy, 6Department of 
Nephrology. University of Verona. Verona, Verona, Italy.
Overexpression of COX-2, which results in excessive prostaglandine 
production, has been observed in human epidermal keratinocytes 
after UVB injury, in squamous cell skin cancer, in actinic keratoses 
and in early stages of carcinogenesis. The dysregulation of COX-2 
expression observed in carcinogenesis can in part be due to functional 
changes affecting regulatory elements in the 5’ or 3’ UTR regions of 
the gene. Two polymorphisms (-765G>C, and -1195A>G) in the pro -
moter and one polymorphism in 3’UTR (8473T>C) regions have been 
described. To elucidate if these COX-2 variants can be associated to 
non-melanoma skin cancer (NMSC) susceptibility after transplanta -
tion, we genotyped 240 North Italian transplant patients (107 cases 
and 133 controls). The distrubution of COX-2 univariant genotypes, 
and of estimated haplotypes was not significantly different between 
the overall NMSC group and controls. However, stratification by kind 
of tumors (SCC or BCC), and age at transplant, showed that allele -
765C was never present in BCC cases who underwent transplantation 
before 50 years (CC+CG vs GG Fisher exact test P=0.00042) sug -
gesting a protective effect of allele -765C in this subclass of patients. 
To determine if other polymorphisms in these regions can contribute to 
NMSC susceptibility, heteroduplex screening of the proximal 5’ and 3’ 
regulatory regions of the gene was performed. One rare polymorphism 
(-62C>G), which was present in both study groups was identified. No 
other variant was found suggesting that sequence variations in these 
regulatory regions of the COX-2 gene do not likely contribute to NMSC 
risk in this population.
P0947. Maternal mosaicism of a RYR2 mutation.
H. Bikker1, J. P. van Tintelen2, Z. A. Bhuiyan1, A. A. M. Wilde3, A. C. P. Wies -
feld4, M. M. A. M. Mannens1;  
1Department of Clinical Genetics, AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2Depart -
ment of Clinical Genetics, UMCG, Groningen, The Netherlands, 3Department 
of Cardiology, AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Department of Cardiology, 
UMCG, Groningen, The Netherlands.
Mutations in the cardiac ryanodine receptor (RYR2) gene have been 
reported to cause autosomal dominant catecholaminergic polymor -
phic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT). Exposure to stress or exercise in 
these patients can lead to ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
death. More than 60 mutations in RYR2 have been reported. They 
cluster in 3 regions: the amino terminus, a central domain and the 
carboxyl terminus.
The diagnosis CPVT was made in a 10year old boy. He presented with 
syncope at the age of 9 years. Family history was remarkable: one 
sister died at the age of 3 weeks while crying and another sister died 
suddenly at the age of 13 years while being angry. Both parents had 
not experienced symptoms of ventricular tachycardias.
In the index-patient, a mutation in the RYR2 gene was identified. The 
mutation c.12446A>C, resulted in a p.Tyr4149Ser amino acid change. 
Tyr4149 is located in the I-domain, a hydrophobic RYR2 region that 
is postulated to transduce cytoplasmic events by regulating the Ca2+ 
pore-forming domain. This domain is a hot-spot for arrhythmia-linked 
RYR2 mutations.
DNA sequencing of the RYR2 gene in the parents suggested that they 
were both homozygous for the wild-type allele. A de novo mutation was 
not expected, because the parents already lost two daughters with 
symptoms compatible with CPVT. Further investigation (dHPLC and 
digestion with Bse1) indicated that the mother was somatic mosaic for 
the mutation.
This finding confirms the occurrence of somatic mosaicism and has 
implications for the genetic counselling of apparently de novo cases 
of CPVT.
P0948. Association of variants of the IL2R  and ATG1L1 genes 
with susceptibility to pediatric Crohn’s disease
M. Devoto , R. N. Baldassano, J. P. Bradfield, D. S. Monos, C. E. Kim, J. T. 
Glessner, T. Casalunovo, E. C. Frackelton, G. Otieno, S. Kanterakis, J. L. Sha -
ner, R. M. Smith, A. W. Eckert, L. J. Robinson, C. C. Onyah, D. J. Abrams, R. 
M. Chiavacci, R. Skraban, S. F. A. Grant, H. Hakonarson;  
The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
Two recent genome wide association studies reported association of 
Crohn’s disease (CD) in adults with single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) in the interleukin-23 receptor ( IL23R ) and autophagy-related 
16-like 1 ( ATG16L1 ) genes. The aim of this study was to examine the 
impact of these SNPs on risk of CD in children. Utilizing data from our 
ongoing genome-wide association study, we investigated the associa -
tion of the previously reported SNPs at the IL23R  (rs11209026) and 
ATG16L1  (rs2241880) genes in a preliminary cohort of 142 pediatric 
CD cases with the childhood form of this disease and 281 matched 
controls. The minor allele frequency (MAF) of SNP rs11209026 in the 
cases was 1.75% while it was 6.61% in controls, yielding a protective 
odds ratio (OR) of 0.25 (95% CI 0.10 - 0.65; one-sided P = 9.2x10-4). A 
transmission disequilibrium test with 65 trios derived from our initial pa -
tient cohort confirmed the significant association with rs11209026 (one-
sided P = 0.0017). Similarly, the frequency of allele G of rs2241880 in 
the cases was 63.73% while it was 51.96% in the controls, yielding 
an allelic OR of 1.62 (95% CI 1.21 - 2.18; one-sided P = 6.93x10-4). 
The ORs in our pediatric study are comparable with those reported 
previously in adult IBD case-control cohorts. As such, these variants 
confer a similar magnitude of risk of CD to children as for their adult 
counterparts. Our findings provide an independent confirmation of the 
effect of variants of these two genes on risk of CD.
P0949. Crohn’s disease and polymorphisms of the NOD2/
CARD15 and TNFA genes
Y. Nasykhova1, T. Ivashchenko1, N. Semenov2, B. Baranov1;  
1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Medical Academy of Postgraduate Study, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Crohn’s disease (CD) is a complex multifactorial disorder, which is 
thought to result from the influence of environmental factors on ge -
netically predisposed host. We studied the mutation frequencies 
(Gly908Arg, Arg702Trp,1007insC) in NOD2/CARD15 gene in the 
group of patients with Crohn’s disease and in the control group. The 
frequencies of these mutations were following: Gly908Arg - 3,2% Ar -
g702Trp-3,8%, 1007insC - 4,4%. 20,5% of the patients had at least 
one mutation in the NOD2/CARD15 gene. We analyzed also polymor -
phic variants of TNFA gene within a promoter region. Recently it was 
reported that this polymorphism is associated with a level of TNFA 
proinflammatory cytokine production and therefore is implicated in an 
inflammatory process. The frequency of -308G/-308A  genotype was 
significantly higher in the group of patients (p=0.003, OR=3.89; 95% 
CI:1.57-9.65). According to the odds ratio it was found that the carriers of the A-allele of TNFA  gene have 3-fold increase of Crohn’s disease 
risk (OR=3.20, 95% CI:1.43-7.15). Interestingly that combined hetero -
zygous genotype -238A/238G  + -308A/-308G  of TNFA  gene resulted 
in considerable increase of CD risk (OR=18.8; 95% CI:1.02-345.97).
TNFA is a key component of inflammatory process development and 
a target for anti-TNFA therapies which are used as a second or third-
line treatment. Therefore further research may help to develop of new 
therapeutic strategies for the treatment of chronic inflammatory dis -
eases by anti-TNFA medicines.
P0950. Variations in C-reactive protein gene and COPD: tagging 
SNPs analysis in case-control study
D. G. Yanbaeva1, M. A. Dentener1, M. A. Spruit2, A. Van de Kruijs2, A. Derks2, 
E. F. M. Wouters1,2;  
1Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2Centre for Integrated 
Rehabilitation of Organ failure, Horn, The Netherlands.
BACKGROUND Chronic low-grade systemic inflammation (i.e. in -
creased C-reactive protein, CRP) has been recognized to be present in 
COPD and, in turn, may have a systemic impact. However, remarkably 
little is known about the underlying mechanisms of systemic inflamma -
tion in COPD. Systemic inflammatory response might be modulated 
by genetic background. The aim of this study was to examine whether 
variations in CRP gene coding for acute phase protein are associated 
with susceptibility for COPD.
METHODS A total of 265 clinically stable patients with moderate-to-se -
vere COPD (mean age 64 years, FEV1 39% pred, FEV1/VC, 44.6%) 
entering pulmonary rehabilitation and 90 healthy smokers (mean age 
56 years, FEV1 109% pred, FEV1/VC, 77%) were enrolled. All sub -
jects were Dutch Caucasians.
Six tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs3091244, 
rs1800947, rs113084, rs1205, rs2808630, rs3093077) within CRP 
gene have been selected for genotyping from Seattle SNPs database 
(r2 0.8, MAF 5%).
RESULTS All tested SNPs were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium both 
in cases and controls. We found that carriers of 5237TT genotype 
(rs2808630) had 50% lower risk of having COPD (p=0.006, reces -
sive model). In addition, two trends have been shown: homosigosity of 
1444A (rs1130864), previously associated with elevated CRP plasma 
levels, has increased the disease risk by 2.1-fold (p=0.06, recessive 
and additive models), and carriage of 1059C allele (rs1800947) also 
was found to be associated with increased risk of COPD (p=0.07, 
OR=1.93, additive model). Analysis of CRP haplotypes confirmed 
these findings.
CONCLUSIONS Results indicate that SNPs in CRP gene might be 
associated with susceptibility for COPD.
P0951. Family based association analysis of TGFB1 as modifier 
gene in Cystic Fibrosis
M. D. Bettin1, C. Bombieri1, G. Malerba1, L. Xumerle1, F. Belpinati1, C. Castel -
lani2, B. M. Assael2, P. F. Pignatti1;  
1Section of Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Cystic 
Fibrosis Veneto Regional Center, Hospital of Verona, Verona, Italy.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a lethal, multi-system autosomal recessive ge -
netic disorder primarily affecting Caucasian populations, caused by 
mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regula -
tor (CFTR) gene. Severity of clinical presentation in CF, particularly 
the pulmonary manifestation, are highly variable, even among CF pa -
tients presenting the same genotype. This variability is only partially 
explained by allelic heterogeneity at the CFTR gene. Literature data 
suggest that the severity in CF may be correlated with other genetic 
factors. Two polymorphisms (-509C/T and Leu10Pro) of the TGFB1 
gene, which encodes for a cytokine involved in inflammation and tis -
sue repair and expressed by several cells, have recently been associ -
ated to a more severe CF pulmonary manifestation in the American 
population (Drumm et al, NEJM 353:1443; 2005). We here report a 
TDT analysis of three TGFB1 functional polymorphisms (-509C/T, 
Leu10Pro e Arg25Pro) in Italian CF patients. Eigthy-three family trios 
were collected through a CF patient attending the Veneto Regional CF 
Centre of Verona. All the 83 patients were severe/severe CFTR muta -
tion carriers and were clinically evaluated for respiratory parameters, 
gastrointestinal and nutritional status parameters, and other clinical 
variables related to the common CF complicances (diabetes, DIOS, 
etc). We found evidence of association between Arg25 homozygotes Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
and FEV1 (p=0.018). No association was found among other poly -
morphisms and studied clinical parameters. In order to confirm these 
preliminary data, we have enlarged our population, and we are now 
genotyping a second group of 60 unrelated Italian CF patients.
P0952. Syntaxin 1A: a possible modifier of lung disease in cysic 
fibrosis (CF)
J. Racine1, R. Kraemer2, A. Schaller1, T. von Kaenel1, M. Schneider1, J. Sanz1, 
S. Gallati1;  
1Division of Human Genetics, Dept. of Paediatrics, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland, 2Dept. of Paediatrics, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
Phenotypic presentation, primarily progression of lung disease, var -
ies significantly even among patients with the same CFTR genotype. 
There is growing evidence that polymorphic variants in genes besides 
CFTR play an important role in phenotype determination. Mainly genes 
that modulate the chloride-transport or the cycle of inflammation may 
lead to progressive lung disease. Syntaxin 1A (STX1A), a SNARE pro -
tein essential for the docking and fusion of exocytotic vesicles, binds 
to the N-terminal tail of CFTR and down-regulates its function by direct 
protein-protein interaction making it a promising candidate as a CF 
modifier.
DNA from 63 F508del homozygous and clinically well characterized 
patients was screened for mutations in the STX1A gene using our very 
sensitive (98%) SSCP/HD method followed by direct sequencing of 
the variants. Eight different sequence variants (c.31-21T>C, 3.17%; 
c.150C>T, p.N50N, 6.35%; c.204T>C, p.D68D, 37.30%, c.284-66G>A, 
2.38%; c.467-38A>G, 42.06%; c.540+52C>T, 42.86%; c.790-15C>T, 
3.97%, c.959+92C>T, 3.17%) were identified and tested for associa -
tions with lung function parameters such as functional residual ca -
pacity determined by whole-body plethysmography (FRCpleth), lung 
clearance index (LCI), trapped gas (VTG) and indexes of flow limi -
tation (FEV1, FEF50). Most significant associations were found be -
tween c.204T>C and c.467-38A>G and the lung parameters LCI and 
FEF50.
Homozygosity for F508del combined with both c.204T/T and c.467-
38G/G predicts a progressive and severe lung disease (n=11), com -
bination with c.204C/C and c.467-38A/A, however, is associated with 
a much milder course (n=18; p = 0.001 for LCI, p=0.002 for FEF50). 
Thus, the STX1A gene seems to act as a modifier of lung disease in 
CF patients.
P0953. Cystic Fibrosis modifier genes and outcome of the 
disease. Correlation with the age of the patients.
J. J. Telleria1, J. Gobernado2, C. Vázquez3, F. Baranda3, M. J. Alonso1, I. 
Fernández1, J. M. F. Fernández1, A. Blanco-Quirós1;  
1Universidad de Valladolid, Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital Clinico Universitario, 
Valladolid, Spain, 3Hospital de Cruces, Bilbao, Spain.
In Cystic Fibrosis (CF) patients, the CFTR genotype is not a good pre -
dictor of pulmonary disease, which is the direct cause of death in over 
90% of CF patients. Genotype-phenotype studies showed a high vari -
ation in severity of pulmonary disease, even between patients sharing 
the same CFTR genotype, suggesting that outcome is under the influ -
ence of other genetic or/and environmental factors.
The aim of this study was to study the role of several potential modifier 
genes and if this role changes as the disease progress.
Sixty one cystic fibrosis patients over 23 years were initially included 
in the study. CFTR mutations were identified and genotype was car -
ried out for the following genes: PI (alpha-1-antitrypsin), TNFA, TGFB1 
(codons 10 and 25), IL10, IL6 and IFNG.
In order to minimise the role of the CFTR genotype, patients with mild 
mutations were excluded of the study. Data corresponding to the basal 
forced expiratory volume in 1s (FEV1), Crispin-Norman score, and 
forced vital capacity (FVC) were retrospectively recorded.
Results showed a double distribution of modifying effect: PI and IFNG 
showed good correlation to FEV1 and FVC between 10 and 15 years, 
whereas for TGFB and IL6 we found good correlation in patients over 
18 years. Crispin-Norman score showed good correlation only with 
TGFB1 codon 10 genotype. We did not find correlation neither for IL10 
nor for codon 25 of TGFB1.
These findings suggest that the role played by the modifier genes 
deppends on the stage of the disease, and changes as the disease 
progressP0954. Polymorphisms of the IL1B and IL1RN genes are 
associated with essential hypertension in Tatars from Russia
Y. R. Timasheva1, T. R. Nasibullin1, A. N. Zakirova2, O. E. Mustafina1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir 
State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Essential hypertension (EH) is a common disease and a major risk 
factor for many cardiovascular events. The hereditary nature of hy -
pertension is well established. Inflammation plays a pivotal role in the 
pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease. Inflammatory damage of en -
dothelium leads to impairment of the vascular tone. Interleukin-1 (IL-1) 
regulates the expression of genes involved in inflammatory response. 
IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) is an endogenous inhibitor of IL-1 
signaling. The rare allele ( IL1RN*2 ) of a variable number tandem re -
peat polymorphism in the IL1RN  gene was demonstrated to signifi -
cantly reduce IL-1Ra level.
The aim of the present study was to investigate the association be -
tween IL1B and IL1RN  polymorphisms with EH in Tatar ethnic group 
(Bashkortostan, Russia).
Our study comprised 360 hypertensive patients. The control group 
consisted of 242 healthy individuals. Genomic DNA was isolated from 
peripheral blood by phenol-chloroform extraction. Genotyping was 
performed using polymerase chain reaction followed by AvaI digestion 
(for IL1B-511T/C polymorphism). Genotypes and allele frequencies 
distribution was estimated using Fisher’s exact test. Odds ratios with 
95% confidential interval were calculated.
IL1RN*2  allele was found to be associated with risk of early onset (be -
fore 45 years) of EH (OR=3.27, CI: 1.65-6.49). We have shown that 
IL1B-511*C/*C genotype was less frequent among hypertensive pa -
tients who had stroke (37.5% versus 57.52% in group of patients with 
non-complicated EH, P=0.03). We may conclude that IL1B-511*C/*C is 
associated with decreased risk of stroke in patients with EH (OR=0.44, 
CI: 0.22-09).
Our results suggest a significant role for IL1 family genes in the devel -
opment of cardiovascular disease.
P0955. Screening for SLC26A4 gene mutation in unilateral 
hearing impairment and same-side EVA
L. Jonard1, D. Feldmann1, A. David2, H. Dollfus3, V. Drouin-Garraud4, F. Fell -
mann5, C. Francannet6, B. Gilbert7, H. Journel8, E. Garabedian1, R. Couderc1, 
C. Petit9, F. Denoyelle1, S. Marlin1;  
1AP-HP, Trousseau, Paris, France, 2CHU, Nantes, France, 3CHU, Strasbourg, 
France, 4CHU, Rouen, France, 5CHU, Besançon, France, 6CHU, Clermont Fer -
rand, France, 7CHU, Poitiers, France, 8CHU, Vannes, France, 9INSERM U587, 
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
Mutations of the SLC26A4 (PDS) gene are involved in either syndromic 
deafness, characterized by congenital sensorineural hearing loss and 
goitre (Pendred syndrome), or congenital isolated deafness (DFNB4).
In our previous studies, we identified mutations in cases with bilat -
eral hearing impairment and unilateral enlarged vestibular aqueduct 
(EVA) in two cohorts (Pendred and DFNB4). In the present study, we 
screened SLC26A4 by DHPLC in 25 patients presenting with unilateral 
hearing impairment associated with same-side EVA. None of these pa -
tients had two deleterious genetic changes in trans. Seven of them had 
a single heterozygous SLC26A4 variation. Among these variations, we 
found three established mutations and three potentially deleterious 
genetic changes.
We conclude that causative SLC26A4 mutations in patients with unilat -
eral deafness and same-side EVA are at best infrequent.
P0956. No evidence for an association of the 
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase gene CT  polymorphism 
with major depressive disorder
D. Gaysina1,2, S. Cohen2, F. Hoda2, N. Craddock3, A. Korzsun4, M. Owen3, I. 
Craig2, A. Farmer2, P. McGuffin2;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2MRC SGDP 
Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London, London, United King -
dom, 3Department of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff University, School of 
Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 4Centre for Psychiatry, Wolfson Institute of 
Preventive Medicine, Barts and The London Queen Mary’s School of Medicine, 
London, United Kingdom.
Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is a complex disorder thought to 
result from multiple genes interacting with environmental and devel -
opmental components. The 5,10-methylentetrahydrofolate reductase Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
gene ( MTHFR ) is considered to be an important candidate gene of 
MDD. A single base mutation C677T  (rs1801133) results in the pro -
duction of a mildly dysfunctional thermolabile enzyme. The MTHFR  
677T/T genotype and, to a lesser extent the 677C/T  genotype, is as -
sociated with a significant elevation in the circulating concentrations of 
the homocystein and a decrease in serum folate concentrations, which 
may parallel a similar reduction in 5-methyltetrahydrofolate in CNS 
and may lead to a reduction in monoamine neurotransmitter function 
and elevated risk of MDD. To test the hypothesis that MTHFR  C677T 
polymorphism can be involved in predisposition to MDD we conducted 
the association study in sample of 1222 patients with recurrent MDD 
and 833 control subjects. The statistical power of our sample to de -
tect an odds ratio of 1.5 for 677T/T  genotype was 88%. There are not 
significant differences in genotype/allele frequencies between depres -
sive patients and controls, neither in total samples, nor in females and 
males separately. We also failed to confirm the association of this gene 
with MDD using meta-analysis of 4 case-control studies. Our results 
exclude a major role for the MTHFR C677T  polymorphism in confer -
ring susceptibility to recurrent unipolar depression in British popula -
tion. However, there are many rare mutations in the MTHFR  gene, 
also associated with minor changes in the enzyme activity of MTHFR, 
which could play a role in susceptibility to depression.
P0957. Association of INSR and IRS-1 gene polymorphisms with 
type 2 diabetes in the Northern Greek population
A. Leondiadou, A. Kouvatsi ;  
Aristotle University, Thessaloniki, Greece.
Type 2 diabetes is a heterogeneous disorder. Several genes have 
been proposed to contribute to its pathogenesis. Associations found 
in a particular population were often not confirmed in others, suggest -
ing regional differences. In the present study we tested the possible 
association of variants in the genes for insulin receptor (INSR) and 
insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) with type 2 diabetes in the North -
ern Greek population. The distribution of three polymorphisms of the 
INSR gene (3559C>T or Y984Y, 3560G>A or V985M and 3781C>T 
or H1058H) and one polymorphism of the IRS-1 gene (3932G>A or 
G972R) were determined in 100 unrelated diabetic patients and 100 
age-matched unrelated control subjects. Genotyping was performed 
by PCR amplification followed by restriction digestion with appropri -
ate enzymes. Samples with certain patterns were further sequenced 
in order not to conceal the coupling between the Y984Y and V985M 
polymorphisms.
Genotypic and allelic frequencies were compared between the two 
groups. No association was found for the four polymorphisms with dia -
betes. The analysis of composite genotypes revealed that individuals 
heterozygous for the Y984Y polymorphism and homozygous normal 
for the other three, were found more frequently among the controls 
(p=0.033). This genotype might be protective against type 2 diabetes 
in Greek individuals.
P0958. Using high-density SNP genotyping to fine-map the 
diabetic nephropathy locus on 3q in patients from Finland
B. He1, A. Österholm1, M. Wessman2, C. Forsblom2, J. Tuomilehto3, P. Groop2, 
K. Tryggvason1;  
1Matrix Biology, MBB, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Folkhälsan 
Research Center, Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3National Public 
Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland.
Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is the leading cause of end-stage renal 
disease and affects about 30 % of all diabetic patients. Our previous 
genome scan using discordant sib pairs from Finland identified the 
3q locus with a suggestive linkage (LOD 2.6, P=0.0004) to DN (Kid -
ney International 2007;71:140). To capture genetic variants in LD with 
the causal SNP, we carried out a high-density SNP genotyping strat -
egy for fine-mapping the 3q locus. Based on the HapMap database, 
3072 tagged SNPs (r2>0.7, MAF>2%) covering 28 Mb, from 124 to 
152 Mb on chromosome 3 (build 35), were selected by the LD-based 
tagging method and were genotyped in 643 samples (456 Finnish and 
187 Icelandic) using the Illumina SNP genotyping platform. In results, 
635 samples (98.7%) and 2820 SNPs (92%) reached the threshold of 
data quality controls. In association analysis, 154 SNPs in the Finnish 
samples and 149 SNPs in the Icelandic samples showed allelic as -
sociations (P<0.05) between cases and controls. Eight SNPs with the 
same direction in both two sets showed significant associations with DN. In combined sample analysis using the Mantel-Haenszel model, 
43 SNPs (1.5%) reached the significant level of association (P<0.01). 
The P values for two most significant SNPs among these 43 SNPs 
were 0.0000038 and 0.00006. respectively. For the follow-up studies, 
a large DN cohort containing more than 1000 cases and 1000 controls 
from the FinnDiane project in Finland is used. Genotyping of these 43 
SNPs in the FinnDiane cohort for replication studies is ongoing.
P0959. Association of a dopamine transporter gene (DAT1) 
polymorphism with alcohol dependence in Russian population 
from West Siberia
A. V. Marusin1, M. O. Abushaeva2, N. A. Bokhan2, A. S. Gureev3, M. G. Spiri -
donova1, Y. R. Pels1, V. A. Stepanov1;  
1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Acad -
emy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Research Institute of 
Mental Health, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, 
Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Tomsk State University, Biology and Soil science 
Faculty, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
The dopamine transporter ( DAT1  or SLC6A3 ) plays the important role 
in dopamine metabolism, serves as a critical regulator of dopaminer -
gic neurotransmission. The association of DAT1 VNTR  with alcoholism 
was found in many populations. Two polymorphisms in DAT1  gene, 
VNTR  in 3’-untranslated region and 1342 A/G polymorphism in exon 
9 were investigated in three groups: alcoholics (n=92), non-alcoholic 
controls (n=81) and population samples from three Russian popula -
tions of Tomsk area (n=583). For both loci the genotype frequencies 
obeyed the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in all groups. No association 
of exon 9 A/G polymorphism with alcoholism was found. As to VNTR  
polymorphism the protective effect of 10/10 genotype was revealed: 
the odds ratio ( OR) for this genotype for alcohol dependence were 
0.49 (95 % CI 0.25 - 0.96; P = 0.025) in patient/control and 0.64 (95 
% CI 0.40 - 1.02; P = 0,048) in patient/population samples compari -
sons. Thus, obtained data testify for importance of DAT1  variability in 
predisposition to alcoholism. This work was supported by the Russian 
Foundation for Basic Research (project no. 05-04-98007-p_ob_a).
P0960. Contribution of the dopamine transporter ( SLCA ) and 
the dopamine receptor D2 ( DRD2 ) genes to cocaine addiction: a 
case-control association study in the Spanish population
N. Fernández1,2, M. Ribasés3, B. Gonzalvo3, M. Casas3,4, C. Roncero3,4, B. 
Cormand1,2;  
1Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER, Instituto de Salud 
Carlos III, Barcelona, Spain, 3Servei de Psiquiatria, Hospital Universitari Vall 
d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 4Departament de Psiquiatria i Medicina Legal, 
Universitat Autònoma, Barcelona, Spain.
Drug addiction is a complex neuropsychiatric disorder in which envi -
ronmental, social and genetic factors are involved. Several evidences 
suggest that the dopaminergic system may play an important role in 
cocaine abuse and dependence and that decreased dopaminergic 
function underlies cocaine addiction. The dopamine transporter (DAT1) 
and the dopamine receptor D2 (DRD2) mediate cocaine effects in the 
central nervous system. In this regard, cocaine binding to DAT1 causes 
an overstimulation of the dopamine reward system, and decreased 
DRD2 availability has been reported in cocaine addicts. In addition, 
consistent associations have been reported between cocaine addic -
tion and several polymorphisms in the dopamine transporter ( SLC6A3 ) 
and the dopamine receptor D2 ( DRD2)  genes. We aimed to replicate 
these results by genotyping the Int8 VNTR of the SLC6A3  gene and 
the TaqIA and TaqIB RFLP polymorphisms within the DRD2  gene in 
a Spanish sample of 85 cocaine addicts and 85 sex-matched healthy 
controls. The case-control study showed an overrepresentation of the 
5R/5R genotype of the SLC6A3  gene in the group of cocaine abusers 
when compared to controls (p=0.009). However, no significant associ -
ation was detected when allele frequencies of the SLC6A3  Int8 VNTR 
or genotype, allele or estimated haplotype frequencies of the DRD2 
TaqIA and TaqIB SNPs were considered. We also evaluated potential 
epistatic effects between the SLC6A3  and DRD2  genes but found no 
evidence supporting the existence of interactions. Although additional 
research in other datasets with an increased sample size is required, 
our preliminar results suggest that the SLC6A3  gene may predispose 
to cocaine addiction.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
P0961. Mutational screening in Dysferlin gene
L. Gonzalez-Quereda1, J. Juan1, N. de Luna2, E. Gallardo2, M. Rodriguez1, C. 
Paradas3, I. Illa2, M. Baiget1, P. Gallano1;  
1Genetics, Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Neurology, Hospital de 
Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3Neurology, Hospital de Valme, Sevilla, Spain.
Mutations in dysferlin gene ( DYSF ) cause different muscular dystro -
phy phenotypes with autosomal recessive inheritance including Limb 
Girdle Muscular Dystrophy 2B (LGMD2B), Miyoshi Myopathy (MM) 
and Distal Anterior Compartment Myopathy (DAT). DYSF  gene, that 
maps to chromosome 2p13, has 55 exons and codifies a protein of 
about 237 kDa.
Dysferlin protein is expressed in skeletal muscle and peripheral blood 
monocytes. The genomic analysis of the DYSF  gene has proved to 
be time consuming because its long size. We designed a mutational 
screening strategy based on cDNA from monocytes to find out whether 
the mutational analysis could be performed in mRNA from a source 
less invasive than the muscle biopsy
We studied 50 patients from 31 families clinically diagnosed as MM, 
LGMD2B and DAT through: 1) the analysis of dysferlin expression by 
immunohystochemistry in muscle biopsies and Western blot in periph -
eral blood monocytes and, 2) the screening of mutations in DYSF  gene 
by sequencing monocytes cDNA, amplifying 14 fragments that covers 
the 55 exons. Finally, the results were confirmed in genomic DNA.
We identified mutations in DYSF  gene in the thirty one families stud -
ied: 17 of them in a homozygous state and 14 in a heterozygous state. 
We found the two mutated alleles in twenty eight families and only one 
mutated allele in 3 families. Seventeen mutations were missense, 10 
nonsense, 13 frameshit and 2 splice site mutations.
This report furnish evidence of reliable mutational analysis using 
monocytes cDNA and constitutes a good alternative to genomic DNA 
analysis.
P0962. Haplotypic classification of DEB in Tunisia: evidence for 
genetic variability among the different geographic regions
H. Ouragini1, F. Cherif2, W. Daoud2, S. Kassar3, S. Nouira1, S. Boubaker3, A. 
Ben Osman-Dhahri2, S. Abdelhak1;  
1Molecular Investigation of Genetic Orphan Diseases, Institut Pasteur de Tunis, 
Tunis, Tunisia, 2Dermatology department, Hôpital de la Rabta, Tunis, Tunisia, 
3Anatomo-Pathology service, Institut Pasteur de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia.
The dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB), a group of heritable blis -
tering skin diseases, is characterized by abnormalities in the anchoring 
fibrils at the dermal-epidermal basement membrane zone. Mutations 
within COL7A1 gene that encodes type VII collagen, the major compo -
nent of the anchoring fibrils, is responsible for DEB.
In order to study the mutational spectrum of DEB in Tunisia, we clas -
sify the DEB Tunisian patients on the basis of their haplotype. Thirty re -
cessive DEB patients, belonging to 24 families, have been genotyped 
with five microsatellite markers overlapping the COL7A1 region.
The genetic investigation showed that there are two common haplo -
types, 3-1-6-3-3 and 1-11-14-6-6, which are shared by 6 and 2 families 
respectively. The most frequent haplotype, 3-1-6-3-3, shared by 25% 
of the families, is mainly found among families originating from Cen -
tral Tunisia, and the second one, 1-11-14-6-6, shared by 8% is found 
among families originating from North Eastern region. The other stud -
ied DEB patients have different haplotype and scattered on different 
cities of the country. All together, seven different haplotypes have been 
identified. This study shows haplotypic heterogeneity among Tunisian 
DEB families, thus suggesting a mutational heterogeneity.
P0963. The ACE  insertion/deletion genotype is associated with 
elite athletic performance
R. E. Amir1, M. Sagiv1, E. Attias1, C. Yamin1, M. Sagiv1, Y. Meckel1, O. Amir2;  
1Zinman College of Physical education and sport sciences at the wingate insti -
tute, Netanya, Israel, 2Lady Davis Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel.
Background: Growing evidence suggests a significant genetic contri -
bution to human physical performance. The deletion (D) allele of an -
giotensin-I converting ( ACE) gene has been associated with higher 
ACE activity. In the current study we evaluated the association be -
tween ACE ID polymorphism and elite endurance athletic ability.
Methods: Ninety-two elite athletes, classified as either endurance type 
performers (51 long distance runners and triathletes) or power athletes 
(41 sprinters and long jumpers), were genotyped for the ACE ID poly -
morphism using polymerase chain reaction on leukocytes DNA. Their ACE genotypes were compared to those of 405 healthy individuals.
Results: Allele and genotype frequencies differed significantly be -
tween the groups. The frequency of the D allele was 0.78 in the elite 
long distance runners and triathletes, 0.66 in the control group, and 
0.57 in the sprinters and long jumpers ( Χ2 = 10.04, P = 0.006). More -
over, the ACE DD genotype was significantly more prevalent among 
the long distance runners (0.63) compared to the controls (0.43), and 
compared to the sprinters and long jumpers (0.34) ( Χ2 = 21.99, P = 
0.0002). Importantly, in the group of elite athletes the odds ratio of ACE 
DD genotype for endurance performance was 3.24 (95% confidence 
interval 1.38-7.61), and of ACE II genotype was 0.25 (95% confidence 
interval 0.06-0.97).
Conclusions: The present study clearly indicates a positive association 
of the ACE D allele with sustained high-level endurance performance. 
These data support the notion that increased ACE activity may be of 
benefit to endurance-type elite athletes.
P0964. Association of TNF-alpha G-308A promoter 
polymorphism with human embryo viability
M. S. Nazarenko , V. P. Puzyrev, I. N. Lebedev;  
State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), a multifunctional cytokine, is 
expressed in embryonic tissues practically at all stages of human de -
velopment. It is believed that TNF-alpha boosts death signaling to kill 
the embryo if damages triggered by detrimental stimuli may culminate 
in structural anomalies, and stimulate protective mechanisms if the re -
pair of these damages may prevent maldevelopment. Nonetheless, 
no data about the influence of TNF-alpha G-308A promoter polymor -
phism for embryo viability itself are found. Samples of trophoblast tis -
sue from delayed miscarriages (n=118) and dried blood spots of new -
borns (n=300) were analyzed for TNF-alpha  G-308A polymorphism. 
The genotypes -308GA and -308AA TNF-alpha  were more prevalent 
among newborns (24%) than in the group of delayed miscarriages 
(14.4%; P=0.03). Carriers of allele -308A predominated in the neo -
natal group to compare with delayed miscarriages (12,3% vs. 7,2%; 
P=0.04). In conclusion, high frequency of mutant TNF-alpha  allele 
among newborns reflect the possible advantage for embryo survival, 
that in turn, may lead to its stable frequency in population.
P0965. Polymorphism of IL4RA gene is associated with 
endometriosis
M. A. Kozlovskaya1,2, G. S. Demin1,2, M. I. Yarmolinskaya1, T. E. Ivashchenko1, 
V. S. Baranov1,2;  
1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Endometriosis is a common multifactorial disease. Typical endome -
trioid cells are characterized by increased cytokine activity. Cytokine 
genes are highly polymorphic that results in synthesis of proteins with 
various functional activities. This study is devoted to definition of role 
of allelic variants of IL4 and IL4RA genes in pathogenesis of endome -
triosis.
DNA samples from the patients with endometriosis (n=36) and control 
group of women without any gynecologic complications (n=69) were 
included in the study. Polymorphisms of IL4 (-590T>C) and IL4RA 
(1902A>G or Gln551Arg) were defined by PCR-RFLP assay.
The distribution of IL4 and IL4RA genotypes was in agreement with 
the HWE law (p>0.05). The frequencies of alleles and genotypes of 
IL4 gene did not differ between studied groups (p>0.05). However the 
frequency of Arg/Arg genotype of IL4RA gene was significantly higher 
in patients with endometriosis (16.7%) than in control group (1.4%, 
p<0.01).
The results of this pilot study demonstrate a role of IL4RA gene poly -
morphism in development of endometriosis. According to odds ratio 
the presence of Arg551/Arg551 genotype more than 13-fold increases 
the risk of endometriosis (OR=13.60; CI: 2.43-76.26). Obtained data 
allow defining Gln551Arg polymorphism as perspective prognostic 
marker of endometriosis.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
P0966. Novel gene loci for the Enlarged Vestibular Aqueduct 
Syndrome
R. Birkenhäger , K. Jaekel, R. Laszig, A. Aschendorff;  
University, Freiburg, Germany.
Background: Enlarged Vestibular Aqueduct Syndrome (EVA-Syn -
drome) (MIM 603545) is the most common form of congenital inner 
ear abnormality seen in radiological assessment, associated with sen -
sorineural hearing impairment or syndromic forms of deafness such 
as Pendred syndrome (MIM 274600). Up to now only mutations in 
the SLC26A4 gene, located on Chromosome 7q31, have been made 
responsible for Pendred- and EVA-Syndrome. This gene product, a 
transporter of iodide and chloride, is called pendrin. In this study we 
analyzed 64 patients with EVA and hearing loss to distinguish between 
the Pendred- and EVA-syndrome.
Methods: Individual exon and intron transitions of the SLC26A4 gene 
of patients were PCR amplified. Direct automatic sequencing of vari -
ant fragments was performed with the same primers. A genome-wide 
linkage analysis was accomplished using the Affymetrix 10K/50K XbaI 
SNP GeneChip® mapping array.
Results: In the analysed patient collective with Pendred syndrome 
and/or enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct, a total of eighteen 
SCL26A4 mutations were detected. A mutation could not be detected 
in 36 % of the cases. With a genomewide linkage analysis, of these 
families, using SNP technology, it was possible to identify potential 
new gene loci for the EVA-Syndrome.
Conclusions: The novel gene loci will be analyzed for additional genes 
involved in the development of the EVA-Syndrome. Our results indi -
cate evidences of a accessory gene for this Syndrome.
P0967. Clinical and genetic familial study of 61 children showing 
different epileptic phenotypes
R. Combi1, S. Redaelli2, D. Grioni3, M. Contri2,3, D. Barisani4, M. L. Lavitrano5, 
G. Tredici2, M. L. Tenchini6, M. Bertolini2,3, L. Dalprà2;  
1Dept. Biotechnologies and Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milano, 
Italy, 2Dept. Neurosciences and Biomedical Technologies, University of Milano-
Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 3Infantile Neuropsychiatry Clinic, S Gerardo Hospital, 
Monza, Italy, 4Dept. Experimental Medicine, University of Milano-Bicocca, Mon -
za, Italy, 5Dept. of Surgical Sciences and Intensive Therapy, University of Mi -
lano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 6Dept. Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, 
University of Milano, Milano, Italy.
During the last 10 years many advances in the genetics of epilepsies 
have been done. In particular, several mutations have been detected 
in genes encoding ion-channels, suggesting that epilepsies are “chan -
nelopathies”. Nevertheless, the genetic basis of idiopathic epilepsies 
remain unknown for a large number of cases and the genetic transmis -
sion of these diseases appear to be “complex” because of the great 
genetic heterogeneity and the coexistence of different epileptic types 
in each familial cluster. Moreover, in different epilepsies, mutations in 
the same gene have been reported.
We performed a clinical and genetic study on 60 Italian families (61 
probands) showing idiopathic epilepsies by sequencing DNA regions 
previously associated to epilepsies in order to collect data on the type 
and frequency of ion channel mutations. Partial epilepsies represented 
28% of the sample, whereas the remaining 72% was constituted by 
generalised epilepsies, subdivided in myoclonic (JME, BMEI, MAE, 
SMEI) and non-myoclonic (GEFS+, GTCS, CAE, FS) epilepsies.
We observed a genetic complexity in all phenotype groups: any epi -
leptic type may be transmitted in either an autosomal dominant or a re -
cessive manner, and furthermore even within a single family, epilepsy 
can be transmitted in either manner.
No significant phenotype identity among generations was observed. 
Moreover, we found an excess of transmitting mothers but no differ -
ences in the sex of children, suggesting a possible role of mitochondria 
in the disease pathogenesis. The frequency of known mutations in the 
analyzed regions resulted very low, while a new missense mutation in 
SCN1A was identified in one subject.
P0968. The analysis of association of six polymorphisms with 
development of ESRD in Romanian population - a preliminary 
report
D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol2, D. Ungureanu3, C. Moldovan3, A. Craciun1, C. Se -
rafinceanu1, D. Usurelu2, M. Stavarachi2, M. Toma2, L. Cherry1, L. Dumitrescu2, 
P. Cimponeriu1, L. Gavrila2;  1N Paulescu Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, 
Romania, 3Titu Maiorescu University, Bucharest, Romania.
Diabetic nephropathy is the leading cause of ESRD. The literature 
suggests that genetic predisposition to ESRD is very complex.
In this study we assessed the association of six polymorphisms with 
ESRD in Caucasian subjects from South part of Romania.
We analyzed blood samples from unrelated dialyzed patients (etiology: 
T1DM: 83, T2DM: 87, chronic glomerulonephritis: 84) and healthy con -
trols (n=494). Six genes polymorphisms associated with extracellular 
matrix proliferation (HSPG BamH1, TGF-beta-509C/T) or regulation 
of blood flow and vascular function (ACE ID, AGTR1, eNOS, MTHFR) 
were genotyped by PCR or PCR - RFLP. Genotype distribution for both 
cases and controls is in respect with Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for 
all studied polymorphisms.
Our results showed that eNOS ID polymorphism increases the risk 
for ESRD in all groups. The highest value was observed in T1DM pa -
tients (ORDD:3.9844, CI95%:1.9198<OR<8.2694). The risk for renal 
failure was increased by AGTR1 A1166C in T1DM patients (OR:1.401, 
CI95%: 0.6753<OR<2.9066) and by TGF-beta -509 CC (OR = 1.9) 
in T2DM patients. A little differences in distribution of MTHFR C677T 
(ORTT:1.48, CI95%:0.8197<OR<2.6722) and ACE ID (ORDD:1.2374, 
CI95%:0.8134<O.R.<1.8824) was observed only in dialyzed nondia -
betic patients. HSPG BamH1 polymorphism has not a significant con -
tribution to ESRD. We observed no difference regarding the contribu -
tion of these genotypes or alleles between men and women whatever 
renal disease is. In conclusion, our preliminary results suggest that the 
genetic predisposition to renal failure depends on the etiology of re -
nal disease. Further clarification is anticipated as we increase our lots 
size. (This study was supported by Romanian CEEX53/2005 grant).
P0969. Variations in ERα gene predict the outcome of ovarian 
stimulation in in vitro fertilization
S. Altmäe1, K. Haller2, M. Peters2, O. Hovatta3, A. Stavreus-Evers3, H. Karro2, 
A. Metspalu1, A. Salumets4,2;  
1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Dep. of obstetrics and 
gynaecology, Univ. of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3CLINTEC, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden, 4Institute of Molcular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia.
Introduction - The outcome of in vitro fertilization (IVF) depends sub -
stantially on the effectiveness of controlled ovarian hyperstimulation 
(COH) by administration of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH). Endog -
enously produced estrogens extend the action of exogenous FSH in 
promoting folliculogenesis in COH. In the current study we determined 
the association between genetic variations in ERα and ERβ genes and 
different causes of infertility, and analyzed the influence of these varia -
tions on the COH outcome in regards to the age and clinical param -
eters of IVF patients. Material & methods - PvuII T/C (rs2234693) and 
XbaI A/G (rs9340799) SNPs, and (TA)n microsatellite polymorphism in 
ERα gene as well as RsaI G/A (rs1256049) SNP and (CA)n microsatel -
lite polymorphism in ERβ gene were genotyped in 159 IVF patients. 
Results - Women‘s age was associated with poorer COH outcome in 
linear manner. In addition, patients with endometriosis represented di -
minished ovarian response to FSH compared to tubal factor infertility. 
ERα PvuII T/C, XbaI A/G and ERβ RsaI G/A  were associated with the 
length of the microsatellites of the respective genes. Shorter ERα (TA)n 
gave a higher risk for unexplained infertility. Longer ERα (TA)n repeat in 
association with ERα PvuII C allele were associated with better COH 
outcome in an age-independent manner. Conclusions - Variations in 
ERα gene, in addition to the woman’s age, predict the outcome of COH 
in IVF.
P0970. A Genomewide scan in Spanish BRCAX Families: Three 
new candidate loci for susceptibility in Familial Breast Cancer
J. M. Rosa-Rosa1, A. González-Neira1, G. Pita1, I. Blanco2, O. Díez3, M. de la 
Hoya4, I. Tejada5, E. González1, V. Fernández1, T. Caldés4, T. Ramón y Cajal3, 
G. Llort2, J. Benítez1;  
1Human Cancer Genetics Programme, CNIO, Madrid, Spain, 2Institut Català 
d’Oncologia, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 4Hospital 
Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 5Hospital de Cruces, Barakaldo-Bizkaia, 
Spain.
Introduction: The two major breast cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 
and BRCA2 have been shown to be involved in a significant proportion 
(25%) of families affected with breast and ovarian cancer. On the other 
hand, it is also clear that a large proportion of families segregating Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
breast cancer alone are not caused by mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 
(BRCAX families). Unfortunately, the discovery of additional breast 
cancer predisposition genes has so far been unsuccessful, presum -
ably because of genetic heterogeneity, low penetrance, and/or reces -
sive/polygenic mechanisms.
Material and Methods: With the aim of finding breast cancer predispo -
sition genes, we genotyped 6000 SNPs across the genome using a 
high-throughput technology (Illumina Linkage panel IV), in 41 BRCAX 
families from Spanish population. SNP data analysis has been per -
formed using the new version of Merlin (MERLIN v.0.10.2) to model 
marker-marker linkage disequilibrium in order to avoid artefacts due 
to LD among SNPs.
Results: These data analysis have allowed us to identify two regions 
with suggestive linkage (Dominant Parametric LOD score ~ 2.3, alpha 
~0.3) in chromosomes 3q and 6q, and one region with complete link -
age (Dominant Parametric LOD score > 3.2, alpha ~0.5) in chromo -
some 21q. In order to confirm these regions, and narrow them if pos -
sible, we are genotyping 2 cM density microsatellite map within them.
P0971. Cardiovascular symptoms associated with mutations in 
the genes encoding fibrillin-1 ( FBN1 ) and transforming growth 
factor beta receptor type II ( TGFBR2 )
S. Waldmüller1, M. Müller1, H. Warnecke2, W. Rees2, W. Schöls3, G. Walter -
busch4, J. Ennker5, T. Scheffold1;  
1University of Witten Herdecke, Dortmund, Germany, 2Heart Centre Osnabrück-
Bad Rothenfelde, Bad Rothenfelde, Germany, 3Heart Centre Duisburg, Duis -
burg, Germany, 4St.-Johannes-Hospital Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany, 5Heart 
Centre Lahr/Baden, Lahr (Baden), Germany.
Objectives: Mutations in the genes encoding fibrillin-1 ( FBN1 ) and 
transforming growth factor beta receptor type II ( TGFBR2 ) are known 
causes of Marfan syndrome (MFS) and related disorders. The objec -
tive of the present study was to assess whether the type of mutation is 
linked to a particular clinical subtype of the cardiovascular condition.
Methods: The genetic and clinical records of 36 patients referred to 
us for molecular genetic diagnosis were reviewed. The frequency of a 
number of clinical signs was determined for the following three groups 
of patients: 1. carriers of a FBN1  mutation that affects a Ca2+-binding 
epidermal growth factor-like domain (cbEGF); 2. carriers of a mutation 
associated with a premature termination codon, PTC, in FBN1 ; 3. indi -
viduals with no mutation detected in either FBN1  or TGFBR2 .
Results: Throughout the study cohort, the incidence of aortic dissec -
tions per se did not depend on the type of mutation. However, we found 
that mutations affecting the calcium-binding epidermal growth factor-
like domain were more frequently associated with a dissection of distal 
parts of the aorta than mutations that lead to a premature termination 
codon (χ2
1: p=0.013), suggesting that the spatio-temporal pattern of 
vascular deterioration may vary with the type of mutation.
Conclusion: Routine genetic testing of patients with suspected MFS or 
thoracic aortic aneurysms/dissections could provide further insight into 
genotype/phenotype correllations related to aortic dissection.
P0972. Fragile X syndrome screening in families with 
consanguineous and nonconsanguineous marriages in the 
Iranian population
S. S. Abedini1, K. Kahrizi1, R. Kariminejad2, V. Hadavi2, F. Behjati1, N. Man -
soorian2, N. Nikzat1, S. Esmaeeli Nieh3, S. Banihashemi1, S. N. Almadani2, F. 
Afroozan2, Y. Shafeghati1, A. Tzschach3, A. Kuss3, H. H. Ropers3, H. Najmaba -
di1,2;  
1Genetics Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology 
and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Max Planck Institute for 
Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
Fragile X syndrome is the most common form of inherited mental retar -
dation (MR). It is caused by the expansion of CGG triplet repeats in the 
fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene. Normal individuals have 
<50 CGG repeats and permutation carriers have 50-200 repeats, but 
affected individuals with full mutation have over 200 repeats, which are 
generally hypermethylated. The objective of this study was to screen 
for and compare the frequency of fragile X syndrome in families afflict -
ed with MR having consanguineous and nonconsanguineous parents.
We examined a total of 1000 families afflicted with MR that had been 
referred to the Genetics Research Center (GRC) and Kariminejad-
Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center. Of these, 558 families had consanguineous parents and the rest of the families had a putative or 
established X-linked inheritance pattern. In order to detect fragile X 
syndrome, we performed molecular and cytogenetic detection meth -
ods simultaneously.
From the total number of families (1000), we identified 127 (12.7%) 
families with fragile X syndrome, 21 of which also had other chromo -
somal abnormalities. Among the consanguineous families, 8.2% were 
positive for fragile X syndrome.
Fragile X syndrome accounts for ¼ of X-linked mental retardation cas -
es, therefore one could assume that up to 30% of the families in our 
population with the autosomal recessive mental retardation (ARMR) 
pattern of inheritance could contribute to X-linked mental retardation. 
Our findings clearly demonstrate that the genetic counselor should rule 
out the X-linked gene in ARMR inheritance as part of the routine diag -
nostic protocol.
P0973. A PCR screening test for recurrent mutations associated 
to X linked mental retardation FRAXA / FRAXE / ARX / PQBP1
M. Fradin1, E. Scherrer1, M. Cossée1,2, M. Antin1, E. Sistermans3, H. Dollfus2,4, 
J. Mandel1,2, V. Biancalana1,2;  
1Laboratoire de Diagnostic Genetique, Faculte de Medecine-CHRU, Stras -
bourg, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, EA3949, Faculté de Mé -
decine et Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France, 3Department of Human 
Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Neth -
erlands, 44. Service de génétique médicale, fédération de génétique, Hôpitaux 
Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
This study presents molecular investigation of recurrent mutations 
associated to 4 syndromes presenting with mental retardation : CGG 
expansion in exon 1 of FMR1 gene for Fragile X syndrome (FRAXA), 
CCG expansion in FMR2 gene for FRAXE mental retardation syn -
drome, c.428_451dup24 and c.333_334ins(GCG)7 in exon 2 of Arista -
less related X gene (ARX) and insertions/deletions frameshift muta -
tions in exon 4 of PQBP1 gene. The aims of the underlying study were 
to validate the FRAXA PCR screening on different genotypes of FMR1 
gene including rare patients who are mosaic for a full mutation and an 
allele in the normal range, to estimate the prevalence of FRAXE, ARX 
and PQBP1 syndromes among individuals referred for FRAXA testing 
and eventually to enlarge the clinical phenotype of ARX and PQBP1 
syndromes.
We have first validated our protocol on well defined samples with the 
recurrent genes mutations and have used it for the diagnostic evalua -
tion of 624 male and 283 female probands, including 15 affected sib-
pairs, combined with a retrospective study of 172 males known to be 
normal by southern blotting at FRAXA locus. In the male group we 
have identified one PQBP1 mutation in two brothers and no FRAXE 
expansion or ARX duplication. FRAXA full mutation was identified in 10 
male and 4 female patients. In frame deleting variations were detected 
in both ARX exon 2 and PQBP1 exon 4, as well as duplication in ARX 
gene that are likely to be non pathogenic.
The test can be used for performing diagnoses, postnatal and prena -
tal.
P0974. Sub-Components of Event Related Potentials (ERP) 
Associated with Polymorphisms in Glutamate, GABA and 
Dopamine Neurotransmitter Receptors
C. Beyazyurek1,2, A. Ademoğlu1, Y. K. Ergen3, B. Umay2, T. Demiralp3;  
1Bosphorus University, Biomedical Engineering Institute, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Is-
tanbul Memorial Hospital Reproductive Genetics Laboratory, Istanbul, Turkey, 
3Istanbul University Faculty of Medicine, Physiology Department, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
Event related potentials (ERPs) reflect perceptual and cognitive pro -
cesses and therefore provide an electrophysiological window on to 
brain function during cognition. P300 component as well as spectral 
components of ERPs is highly heritable. Potential candidates for the 
genetic determinants of ERPs are genes encoding several most im -
portant neurotransmitter receptors. In this study, we aimed to identify 
associations of functional polymorphisms of genes encoding glutamate 
receptor 2A subunit, (NMDAR2A), GABA receptor gamma-2 subunit 
(GABRG2) and dopamine receptor D2 subunit (DRD2) with auditory 
ERPs. EEG recordings and genetic analysis of 72 Turkish male healthy 
volunteers were performed in this study. Groups were formed accord -
ing to their polymorphism types for each of the three neurotransmitter 
receptors. Three cognitive paradigms were designed to generate audi -Genetic analysis, linkage, and association20
tory ERPs. ERP recordings of each polymorphic group were analyzed 
in the time domain by measuring P300 amplitude and latency, and 
furthermore, in the time-frequency domain by decomposition of ERP 
signals by using wavelet transform with analysis of variance (ANOVA). 
Results provide evidence of strong effect of GABRG2 polymorphism 
with ERP characteristics both in time domain and in time-frequency 
domain. The effects of NMDAR2A and DRD2 polymorphisms are less 
significant on P300 wave. However, time-frequency decomposition of 
ERP data showed other effects could be observed in specific frequen -
cy bands of all three polymorphisms that were not reflected in the time-
domain representation of the data. The results of this study show that 
extended analyses on the correlations of genetic differences among 
normal population on electrophysiological parameters may extend our 
view on the genetic basis of cognitive activities.
P0975. GDAP1 gene mutation study among four Iranian families; 
Axonal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 4 disease
M. Rostami1, M. Dehghan Manshadi1, T. Majidizadeh1, s. Seyedhasani1, r. 
mirfakhraei1, M. Ebrahimi2, M. houshmand1;  
1National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is -
lamic Republic of Iran, 2special medical center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease (CMT4) is a 
complex group of severe childhood motor and sensory neuropathies, 
characterized by an early age of onset with rapidly progressive dis -
tal limb weakness and atrophy. CMT disease caused by mutations in 
the ganglioside induced differentiation-associated protein 1 (GDAP1) 
gene is a a severe autosomal recessive neuropathy originally reported 
in families with either demyelinating CMT4A neuropathy or axonal neu -
ropathy with vocal cord paresis, which maps to the CMT4A locus on 
chromosome 8q21.1
we studied four families with 5 affected patients. Significant evidence 
for linkage was found for several markers from chromosome 8q 
(D8S279 , D8S551 , D8S1474 , D8S1289 ,
and D8S84 ).
Following an initial indication for linkage of the family to the CMT4A 
locus on chromosome 8, we sequenced the Ganglioside-induced dif -
ferentiation-associated protein 1 (GDAP1) gene whose genomic struc -
ture contains six exons, and identified mutation. We conclude that a 
novel GDAP1 mutation is associated with AR-CMT.  
P0976. Genome wide linkage of a large serbian family with 
GEFS+
F. Annesi1, G. Provenzano1, S. Carrideo1, A. J. Ristic2, S. Jankovic2, G. Maksi -
movic2, B. Gnjatovic2, I. Petrovic2, N. Vojvodic2, D. Sokic2, A. Gambardella1,3, G. 
Annesi1;  
1National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, 
Clinical Centre of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute of Neurology, University 
Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy.
Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) is a familial 
epilepsy syndrome characterized by heterogeneous phenotypes in -
cluding febrile seizures (FS), FS+ in which children had seizures with 
fever in early childhood that continued beyond age 6 years, or were as -
sociated with afebrile tonic-clonic seizures, and FS+ with other types of 
generalized (absence, myoclonic, or atonic) or partial seizures. GEFS+ 
is an autosomal dominant disorder with incomplete penetrance. Muta -
tions in the SCN1B gene on 19q13 cause GEFS+ type 1. Mutations in 
the SCN1A gene on 2q24 cause GEFS+ type 2. Mutations in the GA -
BRG2 gene on 5q31.1-q33.1 cause GEFS+ type 3. GEFS+ type 4 has 
been mapped to chromosome 2p24. Mutations in the GABRD gene 
can cause GEFS+ type 5. Mutations in the SCN2A gene causes febrile 
seizures associated with afebrile seizures. Recently, a novel FS locus 
was reported on chromosome 21q22 in a family with 13 individuals 
affected by FS and afebrile seizures. We identified a large multigen -
erational GEFS+ Serbian family with 20 affected individuals and we 
performed genetic linkage analysis for exclusion of known candidate 
genes and loci. Subsequently, we conducted a genome wide scan by 
the Linkage Mapping set version 2.5 (Applied Biosystems) genotyping 
382 microsatellite markers located at on average of 10cM distance 
thoughout the genome. We used a dominant genetic model with 0.90 
penetrance and a disease allele frequency of 0.001. Genome scan 
revealed linkage at some chromosomal loci and analysis of implicated 
regions is in progress.P0977. Genetic polymorphisms in metabolizing genes and 
susceptibility to childhood leukemia in the Russian population.
T. V. Nasedkina1, O. A. Gra1, O. V. Makarova2, Z. M. Kozhekbaeva1, A. S. Glo -
tov3, E. V. Samochatova2;  
1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Mos -
cow, Russian Federation, 2Federal Clinical Research Center of Pediatric Oncol -
ogy/Hematology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Russian Academy of Medical Science, St.Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Genetic polymorphisms in metabolizing genes have been reported to 
be individually associated with increased susceptibility to childhood 
leukemia. A case-control study including 332 patients with Acute Lym -
phoblastic Leukemia (ALL), 71 patients with Acute myelogeneous leu -
kemia (AML) and 490 healthy individuals was conducted. All patients 
were 0-18 years old, all controls were 18-34 years old and so failed the 
possibility to develop childhood leukemia. The polymorphic variants of 
genes CYP1A1 (4887C>A, 4889A>G, 6235T>C), CYP2D6 (1934G>A, 
2637delA), GSTT1  (deletion), GSTM1  (deletion), MTHFR (677C>T, 
1298A>C), MTRR (66A>G), NQO1 (609C>T), CYP2C9 (430C>T, 
1075C>T), CYP2C19  (681G>A) and NAT2 (341T>C, 481C>T, 
590G>A, 857G>A) have been studied using allele-specific hybridiza -
tion with Pharmagen-biochip (EIMB). We found that “rapid acetylator” 
NAT2 genotype 341T/T,481C/C,590G/G, as well as combination of a 
“rapid acetylator” NAT2  genotype with “null” GSTT1 genotype, “null”  
GSTM1 genotype and double “null”  GSTT1 /GSTM1  genotype more 
frequently occurred in patients than in population control and this dif -
ference is statistically significant. Also polymorphic variant CYP1A1  
*1/*2A was found to be more frequent among children with relapse 
comparing with primary patients (OR = 2.11, p = 0.0291), while GSTT1  
“null” genotype was less frequent among relapsed patients (OR = 0.55, 
p = 0.0265). Our findings suggest that polymorphic variants of GSTT1, 
GSTM1, NAT2  genes may consider as risk factors modulated the sus -
ceptibility to leukemia among children in Russia, while polymorphic 
variants of CYP1A1, NAT2, GSTT1, GSTM1  genes may have an im -
pact on clinical outcome.
The work was supported by the Basic Foundation for Russian Science 
(project 06-04-49771)
P0978. Effect of 5HTT genetic polymorphism on agression in 
atheletes
M. Timofeeva1, N. Maluchenko1, A. Tonevitsky2;  
1Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian Research 
Institute of Sport and Physical Education, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Genetic variations of serotonin transporter gene (5HTT) are closely re -
lated with human adaptive ability to control emotion and very attractive 
in investigation of athletes whose life is accompanied by high emotion -
al pressure. Present study investigated the effect of genetic polymor -
phism of 5HTT on aggression of athletes, 86 synchronized swimmers 
and 83 non-trained female controls were genotyped. 73 (age 8-18) 
of synchronized swimmers are actively engaged in competition, 64 of 
them participated in psychological testing of aggression (Buss-Durkee 
Hostility Inventory). Analysis of primary of this test reveals, that Indirect 
Hostility is increased with both short alleles SS compared with other 
groups (SL and LL).
Furthermore, it was shown that the frequency of 5HTT alleles in groups 
of elite athletes of different kind of specialization are differ between 
kind of sport and between athletes and control group. Interrelation of 
5HTT genotype, aggressiveness and athletic successfulness are vig -
orously discussed.
P0979. Genome-wide association mapping of the QT-interval in a 
500k scan: confirmation of the NOS1AP locus and identification 
of a spectrum of additional QTLs
A. Pfeufer1, M. Akyol1, M. F. Sinner2, S. Perz3, C. Gieger3, B. M. Beckmann2, M. 
Hinterseer2, H. Prucha2, T. Illig3, H. E. Wichmann3, S. Kääb2, T. Meitinger1;  
1TU Munich, Munich, Germany, 2LMU Munich, Munich, Germany, 3GSF Natio -
nal Research Center, Neuherberg, Germany.
Background: The electrocardiographic QT-interval is a normally distrib -
uted quantitative trait in the general population with over 30% heritabil -
ity, which is associated with sudden cardiac death. In a previous100k 
scan we have identified a QTL for QT-interval at the NOS1AP gene 
which explained approximately 1,5% of trait variance.
Aim: To comprehensively map the spectrum of QTLs we now under -Genetic analysis, linkage, and association21
took a 500k genome-wide scan in a larger sample of individuals.
Method: From the population-based KORA S3 survey 1,644 randomly 
selected individuals were genotyped on Affymetrix 500k arrays. Asso -
ciation was calculated using single and multi-marker tests under addi -
tive, dominant and recessive models adjusting for covariates known to 
explain parts of QT variance.
Results: In the 500k dataset the QTL at the NOS1AP gene gave a 
clear unmistakably association signal. 60 SNPs throughout a 500kb 
genomic region were associated with significance levels down to 1e-
7.5. In addition we identified 55 additional QTLs between 1 and 5 
SNPs in size with significance levels smaller 1e-5. Five of these QTLs 
were confirmed in a n=1.200 replication sample.
Conclusions: The QTL at the NOS1AP gene was confirmed as the 
single most significant signal from a 500k-genomewide scan. Its strong 
signal is due to its high allele frequency (MAF=0.35), 500kb long LD 
relationship and relatively strong effect size. Newly identified QTLs dis -
play a spectrum of different effect sizes, allele frequencies, surround -
ing LD patterns and coverage by genotyping arrays, which in combina -
tion decreased their detection probability and explains why they went 
undetected in the previous association scan.
P0980. Gestational hypertensive disorders, newborn birth weight 
and maternal IGF2/ApaI and H19/RsaI polymorphisms
F. M. Araujo1, M. R. Soares1, M. V. M. Gomes1, G. Duarte1, C. R. Marcondes1,2, 
P. A. Vozzi1, R. B. Lôbo1, E. S. Ramos1;  
1University of São Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil, 2Empresa Brasileira de Pes -
quisa Agropecuária, Belem, Brazil.
Gestational hypertensive disorders are among the leading causes of 
maternal death. Genomic imprinting has an important role in fetopla -
cental development. Polymorphism of the imprinted IGF2 gene has 
been associated with obesity and cardiovascular risk predisposition. 
The maternally expressed H19 gene does not code for a protein, but 
the RNA has growth suppressing functions. In the present study, the 
association among gestational hypertensive disorders, newborn birth 
weight (NBW) and maternal IGF2 /ApaI and H19/Rsa I genotypes were 
investigated. Blood samples of 235 pregnant women [56 with pre -
eclampsia or eclampsia (PE/E); 40 with gestational hypertension (GH); 
34 with chronic arterial hypertension (CH); and 105 healthy controls] 
were obtained for DNA extraction, PCR and genotyping. Statistical 
analyses were performed by Qui-square, G, Kolmogorov-Smirnov and 
Kruskal-Wallis Nonparametric Tests. There was no influence of „skin 
color”. Around 80% of the patients presented at least one copy of the 
alleles B ( H19) and G ( IGF2 ), concomitantly. Although the IGF2 and 
H19 genotypes were not significantly associated with gestational hy -
pertensive disorders and/or NBW, a tendency for higher birth weight in 
newborns of mothers with AA ( IGF2 ) genotype [mean = 3176g versus 
2939g (AG) and 2772g (GG)] was observed. To our knowledge, this 
is the first study regarding the influence of H19/Rsa I polymorphism in 
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy.
P0981. GJB2 mutations in Croatian patients with non-syndromic 
hearing loss
I. Sansović1, I. Barišić1, J. Pavelić2;  
1Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Department of Paediatrics, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Rud-
jer Bošković Institute, Division of Molecular Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia.
Mutations in GJB2 (connexin 26) gene represent a major cause of pre -
lingual non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL) worldwide. Among them, 
35delG mutation accounts for approximately 70% of all GJB2 mutant 
alleles in most European populations.
The aim of the study was to evaluate the frequency and type of muta -
tions in the exon 2 of GJB2 gene and frequency of (GJB6-D13S1830)del 
in GJB6 gene in 48 patients with recessive NSHL from Croatia.
The coding region of the GJB2 gene was sequenced and the GJB6 
deletion was analyzed by two specific PCR reactions.
A half (26/48 or 54%) of our patients presented with one or two muta -
tions in the GJB2 gene. Among 50 mutated chromosomes found in 
patient with NSHL, 41 (82%) carried 35delG mutation. Other common 
mutations - L90P, 313del14, V37I and W24X, accounted for 3.1% - 
1.0% of analyzed chromosomes. We have also found a novel variant, 
-24A>C, reported here for the first time. GJB6 deletion was not found 
in our tested subjects. The high mutation rate (50/96 or 52%) in the 
coding region of the GJB2 gene indicates the importance of the GJB2 
gene testing in Croatian patients with recessive NSHL.P0982. No modifier effect of the Glu298Asp polymorphism of 
ENOS gene in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
N. Stefanakis1, E. Tsaliki1, M. Vasilakou1, P. Zirogiannis2, S. Trigonis2, K. M. 
Lamnissou1;  
1Department of Biology, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Nephrology, 
“G.Gennimatas” Hospital, Athens, Greece.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is one of the 
most common monogenic hereditary diseases. It is characterized by 
a substantial variability in the severity of renal phenotype, primary as -
sessed by the age at end - stage renal disease (ESRD). The role of 
modifier genes has been shown in different hereditary diseases, in -
cluding ADPKD. ENOS, the gene coding for the endothelial nitric oxide 
synthase is considered to have modifier effect in ADPKD. In this study 
we investigated the influence of one of the most studied polymor -
phisms of ENOS gene, the Glu298Asp polymorphism, on the age at 
ESRD. We analysed a total of 100 ADPKD unrelated patients and 104 
healthy cohorts from Greece. The frequencies of the three genotypes 
GG, GT, TT of the Glu298Asp polymorphism were 0.48, 0.38, 0.14, 
respectively in the group of patients and 0.47, 0.46, 0.075, respec -
tively, in the control group. Analysis of the dada regarding progression 
to ESRD within 5 years or after more than 5 years following clinical 
diagnosis of ADPKD provided no evidence of statistical difference. In 
contrast to some earlier studies our results do not support that the 
frequent of Glu298Asp polymorphism of ENOS is associated with a 5 
year lower mean age at ESRD in this subset of ADPKD patients.
P0983. Glucocerebrosidase gene mutations are associated to 
Parkinson’s disease in a population from Southern Italy
E. V. De Marco , F. E. Rocca, P. Tarantino, G. Provenzano, D. Civitelli, S. Carri -
deo, I. C. Cirò candiano, I. C. Cirò Candiano, F. Annesi, G. Nicoletti, G. Annesi;  
Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone (CS), 
Italy.
Recent studies have reported clinical, neuropathological and genetic 
associations between Parkinson’s disease PD) and Gaucher’s dis -
ease (GD), an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in 
the GBA  gene, coding for the lysosomal enzyme glucocerebrosidase. 
Screenings for GBA  mutations in PD subjects belonging to different 
populations have suggested that heterozygosity may be a susceptibil -
ity factor predisposing to PD.
In order to elucidate the role of the GBA gene in PD in our population 
we screened 401 PD patients coming from Calabria (Southern Italy) 
for the two most frequent mutations, N370S and L444P. Forty-nine pa -
tients (12,2%) were familial. A control group consisting of 495 subjects 
originating from the same geographical area of the patients was used 
to determine the mutation frequency in the general population. Geno -
typing was performed by using PCR amplification followed by restric -
tion enzyme digestion with XhoI for the N370S substitution and NciI 
for the L444P substitution. Mutation frequencies in cases and controls 
were compared using Fisher’s exact test.
We found 11 patients (2.7%) carried a heterozygous mutant GBA  al-
lele: three of them had the N370S mutation and eight had the L444P 
mutation. In the control group 1 subject (0.5%) carried a heterozy -
gous L444P mutation. These distributions are significantly different 
(p=0.0018).
This study was performed on the most consistent PD group so far in -
vestigated for GBA  mutations, revealing a significant association with 
the disease. Our results thus contribute to identify genetic factors influ -
encing PD susceptibility in our population.
P0984. Growth hormone receptor codon 440 G/T polymorphism 
is associated with first-year growth response in patients with 
GHD
F. Tsai1,2, L. Wan1, C. Tsai3, C. Lee4;  
1Department of Medical Genetics ,China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan, 2College of Chinese Medicine,China Medical University, Taichung, 
Taiwan, 3Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Asia University, 
Taichung, Taiwan, 4Department of Neurology,China Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
Context: GH replacement is an effective therapy for GH deficient (GHD) 
children. However, growth velocity post-GH replacement therapy var -
ies between individuals.
Objective: To investigate possible influences of gene polymorphisms 
on the growth response to GH in GHD children.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association22
Setting: The study was conducted at the China Medical University 
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
Design: A retrospective observational study.
Patients: A total of 100 GHD children who underwent GH therapy for 
one year were recruited.
Interventions: PCR-RFLP (restriction fragment length polymorphism) 
and PCR experiments were carried out to detect single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the following genes: growth hormone recep -
tor (GHR), Janus-activated kinase 2 (JAK2), signal transducers and 
activators of transcription-5a (STAT-5a), STAT-5b, suppressor of cy -
tokine signaling-2 (SOCS-2), Insulin Growth Factor-1 (IGF-1), insulin-
like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3), and acid-labile subunit 
(ALS). We then evaluated the correlations among these gene poly -
morphisms with various parameters (gender, age, bone age, parents’ 
heights, serum GH concentration, birth weight) on first year growth 
velocity.
Main Outcome Measure: Growth velocity was measured every two 
months for a total of 12 months.
Results: GHR codon 440 G/T was the only polymorphism of the GHR 
gene which correlated with increased growth velocity. The G homozy -
gote was associated with low growth velocity, the G/T heterozygote 
corresponded with moderate growth velocity and the T homozygote 
correlated with high growth velocity. The GHR codon 440 T allele 
showed higher transcriptional activity and stronger Stat5 Tyr694 phos -
phorylation.
Conclusion: The GHR codon 440 T allele is associated with the thera -
peutic efficacy of GH replacement therapy.
P0985. Exceptional mosaicism in grandpaternal haemophilia 
patient in a family with isolated haemophilia A
C. Costa1,2, A. Frances3, S. Letourneau1, P. Comteville1, E. Girodon-Boulan -
det1,2, M. Goossens1,2;  
1AP-HP Groupe Henri-Mondor-Chenevier, Laboratoire de Génétique Molécu -
laire, Créteil, France, 2INSERM U841, IMRB Dept Génétique, Créteil, France, 
3Hôpital Font-Pré, Génétique Médicale, Toulon, France.
About one third of cases of haemophilia have no family history of the 
disorder and 20% are thought to be due to a new mutation. A propor -
tion of such mutations occurs in a single germ cell but some, occurring 
during early embryogenesis produce a germline or somatic mosaic. In 
haemophilia somatic mosaicism is generally observed in women. Only 
3 cases have been reported in grandfathers.
We report here a case of somatic mosaicism in the asymptomatic 
grandfather of a male patient with a severe haemophilia A. The mu -
tation identified in the proband was found in the mother and her sis -
ter, suggesting the grandmother was a carrier. This mutation was not 
found in her leucocytes, buccal and uroepithelial cells, eliminating so -
matic mosaicism. Haplotypes analysis using intragenic and extragenic 
markers allowed to identify the origin of the deleterious allele in the 
grandfather. Analysis of his leucocytes, buccal and uroepithelial cells 
by PCR-sequencing revealed the presence of the allele with a pro -
portion estimated between 15-20%. Somatic mosaicism, varies from 
0.2 to 25%, is not always detected with conventional methods. This 
requires mutation-enrichment procedures that are not used during 
routine tests analysis. Analysis with denaturing-high-liquid-pressure-
chromatography, which is now widely used, increases the proportion 
of allele in our patient.
This report suggests that somatic mosaicism is probably underesti -
mated and points to the need of using methods with higher sensitivity 
in such sporadic cases and if necessary, to perform linkage analysis to 
identify the origin of the deleterious allele.
P0986. Association study of ALOX5AP gene variants with the 
risk of coronary artery disease.
E. Trabetti1, U. Cavallari1, G. Malerba1, M. Biscuola1, D. Girelli2, N. Martinelli2, 
O. Olivieri2, F. Busti2, S. Friso2, F. Pizzolo2, R. Corrocher2, P. Pignatti1;  
1Section of Biology and Genetics - Dept Mother & Child/Biol & Genet, Univ 
Verona, Italy, Verona, Italy, 2Dept Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Univ 
Verona, Italy, Verona, Italy.
Leukotrienes are a group of proinflammatory lipid mediators that are 
implicated in the pathogenesis and progression of atherosclerosis. Ara -
chidonate 5-Lipoxygenase-Activating Protein gene (ALOX5AP), which 
encodes an essential regulator of the biosynthesis of the leukotriene 
A4, has been recently associated to the risk of thrombotic disease.The aim of this study was to explore the role of variants of the AL -
OX5AP as possible susceptibility factors for coronary artery disease 
(CAD) and myocardial infarction (MI) in patients with or without angio -
graphically proven CAD. A total of 1,431 patients with or without angio -
graphically documented CAD were examined simultaneously for sev -
en ALOX5AP SNPs, allowing reconstruction of the at-risk haplotypes 
(HapA and HapB) previously identified in the Icelandic and British pop -
ulations (Nat Genet 2004;36:233-239; Am J Hum Genet 2005;76:505-
509). Using a haplotype-based approach, HapA was not associated 
with either CAD or MI. On the other hand, HapB and another haplotype 
within the same region (that we named HapC) were significantly more 
represented in CAD versus CAD-free patients, and these associations 
remained significant after adjustment for traditional cardiovascular risk 
factors by logistic regression (HapB: OR 1.67, 95% CI 1.04 to 2.67; 
P=0.032; HapC: OR 2.41, 95% CI 1.09 to 5.32; P=0.030). No differ -
ence in haplotype distributions was observed between CAD subjects 
with or without a previously documented MI. This study points out a 
possible role of ALOX5AP in the development of the atheroma rather 
than in its late thrombotic complications such as MI.
P0987. The genetic background of β+ IVSI-6: a primary step, 
in determining the origin and spread of β-globin mutations in 
Romania.
L. Cherry1, C. Calo2, L. Dan1, R. Talmaci1,3, D. Coriu4, D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apos -
tol1, M. Stavarachi1, D. Usurelu1, L. Zahed5, L. Gavrila1;  
1University of Bucharest,, Bucharest, Romania, 2University of Cagliari, Monser -
rato, Italy, 3University of Medicine, Bucharest, Romania, 4Fundeni Clinical Insti -
tute, Bucharest, Romania, 5American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
Romania belongs to a low-prevalence area of beta-thalassemia. In the 
last few years we have identified the most frequent causative muta -
tions of beta-thalassemia in the Romanian population. To elucidate the 
origin and the flow of these mutated alleles, we have started our work, 
by studying one of the most frequent mutations: the β+ IVSI-6 which 
has the highest frequency at homozygous state  among the other mu -
tations found in Romania. Seven restriction fragment polymorphisms 
(RFLP) haplotype have been determined in a sample including ho -
mozygous IVSI-6 patients and carriers. Our study revealed a strong 
linkage of IVSI-6 to haplotype VI (-++---+) 70% , relative to VII (+-----+) 
18% and V (+----+-) 12%. This result confirms what was found in the 
Mediterranean countries regarding the association of β+-IVSI-6 muta -
tion to haplotype VI, the presence of haplotype V seems to demon -
strate the gene flow between Romania and Bulgaria.
The diversity of the β+-IVSI-6 genetic backgrounds found in Romania 
reinforces the picture of the β-globin gene cluster as highly dynamic. 
On the  other hand this diversity highlighted the old age characterizing 
the β-thalassemia alleles. Furthermore this study should be continued 
to examine normal individuals and all the thalassemia alleles to deter -
mine the relationships between Romanian and neighboring popula -
tions.
Funding from the European Commission for the „eInfrastructure for 
Thalassaemia Research Network“, Coordination Action - Contract no 
026539 - for which this study was partially funded is gratefully acknowl -
edged.
P0988. Mapping Genes Influencing Human Stature - Where are 
We?
S. Sammalisto1, M. Perola1,2, L. Peltonen1,2;  
1Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, 
Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 2University of Helsinki, Faculty of Medicine, Depart -
ment of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland.
Human stature is a highly heritable complex trait which is oligo- or 
polygenic in nature. Despite many genome-wide efforts attempting to 
localize genes influencing stature findings have been difficult to repli -
cate and convincing evidence for quantitative trait loci (QTL) has been 
sparse.
In order to facilitate the mapping of stature genes and prioritizing po -
sitional candidate loci we have collected the results of the published 
genome-wide linkage studies on a publicly available web site www.ge -
nomeutwin.org/stature_gene_map.htm which is updated accordingly. 
From these published results it seems likely there are multiple minor 
loci underlying the genetic background of human stature although con -
verging evidence from multiple independent studies also suggests that 
some loci such as 3p, 6q, 7q and 9q probably harbour stature genes of Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
moderate to major effect.
We are coordinating two large multi-national collaborative stature gene 
mapping efforts: 1) the GenomEUtwin and the 2) Marshfield Mamma -
lian Genotyping Service stature projects. Both studies include family 
data from multiple populations with genome-wide genotype data - the 
former containing 8.450 individuals from 3.817 families and the lat -
ter 11.149 individuals from 3.272 families. Using genome-wide link -
age analyses we have localized multiple putative QTLs for stature on 
2p, 2q, 3p, 3q, 8q, 9q, 10p, 11q, 20q and Xq25, some shared across 
multiple populations. Data from further fine mapping analyses of these 
major loci will be presented.
In line with analyses of other complex traits it has become obvious that 
these types of massive data sets are needed to provide solid evidence 
for QTLs contributing to human stature.
P0989. Modulation of HFE-hemochromatosis penetrance by the 
BMP2, BMP4 and HJV genes of the hepcidin regulation pathway
J. Milet1,2, V. Dehais3, C. Bourgain1,2, A. M. Jouanolle3, M. Perrin4,5, J. Morcet5, 
P. Brissot3,6, Y. Deugnier3,7, J. Mosser3,8;  
1INSERM UMR_S535, Villejuif F-94817, France, 2Univ. Paris Sud, Villejuif 
F-94817, France, 3CHU, Rennes F-35033, France, 4Univ. Rennes 1, Rennes 
F-35043, France, 5INSERM, CIC 0203, Rennes F-35033, France, 6INSERM, 
U522, Rennes F-35033, France, 7IFR 140, Rennes F-35033, France, 8CNRS, 
UMR 6061, Rennes F-35043, France.
Most cases of genetic hemochromatosis (GH) are associated to the 
HFE C282Y/C282Y genotype in Caucasian populations. The biochem -
ical or clinical symptoms expressed by C282Y homozygotes are ex -
tremely variable and only a few suffer from an overt disease. Several 
studies have suggested that, in addition to environmental factors, a 
genetic component could explain a substantial part of this phenotypic 
variation, though very few genetic factors have been identified so far .
The aim of the present study was to search for genes modifying hemo -
chromatosis penetrance in a large sample of C282Y homozygotes, us -
ing pre-therapeutic serum ferritin level as marker of hemochromatosis 
penetrance. We used a candidate gene approach and focused on 2 
biologically relevant gene categories: genes involved in non HFE-GH 
(TfR2, Hamp, SLC40A1) and genes from the BMP hepcidin regulation 
pathway (BMP 2, BMP4, HJV, Smad 1, Smad4 and Smad5). We also 
considered the IL6 gene involved in the inflammation hepcidin regula -
tion pathway.
A significant association between serum ferritin level and a SNP in the 
BMP2 genic region (rs235756, P=4.42 x 10-5) was detected. Mean 
ferritin level adjusted for age and sex was 651.97 ng/ml among TT 
genotypes, 518.01 ng/ml in TC genotypes and 350.72 ng/ml in CC 
genotypes. Testing the biologically relevant gene interactions along 
the BMP regulation pathway, we detected a significant interactive ef -
fect of BMP2 and HJV with a small additive effect of BMP4 on ferritin 
level.
All together, our results suggest that the HJV-BMP complex genes are 
involved in the modulation of iron burden in C282Y homozygotes.
P0990. Association of Interferon-gamma (IFN-g) Polymorphisms 
with Susceptibility of Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) Infection in the 
Hong Kong Chinese
W. Lee1, P. W. Lee1, W. H. Wong1, M. F. Yuen2, T. P. Poon3, Y. L. Lau1;  
1Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Hong Kong Jockey Club 
Clinical Research Centre, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of 
Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China, 2Department of Medicine, Hong 
Kong Jockey Club Clinical Research Centre, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, 
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China, 3Department of 
Surgery, Hong Kong Jockey Club Clinical Research Centre, Li Ka Shing Faculty 
of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.
Background: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is the most common 
cause of acute hepatitis and may progress to chronic liver disease, 
including cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Host genetic 
factors are important for this progression. Interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) 
is a pro-inflammatory T-helper 1 (Th1) cytokine. It plays crucial roles 
in downregulation of HBV replication and its clearance.1 Serum IFN-γ 
levels were lower in the chronic hepatitis B patients than the normal 
controls, supporting that IFN-γ is involved in the progression of HBV 
infection.2
Objective: We aimed to determine whether a functional single nucleo -
tide polymorphism (SNP) of IFN-γ may affect the susceptibility of HBV infection in Hong Kong Chinese population.
Methods: We recruited 460 chronic HBV carriers and 87 individuals 
who had spontaneously recovered from HBV infection as evidenced 
by the presence of anti-HBs and anti-HBc antibodies. The SNP of IFN-
γ at +874 A/T at intron 1 at the 5’ end of a CA repeat microsatellite 
sequence was detected using Genescan analysis.
Results: For the spontaneous recovered individuals, the genotype fre -
quencies were 54.0% for A/A, 39.1% for A/T and 6.9% for T/T. For the 
chronic HBV carriers, the genotype frequencies were 72.8% for A/A, 
24.6% for A/T and 2.6% for T/T. The A/A genotype was predominant in 
the chronic carriers (odd ratio=4.09, CI=1.35-12.4), and its frequency 
was significantly higher than those with spontaneous recovery after 
adjusting for age and gender (p<0.0001).
Conclusion: The polymorphism of IFN-γ gene at position +874 may 
confer susceptibility to persistent HBV infection.
References:
1. Rehermann B et al. (2005) Immunology of hepatitis B virus and 
hepatitis C virus infection. Nat Rev Immun. 5: 215-27
2. Akpolat N et al. (2005) Relationship between serum cytokine lev -
els and histopathological changes of liver in patients with hepatitis B. 
World J Gastroenterol. 11 (21):3260-3.
P0991. Detection of mutations in the C1 inhibitor gene: the 
confirmation by using different methods of molecular biology
B. Ravcukova1, H. Grombirikova1, J. Nejedlik1, P. Kuklinek2, J. Litzman2, T. 
Freiberger1;  
1Centre for Cardiovascular Surgery and Transplantation, Brno, Czech Republic, 
2Dept. Clin Immunol. Allergol, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is an autosomal dominant disease with 
incomplete penetrance that affects one in 10 000 -50 000 persons. It 
is characterised by quantitative or qualitative deficiency of C1 inhibitor 
(C1 inh) - the main control element of enzymatic activity of the first 
component of complement cascade. Type I HAE (85% of all patients 
with HAE) is characterised by low antigenic and functional levels of C1 
inh, type II HAE (15%) is defined by normal or elevated levels of C1 
inh with low functional activity. The C1 inhibitor (C1INH) gene maps 
to chromosome 11q12-q13.1. The large number of different mutations 
may have differential effects on HAE phenotype. However, most of 
molecular defects causing low serum C1 inh level in type I HAE are 
poorly characterized. In this study, we focused on mutations causing 
splicing defects which typically result in type I HAE.
Basically, we screened the C1INH gene for mutations by denaturing 
gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) in 33 unrelated patients. Maximal 
sensitivity was reached if different methods were used for detection 
and confirmation of mutations, including sequencing and restriction 
analysis. Using this approach, we detected four novel splice site mu -
tations (g.14255g/a, g.4351-2a>g,g.4486delG, g.4487_4498del12) in 
flanking regions of exons 3, 4 and 7, respectively, in four families (12 
%). Mutations that affect splice sites are supposed to reduce or abolish 
normal splicing by either exon skipping or activation of cryptic splite 
sites. Inhibition of splicing was proved in one case.
Supported by grant IGA-MZ-CR #NR7921-3.
P0992. Whole Genome Scan in a Maltese Family with a rare case 
of Hereditary Persistence of Fetal Hemoglobin
J. Borg1, R. Galdies1,2, R. Schot3, A. Verkerk3, P. van der Spek3, P. Schembri 
Wismayer4, A. G. Fenech5, W. Cassar1,2, S. Bezzina Wettinger1,2, M. R. Carua -
na2, C. A. Scerri1,2, F. Grosveld6, S. Philipsen6, G. Patrinos6, A. E. Felice1,2;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, 
University of Malta, Msida, Malta, 2Thalassaemia and Molecular Genetics Clin -
ic, Division of Pathology, St’Lukes Hospital, Department of Health, G’Mangia, 
Malta, 3Erasmus Centre for Bioinformatics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Neth -
erlands, 4Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Malta, Msida, 
Malta, 5Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of 
Malta, Msida, Malta, 6Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
Hereditary Persistence of Fetal Hemoglobin (HPFH) is an inherited 
condition resulting in high fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels in adults. 
Although this condition is caused by large deletions, removing large 
segments from the human β-globin cluster or point mutation within the 
human γ-globin gene promoters, there have been few cases where the 
HbF-increasing genetic determinant is located outside the human β-
globin locus, e.g. in chromosomes 6q22.3-q23.1, 8q and Xp22.2-22.3. Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
We here describe a Maltese family with high HbF levels and hetero -
cellular HbF distribution. The proband had 20% HbF [HbF/F-cells=9.9 
g/dL] and was homozygous for haplotype IX. Her two daughters had 
5.6% [HbF/F-cells=5.53 g/dL] and 8.8% [HbF/F-cells=6.13 g/dL] HbF 
respectively, and both bearing haplotypes III/IX, while all other family 
members carry normal HbF levels. Extensive molecular haplotyping 
and DNA sequencing across the β-globin locus excluded both point 
mutations and deletions associated with HPFH. The γ-globin chain ra -
tios of the family members with high HbF levels have been found to 
be within the fetal ratio, i.e., 66/33. Whole genomic DNA of this family 
has been done using the 250K Affymetrix GeneChip SNP Array and 
linkage analysis was performed using ALLEGRO software. Genomic 
regions with increased LOD scores will be subsequently analyzed by a 
genomic scanning approach to narrow down on significant areas of the 
genome that are likely candidates for the HPFH phenotype.
P0993. HPLC a new technology for trinucleotide diseases 
analysis
M. Skrzypczak , M. Mierzejewski, W. Heinritz, U. Froster;  
Institute of Human Genetics, Leipzig, Germany.
High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) has proved to be 
time saving and effective screening method for identifying point muta -
tions and sequence variations. Trinucleotide expansions are an im -
portant mutational form specifically in neurogenerative disorders. The 
diagnostic is impaired by the dynamic character of mutation. Thus larg -
er expansions require specific and mostly time consuming methods 
for identification, such fragments length analysis by electrophoresis 
or Southern blot. We tested the effectives and reliability of HPLC for 
diagnosis in trinucleotide repeats disorder. Huntington Disease is an 
autosomal dominantly inherited neuropsychiatric disorder caused by 
an unstable expansion of CAG repeats. The number of CAG in normal 
individuals varies up to 35. In affected patients the expanded allele 
contains 40 or more repeats. The exact determination of both alleles 
on the molecular level is very important for clinical diagnosis and prog -
nosis. We have analyzed 22 patients - clinically diagnosed with HD 
- from the DNA bank of the Institute of Human Genetics, University of 
Leipzig. Following a novel PCR protocol, fragments enclosing the CAG 
repeat region were sized using HPLC in comparison to a 20 bp DNA 
standard. In order to evaluate the HPLC against one of the classical 
methods, the lengths of fragments were determined using ABI Prism®. 
Our results indicated highest accuracy and consistency of the data 
obtained with the HPLC method between 60-280 bp (± 2 CAG). We 
conclude that HPLC can be used as a sensitive and efficient alterna -
tive diagnostic method to conventional techniques for fragment length 
measuring in Huntington Disease.
P0994. Huntington disease-like phenotype due to trinucleotide 
expansions in the /TBP/ (SCA17) and /JPH3/ (HDL2) genes in 
Caucasian patients
C. S. Santos1, P. Magalhães1, S. D. J. Pena2, L. Jardim3, J. Sequeiros1,4;  
1IBMC-Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portugal, 2Departamento 
de Bioquímica e Imunologia, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo 
Horizonte, Brazil, 3Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 
4ICBAS-Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas de Abel Salazar, Porto, Portugal.
Huntington disease (HD) (OMIM 143100) is an autosomal dominant 
disorder of the central nervous system. It is clinically characterized by 
involuntary choreic movements, progressive motor impairment, cogni -
tive decline and behavioural anomalies. HD is caused by the expan -
sion of a (CAG)n tract within the first exon of the HD gene (4p16.3). 
This mutation accounts for 54,6% (124/227) of the cases received for 
confirmation or exclusion of HD at our lab, in the last 3 years.
We selected 93 patients without HD mutation but presenting clinical 
features resembling HD (Huntington-like patients), and analysed them 
for mutations on previously described HD-like genes: an extra octa -
peptide repeat (192 bp) in the PRNP  gene (HDL1); a CAG/CTG repeat 
in the Junctophilin-3  gene (HDL2); and CAG expansion in two domi -
nant SCAs which may also have some overlapping symptoms with HD 
(DRPLA and TBP/SCA17). Age at onset was 45,6 ±19,1 years, ranging 
from onset in childhood up to age 83 years.
Expansion of CAG repeat in ATN1 gene (DRPLA), as well as, the oc -
tapeptide insertion on PRNP  gene (HDL1) were excluded in all our 
patients.
We found a CAG/CTG expansion in the HDL2 locus in a Brazilian fam -ily. The patient carried 47 repeats and onset was at age 44 years. 
Clinical manifestations included bradipsychism, mutism, dysarthrya, 
cognitive deterioration and coreic movements, as well as ataxic gait. 
He showed cortical atrophy. The likelihood of the patient’s ancestrallity 
was estimated 97,4% European, 1,8 % Amerindian and 0,7% African. 
We found also a CAG expansion (44 repeats) in the TBP gene in a 
Portuguese patient with behavioural disturbances, epilepsy, aphasia, 
unbalance, and gait ataxia.
This work stresses the importance of performing the diagnosis of TBP 
and HDL2 in patients with HD-like disease of various ethnical origins.
P0995. Polymorphic variation at P2X receptor genes is 
associated with differences in blood pressure
T. Rahman , J. P. Doza, P. J. Avery, B. Keavney;  
Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
Objectives: Large family based association study was performed to 
examine the association of genetic variation in P2X4, P2X6 and P2X7 
genes and hypertension.
Background: Hypertension is one of the major risk factors for cardio -
vascular diseases. Blood pressure is a quantitative trait clustered in 
families with heritability estimated between 30-60%. However, identi -
fication of the genes responsible for this condition has proved difficult. 
Purinergic receptors are ligand-gated ion channels activated by ATP. 
They were analysed as candidate genes for hypertension due to their 
broad range of expression and their implication in ion exchange, renal 
function and neural impulse transmission.
Methods: 1428 individuals from 248 families ascertained via a proband 
with hypertension were studied. Blood pressure was measured using 
24h ambulatory monitoring. 28 TagSNPs were selected for analysis 
in the region of the gene and 15kb upstream and downstream us -
ing the HapMap data for population of European decent ( r2>0.8 and 
MAF≥0.5). SNPs were genotyped on a Sequenom MassArray platform 
and PCR-RFLP. Genotypes were checked for errors and quantitative 
analysis was performed using QTDT software.
Results: Common haplotype frequencies obtained were similar to the 
HapMap data. A highly significant association was observed between 
genotypes at the rs591874 polymorphism and blood pressure. Other 
significant results are listed in the table.
Gene SNPOffice Day Night Day Night
Systolic Diastolic Pulse Systolic Diastolic Pulse Systolic Diastolic Pulse HR HR
P2X7rs591874 0.019 0.006 0.022 0.004 0.035 0.002 0.008
rs656612 0.007
P2X4 rs2303998 0.016 0.022 0.040
P2X6rs9625334 0.025
rs8141816 0.016 0.032
rs2255371 0.032 0.034
rs2277838 0.04 0.02
rs2541953 0.049
Conclusions: The present results suggest that genetic variation at purinergic receptor 
genes may contribute to variations in blood pressure.
P0996. Association studies of obesity and high blood pressure 
to variants of the genes LEP, LEPR, ADRB2, PPARG, PLIN, 
RETN, INSIG2, ACE, eNOS, GNB and AGT  in afro-derived 
Brazilian populations
C. B. Angeli1, L. Kimura1, M. B. M. Auricchio1, J. Vicente2, A. C. Pereira3, N. H. 
Cotrim1, R. C. Mingroni-Netto1;  
1Instituto de Biociências - USP, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Instituto da Criança FMUSP, 
São Paulo, Brazil, 3Instituto do Coração - INCOR, São Paulo, Brazil.
Obesity and hypertension are common diseases determined by ge -
netic as well as environmental factors. Many genes have been inves -
tigated as possible candidates to these conditions in different popula -
tions, but studies in African-derived populations are rare. Quilombos 
are rural Brazilian populations founded by runaway or abandoned Af -
rican slaves. They have remained partially isolated until recently, thus 
representing an interesting model for the study of complex diseases.
We report the results we obtained in a sample of 528 adult individuals, 
living in remnants of Quilombos, in which we investigated the pos -Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
sible association of obesity and hypertension with polymorphic mark -
ers. Polymorphisms in the genes LEP, LEPR , ADRB2 , PPARG , PLIN , 
RETN , INSIG2 , ACE, eNOS , GNB3  and AGT were investigated in all 
subjects in order to assess their effect on BMI (Body Mass Index) and 
blood pressure. Blood pressure and obesity related phenotypes were 
analyzed both as dichotomous and continuous variables, adjusting for 
other covariates such as age and gender. No significant associations 
were detected between these genetic polymorphisms and BMI. A sig -
nificant association was found between homozygosis CC at the poly -
morphism C825T in the GNB3  gene and hypertension in women (p < 
0,001). Regression analyses showed that systolic blood pressure is 
significantly associated with the polymorphism in GNB3  among women 
(p=0,030), and that diastolic blood pressure is significantly associated 
with the polymorphism rs7566605 in the INSIG2  gene (p=0,027).
P0997. Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis: Mutations in  
ichthyin  associated with specific ultrastructural changes in the 
epidermis
J. Dahlqvist1, J. Klar1, I. Hausser2, M. Hellström Pigg3, T. Gedde-Dahl Jr4, A. 
Vahlquist3, N. Dahl1;  
1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany, 3Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden, 4National Hospital, 
Oslo, Norway.
Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI) is a heterogeneous 
group of skin disorders. Several mutant genes are identified in ARCI 
but the association between genotype and phenotype is poorly un -
derstood. In search for genotype-phenotype correlations in ARCI 
we selected 27 patients from 18 families with specific ultrastructural 
features of the epidermis. The electron microscopy (EM) picture was 
characterized by abnormal lamellar bodies and elongated membranes 
in stratum granulosum and was classified as ARCI EM-type III. DNA 
samples from a subset of the affected individuals were screened for 
homozygous genomic regions and a candidate gene region was iden -
tified on chromosome 5q33. The region coincides with the ichthyin  
gene, previously reported as mutant in ARCI. Mutation screening of 
ichthyin  revealed missense or splice site mutations in 25 out of the 
27 individuals (93%) with specific EM characteristics of type III. In a 
control group of 18 ARCI patients without EM findings consistent with 
type III we found only one individual with a mutation in ichthyin . Our 
findings indicate a strong association between ARCI caused by ich-
thyin  mutations and characteristic ultrastructural findings in epidermis. 
These results suggest that EM provides a specific diagnostic tool for a 
subgroup of ARCI patients.
P0998. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase ( NOS ) haplotype 
is associated with diabetes type 1 and its microvascular 
complications.
N. V. Tarasenko1, E. I. Kondratieva1, V. P. Puzyrev2,1;  
1Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2State Re -
search Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Diabetes is a common, chronic disease that profoundly impacts health 
and quality of life. Type 1 diabetes (IDDM) is an autoimmune disease 
with a complex polygenic inheritance. Polymorphism of NO-synthases 
genes could be one of the earliest marker of vascular damages in dia -
betes.
To study contribution of NOS3 gene into IDDM and its microvascular 
complications, a group of patients has been investigated (N=154 mean 
age 13,56±2,67; 72 females, 82 males). Control group consisted of 
241 healthy donors.
C-691T, VNTR, C774T and G894T gene NOS3  polymorphisms were 
analyzed by PCR-RFLP. Frequencies of haplotypes were estimated 
using the E-M approach and a more computationally-intensive Bayes -
ian approach as implemented in PHASE.
The „C-B-C-G“ haplotype was more common in IDDM patients (51%) 
and group of patients with microvascular complications (51%) than in 
healthy controls (40%; p<0.05).
In conclusion, the „C-B-C-G“ haplotype may have a negative influence 
in the pathogenesis IDDM and its microvascular complications. Fur -
ther studies should be conducted to address the molecular basis for 
such an effect.P0999. IL-23 receptor 3’UTR C2370A variant in inflammatory 
bowel disease: differential profile in Crohn’s disease and 
ulcerative colitis
L. Magyari , B. Faragó, E. Sáfrány, V. Csöngei, K. Horvatovich, L. Járomi, C. 
Sipeky, B. Melegh;  
Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, 
Pécs, Hungary.
Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) are two main clinical 
presentations of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The pathogenesis 
of IBD is complex and both environmental and genetic factors contrib -
ute to its etiology. The IL-23 receptor (IL23R) gene on chromosome 
1q31 encodes a subunit of the receptor for the proinflammatory cyto -
kine IL-23. In a genome-wide association study Duerr et al. (Science, 
2006; 314:1461-1463) verified IL23R as an inflammatory bowel dis -
ease associated gene. Amongst the identified SNPs, the C2370A vari -
ant (rs 10889677) in the 3’ UTR was found to confer risk for IBD in non-
Jewish population. Our aim was to obtain quantitative data on preva -
lence rates of IL23R 3’ UTR C2370A separately on CD or UC affected 
group of patients using another approach, a case-control study. A total 
of 330 patients with IBD (124 CD, 206 UC) and 235 controls were gen -
otyped for the SNP using PCR/RFLP method. The A allele frequency 
was 38.3% in the CD group, 32.0% in the UC group, and 30.0% in the 
controls (p<0.05 vs CD). We found increased AA genotype frequency 
in the CD group (15.3%), compared to the controls (5.5% p<0.05). A 
statistically not significant trend to increase was found in the preva -
lence of AA genotype in the UC group (9.2%), compared to the controls 
(5.5%). Logistic regression analysis adjusted for age and gender con -
firmed, that the AA genotype represent independent risk factor for CD 
(OR=3.090, 95% CI: 1.470-6.494, p=0.003), but not for UC.
P1000. Methods to detect imprinting using linkage data: parent-
of-origin-based penetrance vs. independent male-female 
recombination fractions
M. Monti1,2, J. Zhang1, L. Strug1, B. Feenstra3, D. A. Greenberg1;  
1Div Stat Genet, Dept Biostat, Columbia Univ, New York, NY, United States, 
2Dept. of Applied Health Sciences, Pavia, Italy, 3Royal Vet & Agricult Univ, Dept 
Natural Sci, C, Denmark.
Genes whose expression depends on the sex of the parent contrib -
uting the gene, i.e., imprinting, are being recognized. We tested two 
methods for detecting imprinting using linkage data.
Maximizing the lod score:
1) over parent-of-origin penetrances (PP)
2) over independent male-female recombination fraction (RF).
We simulated family data with and without imprinting, defined as pen -
etrance in offspring dependent on the parent contributing the allele. 
We compared the max lod score assuming equal parameter values 
from mothers and fathers to the global max over all combinations. 
We calculated the chi-squared for the null hypothesis of no imprinting 
and the power to detect imprinting over a range of data set sizes. We 
tested the confounding effects of reduced penetrance, heterogeneity, 
differential male-female penetrance and biased ascertainment, and 
studied the distribution of the nested likelihood ratio test statistic under 
the null hypothesis.
Without heterogeneity and reduced penetrance, the PP method has 
more power. Imprinting detection power actually increases for PP if 
reduced penetrance exists. If one sex had higher penetrance than the 
other, PP could falsely indicate imprinting, while RF was not fooled. 
Neither method gave biased results because of parent-specific ascer -
tainment bias.
When there is no imprinting, without heterogeneity or reduced pen -
etrance in the generating model, the likelihood ratio test was conser -
vative for both PP and RF, however the type I error rate is strongly af -
fected by locus heterogeneity and the ascertainment criteria. Families 
selected for having a high density of affected members also resulted in 
an increased Type I error rate.
P1001. A North African founding mutation causes male infertility 
by disrupting meiotic cytokinesis
P. Ray1,2, K. Dieterich1,2, R. Soto Rifo3,4, A. K. Faure1,2,5, S. Hennebicq1,2,5, B. 
Ben Amar6, M. Zahi7, D. Martinez1,2, B. Sèle1,2,5, P. S. Jouk1,2, T. Ohlmann3,4, S. 
Rousseaux1,2,5, J. Lunardi1,2;  
1CHU de Grenoble, Département de Génétique et Procréation, UF de biochimie 
génétique et moléculaire, Grenoble, France, 2Faculté de Médecine-Pharmacie, Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
Domaine de la Merci, Université Joseph Fourrier, Grenoble, France, 3Inserm, 
U758, Lyon, France, 4Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Unité de Virologie 
Humaine, IFR 128, Lyon, France, 5Inserm U309, Institut Albert Bonniot, Greno -
ble, France, 6Laboratoire d’analyse médicales, Rabat, Morocco, 7Centre privé 
de Fécondation In vitro, Rabat, Morocco.
An estimated 80 million people face reproductive difficulties worldwide. 
An important proportion of these cases is believed to be caused by 
genetic defects, yet few genes have formally been associated with 
infertility in the human. We performed a genome-wide microsatellite 
scan on 14 unrelated infertile men, all originating from North Africa and 
born from first degree cousin. All presented very characteristic sperm 
parameters with close to 100% abnormal spermatozoa with anomalies 
of the head, several flagellae and polyploidy. A common homozygous 
region harboring the Aurora Kinase C gene (AURKC) known to be 
highly expressed in the testis and involved in cytokinesis and mitosis/
meiosis was detected in 10/14 patients. Sequence analysis of AURKC 
coding sequence showed the presence of a homozygous single nu -
cleotide deletion in all 14 patients. This mutation results in premature 
termination of translation thus yielding a truncated protein which lacks 
its kinase domain. We conclude that the absence of AURKC leads 
to male infertility due to the production of «large-headed multiflagella 
spermatozoa».
P1002. The study of Insulin, Igf2 and NAIP mutations in 
romanian population
L. Dumitrescu1, P. Apostol1, D. Cimponeriu1, M. Stavarachi1, M. Toma1, D. 
Cheta2, L. Gavrila1;  
1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Institute of Diabetes, Nutrition and 
Metabolic Diseases “Nicolae Paulescu”, Bucharest, Romania.
The balance between proliferation and apoptotic processes is involved 
in some pathologic phenotype, including type 1 diabetes mellitus 
(T1DM), type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and obesity. The genetic 
markers from IDDM2 region were associated with these phenotypes. 
Neuronal apoptosis inhibitory protein (NAIP, 5q) was found also to 
have anti-apoptotic effects in different cells and to be up-regulated dur -
ing adipocytes differentiation.
The aims of our study were to test the contribution of Insulin, IGF2 and 
NAIP polymorphisms to diabetes onset and obesity.
Clinical information and blood samples were collected from unrelated 
obese T2DM subjects (n=70, BMI between 32,5-39 kg/m2), nonobese 
T1DM (n=70, BMI between 20-25kg/m2) and 150 controls (non obese, 
non-diabetic subjects). All samples were genotyped for Insulin -23Hph, 
Insulin +1127Pst1, IGF2Apa and NAIP exon 5 polymorphisms.
We observed a higher frequency (4%) of NAIP exon 5 homozygous 
deletion in control group compared with obese T2DM (2,85%) and 
T1DM (1,42%) patients. This value is also higher than in other popula -
tions. Interesting, all subjects with homozygous absence of NAIP exon 
5 have low BMI .The IGF2 AA genotype was more frequent in T2DM 
comparing with T1DM and control subjects (OR=1,9) and polymor -
phisms from insulin region (OR-23Hph AA= 2,7, OR +1127Pst CC = 
2,0983) were more frequent in T1DM subjects.
Taken together, we found a high frequency of -23Hph AA and +1127Pst 
CC in T1DM patients, of IGF2 AA in T2DM and of NAIP exon 5 homo -
zygous deletion in control group.
P1003. Analysis of IGF1  gene polymorphism in newborn and 
elderly people from North-West region of Russia
S. V. Potulova1, O. S. Glotov2, V. G. Vakharlovsky2, O. N. Bespalova2, T. E. 
Ivaschenko2, V. S. Baranov2,1;  
1Saint-Petersburg State University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s In -
stitute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
The serum insulin growth factor IGF-1 level differs in various human 
ages. The individual variations in the level of this enzyme depend on 
the number of CA repeats in the promoter region of IGF-1  gene. In this 
study IGF-1  (CA repeats) gene polymorphism was analyzed by PCR 
method in 102 newborns and also in 136 elderly people from North-
West Region of Russia. Increasing of the frequency of 20/- genotype 
in elderly people when compared to newborn group (26.7%, 44.1%, 
respectively, p=0.0034) with concomitant age-related decrease of 
19/19 genotype frequency (51%, 27.9%, respectively, p=0.0001) were 
found. According our data 19/20 genotype in male newborns was twice 
more frequent than in female ones (23.2%, 11.3%). The same ration 
remained constant in elderly people as well but the proportion of 19/20 genotype in this group increased almost twice (44.4%, 21.1%, respec -
tively, p=0.025). The association of 20CA allele with lower body weight 
(Z=2.2, p=0.028) and reduced height in female newborns has been 
registered. We suggest that increased number of CA repeats (more 
than 20 CA) being responsible for low production of IGF-1 enzyme is 
associated with longevity in man as well as with reduced body weight 
and the height in female newborns. Allele 19 responsible for the high 
level of serum IGF-1 might be associated with longevity for women. 
Our final finding was the correlation between 20 CA allele of IGF-1 and 
cataract (Z=2.4, p=0.018). There was no correlation between IGF-1  
gene polymorphism and stroke, essential hypertension, coronary heart 
disease and Type 2 diabetes.
P1004. Interleukin-23 receptor (IL23R) gene C2370A 
polymorphism in scleroderma patients
E. Sáfrány1, B. Faragó1, V. Csöngei1, L. Magyari1, A. Maász1, C. Sipeky1, L. 
Járomi1, K. Horvatovich1, J. Radics2, L. Czirják2, B. Melegh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, 
Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, University of 
Pécs, Pécs, Hungary.
Scleroderma or systemic sclerosis is a chronic connective tissue 
disease generally classified as one of the autoimmune rheumatic 
diseases. The cause of scleroderma is still unknown but there are 
several factors presumed: abnormal immune or inflammatory activ -
ity stimulating the fibroblasts to produce too much collagen, as well 
as not yet discovered genetic and enviromental factors. Interleukin-
23 plays an important role in the Th17 mediated immune response. 
The IL23R gene located on chromosome 1p31 encodes a subunit of 
the IL23-receptor. Recent investigations (Duerr et al, Science, 2006; 
314:1461-1463) identified several IL23R gene polymorphisms as risk 
factors for inflammatory bowel diseases. Theoretical considerations 
also suggested possible association of these SNPs with other autoim -
mune diseases. Our aim was to test whether the 3’-UTR C2370A SNP 
of the IL23R gene (rs10889677), one of the verified IBD susceptibility 
genes also confers risk for scleroderma. We performed genotyping 
using DNA samples collected from 244 patients with scleroderma and 
135 unrelated, healthy controls. The genotypes were analysed using 
PCR/RFLP-methods. We found no significant difference between the 
allele frequencies of the two groups (73% and 71% for the C allele 
and 27% and 29% for the A allele in patients with scleroderma and in 
the control group, respectively). Our results show that eventhough the 
C2370A polymorphism of IL23R can associate with selected autoim -
mune diseases like the Crohn’s disease, but not with others, including 
the scleroderma, thereby it is not an universal autoimmune disease 
associated susceptibility factor.
P1005. Interleukin-23 receptor 3‘-UTR C2370A SNP confers risk 
for rheumatoid arthritis
B. Faragó1, L. Magyari1, V. Csöngei1, L. Járomi1, E. Sáfrány1, K. Horvatovich1, 
C. Sipeky1, A. Maász1, J. Radics2, L. Czirják2, B. Melegh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, 
Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, University of 
Pécs, Pécs, Hungary.
INTRODUCTION: Interleukin-23 (IL23) is a proinflammatory cytokine 
that plays a crucial role in the development of chronic inflammation, 
being a master regulator of the IL17/23 molecular pathway. IL23-re -
ceptor gene (IL23R) on chromosome 1p31 encodes one subunit of 
the IL23-receptor. Duerr et al. (Science, 2006; 314:1461-1463) using 
genome-wide association study found association between Crohn’s 
disease and the IL23R gene; amongst the reported SNPs the 3’-UTR 
C2370A (rs10889677) conferred risk for Crohn’s disease in a non-Jew -
ish population. Since the IL17/23 pathway is known to associate with 
experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, inflammatory bowel disease, 
multiple sclerosis, collagen-induced arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 
and perhaps other autoimmune diseases, we theoretized that this SNP 
described originally for Crohn’s disease might also have significance 
in the development of RA. Therefore, the aim of the present study was 
to test this hypothesis. METHODS: Genotyping was performed on 226 
well-characterized RA-patients and 135 age-and sex-matched con -
trols using a PCR-RFLP method. All RA-patients were characterized 
for RF- and anti-CCP seropositivity. RESULTS: We observed a highly 
increased prevalence of the homozygous AA genotype compared to 
the controls (15.0% vs. 4.44%; p<0.05). DISCUSSION: Our results Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
show that the AA genotype means a 4-fold risk for the development of 
RA (χ2=8.55, p=0.003, OR=3.81, 95%CI: 1.55-9.33). The data of the 
study reported here provide direct evidence first in the literature, that 
besides Crohn’s disease the IL23R 3’-UTR single nucleotide polymor -
phism C2370A is an independent risk factor also for RA.
P1006. Genetic Association of TAPBP, IKBL, and MIF 
Polymorphisms with Juvenile Rheumatoid Arthritis in Mexican 
Population.
L. S. Orozco1,2, J. Ramirez1,2, R. Velazquez1, F. Espinoza3, G. Escamilla3, S. 
Jimenez-Morales1, V. baca4;  
1Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, Mexico, Mexico, 2Universidad 
Autónoma de la Ciudad de Mexico, Mexico, Mexico, 3Instituto Nacional de 
Pediatria, Mexico, Mexico, 4Hospital de Pediatria, Centro Medico Nacional, S. 
XXI, Mexico, Mexico.
Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA) comprises the most common 
chronic autoimmune arthropathies of childhood. Strong evidence is 
emerging to suggest that the disease likely involves multiple suscepti -
bility genes, a feature common to many autoimmune disorders. Single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in some genes of system immune 
like TAPBP 260 C/G, IKBL - 62 T/A and MIF - 173 G/C, have been 
found associated with ARJ in different populations,. Our aim was to 
identify whether TAPBP, IKBL, and MIF polymorphisms are associated 
with JRA in a sample of Mexican patients. We performed a case-control 
association study in 133 pediatric patients with ARJ, and 350 unrelat -
ed, healthy Mexican controls. Allelic discrimination was carried out by 
TaqMan assay. The genotypes and allele frequencies were compared 
between cases and controls by x2 test. Genotype frequencies were 
in Hardy - Weinberg equilibrium. When genotype and allelic frequen -
cies were compared between cases and controls we observed that 
the 260G TAPBP and - 173C MIF alleles ((p=0.01, OR 1.42, 95% CI 
1.06- 1.89 and p=0.03, OR 1.4, 95% CI, 1.02 - 1.84, respectively) were 
associated with susceptibility to JRA in Mexican population, while- 62 
T/A IKBL (p= 0.01, OR 0.7, CI 95%, 0.52 - 0.93) was found associated 
with protection.
P1007. Bone mass and genetic study of a 113 year-old man
M. Bustamante1,2, L. Mellibovsky3, X. Nogues3, P. Lluch1, A. Diez-Perez3, D. 
Grinberg1,2, S. Balcells1,2;  
1Department of Genetics, UB, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER, ISCIII, IBUB, Bar -
celona, Spain, 3Hospital del Mar, URFOA, UAB, Barcelona, Spain.
Osteoporosis is a common disease that affects postmenopausal wom -
en and elderly people. Aging induces loss of bone density and quality 
resulting in a progressive incidence of fractures with significant mor -
bidity and mortality. The KLOTHO  gene has been related to the ageing 
process. Klotho  knock-out mice display multiple disorders that resem -
ble human aging, including osteopenia. Furthermore, polymorphisms 
in KLOTHO  have been associated with life span and bone mineral 
density (BMD). On the other hand, the LRP5  gene has been related 
to variations in bone mass. In particular, the Gly171Val mutation has 
been associated with a high bone mass phenotype (HBM).
Here we describe the bone mass and a limited exploratory genetic 
study of a 113 year-old man and several first-degree relatives. No frac -
tures have been suffered by any of them and their BMD values are 
listed in Table 1.
Regarding the KLOTHO  gene, no mutation was detected in either the 
index case or any of his relatives, with the exception of a previously 
described polymorphic variant: one of the proband’s daughters pre -
sented one copy of the KL-VS allele, which has been associated with 
longevity and increased bone mass. Finally, mutation Gly171Val of the 
LRP5  was not present in any individual. These data rule out these po -
tential genetic contributions. The identity of other longevity and/or high 
bone mass genes or environmental factors remains to be defined.
Table 1 Values of bone mass in the index case and four relatives
Individual AgeBMD T-Score Z-Score
L2-L4Femoral 
neckTotal 
hipUDL2-
L4Femoral 
neckL2-L4Femoral 
neck
Index 
case1130.880 0.533 0.742 0.294 -3.00 -4.10 -1.45 -1.01
Daughter 771.033 0.768 0.914 0.335 -1.40 -1.80 -1.4 0.9
Daughter 810.939 0.731 0.853 0.251 -2.20 -2.10 0.28 0.0
Nephew 851.227 0.839 1.004 0.565 -0.10 -1.80 2.08 1.2
Brother 1011.163 0.922 1.043 0.440 -0.60 -1.10 0.60 1.75
L2-L4: lumbar spine; UD: ultradistal radiusP1008. Focal Idiopathic Torsion Dystonia: A new locus identified 
in a Large French family.
M. Y. Frederic1,2, C. Dhaenens3,4, C. Davin1,2, R. Mazzoleni5,6, A. Kreisler5,6, 
I. Vuillaume3,4, M. Martinez7, M. Claustres1,8, B. Sablonnière3,4, S. Tuffery-Gi -
raud1,2, G. Collod-Beroud1,2, and the INSERM National Dystonia Network and 
GIS Maladies Rares;  
1INSERM U 827, Montpellier, France, 2Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, 
France, 3CHRU de Lille, Institut de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Lille, 
France, 4INSERM U 837, Lille, France, 5CHRU Lille, Pôle de Neurologie, Lille, 
France, 6Faculté de Médecine, Institut de Médecine Prédictive et de Recher -
che, EA 2683, Lille, France, 7INSERM U 563, Toulouse, France, 8CHU Mont -
pellier, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, 
Montpellier, France.
Focal Idiopathic Torsion Dystonia (FITD) is a group of movement dis -
orders, which is usually autosomal dominant with reduced penetrance. 
Commonly described forms of FITD include cervical dystonia, blepha -
rospasm, oromandibular dystonia, laryngeal dystonia and limb dysto -
nia. We studied a large French family presenting with varied symptoms 
of adult-onset FITD. The family is composed of 30 subjects (six defi -
nitely affected and one asymptomatic obligate carrier). The average of 
onset is 43 +/- 20 years. The three loci known to be implicated in FITD: 
DYT6 , DYT7  and DYT13  have been studied and excluded. Genome-
wide linkage analyses have been performed with a parametric model 
and incomplete age-dependant penetrance. This study identified a new 
highly probable locus, DYTL , with several lod scores > +2 for contigu -
ous markers and a maximum of 2.37 (maximum lod score estimated 
in the family: 2.62) defining a 40 cM candidate region. Concurrently, 
another project has been established in collaboration with practitioners 
implicated in the follow up of dystonic patients in France and associa -
tions of patients to recruit other families presenting with FITD. Forty-
three families presenting with intrafamilial heterogeneous phenotypes 
and corresponding to 170 affected patients have been identified and 
are in recruitment. The preliminary results of the DYTL  analysis in 14 
families show possible segregation of this locus with the disease in ten 
families and exclusion in 4 families. This last result further illustrates 
the great genetic heterogeneity of FITD and is in favor of the existence 
of more than one unassigned genes for this pathology.
P1009. Association of VEGF gene variant with left ventricular 
hypertrophy in athletes
A. M. Hakimullina1, E. V. Linde2, I. I. Ahmetov1, I. V. Astratenkova1, V. A. 
Rogozkin1;  
1St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2Combat Sports Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) in endurance-oriented athletes is 
generally understood to be a limiting factor for improving maximal 
oxygen uptake (VO2max). Studies in related and unrelated individuals 
clearly demonstrate that a high proportion of interindividual variability 
in left ventricular mass and risk of LVH is attributable to genetic fac -
tors. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) has been identified as 
one of the key regulators of angiogenesis and, therefore, VO2max. 
Several studies have shown that human VEGF gene polymorphisms 
are associated with VEGF gene expression and VO2max before and 
after aerobic exercise training. However, the influence of VEGF gene 
variants on cardiac growth of athletes has not been examined. The 
purpose of the study was to investigate the VEGF promoter G-634C 
polymorphism for association with LVH in athletes. Seventy one Rus -
sian athletes (all-round speed skaters and rowers) of national competi -
tive standard (sub-elite and elite) were studied. VEGF gene G-634C 
polymorphism was determined by PCR-RLFP. Echocardiography was 
performed for the measurement of left ventricular mass and function. 
We found that left ventricular mass (LVM) and LVM index (LVMI) in 
male sub-elite speed skaters was significantly greater in GG genotype 
carriers than in heterozygotes (GC) (LVM: 333 (21) g vs. 254 (21) g, 
p=0.002; LVMI: 169 (10) g/m2 vs. 130 (18) g/m2; p=0.015). It has been 
shown previously that -634C allele is associated with increased VEGF 
expression, and, therefore, can be considered to be protective against 
LVH. Thus, VEGF G-634C polymorphism is associated with develop -
ment of LVH in athletes.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
P1010. Are common variants in leptin and leptin receptor 
genes associated with specific eating patterns in the Czech 
population?
M. Forejt1, J. A. Bienertova Vasku2, P. Bienert2, T. Prusa1, M. Vavrina2, J. Kudel -
kova2, S. Cifkova1, M. Chmelikova1, Z. Brazdova1, A. Vasku2;  
1Institute of Preventive Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 
2Institute of Pathological Physiology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
INTRODUCTION: Mutations in the leptin and the leptin receptor genes 
were previously reported to cause rare obese syndromes, however, 
both leptin and leptin receptor play also an important role in common 
multifactorial obesity. Therefore, increasing attention is being paid to 
specific eating patterns as obesity determining traits that undoubtedly 
display a heritable component. In this study, we determinated whether 
genetic variations within the leptin and leptin receptor genes underlie 
specific eating patterns.
METHODS: The case-control study comprised a total of 45 obese in -
dividuals ((BMI>=30 ) and 38 healthy controls aged 18.6-68.2 y whose 
uptake of nutrients was determined by using 7-d food records; with 
special attention paid to the use of excessive portion sizes or irregular -
ity in eating. They were genotyped for the LEP -2548G/A (5’UTR) and 
LEPR Gln223Arg (exon 4) variants by means of PCR-based method -
ology.
RESULTS: No statistically significant associations of both examined 
polymorphisms with age, BMI, systolic and diastolic blood pressure, 
history of sterility or infertility or waist-to-hip ratio were observed. 
Obese carriers of examined allelic variations in leptin or the leptin 
receptor gene did not express an increased risk to display extreme 
snacking behavior or to eat excessive portion sizes; however, the AG 
carriers of LEPR Gln223Arg tended significantly to prefer the low-fibre 
diet (p=0.03).
DISCUSSION: These results do not provide evidence for a preferen -
tial transmission of some alleles of the LEP of LEPR polymorphism 
in obesity, but support the hypothesis that LEPR Gln223Arg confers 
susceptibility to specific eating patterns, such as low fibre diet.
P1011. Molecular analysis of the CAPN3 gene by both dHPLC, 
direct sequencing and cDNA analysis identify new mutations in 
LGMD2A patients
M. Duno1, M. Sveen2, J. Vissing2, M. Schwartz1;  
1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, 4062, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Neuromuscular 
Research Unit, Universityhospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
Limb-Girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMD’s) are a group of neuromus -
cular disorders presenting great clinical heterogeneity. Among these, 
LGMD-2A is the most prevalent and assumed to account for at least 
30% of LGMD’s, LGMD-2A is inherited recessively and caused by mu -
tations in the CAPN3 gene which encodes a skeletal-muscle-specific 
member of the calpain superfamily.
We report here on the molecular analysis of the CAPN3 gene in 41 
patients suspected for LGMD2A.
The CAPN3 gene of 18 patients were screened for mutations by dHPLC 
and/or direct sequencing of the entire coding and intron flanking se -
quence, whereas the remaining patients were investigated by RT-PCR 
and CAPN3 cDNA sequencing. Seven of the patients in whom no mu -
tations were found by dHPLC/exon sequencing were also sequenced 
for their CAPN3 cDNA. In total we identified 14 different mutations of 
which 6 were previously unknown. In eight patients we identified both 
mutant alleles. In additional two of the patients only one mutation could 
be identified on the genomic level, however CAPN3 cDNA analysis 
demonstrated that both patients only expressed the mutant allele, in -
dicating that both harbor an unidentified allel that somehow compro -
mise CAPN3 RNA maturation. In three of the remaining patients only 
one mutation could be identified. Interestingly, all three patients had a 
highly abnormal western blot for calpain-3 and clinical characteristics 
of LGMD-2A, however the mutations were all clearly heterozygous on 
full-lengthCAPN3 cDNA.P1012. Lipoedema associated with familial growth hormone 
deficiency
S. Mansour, G. Brice, S. Jeffery, S. Nussey, C. Carver, P. Ostergaard , P. S. 
Mortimer, G. Bano;  
St. George’s University of London, London, United Kingdom.
Lipoedema is a poorly understood condition that does not appear in 
the medical textbooks. It is frequently mistaken for lymphoedema but 
instead of fluid accumulating in the tissues there is heavy deposition of 
fat. The cause is unknown but it leads to increased swelling, marked 
floppiness and looseness of the tissues, tenderness and sometimes 
pain and bruising. It is distinct from morbid obesity and apparently af -
fects females only after puberty. No endocrine or hormonal abnormali -
ties have been identified. A family history is common, and it appears to 
be a sex limited condition even within families.
We report a family of 4 generations presenting with short stature and 
lipoedema. The proband, a 60 year old Caucasian lady, is 132cm and 
has suffered with gross lipoedema of her arms and legs since puberty. 
Her mother and grandmother also exhibited short stature and lipoede -
ma. Her son is short but has no lipoedema. Studies show that both 
the proband and her son have growth hormone, TSH and prolactin 
deficiency.
This pattern of combined pituitary deficiency is suggestive of mutations 
in the PIT1  (POU1F1 ) gene. We have found a mutation in PIT1  (P24L 
in exon1), which acts in an autosomal dominant manner. The proline is 
in the transactivation domain of the protein, and is highly conserved. It 
is previously described in one sporadic case with no clinical details.
Growth hormone is associated with insulin regulation, which in turn is 
important in adipose formation and cardiovascular disease. This is the 
first gene associated with lipoedema.
P1013. Sudden cardiac death in a Swiss family is potentially 
caused by two distinct genetic elements
C. Rieubland1, N. Civic2, F. Fellmann1, H. Abriel3,4, J. Schläpfer3, J. S. Beck -
mann1,2, C. Rivolta2;  
1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Département 
de Génétique Médicale, UNIL, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Service de Cardiologie, 
CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Département de Pharmacologie et Toxicologie, 
UNIL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Introduction: Congenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) is characterized by 
a prolonged QT interval on the electrocardiogram, leading to syncope 
or sudden death. Ten specific LQTS loci (LQT1-LQT10) have been 
found. We identified a four-generation Swiss family with several cas -
es of sudden death and displaying two heart phenotypes: LQTS and 
conduction defects of the cardiac electrical impulse (CD). These two 
anomalies were present as independent entities, since some individu -
als exhibited only one of them, while others suffered from both.
Methods: Microsatellites linkage analysis was performed for three of 
the most frequent LQT loci (LQT1, LQT2, LQT3), accounting for ~ 80% 
of all LQTS cases. The KCNQ1  gene (LQT1) was screened by direct 
DNA sequencing.
Results: We found perfect co-segregation between LQTS and a spe -
cific LQT1 haplotype. Sequencing of KCNQ1  revealed the previously 
described mutation p.A344A (GCG>GCA) in all individuals with LQTS. 
However, this mutation was absent in patients (one of whom died sud -
denly) with CD and no LQTS. We then tested LQT2- and LQT3-asso -
ciated markers for co-segregation with CD and could clearly exclude 
these two loci as being responsible for this phenotype.Conclusion: The 
mutation identified in KCNQ1  is responsible for LQTS in this family, 
but cannot explain all cases of sudden death, nor the cardiac conduc -
tion defects also present in some individuals. It is therefore likely that 
another genetic cardiac anomaly, potentially lethal, segregates inde -
pendently in this family. We plan to fully genotype the members of this 
family, in hopes of identifying this second gene.
P1014. Haplotype analysis of G72/G30 genes polymorphisms in 
major depressive disorder
T. G. Noskova1, D. A. Gaysina1, A. Asadullin2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Department 
of Psychiatry, Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Major depression disorder (MDD) is a common, severe, chronic, and 
often life-threatening illness. There is evidence that overlapping genes 
G72/G30 (13q32-33) are transcribed in brain and involved in the etiol -Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
ogy of affective disorders. Interestingly, G72 protein interacts with the 
gene for D-amino-acid oxidase on 12q24 to regulate glutaminergic sig -
naling through the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor pathway, whereas 
the function of the G30 gene remained unclear. Recently, an association 
between the G72/G30 genes and bipolar disorder and schizophrenia 
has been reported. The aim of the present study is to determine wheth -
er the G72/G30 genes are a susceptibility factor for major depressive 
disorder. Three SNPs - rs2391191, rs3918342 of the G72 gene and 
rs1341402 of the G30 gene - were investigated in a case-control study 
included 108 individuals who had MDD and 244 healthy controls from 
Russia. There were no statistical differences between MDD patients 
and healthy controls in the genotypic and allelic distribution of the G72/
G30 genes investigated polymorphisms. Maximum likelihood analysis 
of haplotype distribution demonstrated the presence of linkage dis -
equilibrium between the two polymorphisms (rs2391191, rs1341402) 
both in control subjects (D’=0.999), and in cases (D’=0.35). Analysis of 
distribution of the estimated haplotype frequencies revealed significant 
difference between depressive subjects and controls (χ2=14.54, df=3, 
p=0.0023). Further analysis showed overrepresentation of the haplo -
type CA (χ2=20.13, p<0.001) in depressive group compared to control 
one. Our findings indicate the contribution of the G72/G30 genes to 
susceptibility for MDD, but further research of these genes on case-
control phenotypic groups is of high importance.
P1015. Common variation in the ABO glycosyltransferase is 
associated with susceptibility to severe Plasmodium falciparum 
malaria.
A. E. Fry1, S. Auburn1, M. Diakite1, J. T. Forton1, A. Green1, A. Richardson1, K. 
A. Rockett1, J. Wilson1, M. Jallow2, F. Sisay-Joof2, M. Pinder2, M. J. Griffiths1,3, 
N. Peshu3, T. N. Williams3,4, K. Marsh3,4, M. E. Molyneux5,6, T. E. Taylor7,8, D. P. 
Kwiatkowski1;  
1The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 
2MRC Laboratories, Fajara, Gambia, 3Kenya Medical Research Institute Centre 
for Geographical Medicine Research (Coast), Kilifi, Kenya, 4Nuffield Depart -
ment of Medicine, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Malawi–Liverpool–Wellcome Trust 
Programme of Clinical Tropical Research, Blantyre, Malawi, 6Liverpool School 
of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 7Blantyre Malaria Project, 
Blantyre, Malawi, 8Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, United States.
A link between host ABO blood group and susceptibility to severe 
Plasmodium falciparum  malaria has long been suspected. Previous 
serological studies have suggested that blood group O individuals are 
relatively protected from severe disease; however the association has 
often proved difficult to confirm. Using a combination of family- and 
population- based studies from three African populations (almost 10 
thousand individuals) we tested the molecular genetic variation under -
lying the ABO system. Our results confirm that the common frame-shift 
mutation underlying blood group O is associated with protection from 
severe disease (Odds Ratio 0.8, p-value 2x10-7). The high frequency 
of the common ABO alleles means that even modest differences in 
susceptibility could significantly affect the health of millions of people 
in malaria endemic regions. Using our genetic data, and additional 
resources from the International HapMap project, we went on to in -
vestigate the evidence for a possible parent-of-origin effect related to 
ABO alleles, and the signals of balanced evolutionary selection at the 
ABO locus.
P1016. Analysis of Y chromosome markers in patients with 
spermatogenesis abnormality.
A. A. Islamova , R. I. Khusainova, I. A. Kutuev, E. K. Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
AZF region microdeletions of Y chromosome are one the most frequent 
causes of spermatogenesis abnormality. We investigated 131 unrelat -
ed males with azoospermia and oligozoospermia. Microdeletions were 
revealed in 11.45%. The spectrum of microdeletions was the following: 
AZFc - 5.34 %, AZFa+b+c - 1.5 %, AZFa+c, AZFb+c, AZFb - 0.76 %. 
Haplogroups determination was carried out using 19 diallelic markers 
of Y chromosome in 117 patients of Russian, Tatar and Bashkir ethnic 
origin with spermatogenesis abnormalities. The control group consists 
of 300 fertile men of Tatar (100), Bashkir (100) and Russian (100) 
ethnic origin. The comparison of group of Bashkir and Russian eth -
nic origin there were statistically significant differences in R1a, R1b3, 
I, N3 haplogroup frequency distributions (p=0.013,chi-square=6.271; 
p=0.005, chi-square=37.955; p=0.005,chi-square=8.482; p=0.003,chi-square=9.76, respectively). Haplogroup R1b3 frequency distribution 
were found between control groups of Bashkir ind Tatar ethnic origins 
(p=0.0005,chi-square=9.770). Haplogroup R1b3 found to be protec -
tive in spermatogenesis abnormality in males of Bashkir ethnic origin 
(p=0.0024; chi-square=12.4419; OR=0.29).The analysis of gr/gr de -
letions of AZFc locus was spent in 132 males with spermatogenesis 
abnormalities and in 300 control individuals. There were no statistically 
significant differences in deletions frequency distribution, but we de -
termined association of gr/gr deletions with N haplogroups of Y chro -
mosome (p=0.0005, chi-square=63.115) both in patients and controls 
irrespective of ethnic origin of individuals.Thus, characteristic features 
of Y chromosome haplogroups and gr/gr deletions of AZFc locus dis -
tribution were revealed in 3 ethnic groups from the Volga-Ural region 
and in patients with spermatogenesis abnormality.
P1017. Distribution of the MAOA-VNTR polymorphism in groups 
of elite athletes
J. Schegolkova , N. Maluchenko, A. Tonevitsky;  
Moscow State University, Biological Faculty, Department of Bioengeneering, 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
Monoamine oxydase (MAO), as a catabolic enzyme, regulates mono -
amine transmitter levels in the central nervous system. The activity of 
this enzyme is genetically regulated. The gene encoding the A form of 
human monoamine oxidase enzyme (MAOA) is located on the short 
arm of X chromosome. One of the common polymorphisms is a 30 bp 
functional VNTR polymorphism (MAOA-uVNTR).
In this study, we examined distribution of the MAOA-uVNTR polymor -
phism in groups of elite athletes of different specialization. 100 athletes 
and 105 non-trained controls were genotyped. Analysis of this test 
reveals that the frequency of MAOA alleles differ between groups of 
complex-coordination, playing and endurance kind of sport. Frequency 
of high active allele increases in groups of complex-coordination and 
endurance sportsmen. Frequency of low active allele decreases in 
groups of complex-coordination and playing sportsmen.
Interrelation of MAOA genotype and athletic successfulness are dis -
cussed.
P1018. Homozygosity mapping of primary microcephaly in 
Iranian families revealed novel mutations and novel phenotype
S. Esmaeeli Nieh1, M. Ghani Kakhki2, M. Garshasbi1, K. Kahrizi3, F. Behjati3, S. 
S. Abedini3, S. Ghasemi Firoozabadi3, M. Mohseni3, V. Hadavi4, R. Vazifehm -
and3, M. Falah3, A. Dehghan3, S. M. Seyfati3, P. Jamali3, D. Habibi3, A. W. 
Kuss1, H. H. Ropers1, H. Neizel2, H. Najmabadi3,4;  
1Max Planck Institue for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Institut fur 
Humangenetik, Charite-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3University 
of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Genetics Research Center, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Kariminejad and Najmabadi Pathology and 
Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder 
showing an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance in the majority 
of cases. Affected individuals present with head circumferences more 
than 3 standard deviations below the age- and sex-matched popula -
tion mean, accompanied by mental retardation without further associ -
ated malformations and with no manifest etiology.
Six genomic loci have been identified so far (MCPH1-6) and for four of 
these, the underlying genes are known.
For this study we have ascertained patients with primary microceph -
aly and additional family members from 30 consanguineous Iranian 
families. In addition to a thorough clinical characterisation, karyotype 
analyses were performed for all patients. For linkage analyses, several 
Microsatellite loci were selected for each known MCPH locus and used 
for genotyping in all available family members.
Our investigation enabled us to detect linkage to the ASPM  (MCPH5) 
region in three families. Two families showed linkage to MCPH2 and 
one to MCPH1 . For the remaining 24 families linkage to one of the six 
known loci could not be established. Subsequent sequencing revealed 
one novel mutation in MCPH1  and two in ASPM . It is interesting that 
all carriers of ASPM  mutations in this study also show short stature. 
This has not been observed before in and thus widens the spectrum 
of clinical manifestations of sequence changes in ASPM . In addition to 
that our results indicate that, in keeping with previous findings for other 
populations, ASPM  mutations are the most common cause for primary 
microcephaly in the Iranian population.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association20
P1019. Polymorphisms of the MDR1 gene in Hungarian Roma 
population samples
V. Csöngei1, L. Járomi1, E. Sáfrány1, C. Sipeky1, A. Maász1, L. Magyari1, K. 
Horvatovich1, B. Faragó1, I. Takács2, B. Melegh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, 
Pécs, Hungary, 22nd Department of Internal Medicine and Haematology, Sem -
melweis Teaching Hospital, Miskolc, Hungary.
The human multidrug resistance gene (MDR1) product P-glycoprotein 
(P-gp), a member of the ATP-binding cassette superfamily of trans -
porters, plays crucial role in the bioavailability, absorption, distribution 
and excretion of various natural substrates and xenobiotics. Therefore 
its activity has significant pharmacokinetic and pharmacodinamic con -
sequences. Among many SNPs of the MDR1 gene, C3435T in exon 
26 and G2677T/A in exon 21(Ala893Ser/Thr) are the most extensively 
studied in relation to interindividual variability of P-gp expression and 
activity, and show linkage disequilibrium with C1236T in exon 12. The 
aim of this study was to investigate the frequency of these three ma -
jor functional SNPs in the Hungarian Roma population: 251 unrelated 
Hungarian Roma subjects and 139 controls of Caucasian origin were 
examined. The genotypes of polymorphic positions C1236T, G2677T/
A and C3435T were determined by PCR-RFLP. No significant differ -
ences were found in genotype distribution in exon 21 and 26 between 
the two groups. The observed allele frequencies were 48.6%, 1.4% 
and 48.2% in the Roma population, and 43.8%, 0.40% and 51.8% in 
controls for the alleles 2677T, 2677A and 3435T, respectively. These 
results were similar to that of other Caucasian populations in Europe. 
In exon 12 the Roma population had significantly higher frequency for 
the 1236T allele (57.8%) and showed increased frequency of TT geno -
type (34.3%) compared to controls (42.8% and 20.1%, respectively, 
p<0.05). The differential profile can have consequences for choice of 
treatment with drugs metabolising via this system.
P1020. Elucidating the molecular causes of autosomal recessive 
mental retardation in a systematic fashion: a progress report
H. H. Ropers1, K. Kahrizi2, A. Tzschach1, S. S. Abedini2, M. M. Motazacker1, M. 
Garshasbi1, L. Abbasi1, F. Behjati2, V. Hadavi3, S. Esmaeeli Nieh1, S. G. Firouz -
abadi2, N. Nikzat2, M. Falah2, S. Banihashemi2, M. Mohseni2, R. Vazifehmand2, 
P. Jamali2, P. Nekoei2, A. Grüters4, A. W. Kuss1, H. Najmabadi2;  
1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Genetics Re -
search Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Teh -
ran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics 
Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Paediatric Endocrinol -
ogy, Otto Heubner Centre for Paediatrics, Berlin, Germany.
Mental retardation (MR) is a common disorder with severe socio-eco -
nomic consequences. Most moderate and severe forms have genetic 
causes. These include cytogenetically visible chromosomal rearrange -
ments, submicroscopic deletions and duplications as well as X-linked 
gene defects, which have recently received much attention.
There is reason to believe that autosomal recessive MR (ARMR) is far 
more common than XLMR, but to date, no more than 3 ARMR genes 
have been identified. In part, this is due to small family sizes and low 
consanguinity rates in industrialized societies, which has greatly ham -
pered gene mapping and identification. These constraints do not exist 
in most Arabic populations, nor in Iran or Pakistan.
In 2003, we have set out to perform systematic clinical and molecular 
studies in large consanguineous Iranian families with several mentally 
retarded children. Here we report on the results of SNP array-based 
homozygosity in more than 120 families. So far we have identified 
12 novel loci for non-syndromic ARMR, 8 of which with a LOD score 
above 3. None of these intervals show overlap with the 3 previously 
known ARMR loci. Mutation screening has so far enabled us to identify 
2 novel genes.
The recent introduction of novel high-throughput sequencing technol -
ogies and our access to hundreds of consanguineous families with 
ARMR should enable us to greatly expand our ongoing search for 
novel ARMR genes. This collaborative effort will shed more light on 
brain function and will improve the prospects for molecular diagnosis, 
genetic counselling and eventually, therapy of mental retardation.P1021. Association of HLA allele and level of streptococcus 
mutans in saliva of normal and mentally retarded Egyptian 
children
S. El Hadidi1, M. Abdel Razzak1, F. S. Bayoumi1, I. R. Hussein1, S. E. Taha2, H. 
M. Abbas2, E. H. A. Abouel-Ezz1;  
1National Research Center (NRC), Cairo, Egypt, 2Oral and Dental Medicine 
- Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
Streptococcus Mutans (SM) is thought to play a major role in the 
etiology of dental caries. The aim of this study was to evaluate the 
relationship between HLA DRB1*0701-DRB1*0702 and DRB1*1101-
DRB1*1104 loci and levels of SM in normal and some mentally re -
tarded (MR) Egyptian children. Subjects and methods: subjects were 
68 normal and 58 MR children, their ages ranged between 6-14 years. 
Subjects were classified according to caries index into free (0 caries 
index), low ( 1-6 caries index) and high (>6 caries index). Results: 
in MR children high levels of SM (mean: 84±127) were positively as -
sociated with absence of HLA DRB1*1101-DRB1*1104 alleles com -
pared to normal children were high level of SM (mean 107±129) were 
positively associated with absence of DRB1*0701-DRB1*0702 allele, 
but not associated with DRB1*1101-DRB1*1104 alleles. A significant 
association was observed between caries level and HLA DRB1*0701-
DRB1*0702 in MR children. No significant association was observed 
between DRB1*1101-DRB1*1104 allele and caries level in both 
groups. In conclusion, these results support the hypothesis of an as -
sociation between HLA class II genetic profile and colonization of SM 
as pathogens for dental caries. However, further studies are needed to 
evaluate other HLA alleles as genetics variants in dental caries.
P1022. SNP association analysis of adipokines and metabolic 
traits in obesity and hypertension
P. Fortina1, C. Specchia2, W. Mettil1, K. Scott1, H. Rydbeck3, M. Devoto3, B. 
Falkner4;  
1Kimmel Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2University of Brescia, 
Brescia, Italy, 3The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United 
States, 4Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
Essential hypertension and obesity are multifactorial traits determined 
by a complex interplay of genetic and environmental factors. Obesity is 
frequently associated with elevated blood pressure (BP), insulin resis -
tance, dyslipidemia and abnormal glucose tolerance. However, many 
individuals with comparable degrees of obesity and similar environ -
mental exposure have normal levels of BP, lipids and glucose toler -
ance. This suggests the existence of underlying regulatory functions 
which might confer protection from expression of inflammatory me -
diators and cardiovascular injury in the obesity/normal BP phenotype. 
Adipokines are proteins produced by fat cells with pro or anti-inflam -
matory function. The purpose of this study was to determine if genes 
involved in adipokines regulation are associated with metabolic phe -
notypes in obesity and hypertension. A cohort of 275 African American 
unrelated subjects was studied. The European admixture in this cohort 
was estimated between 12.7 and 13.6%. Metabolic traits quantified 
included insulin sensitivity, lipids and urinary albumin. DNA was ex -
amined by DNA sequence analysis and TaqMan. SNPs of candidate 
genes including pro-inflammatory PAI1  and IL6, and anti-inflammatory 
adiponectin ( APMI ), as well as Calpain-10 were studied. Statistical 
analyses were performed by regression of the trait phenotypes on the 
groups defined by the SNP genotypes, adjusting for age, sex and BMI 
as covariates when appropriate. SNP 712 of the APMI  gene showed 
significant association with insulin resistance (p=0.005). Despite the 
relatively small sample, our results indicate that genes that regulate 
adipocyte function may have a regulatory role in the expression of 
metabolic traits in obesity associated hypertension.
P1023. Prevalence and heritability of the metabolic syndrome 
and individual components in a Dutch isolate: the Erasmus 
Rucphen Family study
P. Henneman1, Y. Aulchenko2, R. R. Frants1, K. Willems van Dijk3, B. A. Oos -
tra2, C. van Duijn2;  
1LUMC Human Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Epidemiology & Biosta -
tistics, Erasmus Medical Centre Rotterdam, The Netherlands, 3LUMC Human 
Genetics and Internal Medicine, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Objective: In western countries, the metabolic syndrome (MetS) is a 
growing cause of morbidity and mortality. The MetS includes both an 
environmental and genetic component. We aim to determine heritabil -Genetic analysis, linkage, and association21
ity and find novel loci for the MetS (IDF, 2003) and correlate inflamma -
tion and visceral obesity with MetS, in a Dutch isolate.
Methods: The Erasmus Rucphen Family study (ERF) consists of some 
3000 individuals that descend form a limited set of founders. Waist cir -
cumference (WC), blood pressure, HDL-C, triglycerides and glucose 
levels were obtained. Variance component analysis was applied to ex -
tended family data to test for evidence of heritability (SOLAR).
Results: The prevalence of MetS, according to the IDF definition, in 
the ERF cohort is 36.8% in males and 31.0% in females. Our results 
indicate that HDL-C and WC are the main contributors to the MetS. 
Heritability of the MetS (as binary trait) was 14.3% ( P < 0.0001). The 
heritability for the MetS corrected for household, decreased to 10.6% 
(P = 0.012). Also the heritability of individual components of MetS were 
analyzed (as quantative traits). The highest heritability was obtained 
for HDL-C (42.9%, P < 0.0001).
Discussion: The heritabilities of MetS in the ERF population are found 
to be highly significant. Moreover, our results indicate that the HDL-C 
component is a main contributor to the MetS and was found to have 
the highest individual heritability. Our data on prevalence and herita -
bility of the MetS, indicate that determining loci for MetS by linkage 
analysis, with emphasis on the individual traits, is feasible.
P1024. Homozygous silencing of the T-box transcription factor 
TBR2/EOMES  locus. Results in a microcephaly syndrome with 
polymicrogyria and corpus callosum agenesis
L. Baala1,2, S. Briault3, H. C. Etchevers2, F. Laumonnier3, A. Natiq1, J. Amiel2, 
N. Boddaert4, C. Picard5, A. Sbiti1, A. Asermouh6, T. Attié-Bitach2,7, F. Encha-
Razavi2,7, A. Munnich2,7, A. Sefiani1, S. Lyonnet2,7;  
1Dép. Génétique Médicale, Institut National d’Hygiène, Rabat, Morocco, 
2INSERM U-781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades (AP-HP), Paris, France, 
3INSERM U-619 Faculté de Médecine, Tours, France, 4Service de Radiologie 
Pédiatrique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades (AP-HP), Paris, France, 5Centre 
d’étude des Déficits Immunitaires, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades (AP-HP), 
Paris, France, 6Hôpital d’Enfants Avicenne, Rabat, Morocco, 7Université René 
Descartes, Paris, France.
Mechanisms regulating brain size during neurogenesis include the 
regulation of neural progenitor proliferation and migration. We report 
an autosomal recessive microcephaly syndrome co-segregating with 
a homozygous balanced translocation between chromosomes 3p and 
10q in a large inbred family. The translocation was found at the ho -
mozygous status in all affected individuals (46,XY,t(3;10)(p24;q23)2x), 
while unaffected parents were heterozygous. We established a physi -
cal and characterized the BACs that encompassed the breakpoints on 
3p24 and 10q23 (BAC RP11-9a14 and RP11-104H24). Interestingly, 
neither of the two translocation breakpoints disrupted a known or pre -
dicted gene coding sequence.
However, we showed that a position effect at the breakpoint on chro -
mosome 3 silences the Tbox-brain2 /Eomesodermin ( TBR2/EOMES)  
transcript. Together with its expression pattern in the developing hu -
man brain, our data suggest an involvement of TBR2/EOMES  in neu -
ronal division and/or migration. Thus, mutations in not only mitotic and 
apoptotic proteins but also transcription factors may be responsible for 
malformative microcephaly syndromes.
P1025. Identification of a gene involved in hereditary microcytic 
anemia due to defective iron absorption in a Sardinian family
M. A. Melis1, M. Cau1, R. Congiu1, G. Sole2, A. Cao2, R. Galanello1;  
1University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 2CNR, Cagliari, Italy.
We report the study of a large sardinian family where five patients 
show iron deficiency resulting in microcytic hypochromic anemia, not 
responsive to oral treatment but partially responsive to parenteral treat -
ment. Known causes of hereditary microcytic anemia such as thalas -
semia, hemorrages, gastrointestinal disorders have been excluded by 
specific tests. By the pedigree analysis it seems an autosomal reces -
sive disorder. Since clinical data suggest that it could be a defect of 
iron metabolism, especially a defect of iron absorption and/or mobiliza -
tion of intracellular iron storage, initially we studied all the known gene 
involved in iron metabolism (Tf, TfR, ZIRTL, HJV and DMT1). Linkage 
analysis for these genes resulted negative, therefore we supposed 
that a different gene could be involved. Wide genome screening using 
300 microsatellite markers was performed and a chromosome 22q13 
region showing 5.6 multipoint LOD SCORE near marker D22S1177 
and 5.4 multipoint LOD SCORE near marker D22S423. This region spans 7.2 cM and the affected subjects share two homozygous tracts. 
No recombination has been observed.
A further linkage analysis based on SNPs study was performed to bet -
ter define the locus limits. This study confirmed the homozygous tract 
but did not allow to narrow the interval of interest. These results rein -
force the hypotesis that the locus for hereditary microcytic anemia is 
on chromosome 22q13.
The 7.2 cM critical region of chromosome has been completely se -
quenced and is available from published databases. A large number of 
genes have already been characterized in the region.
P1026. Exclusion of ADAMTS10 gene for the isolated 
microspherophakia in a consanguineous multiplex Tunisian 
family
F. Ouechtati1, S. Ben Yahia2, I. Chouchen1, S. Chakroun1, M. Kheirallah2, S. 
Abdelhak1;  
1UR26/04 Molecular investigation of genetic orphan diseases, Pasteur Institute 
of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Fattouma Bourguiba 
Hospital, Monastir, Tunisia.
Microspherophakia (OMIM 251750) is an eye disease characterized 
by a small and spherical crystalline lens with increased anteropos -
terior thickness. Autosomal recessive Weill Marchesani Syndrome is 
due to mutations within ADAMTS10 gene. The locus responsible for 
the isolated form of microspherophakia is still unknown because the 
reported cases are rare and sporadic. A consanguineous family with 
two patients affected with isolated microspherophakia has been identi -
fied in Central Tunisia. In order to check if ADAMTS10 gene is involved 
in microspherophakia in this family, a linkage analysis was performed 
using microsatellite markers flanking this gene. Genetic investigation 
showed an exclusion of linkage between ADAMTS10 gene and the 
disease locus in this family. This result suggests that isolated micro -
spherophakia is not an allelic disorder to Weill Marchesani Syndrome.
P1027. Mitochondrial mutations in maternally-inherited non-
syndromic deafness: whole-mitochondrial-genome screening 
using a microarray resequencing mitochondrial DNA chip
M. Leveque1, S. Marlin1, L. Jonard1, V. Procaccio2, P. Reynier3, S. Baulande4, 
R. Couderc1, E. Garabedian1, C. Petit5, D. Feldmann1, F. Denoyelle1;  
1AP-HP, Trousseau, Paris, France, 2Université de Califormie, Irvine, CA, United 
States, 3INSERM U688, Angers, France, 4PartnerChip, Evry, France, 5INSERM 
U587, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations have been implicated in non-
syndromic hearing loss, with various degrees of penetrance. As only 
part of the mitochondrial genome is usually explored in deaf patients, 
their prevalence is probably under-estimated. Among 1350 families 
with sensorineural deafness collected through a French collaborative 
network, we selected 29 large families with clear maternal inheritance 
and screened them for the known mtDNA mutations in 12S rRNA, 
tRNAser(UCN), and tRNAleu(UUN) genes. When no mutation could 
be identified, a whole-mitochondrial genome screen was performed 
using the MitoChip v2.0 microarray resequencing chip (Affymetrix, 
Inc). Known mtDNA mutations were found in 9 of the 29 families: 
A1555G in five, T7511C in two, 7472insC and A3243G in one each. 
In the remaining 20 families, the resequencing Mitochip detected 258 
mitochondrial homoplasmic variants and 107 potentially heteroplasmic 
variants. The more likely pathogenic variants are displayed based on 
allelic frequency and conservation between species. The whole-ge -
nome analysis elicited 5 additional families with a possibly pathogenic 
mitochondrial DNA variant: T669C, C1537T, G8078A, G12236A, and 
G15077A. These results indicate that the new MitoChip platform is a 
rapid and reliable tool for (the) identification of new mtDNA mutations, 
whether in deafness or other mtDNA-related diseases.
P1028. Multiple Ligation Probe Amplification analysis in the DMD  
gene: hidden results
M. Rodriguez , J. Juan, L. Gonzalez-Quereda, S. Gutierrez, M. Baiget, P. Gal -
lano;  
Genetics Dept, Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD/BMD) are the 
most common form of dystrophinopathies, with a reported incidence of 
1:3500 and 1:18000 birth males repectively.
About 65% of DMD/BMD cases are attributable to large deletions of 
the DMD gene, whereas the remaining cases are caused by duplica -Genetic analysis, linkage, and association22
tions or point mutations of the gene. More than 98% of deletions of the 
DMD  gene are readily detectable in affected males by using a PCR 
reaction. We routenly use three multiplex PCR reactions to analyse 
25 exons and the muscle and brain promoters. Recently, we started 
to use the Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) 
technique, with the two commercial dystrophin probe mixes (P034/
P035 MRC Holland). This system allows the simultaneous hybridisa -
tion and ligation of several probes, followed by PCR amplification and 
analysis by capillary electrophoresis. We analysed with this technique 
200 affected males and 60 female relatives for deletions and duplica -
tions detection.
An sporadic DMD patient, presenting absence of dystrophin in the im -
munohystochemistry, was analyzed firstable with by multiplex PCR 
and no deletion was observed. Subsequently a deletion of exon 12 
was observed with the P035 MLPA probe mix. The sequencing of 
exon 12 showed the c.1438G>T, p.Gly480X mutation. This mutation 
changes the penultimate nucleotide of the ligation site sequence and 
consequently originates an apparent absence of exon 12.
In case of a single exon deletion pattern in MLPA reaction, it is manda -
tory to perform the multiplex PCR and the sequencing of the exon in 
order to check a point mutation.
P1029. High prevalence of GCK mutations and low prevalence of 
HNF1A mutations in Italian MODY patients
N. Calza1, V. Mantovani1,2, P. Garagnani1,3, M. Cenci2, D. Bastia1, S. Salardi4, C. 
Monciotti5, D. Luiselli3, G. Romeo2;  
1Centro Ricerca Biomedica Applicata Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, 
Italy, 2U.O. Genetica Medica Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 3An-
tropologia Molecolare Dip. Biologia Evoluzionistica Sperimentale UniversitÃ di 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4U.O. Endocrinologia Pediatrica Policlinico S. Orsola-
Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 5Dip. Pediatria UniversitÃ di Padova, Padova, Italy.
Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically hetero -
geneous group of disorders characterised by early onset non-insulin-
dependent diabetes mellitus, autosomal dominant inheritance and pri -
mary defect in pancreatic beta cells function. Six genes have been as -
sociated with different subtypes of the disease, but 15-20% of MODY 
families do not exhibit any mutations in these genes. MODY2, caused 
by glucokinase (GCK) mutations and MODY3, caused by hepatocytes 
nuclear factor (HNF1A) mutations, are the most common forms; while 
MODY1, 4, 5 and 6 are rare disorders. Aim of our study is to assess the 
relative prevalence of MODY2 and MODY3 in Italian patients.
96 unrelated probands fitting MODY criteria were screened for GCK 
mutations and, when negative, for HNF1A mutations. The analysis 
was performed by DHPLC and direct sequencing. Mutations in the 
GCK gene were detected in 33 of 96 (34.3%) families. 7 mutations 
were previously undescribed: 3 missense ( E372D, C382X, H424Y), 
2 deletions (Q106_M107 delinsL and G295fsdel CA), 1 splicing muta -
tion (IVS7+2T>C) and a stop codon suppression (X465insQ465+1_
X+145). Mutations in HNF1A gene were detected in 3 (3,1%) pro -
bands, consisting in 2 new missense mutations (R159P and E508K) 
and the known G31D. All mutations co-segregated with affected family 
members, except for the de novo  R159P mutation.
Our study indicates that defects in GCK/MODY2 gene are a very com -
mon cause of MODY in Italian population, whereas HNF1A/MODY3 
has a lower prevalence. Our data broadens our knowledge of the natu -
rally occurring GCK and HNF1A mutations repertoire.
P1030. Resolving a genetic paradox for Kostmann disease 
through PGD
M. Malcov , D. Ben-Yosef, I. Roitberg, T. Cohen, T. Frumkin, A. Amit, Y. Yaron;  
Tel-Aviv Sourasky medical center, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Introduction: Kostmann disease is a congenital immunodeficiency 
syndrome amenable to bone marrow transplantation. The family de -
scribed, has a son affected with this disease. Genetic analysis identi -
fied a known dominant mutation in the ELA2 gene in the affected child, 
but also in the asymptomatic father. The parents requested preimplan -
tation genetic diagnosis (PGD), coupled with HLA matching, to obtain 
a healthy suitable donor for the affected child.
Method: A PGD protocol was developed for the known mutation in 
the ELA2 gene. The protocol was based on multiplex nested PCR for 
direct analysis of the mutation, flanking polymorphic markers in the 
ELA2 gene locus and HLA typing. The protocol was calibrated and 
applied to single leukocytes isolated from the father, the mother and the affected child.
Results: The amplification efficiency of the mutation was >90% in sin -
gle leukocytes from the affected child but only 67% in the father, sug -
gesting somatic mosaicism for the mutation. Analysis of single haploid 
sperm cells from the father, using the same protocol, demonstrated 3 
different sperm-cell populations: 1) sperm cells harboring the ELA2 
mutation with the suspected allele, shared with the affected child, 2) 
Sperm cells without the ELA2 mutation and the normal haplotype, and 
3) sperm cells without the ELA2 mutation but with suspected allele, 
shared with the affected child.
Conclusion: This was taken as evidence of somatic mosaicism for the 
ELA2 mutation in the father, explaining why he is asymptomatic. These 
data were also taken into consideration when deciding which embryos 
to transfer.
P1031. A novel locus for Autosomal Dominant Distal Motor 
Neuronopathy maps to chromosome 4q-ter
A. Magariello1, L. Citrigno1, L. Passamonti1, A. Patitucci1, F. L. Conforti1, A. L. 
Gabriele1, R. Mazzei1, T. Sprovieri1, C. Ungaro1, M. Bellesi2, M. Muglia1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neurologi -
cal Sciences, University Ancona, Ancona, Italy.
Distal hereditary motor neuronopathy (dHMN), also known as distal 
spinal muscular atrophy, is a rare genetically and clinically heteroge -
neous early-onset disorder, characterized by weakness and wasting of 
distal limb muscles with possible pyramidal dysfunction, in absence of 
overt sensory abnormalities. To date nine and three loci for autosomal 
dominant dHMN and autosomal recessive dHMN have been described 
respectively. We have previously reported a four generation kindred 
characterized by atrophy and weakness of distal leg muscles asso -
ciated with pyramidal features without sensory abnormalities. Link -
age analysis excluded association to all the known loci for autosomal 
dominant dHMN suggesting further locus heterogeneity for dHMN. A 
genome wide search was performed by using 206 microsatellite mark -
ers from the ABI PRISM Linkage Mapping Set LD 20. All genotyped 
markers generated negative or nonsignificant LOD scores at all re -
combination fractions tested, except for markers on chromosome 4. A 
maximum LOD score of 3.19 at marker D4S408 was obtained, provid -
ing evidence of linkage between the disease and this region. All af -
fected individuals in the family shared a commom haplotype between 
D4S1552 and D4S426 ,which allowed the identification of a 20 cM 
interval. The locus region contains many genes, including SNX25, a 
member of the sortin nexin family. This gene was screened by using 
DHPLC followed by sequencing of the variants. A nucleotide variation 
was identified in the IVS13, but it was also present in the unaffected 
members of the family suggesting that it is a polymorphism.
P1032. Association of mtDNA polymorphism with hypertension 
and its complications
S. V. Buikin1, M. V. Golubenko1, V. V. Pogrebenkova1, K. V. Puzyrev2, I. V. 
Tsymbalyuk3, V. P. Puzyrev1,3;  
1State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 
2State Research Institute of Cardiology, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Siberian 
State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Hypertension is among most frequent cardiovascular diseases. It 
is known that failing of energetic processes in cardiomyocyte mito -
chondira plays substantial role in pathogenesis of cardiological dis -
eases. Mitochondrial DNA contains genes which encode subunits of 
electron-transfer chain. Polymorphisms in these genes may influence 
cardiovascular system function. To evaluate associations of mtDNA 
polymorphisms with development of arterial hypertension, we have 
studied sample of 147 patients (51 females, 96 males) with hyper -
tension and 137 healthy Russian individuals (81 females, 50 males). 
Mean age in the samples was 48,3 +5,5 and 47,6 +10,2 years, respec -
tively. In the groups, ultrasound examination and 24-hours monitoring 
of blood pressure was performed. Statistical analysis has shown that 
in the hypertensive patients, prevalence of polymorphisms in positions 
16292-16298 was revealed, so this locus might be designated as risk 
factor for hypertension (OR=1,86; p=0,046). Frequencies of mitochon -
drial polymorphisms were compared in the groups of patients with or 
without left ventricular hypertrophy. It has been found that haplogroup 
H was more frequent in hypertensive patients without hypertrophy 
(OR=0,36; p=0,043) whereas haplogroup T was more frequent in the 
patients with hypertrophy (OR=9,33; p=0,018). The findings suggest Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
that carrying of particular mtDNA haplogroup may have some impact 
on energetic processes and may be a predisposition factor for arterial 
hypertension and its complications. The work was supported by partial 
support of Russian Foundation for Basic research (RFBR) grants 04-
04-48792, 04-04-48732, 06-04-08326.
P1033. Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome
S. Seneca1, I. Liebaers1, L. Van Haute1, R. Van Coster2, J. Smet2, G. Van 
Goethem3, A. Löfgren4, J. Jaeken5, M. Nassogne6, B. François7, L. Diogo8, W. 
Lissens1, A. Meulemans1, L. De Meirleir9;  
1UZ Brussel, Center for Medical Genetics, Brussels, Belgium, 2UGent, Pediatric 
Neurology & Metabolism, Ghent, Belgium, 3University of Antwerp, Department 
of Neurology and Neuromuscular Reference Center, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Uni-
versity of Antwerp, Department of Molecular Genetics-VIB, Antwerp, Belgium, 
5University of Leuven, Department of Pediatrics, Leuven, Belgium, 6Saint-Luc 
Academic Hospital, Departments of Pediatrics, Brussels, Belgium, 7Clinique de 
l’Espérance, Pinocchio Centre, Montegnée, Belgium, 8Hospital Pediatrico, Uni -
dade de Doenças Metabolicas, Coimbra, Portugal, 9UZ Brussel, Department of 
Pediatric Neurology, Brussels, Belgium.
The mitochondrial genome (mt) is a small (16.5kb) DNA molecule that 
is normally present in multiple copies in individual mitochondria. MtDNA 
depletion syndrome (MDDS) is a recently recognized disorder involv -
ing a quantitative defect of mtDNA, that is inherited in an autosomal-
recessive mode. The patients are born after an uneventful pregnancy 
and often normal at birth, but deteriorate in the neonatal period or early 
childhood. There are two main clinical presentations : myopathic and 
hepatocerebral. In the first group children usually present with devast -
ing myopathy and neurological abnormalities. In the second condition 
patients suffer from early progressive hepatic failure with hypotonia, 
hypoglycaemia, lactic acidosis and progressive neurodegeneration as 
described in Alpers syndrome. We used real-time PCR techniques to 
quantify the level of mtDNA in fibroblast, blood, and muscle or liver tis -
sue of patients suspected clinically and on the basis of the biochemical 
data. Of all patients clinical presentation of MDDS, mtDNA depletion 
was documented in ten. Molecular analysis of known nuclear mutant 
genes was undertaken and the exons of the TK2, DGUOK and polG 
genes were sequenced. In two patients DGUOK gene mutations were 
revealed, while in four other patients recessive polG mutations were 
seen. It is known that mutations in these genes count only for a frac -
tion of MDDS cases. Recently mutations in two other nuclear genes, 
SUCLA and MPV17, segregating with mtDNA depletion were identified 
in patients with MDDS.
P1034. Myosin IXB: Initial evidence for association to multiple 
sclerosis in Finnish MS study sample
A. Kemppinen1,2, M. Daly3, A. Palotie4, J. Saarela1,2, L. Peltonen1,2;  
1Dept of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 
2Research Program in Molecular Medicine at Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki, 
Finland, 3Medical and Population Genetics Program, Broad Institute of MIT 
and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Finnish Genome Center, Univ of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disease with a dis -
tinct autoimmune component affecting the myelin of CNS. Our group 
has previously identified MS-associated allelic haplotypes of the gene 
encoding protein kinase C alpha (PRKCA) in Finnish and Canadian 
populations. In vitro evidence suggests that PRKCA is a downstream 
target of RhoA in a pathway regulating blood brain barrier permeabil -
ity. In this pathway, RhoA is regulated by myosin IX class proteins, 
of which MYO9B was recently associated with two autoimmune dis -
eases, celiac disease and inflammatory bowel disease.
We genotyped 21 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), covering 
the MYO9B gene, in the nationwide collection of 970 Finnish MS fami -
lies. Two SNPs (rs17533945 and rs12986130), located 22 kb apart 
in introns 2 and 10, provided evidence for linkage (Pseudomarker, 
Linkage p-values 0,0004 and 0,001, respectively). rs12986130 also 
showed evidence for association assuming linkage in a set of fami -
lies stratified based on the PRKCA haplotype (Pseudomarker LD as -
suming Linkage p-value 0,001; Gamete competition p-value 0,002). 
The results lend support to our hypotheses that PRKCA and MYO9B 
may operate in the same biological pathway, potentially relevant for 
the disease pathogenesis of MS. The replication effort is ongoing in 
217 MS trios and 3000 case-control samples from Denmark, Sweden 
and Norway.P1035. Sequencing: a time consuming but robust highway to 
multifactorial diseases associated polymorphisms
I. Cournu-Rebeix1, M. C. Babron2, E. Genin2, L. Guillot-Noël1, F. Clerget-Dar -
poux2, B. Fontaine1,3;  
1INSERM UMRS546, Paris, France, 2INSERM UMRS535, Villejuif, France, 
3Univ P et M Curie, Paris, France.
The HapMap project has characterized sets of Single Nucleotide poly -
morphisms (SNPs) to be picked for disease association studies. How -
ever, divergence of opinion still exists on how to optimise the selection 
of markers to capture the genetic variation underlying complex traits.
Cytokine gene polymorphisms are known to influence susceptibility 
and disease course of many autoimmune diseases. Interleukin 4 (IL4), 
Interleukin 13 (IL13) and their receptor (IL4R) have been partially in -
vestigated as candidate genes for MS by linkage and association stud -
ies with contradictory results.
In order to perform an exhaustive investigation of Il4-IL13 cluster and 
IL4R gene polymorphisms in susceptibility to MS we sequenced the 
complete region of each gene (promoter, exons and introns), in col -
laboration with the National Center of Sequencing (Evry, France) in 
128 MS trio families.
Among the 145 SNPs within the IL13-IL4 cluster, 63 were newly identi -
fied by our study. Note that 54 previously reported SNPs were mono -
morphic in our sample. Using pairwise linkage disequilibrium (LD) we 
determined that 93 SNPs would need to be genotyped to represent 
the 145 SNPs with r2=0.8. Concerning IL4R gene, 71 sites were newly 
identified, 44 previously reported are not polymorphic in our sample, 
leading to a total of 157 SNPs which can be tagged by 74 SNPs.
Comparison with the tags proposed by HapMap is in progress. Pre -
liminary results show that at least 10 of the 43 common SNPs of the 
IL13-IL4 cluster would not have been tagged if markers were selected 
based on the HapMap CEU data.
P1036. Investigation of the IL4-IL13/IL4R pathway in French 
Multiple Sclerosis patients
M. C. Babron1,2, E. Génin1,2, I. Cournu-Rebeix3,4, H. Perdry1,2, F. Clerget-Dar -
poux1,2, B. Fontaine3,5;  
1INSERM U535, Villejuif, France, 2Univ Paris Sud, Villejuif, France, 3INSERM 
U546, Paris, France, 4Univ Pierre et Marie Curie 6, Paris, France, 5Fédération 
de Neurologie- Hop de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a multifactorial disease, in which genetic 
and environmental factors intervene. Apart from HLA, little is known 
on the other genetic factors involved. Two genome scans [Broadley et 
al, 2001; Babron et al, 2004] suggested the presence of a risk factor in 
the chromosomal region 5q31. The location of the IL4 and IL13 genes, 
coding for cytokines involved in the immune response, in this region 
makes them good candidates for susceptibility to MS. Previous stud -
ies on type I diabetes, another autoimmune disease have suggested 
interactions between IL4/IL13 and their receptor IL4R [Bugawan et al, 
2003].
We investigated the role of this pathway in a sample of 124 French 
trios (an affected child and his two parents). Sequencing of all the in -
dividuals allowed identification of a total of 249 SNPS. Among them, 
14, 23 and 86 for IL13, IL4 and IL4R, respectively, had a minor allele 
frequency greater than 1%. None of these, taken individually, showed 
significant association with MS.
However, in multifactorial diseases such as MS, combinations of two 
or more variants in the same pathway may be involved. Thus, as pro -
posed by Jannot et al [2003], we investigated combinations of two 
variants, one in IL4 or IL13 and one in IL4R. Among the 3219 combi -
nations tested, 12 were significant at the nominal 1% level, and were 
more significant than each SNP analysed separately. These combina -
tions will need to be tested in independent samples for replication.
We thank REFGENSEP for data sharing and ARSEP for funding.
P1037. A Multiple Imputation approach to test the role of 
the CD28-CTLA4-ICOS gene cluster in Multiple Sclerosis 
susceptibility
P. Croiseau1,2, M. Alizadeh3, M. Babron2,1, F. Clerget-Darpoux2,1, G. Semana3, 
E. Génin2,1;  
1Univ Paris-Sud, UMR-S535, Villejuif, F-94817, France, 2INSERM, Villejuif, F-
94817, France, 3UPRES EA 1257, Faculté de médecine, Rennes, France.
Genes involved in Multiple Sclerosis (MS) are difficult to identify be -
cause of their small effect and their possible interaction with other Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
factors. This is well illustrated by the numerous studies of the role of 
CTLA4 in MS, which showed an association with the CTLA4 gene in 
three cohorts (France, Italy and Portugal) in the subset of patients car -
rying the HLA-DRB1*1501 allele (Alizadeh et al, 2003) whereas this 
association was not replicated in a British sample (Roxburgh et al, 
2006). However, since the CTLA4 gene is located close to two other 
genes, CD28 and ICOS, also involved in the immune response, it is 
possible that the former association detected reflects an association 
with other polymorphism(s) in any of these three genes. To study this 
hypothesis, 19 markers spanning this cluster were tested in a sample 
of 450 French MS cases-parent trios. Since these markers were not 
consistently genotyped among the different families, power to detect 
the association was not the same at the different markers and compar -
ison was therefore very difficult. To help solve this problem, a multiple 
imputation approach (Croiseau et al, 2006) has been used. After a 
complete association study including a stepwise approach and tests of 
interaction, no marker other than the one previously reported in CTLA4 
showed significant association with MS. However, since only a few 
markers in this cluster have been investigated, it is difficult to rule out 
the possibility of their involvement in MS.
We thank the REFGENSEP, coordinated by Bertrand Fontaine for data 
sharing.
P1038. Searching for factors modifying disease expression: 
Application to Multiple Sclerosis.
H. Perdry1,2, M. Babron1,2, F. Clerget-Darpoux1,2, REFGENSEP;  
1INSERM, UMR-S 535, Villejuif, F-94817, France, 2Univ. Paris Sud, Villejuif, 
F-94817, France.
A modifying locus is a polymorphic locus, distinct from the disease 
locus, which leads to differences in the disease phenotype, either by 
modifying the penetrance of the disease allele, or by modifying the ex -
pression of the disease. The effect of such a locus is a clinical hetero -
geneity that can be reflected by the values of an appropriate covariate, 
such as the age of onset, the severity of the disease.
We designe the Ordered Transmission Disequilibrium Test (OTDT) to 
test for a relation between the clinical heterogeneity, expressed by the 
covariate, and marker genotypes of a candidate gene. The method 
applies to trio families with one affected child and his parents. Each 
family member is genotyped at a bi-allelic marker M of a candidate 
gene. To each family is associated a covariate value; the families are 
ordered on the values of this covariate. As the TDT (Spielman et al, 
1993), the OTDT is based on the observation of the transmission rate 
T of a given allele at M. The OTDT aims to detect whether T depends 
on the value of the covariate.
We illustrate this method on Multiple Sclerosis trio families ascertained 
by REFGENSEP (Réseau Français d‘Études Génétique sur la Sclérose 
En Plaques) which are genotyped for several candidate genes. The 
EDSS (Expanded Disability Status Scale) of 268 patients is used to 
compute the MSSS (Multiple Sclerosis Severity Score)(Roxburgh et 
al, 2005), which we use as a covariate.
Acknowledgments: H Perdry is funded by ARSEP.
P1039. A simple model for a complex disease: PLOSL and 
multiple sclerosis - are two demyelinating diseases related?
A. Sulonen1, S. Kallio1, A. Palotie2, J. Saarela1, L. Peltonen1,3;  
1Dept of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 
2Finnish Genome Center, Univ of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Dept of Medical 
Genetics, Univ of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
PLOSL is a recessively inherited disease characterised by demyelin -
ation in the CNS and bone cysts. The causative mutation in Finnish 
patients is a 5.3 kb deletion in TYROBP on 19q13.12, while mutations 
in TREM2 on 6p21.1, encoding another molecule in a receptor com -
plex with TYROBP, have been identified in PLOSL patients from other 
populations. Demyelination in the CNS and the role of TYROBP and 
TREM2 in inflammatory cell activation makes PLOSL-genes potential 
candidates behind demyelination in MS.
Since all the Hapmap SNPs in TYROBP or TREM2 were not polymor -
phic or had very low minor allele frequency among Finns, we re-se -
quenced parts of the TYROBP gene in 12 patients and identified four 
novel SNPs. These SNPs and additional 24 polymorphic SNPs flank -
ing the genes were genotyped in 970 Finnish MS families. To increase 
the allelic information content, two flanking STS markers (D19S876 
and D6S1575) were also genotyped. Pseudomarker program was used to monitor for linkage and association. Eight SNPs mapping to 
6p21.1 provided some evidence for linkage, the highest LOD (2.51) 
observed with the SNP rs6923053 located 24 kb from TREM2 and 
8.5Mb from the MS associated HLA region. Polymorphic variations in 
TYROBP region showed no evidence for linkage or association in MS 
families. We conclude that although the exceptionally low number of 
SNPs in both TYROBP and TREM2 prevent final conclusions, no obvi -
ous relation with the increased risk of MS for the carriers of specific 
alleles of these demyelination-associated genes was observed in this 
set of Finnish MS families.
P1040. The association of single nucleotide E-selectin gene 
polymorphism with Multiple Sclerosis
V. Andreoli1, P. Valentino2, F. Trecroci1, F. Condino1, A. La Russa1, F. Scionti1, 
R. Cittadella1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Pianolago di 
Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catan -
zaro, Italy.
E-selectin (endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule; ELAM-1), a cell 
surface glycoprotein expressed on endothelial cells, is an important 
adhesion molecule involved in lymphocyte recruitment into the brain, 
which represents a crucial step in the pathogenesis of multiple scle -
rosis (MS). Several polymorphisms have been described within the 
ELAM-1 gene. A single nucleotide polymorphism in the coding region 
of the gene (A561C) causes a conservative change of a serine with 
an arginine at codon 128 (S128R). Previous study showed that the 
presence of this variation confers not only an increased capability of 
binding lymphocytes, but also a different specificity in their recruitment. 
Thus, the S128R E-selectin molecules may be an important variable 
with regard to susceptibility to MS. Two hundred ninety-two patients 
were genotyped for the presence of this polymorphism in the ELAM-1 
gene, through a case-control study involving Southern Italian patients 
(Calabria region) with definite MS, and 245 age and sex-matched 
healthy controls from the same geographical area. Our results showed 
no significant differences in the allele and genotype distribution of the 
ELAM-1 polymorphism between MS patients and controls. In addition, 
in patients no difference was observed in the age of MS onset, accord -
ing to ELAM-1 genotypes; furthermore, dividing patients according to 
disease type, EDSS, or age and gender did not yield significant differ -
ences for the examined polymorphism. The current findings demon -
strate that ELAM-1 gene is not a major susceptibility or modifying gene 
for MS in Southern Italian population.
P1041. Chromosome 19q13 and multiple sclerosis
A. Bonetti ;  
Biomedicum-Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Previous studies have suggested a role of allelic variation on chromo -
some 19q13 in multiple sclerosis (MS) susceptibility. The object of the 
study was to test three subregions of 19q13 for association with MS 
in 440 families using the transmission disequilibrium test. A marker in 
the 19q13.1 area showed nominally significant association with MS. 
This marker resides at a suggestive linkage peak, and associated with 
MS in a previous Italian study. Another association was found with an 
APOE haplotype on 19q13.2, supported also by a separate case-con -
trol analysis. Previous suggestions on ILT6 deficiency or association 
with D19S585 on 19q13.3-q13.4 were not replicated in this study.
These results show that two subregions of chromosome 19q13 are 
associated with MS warrating further studies on their implication with 
the disease .
P1042. NFATC4 gene variation is associated with muscle fiber 
composition of athletes
J. V. Shikhova1, I. I. Ahmetov1, E. V. Lyubaeva2, I. V. Astratenkova1, O. L. Vino -
gradova2, V. A. Rogozkin1;  
1St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2SRC Institute for Biomedical Problems of the Russian Acad. Sci., 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
There is strong relationship between muscle fiber type distribution and 
human physical performance. Studies reveal that skeletal muscle can 
exhibit a high or a low percentage of type I fibers. It has been shown 
recently that the genetic variation component for the proportion of type 
I fibers in human muscles is of the order of 40 to 50%. Calcium/calci -
neurin/NFAT pathway has been suggested to play a role in the regula -Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
tion of several slow fiber-specific genes. To investigate the question 
of the influence of NFATC4 gene polymorphism on the proportion of 
fibers types of m. vastus lateralis, we have analyzed the muscle biop -
sies obtained from 27 elite Russian athletes (all-round speed skaters). 
M. vastus lateralis was chosen for muscle biopsy because of great 
individual variability of muscle fiber type composition (i.e. 5-90% for 
type I fiber). The immunoperoxidase technique was employed for im -
munohistochemical identification of myosin isoforms. Fiber distribution 
was expressed as a ratio of the number of fibers of each type in a sec -
tion to the total number of fibers. DNA was extracted from mouthwash 
samples. NFATC4 gene Gly160Ala polymorphism was determined 
by PCR-RLFP. NFATC4 Ala allele frequency in athletes was 48.1%. 
Mean percentages of type I fiber in Ala/Ala homozygotes were signifi -
cantly higher than in NFATC4 Gly allele carriers (Ala/Ala - 74.2±2.8%, 
Gly/Ala+Gly/Gly - 63.1±2.3%; p=0.019). We speculate that Gly160Ala 
substitution in NFATC4 is associated with increased transcript activ -
ity. Thus, NFATC4 Gly160Ala polymorphism is associated with muscle 
fiber composition in athletes.
P1043. The -1159 A/C polymorphism of interleukin-12B 
gene in myocardial infarction in Russians and Tatars from 
Bashkortostan
G. Tulyakova1, T. Nasibullin1, A. Zakirova2, O. Mustafina1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir 
State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Objective: Inflammation plays an important role in the pathogenesis of 
atherosclerosis. The aim of this study was to test whether the -1159 A/
C polymorphism of the interleukin-12B gene (IL12B) is associated with 
myocardial infarction (MI) in Russians and Tatars from Bashkortostan 
region of Russia.
Methods: The -1159 A/C polymorphism of IL12B gene was studied by 
polymerase chain reaction - restriction fragment length polymorphism 
method in 306 male patients with MI and 245 healthy controls from 
Bashkortostan region of Russia. For comparison of genotype and al -
lele frequencies between the patients and the controls we used two-
tailed Fisher test and odds ratio (OR).
Results: Genotype frequencies for IL12B gene polymorphism in Rus -
sian controls: 55 A homozygotes (53.4%), 39 A/C heterozygotes 
(37.86%), 9 C homozygotes (8.74%), and in Tatar controls 64 (60.95%), 
34 (32.38%) and 7 (6.67%), respectively, and were similar to those re -
ported for Italian Caucasian healthy controls. In the MI patients, the 
genotype frequencies in Russians were 125 A/A (65.45%), 50 A/C 
(26.18%), 16 C/C (8.38%), and in Tatars 61 (53.04%), 44 (38.26%) 
and 10 (8.70%), respectively.
No significant differences in the genotype and allele frequencies were 
found between the Tatar patients and the control group. In Russian 
patients the frequencies of the A/A genotype were significantly higher 
than in the control group (P=0.046, OR=1.65).
Conclusion: Our results suggest that IL12B gene polymorphism may 
be a genetic risk factor for the development of MI in Russian patients.
P1044. A family-based test of association between alleles at the 
5‘ UTR polymorphism of the myocilin (MYOC) gene and high 
myopia in subjects from the UK
T. Zayats1, J. A. Guggenheim1, R. Creer1, H. Williams2, G. Kirov2, M. J. Owen2;  
1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Cardiff University, Neuropsycho -
logical Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
Purpose: Mutations in the myocilin gene (MYOC) on chromosome 1 
can cause juvenile-onset open-angle glaucoma and are associated 
with 2-4% of cases of primary open angle glaucoma in adults. Three 
previous studies (Wu et al.  (1999), Leung et al.  (2000), Tang et al.  
(2004)) have tested for association between MYOC polymorphisms 
and high myopia. For a dinucleotide repeat polymorphism in the 5’UTR 
(untranslated region), 2 of these studies reported a significant asso -
ciation.
Methods: DNA was collected from 96 high myopes (≤-6.00 D) and 
both their parents. The polymorphism in the 5’UTR and another in the 
3’UTR of MYOC were genotyped using standard techniques. Associa -
tion was assessed using FBAT.
Results: For the 5’UTR polymorphism, 3 common (13, 14 and 15-
repeats) and 2 rare (12 and 16-repeats) alleles were found. FBAT 
showed weak evidence of decreased transmission of the 15-repeat 
allele (Z = -2.26, P = 0.02) when high myopia was considered as a dichotomous trait. However, after accounting for multiple testing, this 
result did not reach statistical significance. For the 3’UTR, no associa -
tion was detected.
Conclusion: Our findings do not support the hypothesis that MYOC 
is a high myopia susceptibility gene in Caucasian subjects. However, 
the pattern of allele transmissions was consistent with previous stu -
dies, and therefore it may be that our sample size was insufficient to 
disclose a real, yet small, relative risk at this locus. We are currently 
examining a larger sample to resolve whether MYOC polymorphisms 
impart an increased risk of high myopia in Caucasian subjects.
P1045. Intergenerational contraction of the CTG repeat in 
French-Canadian myotonic dystrophy (DM1)
J. Puymirat1, J. Mathieu2;  
1Unit of Human genetics, Sainte-Foy, PQ, Canada, 2Neuromuscular cllinics, 
Jonquiere, PQ, Canada.
The aim of this study is to determine the occurence of intergeneration -
al contraction of the CTG repeats and its recurrence among siblings in 
French-Canadian DM1 families. We examined 122 French-Canadian 
DM1 families. The contraction of the CTG repeats occurred in 4 fami -
lies (3,3 %) of paternal transmission while no contraction occurred in 
cases of maternal transmission. In family 1, the number of the CTG 
repeats was 650 for the father and 250 for all 4 affected children. In 
family 2, two brothers with 650 and 500 repeats had all DM1 offspring 
with CTG repeat contractions (210 and 210 CTG repeats for the first 
and, 160 and 350 CTG repeats for the second father). In family 3 and 
4, the fathers with 700 and 550 CTG repeats have DM1 offspring with 
230, 300 and 170 CTG repeats, respectively. In all cases, DM1 off -
spring had a less severe phenotype than the father. We did not ob -
serve a case with regression of CTG repeats and another with ex -
pansion within the same sibship. These observations indicate that:1) 
the frequency of intergenerational contraction of the repeats in DM1 
French-Canadian population is lower than that previously reported 
(6,4%) in other populations; 2) the paternal transmission of DM1 and 
the presence of CTG repeats contraction in a child greatly increase 
the probability of CTG repeat contraction in the other affected sibs; 3) 
large contractions are associated with a less severe phenotype than 
the transmitting parent’s phenotype. It may exist a familial paternal fac -
tor that restricts the expansion.
P1046. Simple genetic protocol for detection of normal and 
expanded alleles in myotonic dystrophy type 2
J. Sertic1, Z. Mitrovic2, R. Zrinski Topic1, M. Zagar2, J. Vlasic Tanaskovic3;  
1Clinical Institute of Laboratory Diagnosis, Zagreb University Hospital Center, 
Zagreb, Croatia, 2Department of Neurology, Zagreb University Hospital Center, 
Zagreb, Croatia, 3Medical Biochemistry Laboratory, Pula General Hospital, 
Pula, Croatia.
Myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2) is an autosomal dominant multisys -
temic disease which is caused by expansion of CCTG repeats in intron 
1 of ZNF9 gene on chromosome 3q21. The range of expansion varies 
widely, starting from 75 up to 11000 repeats. Such expansions can 
usually be detected by Southern blot after restriction enzyme digestion 
of genomic DNA. However, this method is time consuming, requires 
large amounts of genomic DNA and fails to detect approximately 20% 
of affected individuals. Therefore, the aim was to introduce a simple 
and non-radioactive method for molecular diagnosis of MD2. Our spe -
cially designed PCR-based protocol allows amplification of normal 
and very long repeat tracts that are visualized after oligonucleotide 
hybridization. Very low amounts of genomic DNA (as little as 30 ng) 
are needed for this method which is simple, relatively fast and thus 
reduces the cost of diagnostic laboratory processing of DM2 patients. 
We tested 78 patients showing different symptoms related to myotonic 
dystrophy but with negative test results for myotonic dystrophy type 1 
(DM1) as part of molecular diagnosis of DM2 in Croatia. DNA analysis 
confirmed mutation of ZNF9 gene in 8 patients. This result indicates 
that laboratories should establish a protocol for molecular genetic test -
ing of DM1 negative patients for a mutation causing DM2 due to their 
overlapping clinical symptoms.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
P1047. N-acetyltransferase 2 ( NAT2 ) gene polymorphisms 
in psoriasis and colon cancer patients from the Moscow 
population
Z. M. Kozhekbaeva1, O. A. Gra2, A. S. Glotov3, I. V. Goldenkova-Pavlova1, S. 
A. Bruskin1, E. V. Markarova4, E. S. Piruzyan1, T. V. Nasedkina2;  
1Vavilov Institute of General Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
2Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
3Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 4Center of Theoretical Problems of Physical and Chemical Pharma -
cology RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation.
N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) is one of the key enzymes of a phase II 
detoxification of xenobiotics, including carcinogens. The decrease in 
activity of NAT2 enzyme may correlate with accumulation of harmful 
intermediate metabolites and influence on the risk to develop different 
multifactorial diseases. NAT2 -biochip has been developed including 
17 SNP in the NAT2  gene, most significant for European populations 
(282C/T, 341T/C, 481C/T, 590G/A, 803A/G and 857G/A). The biochip 
has been tested on more than 450 clinical DNA samples of 166 pa -
tients with psoriasis, 104 patients with rectal cancer, 84 patients with 
various dermatological diseases and 99 healthy individuals. We found 
that patients with psoriasis and rectal cancer had the increased fre -
quency of mutation 282T comparing with population control (OR=1.3, 
p = 0.134 and OR = 1.58, p = 0.045, respectively). On the contrary, the 
mutation 481T had a reduced frequency in patients with psoriasis com -
paring with healthy controls (OR=0.89, p = 0.567). No differences have 
been found in distribution of the same mutations in male and female. 
Also patients with psoriasis and rectal cancer revealed the increase in 
frequency of 590A mutation in comparison with control group (OR = 
1.48, p = 0.055 and OR = 1.501, p = 0.0656, respectively). Thus, the 
data presented suggest association of separate polymorphic variants 
of gene NAT2  with such multifactorial diseases as psoriasis and rectal 
cancer.
The work has been particularly supported by a grant „Fundamental 
Science for Medicine“ from the Presidium of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences.
P1048. A new substitution in Aqp2  gene in a family with history 
of three affected children with Nephrogenic Diabetes Insipidus
N. Almadani1, V. Hadavi1, F. Afroozan1, R. Kariminejad1, D. G. Bichet2, H. 
Najmabadi1;  
1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Universite de Montreal,Hopital du Sacre-Coeur de 
Montreal, Montreal, PQ, Canada.
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) is characterized by inability to 
concentrate the urine, which results in polyuria (excessive urine pro -
duction) and polydipsia (excessive thirst). NDI is most commonly in -
herited in an X-linked manner (~90% of individuals), but can also be 
inherited in an autosomal recessive manner (~9% of individuals) or in 
an autosomal dominant manner (~1% of individuals). Autosomal NDI is 
caused by mutation in the gene encoding the aquaporin-2 water chan -
nel (Aqp2 ), which maps to chromosome 12q13.We report on a family 
with history of two daughters and a son affected with Nephrogenic dia -
betes insipidus, who developed the clinical and biochemical features 
of metabolic acidosis and hypernatremic dehydration with generalized 
hypotonia and moderate mental retardation in the first year of life. They 
suffered from unconsiousness spell, polyuria and polydypsia without 
any ophthalmologic cystinosis. Laboratory tests indicated severe ane -
mia, asotemia, thrombocytopenia and they died from the disease in 
the first 5 years of life.We determined by sequencing analysis that the 
two parents were both heterozygote for the G175R mutation in Aqp2  
gene. The mutation is already known but the base pair change is new. 
It is thus likely that the deceased infants were homozygotes for this 
mutation and suffered from repeated episodes of dehydration due to 
non-linked Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. The prenatal diagnosis for 
this family revealed that the fetus was heterozygote for the same mu -
tation.
P1049. MGP gene T-138C and G-7A polymorphisms in patients 
with nephrolithiasis.
A. Kizilyer1, A. Arslan1, B. Göğebakan1, M. İğci1, S. Erturhan2, Y. İğci1, S. 
Oğuzkan1, E. A. Çakmak1, H. Şen2;  
1Department Medical Biology and Genetics, Gaziantep, Turkey, 2Department of Urology, Gaziantep, Turkey.
Kidney stone formation is the result of cascade of events to mineralize 
calcium salts in the urinary space causing pathological nephrolithiasis 
condition. The mechanism of nephrolithiasis is unknown and usually 
calcification and stone formation is associated with the bone specific 
proteins. One of them is human matrix Gla protein (MGP). It is also 
shown that calcium containing stone growth concurs with the increase 
of MGP expression along with the other proteins. MGP gene is located 
on chromosome 12p13.1 - p12.3, consists of 4 exons. Its promoter 
region contains dense binding sites for variety of transcription factors. 
In addition to T-138C and G-7A polymorphisms, primer design for the 
analysis of promoter sites has been achieved using Workbench Bi -
ology 3.2. Promoter screening and polimorphic analysis were done 
by SSCP and PCR-RFLP methods using NcoI and BsrSI restriction 
enzymes. For this, 89 patients with familial and 111 patients with spo -
radic nephrolithiasis, totalling 200 neprolithiasis patients and 94 nor -
mal subject DNAs from their peripheral blood samples were used. The 
results showed that there is no significant difference between patient 
and control groups for T-138C and G-7A polymorphisms. Therefore, 
no association can be attributed to T-138C and G-7A polymorphisms 
in patients with nephrolithiasis.
P1050. No evidence of Neuregulin 1 plays a role in the 
continuum model of psychosis
N. Unlu-Gursoy1, Z. Yuncu2, B. Akin3, M. Celik1, S. Kesebir4, S. Vahip5, A. 
Ulusahin1, N. A. Akarsu3;  
1Hacettepe University, Department of Psychiatry, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ege Uni -
versity, Department of Child Psychiatry, Izmir, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University, 
Department of Pediatrics, Gene Mapping Laboratory, Ankara, Turkey, 4State 
Hospital, Psychiatry Unit, Kirikkale, Turkey, 5Ege University, Department of 
Psychiatry, Izmir, Turkey.
Although family and twin studies support independent transmission of 
schizophrenia and bipolar disorder there are some evidence suggest -
ing that schizophrenia may be genetically related to mood disorders 
with regard to psychotic symptoms (continuum model of psychosis). 
In consensus with this model, we have previously reported an inbred 
multigeneration family overloaded with distinct psychotic disorders 
(schizophrenia, schizoaffective, bipolar and unipolar disorders with 
psychotic features) in 18 affected members of the pedigree (Prog. 
Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 2004,  28; 255-
266). Chromosome 8p12 region containing neurogulin 1 (NRG1) gene 
was excluded by both linkage and haplotype analysis for this particular 
family. A total of 134 parent-offspring trios with psychotic disorders (53 
schizophrenia; 5 schizoaffective; 70 bipolar affective disorders with 
psychosis and 6 unspecified psychosis) were further genotyped with 
the polymorphic DNA marker, D8S1810 located in the core at-risk hap -
lotype of the NRG1 gene. There was no evidence for overtransmis -
sion of a spesific allele of the DNA marker D8S1810 to affected off -
spring using broad model including distict types of psychotic disorders 
. We have observed an overtransmission for 206 bp allele (allele 6) 
of D8S1810 to affected offspring when we used a narrower (schizo -
phrenia and schizoaffective disorder only) model in the TDT analysis 
( p= 0.0081 after correction p= 0.07). These preliminary results do not 
support the hypothesis that NRG1 also plays a role in influencing dist -
ict types of psychotic disorders. (Supported by Hacettepe University 
Research Foundation: 06 01 101 020; NARSAD: 2003II)
P1051. The MLPA-dHPLC approach of the NF1 gene analysis: a 
french experience
S. Pinson1,2, C. Vallet1, S. Lefebvre1, P. Combemale3, B. Chambe1, A. Tous -
saint1, S. Giraud1, C. Bellané-Chantelot4, D. Vidaud4, C. De Toma5, P. Wolkens -
tein4, A. Calender1;  
1Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 2NF France, Lyon, France, 3HIA Des -
genettes, Lyon, France, 4Assistance Publique de Paris, Paris, France, 5Centre 
Du Polymorphisme Humain, Paris, France.
The identification of mutations in the NF1 gene causing type 1 neuro -
fibromatosis (NF1) is still presenting a considerable amount of work 
mainly because of the large size of the gene (350 kb - 60 exons) and 
the restricted number of recurent mutations. The high frequency of 
NF1 which is affecting 1 in 3500 individuals made us choose two com -
plementary methods to perform NF1 gene analysis:
- the multiplex ligation-dependant probe amplification (MLPA) for the 
large deletion and duplication detection (P081-P082)Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
- and the automated denaturing high performance liquid (dHPLC) 
screening method.
The MLPA method was validated by the detection of 18 known large 
NF1 gene deletions. The dHPLC was optimised for a rapid screening 
of the 60 exons and the splice junctions of the NF1 gene. The dHPLC 
conditions were validated by the detection of 260 known variants lo -
cated in two third of the NF1 exons.
The sensitivity was evaluated in a MLPA/dHPLC analysis of a panel of 
100 unrelated french NF1 patients with at least two consensus diag -
nostic criterias.
Four large deletions were detected by MLPA and mutations were iden -
tified in 91 patients with a global mutation detection rate of 96%. The 
mutations included 18 deletions, 10 insertions, 33 non sens mutations, 
11 missense mutations, 16 splice mutations and 3 complex rearrange -
ments.
Our results confirm that the association of the MLPA and dHPLC tech -
niques provides an accurate and fast method for the identification of 
NF1 mutations.
P1052. NOD2/CARD15 mutation analysis and genotype-
phenotype correlation in Russian patients with Crohn‘s disease
E. V. Stepanova1, O. A. Schagina2, I. D. Loranskaya1, A. V. Polyakov2;  
1RMAPE, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Research centre for medical genetics, 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
Crohn’s disease (CD) is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the gastro -
intestinal tract with variations in localization and behavior. Mutations in 
the NOD2/CARD15  gene on chromosome 16q have been implicated 
in the pathogenesis of the disease and three main sequence variants, 
all single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). We collected a cohort of 
78 CD patients and 54 population controls to determine the preva -
lence of NOD2/CARD15  SNPs and their association with phenotypic 
expression of the disease. All patients and controls were genotyped for 
Arg702Trp, Gly908Arg and Leu1007fsinsC.
At least one mutation was present in 21,7% of patients compared to 
10.0% in controls (p=0,02), in patients with Crohn disease, the allelic 
frequency of R702W, G908R, and L1007fs was 22%, 8.3%, and 1,3%, 
respectively. Compound heterozygotes and homozygotes occurred in 
26,9% of patients and in none of the controls.
The correlation of genotype-fenotype showed a significant association 
with early onset in patients with R702W or G908R, but not in patients 
with L1007fs. There was not a significant association between this 
SNPs carriership and inflammatory localization (p=0,08). Association 
between carriage of this allels and colonic complication (p=0,004) such 
as stenosis, penetration and perianal exhibitings were revealed in our 
study.
In a Russian population SNPs of the NOD2/CARD15  gene were a 
marker of susceptibility to Crohn disease and were associated with co -
lonic complication. Carriers of the R702W and G908R alleles showed 
early onset of Crohn disease.
This work was pertly supported by Russian President‘s grant 
NSh5736.2006.7
P1053. Opitz-Kaveggia (FG) and Lujan syndromes are allelic 
having mutations in the MED12 gene
C. E. Schwartz1, P. S. Tarpey2, H. Risheg1, H. A. Lubs1, J. M. Opitz3, R. D. 
Clark4, M. M. May1, S. Briault5, J. M. Graham6, J. Fryns7, G. Piluso8, J. Chelly9, 
A. Verloes10, C. Skinner1, R. C. Rogers1, J. B. Moeschler11, S. M. Joseph1, J. 
Jones1, J. Gecz12, F. L. Raymond13, M. Stratton2, M. J. Friez1, R. E. Stevenson1;  
1Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 2Wellcome Trust 
Sanger Institute, Hinkton, United Kingdom, 3University of Utah Medical Center, 
Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 4Loma Linda University Children’s Hospital, 
Loma Linda, CA, United States, 5Centre Hospitalie Regional d’Orleans, Or -
leans, France, 6Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 
7Human Genome Laboratory, Leuven, Belgium, 8Seconda Universite degli Studi 
di Napoli, Napoli, Italy, 9Institut Cochin, Paris, France, 10Robert Debre University 
Hospital, Serurier, France, 11Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, 
NH, United States, 12Women and Children’s Hospital, Adelaide, Australia, 
13Cambridge Institute of Medical Research, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
FG syndrome is an X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) syndrome first 
described by Opitz and Kaveggia in 1974. It is characterized by MR, 
relative macrocephaly, hypotonia and constipation. Five different loci 
have been reported for FG syndrome on the X chromosome. Analysis 
of a candidate gene, MED12, in 24 XLMR families linked to Xq13, identified a specific nucleotide substitution, c.2881C>T, in 2 FG fami -
lies. This change results in a missense mutation, p.R961W. Subse -
quent analysis of an additional 119 patients with FG identified another 
7 patients with the same mutation, meaning 7.4% of the FG patients 
tested had this mutation. The mutation was not observed in more than 
1400 normal males.
Independently, a systematic screen of 737 annotated Vega genes in 
250 XLMR probands, identified another base change, c.3020A>G in 
MED12 in the proband from the original Lujan family. This change seg -
regated in the family and was not observed in greater than 1400 nor -
mal males. The c.3020A>G results in a missense mutation, p.N1007S. 
Subsequent studies of 111 FG and 40 Lujan patients found another 
family with the same mutation. The phenotype of the family, K9359, 
consisted of height in 80th - 90th centile range, weight at the 40th cen-
tile, normal head circumference, tall narrow face, high nasal root and 
behavior disturbances. This closely overlaps with Lujan syndrome: tall, 
asthenic habitus, tall narrow face, high narrow palate, behavior abnor -
malities.
These findings in the original families with Opitz-Kaveggia (FG) and 
Lujan syndromes, indicate these two XLMR syndromes are allelic, with 
mutations in MED12.
P1054. A novel type of canine osteodysplasia resembling human 
Osteogenesis imperfecta
M. K. Hytönen1, H. Lohi2, K. Sainio3;  
1Institute of Biomedicine and Department of Molecular Genetics, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Molecular Genetics, The Folkhälsan 
Institute of Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Institute of Bio -
medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Recently completed genetic analysis indicates that the dog genome 
holds a wealth of information that will benefit human health. Most of the 
canine inherited diseases are shared with humans. Complex genetic 
problems can be simplified in dogs since each pure breed represents 
a group of genetically similar animals that have descended from only 
a few ancestors. We have characterized a novel congenital disorder 
involving multiple skeletal defects among Brazilian Terriers. Affected 
dogs have typical craniofacial features, growth retardation, joint hy -
perlaxity and osteopenia based on radiographical examination. The 
clinical symptoms are severe and dogs have failure to thrive within a 
few weeks of life. The affected puppies have to be euthanized at an 
early age. Histological analyses reveal abnormalities in bone forma -
tion including the thinning of cortical bones and reduced amount of 
cancellous bone. These pathological features of the canine osteodys -
plasia resemble that of human osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). In hu -
mans, most of the OI cases are caused either by dominant mutations 
in COL1A1 and COL1A2 or recessive mutations in the cartilage asso -
ciated protein gene (CRTAP). We have excluded these three genes as 
candidates using microsatellite-based association analyses. Pedigree 
analysis indicates a recessive mode of inheritance. A whole genome 
wide study with canine SNP chip arrays has been initiated to map the 
causative gene for this novel type of canine osteodysplasia.
P1055. Predictive value of cytokine gene polymorphisms for the 
development of osteonecrosis
S. Samara1, C. Chassanidis1, A. Dimitroulias2, Z. Dailiana2, T. Koromila1, K. N. 
Malizos2, P. Kollia1;  
1Laboratory of Medical Genetics and Cytogenetics, School of Medicine, Univer -
sity of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece, 2Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, School 
of Medicine, University of Thessaly, Larissa, Greece.
Osteonecrosis of the femoral head is a disease of unknown etiology 
that usually progresses to hip joint destruction necessitating total hip 
arthroplasty. Cytokines, other signaling molecules and angiogen -
ic factors may lead to more rapid healing and filling of defects with 
biomechanically competent and viable bone. Cytokine production is 
determined by polymorphisms in the relevant genes. In this context, 
we explored the hypothesis that these polymorphisms of the cytokine 
genes may be potential genetic susceptibility factors for the progres -
sion of osteonecrosis. The IL-1α(-899), IL-1β(-511), IL-4Ra(+1902), 
TGF-β (cd10), ΤΝF-α(-308/-238), IL-4(-1098/-590) and IL-10(-1082/-
592) gene single nucleotide polymorphisms were studied in 30 healthy 
donors and 50 patients with osteonecrosis. Genotyping of the poly -
morphisms was detected by PCR followed by restriction fragment 
length analysis. A significant association in the genotype distribution Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
of IL-1α(Τ/C), IL-1β(-511)(T/T) and TGF-β(cd10/25) (CG/TG) was 
observed when comparing the osteonecrosis group with the control 
group (p<0.05). A high percentage of the patients (30%) carried simul -
taneously either the genotypes T/C(IL-1α) and T/T(IL-1β) or T/C(IL-1α) 
and CG/TG(TGF-β) while only one patient carried all three polymor -
phisms; in contrast in the controls 3 out of 30 (10%) were associated 
with the polymorphisms IL-1α(T/C) and TGF-β(CG/TG). There was no 
significant difference in IL-4Ra, TGF-β(cd10), ΤΝF-α, IL-4 and IL-10 
genotype and allele distributions between patients with osteonecrosis 
and controls. These results imply that the genotypes (Τ/C), (T/T) and 
(CG/TG) of IL-1α, IL-1β and TGFβ, respectively, are associated with 
increased risk for osteonecrosis and that the simultaneous carriage of 
more than one may further increase the risk for osteonecrosis.
P1056. Fine mapping by SNP linkage disequilibrium analysis of a 
candidate region in 1p36 for bone mineral density
H. Zhang1, H. Rydbeck1, D. Stabley2, L. D. Spotila3, K. Sol-Church2, M. De -
voto1;  
1The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 
2Nemours Children’s Clinic, Wilmington, DE, United States, 3ScienceScribe, 
Haddonfield, NJ, United States.
Low bone mineral density (BMD) is one of the major risk factors for 
osteoporosis. Epidemiological studies support the hypothesis that a 
large part of the variation in BMD is caused by genetic susceptibility 
factors. We performed a whole genome scan for linkage in a total of 40 
Caucasian families recruited through probands with low BMD. A region 
on 1p36 near marker D1S214 received support as a candidate locus 
for femoral neck BMD from both linkage (max LOD = 3.53) and link -
age disequilibrium analysis (p < 0.01) with microsatellite markers. In 
an attempt to better characterize the genetic risk factors for low BMD 
located in this genomic region, we have now genotyped the same 
group of families for 1095 SNPs across 11 Mb on chromosome 1p36 
at an average spacing of about 10 Kb in length. Linkage disequilibrium 
and association analysis have been carried out using the quantitative 
trait linkage disequilibrium (QTLD) test and transmission disequilib -
rium test (QTDT) implemented in SOLAR. We have identified several 
SNPs potentially associated with BMD in our samples, with minimum 
p=0.00004 for femoral neck BMD, p=0.00001 for lumbar spine BMD, 
and p=0.00010 for trochanter BMD. Among the candidate genes in this 
region, it is suggested that association may exist for RPL22 , SHREW1  
and CAMTA1  with at least one of the BMD traits.
P1057. The MTHFR c.677C>T polymorphism and osteoporotic 
phenotypes in Spanish postmenopausal women
L. Agueda1,2, M. Bustamante1,2, S. Jurado3, X. Nogués3, L. Mellibovski3, A. 
Díez-Pérez3, S. Balcells1,2, D. Grinberg1,2;  
1Dept. Genetics University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER, ISCIII, 
IBUB, Barcelona, Spain, 3URFOA-IMIM Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain.
Osteoporosis is a multifactorial disease, with a genetic component. 
Several candidate genes have been proposed, among them MTHFR  
(encoding methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase). This gene, associ -
ated with several diseases, has been hypothesised to play a role in 
osteoporosis through interference of collagen maturation caused by 
elevated homocysteine. Additionally, a QTL for bone mineral density 
(BMD) was mapped to Chr1, where MTHFR  is located. In particular, 
the c.677C>T polymorphism of this gene, is responsible for increased 
homocysteine plasma levels. Recently, an association of this polymor -
phism with lower BMD and increased risk of fractures has been de -
scribed in several populations. Our aim was to replicate these findings 
in a Spanish postmenopausal cohort, performing association analy -
ses with femoral neck (FN), lumbar spine (LS) BMD and osteoporotic 
fracture. Genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP in 950 postmeno -
pausal women (mean age 55.6 ± 8.7). The association analysis was 
performed by lineal regression for BMD and by logistic regression 
for fracture. The minor allele frequency in our population was 39.7% 
and the distribution of genotypes was in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium 
(p=0.521). No association was observed between the polymorphism 
and either LS BMD (n=944, p=0.26 recessive model), or FN BMD 
(n=564, p= 0.49 recessive model). For the presence of osteoporotic 
fracture, the results were also negative (n=835, p=0.20). In conclusion, 
this polymorphism is not associated with these osteoporotic pheno -
types in our cohort.P1058. Vitamin D receptor and osteocalcine HindIII  gene 
polymorphism and bone mineral parameters in people, who 
lived in Blockaded Leningrad during 1941-1944.
M. M. Kostik1, M. A. Bogdanova1, A. N. Voitovich1, O. S. Romashkina1, S. I. 
Yagashkina2,3, O. N. Semenova2, V. I. Larionova1;  
1State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Researche Center for People, who lived in Blockaded Leningrad, Saint-Pe -
tersburg, Russian Federation, 3Military Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, 
Russian Federation.
Osteoporosis is well-known phenomena in old population. Starvation 
of Leningrad children during blockade 1941-1944 resulted in total dys -
trophy. Hungry children weren’t accumulate peak bone mass and they 
have high risk of osteoporosis realisation.
The mean age of 48 patients, included in our study was 8,64±5,12 
years in 1941 was. Bone mineral parameters were detected by DEXA. 
ApaI, TagI  vitamin D receptor ( VDR ) and Hind III  osteocalcine genes 
polymorphism were detected by PCR.
Femur neck osteopenia people were elder in the end of blockade, 
when people without OP (p=0,006). We have revealed differences in 
TagI genotypes distribution between people with and without osteope -
nia (OP) Wards zone (p=0,04), trochanter (p=0,05), L1-L4 (p=0,01), and 
differences in ApaI genotypes distribution between males (p=0,05), all 
patients (p=0,03) with and without OP L1-L4. Males with t allele had sig -
nificant higher BMC femur neck, BMC, BMD, Tscore Wards zone, BMD 
trochanter, females had higher Tscore Wards zone, BMC, Tscore trochan -
ter, BMC, BMD L1-L4. Females with A allele had higher BMC, BMD 
L1-L4.
Females with and without OP L1-L4 had differences in  HindIII  genotype 
(p=0,05) and alleles distribution (p=0,049). People with and without 
OP proximal part of femur had differences in genotype (p=0,03) distri -
bution. Females with H allele had significant higher BMC, BMD, Tscore 
of femur neck, Wards zone, proximal part of femur (total), L1-L4.
Conclusion: TT genotype and T allele of TagI, aa genotype ApaI VDR  
and h allele of HindIII  osteocalcine gene polymorphism associated 
with osteoporosis in people, who lived in Blockaded Leningrad during 
1941-1944.
P1059. Research of MspI(a) and PvuII(a) polymorphism of PAH 
gene in Kazakhstan
G. S. Svyatova1, M. G. Orazgalieva1, V. L. Akhmetova2;  
1THE REPUBLICAN SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH CENTRE OF MOTHER AND 
CHILD HEALTH PROTECTION, Almaty, Kazakhstan, 2Institute of biochemistry 
and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
We investigated the frequencies distribution of polymorphic MspI(a)  lo-
cus in 8 intron and PvuII(a) locus in 2 intron  of PAH gene. For research 
we have taken DNA from blood of 100 not related representatives of 
the Kazakh nation. In the Kazakh population the most often genotypes 
were a MspI(à)*À/*à (0,58) and PvuII(a)*À1/*À2 (0,57). There were 
no deviation in distribution of frequencies of a MspI(à) and PvuII(a)-
genotypes from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. In the Kazakh popula -
tions allele MspI(à)*À (frequency 0,57) and PvuII(a)*À2 (0,59) were 
most often.
We have done the comparative analysis of distribution of frequencies 
MspI(a)  and PvuII(a) alleles of a gene PAH. We have found out dis -
tinctions in the MspI(a) alleles between sample of the Kazakhs and 
Russian (χ2=5,122, ð=0,034), French (χ2=5,785, ð=0,024), Udmurts, 
Mordvins, Maris(χ2=5,122, ð=0,032) and Chinese (χ2 = 27,955, ð< 
0,001) [Daiger et al., 1989; Akhmetova V., 2001]. Observed hetero -
zygosity was 0,57. This meaning was higher than in populations of 
Volga-Ural region of Russia (0,50). In the PvuII(a) alleles we have 
found out distinctions between sample of the Kazakhs and popula -
tions of Germany (χ2=7,445, ð=0,01), Bulgaria(χ2=25,293, ð<0,001), 
Czechoslovakia(χ2=5,789, ð=0,024), China (χ2=11,524, ð=0,001) and 
Japan (χ2=10,402, ð=0,001)[Daiger et al., 1989]. Observed heterozy -
gosity was 0,57.
P1060. Germline mutation analysis in patients with 
nonsyndromic Pheochromocytoma or Paraganglioma
S. Lefebvre1, A. Toussaint1, C. Bourdin1, N. Burnichon2, S. Pinson1, A. Calen -
der1, A. Gimenez-Roqueplo2, S. Giraud1;  
1Service de génétique moléculaire et médicale, Hopital edouard Herriot, Hospi -
ces civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 2Département de génétique, Hopital européen Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
G. Pompidou, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
Paragangliomas and phaeochromocytomas are neuroendocrine tu -
mors derived from parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems. 
Three genes have been associated with non syndromic paraganglio -
mas: SDHB , SDHC  and SDHD .
We studied the coding sequence of these genes by dHPLC (denatur -
ing High Performance Liquid Chromatography) followed by sequenc -
ing of the shifted bands. We developed MP/LC (Multiplex PCR Liquid 
Chromatography) for the detection of large genomic rearrangements. 
We analyzed 21 positive control cases and detected 100% of vari -
ants: 20 variants by dHPLC and one deletion of the exon 1 of SDHB 
by MP/LC.
We studied 123 unrelated index cases presenting paraganglioma and/
or phaeochromocytoma for which syndromic possibilities were exclud -
ed (negative sequencing of the genes RET and VHL). The sequenc -
ing of abnormal profiles in dHPLC allowed identification of 38 different 
variants (including 11 unpublished in literature): 17 polymorphisms, 3 
variants with unknown pathogenic caracteristics and 18 pathogenic 
mutations: 8 in SDHB , 4 in SDHC  and 6 in SDHD  (7 missense, 3 non -
sense, 7 frameshift and 1 splice site mutation). For 14 remaining nega -
tive patients we looked for large genomic rearrangements by MP/LC 
but none variant of this type was highlighted.
Genetic analysis with dHPLC and MP/LC allows us to systematically 
analyze SDHB , SDHC  and SDHD for small mutations or large rear -
rangement in all our patients. We discuss genotype-phenotype cor -
relations about our patients.
We use complementary genetic technics to complete clinical studies 
of a patient and his family. This approach can be extended to whole 
genetic pathologies tested in diagnosis.
P1061. Parkin  analysis in early onset Parkinson Disease
F. Sironi1,2, P. Primignani1, M. Zini2, S. Ricca2,1, T. Brambilla1,2, C. Ruffmann2, S. 
Tunesi3, A. Antonini2, A. Zecchinelli2, C. Mariani2, D. A. Coviello1, M. Travi1, G. 
Pezzoli2, S. Goldwurm2;  
1Fondazione IRCCS Opedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, 
Milan, Italy, 2Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Parkinson Institute, Milan, Italy, 
3Institute of Medical Statistics and Biometry, Univerity of Milan, Milan, Italy.
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegen -
erative disorder with a prevalence of 2% over 65 years of age. A strong 
genetic component is present when the disorder begins before 40 
years of age. The parkin  gene (PARK2 - 6q25.2-27; OMIM: 602544) is 
the most common cause associate with autosomal recessive-juvenile 
parkinsonism.
146 PD patients (26.7% familial - 73.3% sporadic) with onset <40yy 
have been analyzed in order to asses the frequency, nature and as -
sociated phenotypes of PARK2 mutations. The 12 exons of the gene 
were screened for point mutations by DHPLC and/or sequencing anal -
ysis and, when necessary, a gene-dosage assay has been done using 
RealTime PCR.
A total of 17 patients were found to carry parkin  mutations: 13 (9%) had 
two parkin  mutations, meanwhile single gene mutations were found 
in 4 probands (2%). Eleven point mutations were detected: 6 have 
been previously reported (pR42P, pA82E, pM192L, pT240M, pR275W, 
pE409X) and 5 are novel variants (pC212_CfsX224, pA230T, pC238W, 
p.C253Y). Gene-dosage analysis identified deletions of exons 3, 3-4, 
3-5, 5-6, 6, 6-7, and duplications of exons 2 or 3 in homozygous or het -
erozygous state. The parkin phenotype is similar to typical idiopathic 
PD: patients with 2 mutations were younger at onset and more likely 
with symmetric symptoms. According to previous European studies we 
found that the more frequent amino acid change is the pR275W.
P1062. Molecular Analysis of the LRRK2 Gene in Familial and 
Isolated Turkish Parkinson‘s Disease Patients
C. S. Pirkevi1, S. Lesage2, A. Brice2, S. Ertan3, A. Başak1;  
1Boğaziçi University, Neurodegeneration Research Laboratory, Istanbul, Turkey, 
2INSERM U679 Pitié Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 3Istanbul University, 
Cerrahpaşa School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey.
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegen -
erative disorder in the Western world after Alzheimer’s disease. Every 
year 16/ 100,000 people are diagnosed with PD. James Parkinson 
was the first person in 1817 to describe six individuals with symptoms 
of “shaking palsy” but it was some 60 years later that Jean Martin 
Charcot named the condition “Parkinson’s disease”. Typically, this pro -gressive movement disorder produces bradykinesia, tremor, rigidity, 
and impairment of postural reflexes. PD is characterized by a deple -
tion of dopamine in the striatum. Recently, several genes have been 
shown to result in PD phenotype. Mutations in these genes may lead 
to autosomal dominant (α-synuclein, LRRK2), autosomal recessive 
(parkin, PINK1, DJ1) or sporadic PD. In a recent paper, the frequency 
of the LRRK2 G2019S mutation has been shown to reach 41% in the 
North-African population compared to 3% in the European population. 
The aim of this study is to identify the frequency of the LRRK2 G2019S 
mutation in Turkish patients with PD. The presence of the G2019S mu -
tation was analyzed in 72 Turkish PD patients and their 43 relatives by 
direct sequencing of the LRRK2 gene (47 familial and 25 isolated cas -
es). Direct sequencing of exon 41 in 115 Turkish PD patients and their 
relatives revealed a heterozygous G2019S mutation in a 69-years-old 
female patient, with disease onset at 62 years. The results obtained 
so far in 72 Turkish patients indicate that the frequency of the G2019S 
mutation is in accordance with the European populations.
P1063. Mitochondrial DNA haplogroups and risk of Parkinson‘s 
disease in patients of Tatar ethnic origin from the Volga-Ural 
region of Russia
I. Gilyazova1, I. Khidiyatova1, O. Derbeneva2, E. Ruiz-Pesini2, R. Khusainova1, 
A. Baitimerov1, R. Magzhanov1, D. C. Wallace2, E. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics,Ufa Science Centre, RAS, Ufa, Russian 
Federation, 2Center for Molecular and Mitochondrial Medicine and Genetics, 
University of California, Irvine, CA, United States.
There is the increasing evidence that genetic variants of mitochondrial 
DNA may be involved in Parkinson’s disease (PD) development. We 
analyzed mtDNA variation in 153 unrelated patients of Tatar ethnic ori -
gin, aged 46-89 from the Volga-Ural region and 183 age- and ethnical -
ly-matched controls. Patients were clinically examined in Department 
of Neurology of Bashkir State Medical University and diagnosed PD.
In PD patients and control subjects all the examined Western Eur -
asian and Eastern Eurasian mtDNA haplogroups were detected. There 
was a highly significant difference in the overall haplogroup distribu -
tion between PD patients and control subjects. Haplogroup H was 
significantly overrepresented in PD patients and underrepresented in 
controls (χ2=15.56, p=0.0007, OR=2.69, CI=1.61-4.49) whereas UK 
haplogroup cluster was significantly overrepresented in controls and 
underrepresented in patients (χ2=18.26, p=0.0005, OR=0.31, CI=0.17-
0.55). The frequency of haplogroups J, T, A, C, D, I, W, F didn’t differ 
significantly in the compared groups. The frequency of U and K hap -
logroups distribution between patients and controls, analyzed sepa -
rately, showed highly significant results. The frequency of haplogroup 
U in PD patients was 14.38%, whereas its frequency in control sub -
jects was twice higher - 28.96% (χ2=9.39, P=0.003, OR=0.41, CI=0.23-
0.74). Haplogroup K was revealed in 1.31% of PD patients and 8.19% 
of control individuals (χ2=6.86, P=0.009, OR=0.15, CI=0.02-0.69). So, 
individuals classified as haplogroup U and K demonstrated a signifi -
cant decreased risk of PD versus individuals, belonging to haplogroup 
H, confirming that the “uncoupled” European mtDNA haplogroups are 
strongly protective of PD while the “coupled” European haplogroups 
are strongly predisposing to PD.
P1064. A Common Haplotype in the Annexin A5 (ANXA5) Gene 
Promoter Is Associated with Recurrent Pregnancy Loss
N. Bogdanova1, J. Horst1, M. Chlystun2, P. J. P. Croucher3, A. Nebel4, A. 
Bohring1, A. Todorova5, S. Schreiber4, V. Gerke2, M. Krawczak3, A. Markoff2;  
1Institut für Humangenetik, University of Muenster, Germany, 2Institue of Medi -
cal Biochemistry, ZMBE, University of Muenster, Germany, 3Institute of Medical 
Informatics and Statistics, University of Kiel, Germany, 4Institute of Clinical 
Molecular Biology, University of Kiel, Germany, 5Laboratory of Molecular Pthol -
ogy, University of Sofia, Bulgaria.
We sought to verify whether variation in the promoter of the placental 
anticoagulant protein annexin A5 (ANXA5) gene represents a risk fac -
tor for recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL). Sequence analysis of 70 Ger -
man RPL patients, all known to carry neither factor V Leiden nor a pro -
thrombin mutation, revealed four consecutive nucleotide substitutions 
in the ANXA5 promoter that were transmitted as a joint haplotype (M2). 
Reporter gene assays revealed that M2 reduces the in vitro activity 
of the ANXA5 promoter to 37-42% of the normal level. The possible 
relationship between M2 and RPL was evaluated by comparing RPL 
patients with two independent control groups recruited from the regis -Genetic analysis, linkage, and association20
try of the Institute of Human Genetics in Münster and the PopGen bio -
bank in Kiel, respectively. Carriers of M2 were found to exhibit a more 
than two-fold higher RPL risk than non-carriers (odds ratio = 2.42, 
95% confidence interval: 1.27 - 4.58) when using unselected controls 
(PopGen), and an almost four-fold higher risk when using the Münster 
‘super-controls’, i.e. women with successful pregnancies and no previ -
ous history of pregnancy losses (odds ratio = 3.88, 95% confidence 
interval: 1.98 - 7.54). This statistically significant association should 
facilitate the development of improved prognostic algorithms for RPL, 
involving a more precise assessment of individual disease risks, and 
provide a guide to offering adequate therapies where relevant.
P1065. Application of genetic markers for prognosis of physical 
performance of athletes
A. M. Druzhevskaya1, I. I. Ahmetov1, D. V. Popov2, I. V. Astratenkova1, S. S. 
Missina2, O. L. Vinogradova2, V. A. Rogozkin1;  
1St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2SRC Institute for Biomedical Problems of the Russian Acad. Sci., 
Moscow, Russian Federation.
The aim of the study was to investigate genotype and allele distribu -
tion of ACE (I/D polymorphism), ACTN3 (R577X), NOS3  (5/4), UCP2  
(Ala55Val) and UCP3  (-55C/T) genes in rowers ( n=230) and controls 
(n=855), and to find an association of genotypes with physiological 
parameters. Genotyping was performed by restriction fragment length 
polymorphism analysis. Physiological parameters were evaluated by 
PM 3 Rower Ergometer and MetaMax 3B Gas Analyzer. The frequen -
cy of ACE II genotype (34.6% vs. 23.6%, p=0.017) was significantly 
higher in elite rowers ( n=107) than in controls. Amongst all athletes 
the frequency of unfavorable for speed and power qualities ACTN3  XX 
genotype was two times less than in controls (6.2% vs. 12.8%, p=0.01). 
Moreover, the frequencies of ACE I, ACTN3  R, UCP2  Val, UCP3  T al-
leles increased in athletes with the growth of skills. Furthermore, ACE 
I (when maximal power production capacity was measured), NOS3 
5 (power at the anaerobic threshold data), UCP2  Val (VO2 data) and 
UCP3  T (power at the anaerobic and aerobic thresholds and VO2 
data) alleles were associated with high values of aerobic performance. 
Thus, ACE I, ACTN3  R, NOS3 5, UCP2  Val and UCP3  T alleles can 
be considered as genetic markers associated with enhanced physical 
performance, and can be included in the diagnostic complex for the 
prognosis of human physical performance.
P1066. The (TAAAA)n microsatellite polymorphism in the SHBG  
gene influences serum SHBG levels in women with polycystic 
ovary syndrome
P. Ferk1, N. Teran2, K. Geršak2;  
1University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2University 
Medical Centre, Dept. of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Hyperandrogenaemia and hyperandrogenism are common features 
of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Since the sex hormone-bind -
ing globulin (SHBG), a specific plasma transport glycoprotein for sex 
steroid hormones, regulates the access of the hormones to their tar -
get cells, the SHBG  gene was proposed as being a PCOS candidate 
gene. We investigated a possible influence of the microsatellite poly -
morphism (TAAAA)n in the SHBG  gene on serum SHBG levels in 123 
PCOS patients (study group) and 110 age-matched healthy volunteers 
(control group). Peripheral blood samples were obtained in the early 
follicular phase of the menstrual cycle or randomly in amenorrhoeic 
patients. Genotyping of the polymorphism was performed and serum 
SHBG and total testosterone (TT) levels were determined. The SHBG 
alleles with 6-11 TAAAA repeats were found; however, none of the 
alleles or genotypes was characteristic for PCOS patients. Serum TT 
levels were significantly elevated (P < 0.001), while serum SHBG lev -
els were significantly lower (P < 0.001) in PCOS patients compared 
with controls. Moreover, serum SHBG levels were found to be strongly 
influenced by the (TAAAA)n SHBG  polymorphism, in both the PCOS 
(55.3%) and the control (33.1%) group of patients. According to our 
results, the (TAAAA)n SHBG  polymorphism might be an important pre -
dictor for serum SHBG levels and, consequently, for hyperandrogen -
aemic clinical presentation of PCOS.P1067. Polymorphic genetic markers and birth weight
D. G. Melo1, M. C. T. Canas2, A. L. Pimentel2, A. L. Simões2;  
1UFSCar, São Carlos, Brazil, 2USP, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
This study aimed to evaluate a possible correlation between birth 
weight and four polymorphic genetic markers: ESD, GSTT1, GSTM1 
and the microsatelite promoter region of IGF1 gene. We studied blood 
samples of mothers and their neonates from two maternities at Ri -
beirão Preto, São Paulo state, Brazil. The first group was composed 
of 509 mothers and their neonates, born at University Clinical Hos -
pital maternity (HC). The second group was composed of 339 moth -
ers and their neonates, born at Airport Complex maternity (Mater). In 
order to exclude factors that may or may not interfere in birth weight, 
all mother’s medical records were analyzed for: age, number of preg -
nancies, miscarriages, previous deliveries, number of medical con -
sultations, smoking, alcohol consumption and morbidity during actual 
pregnancy. Babies were analyzed for: sex, birth weight and length, 
gestational age, APGAR score and congenital anomalies detected at 
birth. Birth weight was associated four molecular genetic markers us -
ing the Generalized Linear Model. An association has not yet been 
shown between ESD, GSTT1 and GSTM1 (maternal and fetal) phe -
notypes and neonates´ birth weight. Some alleles in the IGF1 locus 
showed correlation with birth weight and, in the group from Mater, a 
strong association between IGF1*22/*22  homozygote neonates and 
lower birth weight was noticed (P=0,0008). The IGF1*20/*20  genotype 
was associated with higher birth weight (P=0,0445). This data strongly 
suggest that such markers may play a direct or indirect role in the 
modulation of birth weight.
P1068. The influence of endothelin-A receptor polymorphism on 
the progression of renal diseases
J. Reiterova1, J. Štekrova2, D. Maixnerová1, M. Merta1;  
1Nephrology Dept. of 1st Medical Fac., Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of 
Biology and Human genetics of 1st. Medic Fac, Prague, Czech Republic.
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most 
common hereditary renal disease. IgA nephropathy (IGAN) is a me -
sangial proliferative glomerulonephritis characterized by diffuse me -
sangial deposition of immunoglobulin A. Endothelin-1 (ET-1) has been 
suggested to be a major disease promoting factor in renal diseases. 
The vasoconstrictor effect of ET-1 is mediated by ET-A receptor. We 
have investigated influence of C/T polymorphism in exon 8 of ET-A 
receptor gene.
A total number of 193 patients (pts) (87 males, 106 females) with AD -
PKD entered into this study. Patients were divided into three groups: 
1. 47 pts with end stage renal disease (ESRD) later than in 63 years 
(slow progressors), 2. 49 pts with ESRD before 45 (rapid progressors) 
and 3. 97 pts with ESRD between 45-63 years. Moreover, we exam -
ined a group of 153 pts with histologically proven IGAN ( 116 males, 37 
females). Pts were divided into two groups: 1. 79 pts with ERSD during 
5 years of the (rapid progressors) and 2. 74 patients with normal renal 
function (slow progressors). As a control group we used 200 geneti -
cally unrelated healthy.
The distribution of C/T polymorphism did not significantly differ be -
tween rapid and slow progressors of ADPKD and IGAN. The compari -
son of ESRD ages showed that CC females with ADPKD failed signifi -
cantly later than CT heterozygotes: CC (57.4±8.1), CT (53.0±9.1) and 
TT (54.5±6.4) (t-test, p=0.018).
To conclude, CC genotype could be protective in ADPKD females. This 
genotype was described to be associated with lower pulse pressure.
Supported by project MSMT 0021620806
P1069. Combined effect of hemostatic gene polymorphisms 
and the risk of myocardial infarction in patients with advanced 
coronary atherosclerosis.
M. Biscuola1, E. Trabetti1, N. Martinelli2, U. Cavallari1, M. Pinotti3, O. Olivieri2, 
S. Cheng4, M. Sandri2, S. Friso2, F. Pizzolo2, C. Bozzini2, P. Caruso3, F. Ber -
nardi3, R. Corrocher2, D. Girelli2, P. Pignatti1;  
1Section of Biology and Genetics - Dept Mother & Child/Biol & Genet, Univ 
Verona, Italy, Verona, Italy, 2Dept Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Univ 
Verona, Italy, Verona, Italy, 3Dept Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Univ 
Ferrara, Italy, Ferrara, Italy, 4Dept Human Genetics, Roche Molecular Systems, 
Inc., Alameda, CA, United States.
Relative little attention has devoted until now to the combined effects 
of gene polymorphisms of the hemostatic pathway as risk factors for Genetic analysis, linkage, and association21
Myocardial Infarction (MI), the main thrombotic complication of Coro -
nary Artery Disease (CAD). We studied a total of 804 subjects, 490 
of whom with angiographically proven severe CAD, with or without 
MI (n=306; n=184; respectively). An additive model considering ten 
common polymorphisms [Prothrombin 20210G>A, PAI-1 4G/5G, Fi -
brinogen β -455G>A, FV Leiden and “R2”, FVII -402G>A and -323 
del/ins, Platelet ADP Receptor P2Y12 -744T>C, Platelet Glycoproteins 
Ia (873G>A), and IIIa (1565T>C)] was tested. The prevalence of MI 
increased linearly with an increasing number of unfavorable alleles (χ2 
for trend = 10.68; P = 0.001). In a multiple logistic regression model, 
the number of unfavorable alleles remained significantly associated 
with MI after adjustment for classical risk factors. As compared to sub -
jects with 3-7 alleles, those with few (£2) alleles had a decreased MI 
risk (OR 0.34, 95%CIs 0.13-0.93), while those with more (³8) alleles 
had an increased MI risk (OR 2.49, 95%CIs 1.03-6.01). The number of 
procoagulant alleles correlated directly (r=0.49, P=0.006) with endog -
enous thrombin potential. The combination of prothrombotic polymor -
phisms may help to predict MI in patients with advanced CAD.
P1070. Frequency of C-1055T gene polymorphism in IL-13 in 
Russian population and its association with asthma, IgE and 
IL-13.
S. A. Mazurina , V. A. Kaznacheev, Y. V. Gervaziev;  
Mechnickov Research Institute for Vaccines and Sera RAMS, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
Bronchial asthma (BA) is a chronic disease associated with elevated 
IgE levels. It was demonstrated that IL-13, as well as IL-4, plays a cru -
cial role in IgE production regulation. IgE - regulating effect of IL-13 is 
confined to activation of IgE’s ε-chain gene transcription.
The aim of our study was to reveal the association between C-1055T, 
IL-13 gene polymorphic modifications and level of total IgE and IL-13 
in BA patients.
The C-1055T gene polymorphism in Il-13 was analyzed by the PCR-
RFLP, using restriction enzyme BstFNI in 136 asthma patients and 64 
healthy control subjects. Total IgE and IL-13 levels were measured by 
ELISA.
The total serum IgE level was found to be elevated in BA patients 
group: 190(47,5;495)kE/l, and within normal range in the control group: 
25,5(19;100)kE/l. The levels of total IgE in BA patients and controls dif -
fer significantly, p<0,001.
The serum IL-13 level was elevated in BA patients group: 165(22;320)kE/
l, and normal in the control group: 70(15;130)kE/l. The levels of IL-13in 
BA patients and controls differ significantly, p<0,001.
The frequency of allele T was 40% in the BA patients group and 61% in 
control group, this parameter differed significantly, (p=0,005). In spite 
of the high frequency of T allele, the number of homozygotes was less 
than 2% within the whole group. Therefore we failed to determine the 
association of C-1055T polymorphism with total IgE level and serum 
IL-13 level. Thus in our study we didn’t revealed the association be -
tween C-1055T and IL-13, total IgE levels and atopy.
P1071. TNF-a and Lt-a gene polymorphisms and suceptibility to 
COPD in a spanish population
E. Cordoba-Lanus , J. de Torres, A. Montejo de Garcini, L. Perez-Mendez, A. 
Aguirre-Jaime, C. Casanova;  
Unidad de Investigación-Hospital Univ. N/S de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Te -
nerife, Spain.
Several cytoquines that contribute to airway inflammation, including tu -
mor necrosis factor a (TNF-a), have implicated in the pathogenesis of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Some polymorphisms 
of the TNF-a and Lt-a  gene may be associated with COPD in different 
ethnic populations. We investigated the importance of certain variants/
haplotypes of seven single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of these 
genes in the course of the disease or whether they predispose to a 
more severe form of COPD in a Spanish population.
Case-control study. We analyzed the SNPs: -857(C/T), -376(G/A), -
308(G/A), -238(G/A) and +489(G/A) of the TNF-a gene and +249(G/
A) and +720(C/A) of the Lt-a gene in 323 Caucasian individuals. The 
study included 143 COPD patients (62 ± 10 years; 96 men and 47 
women) with airflow obstruction (55%±20 media predicted (FEV1)) re-
cruited from a outpatient pulmonary clinic and 180 control subjects 
without any respiratory disease included in a cohort of 15000 subjects 
of the Canary Islands.Each subject was genotyped by a multiple polymerase chain reaction 
followed by a SNaPshot® reaction. A random number of PCR ampli -
fied products were sequenced as a confirmational method. We deter -
mined TNF-a and Lt-a haplotypes by PHASE v2.1 software.
Alleles at the individual loci studied, both in the patient and control 
group, were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. The polymorphisms ana -
lyzed revealed no differences in the allele or haplotype distribution in 
patients compared to control subjects.
We conclude that the TNF-a and Lt-a gene polymorphisms analyzed 
are not major genetic risk factors for COPD at least for the studied 
population.
P1072. Association of the FADS gene cluster with 
polyunsaturated fatty acids in serum and erythrocytes
G. Malerba1, L. Schaeffer2, L. Xumerle1, N. Klopp2, E. Trabetti1, M. Biscuola1, U. 
Cavallari1, N. Martinelli3, D. Girelli3, O. Olivieri3, R. Corrocher3, J. Heinrich 2, P. 
F. Pignatti1, T. Illig2;  
1DMIBG, Biology and Genetics, Univ. Verona, Verona, Italy, 2GSF-National 
Research Center for Environment and Health, Munich, Germany, 3Department 
of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
Polymorphisms of the human delta-5 (FADS1) and delta-6 (FADS2) 
desaturase genes have been recently described to be associated with 
the levels of several long-chain n-3 and n-6 polyunsaturated fatty acids 
(PUFAs) in serum phospholipids in an East German population. We 
report a study in an Italian population that replicates the association, 
extends it to erythrocyte cell membrane PUFAs, and to the FADS3 
gene as well.
Thirteen polymorphisms located in FADS1-FADS2-FADS3 gene clus -
ter (chromosome 11q12-13.1) were genotyped in 658 adults.
The markers showed the presence of linkage disequilibrium (LD) and 
the LD-block structure of the gene cluster was determined.
Polymorphisms and statistically inferred haplotypes showed stron -
gest associations with the acid arachidonic acid (C20:4n-6) in serum 
phospholipids and in erythrocyte cell membranes (rs174545 adjusted-
p-value=6.48x10-22 and adjusted-p=1.4x10-10, respectively). Other 
significant associations were observed for eicosadienoic (C20:2n-6), 
linoleic (C18:2n-6), alpha-linolenic (C18:3n-3), stearidonic (C18:4n-
3) and eicosapentaenoic (C20:5n-3) acids. No significant association 
was observed for docosahexaenoic acid (C22:6n-3).
P1073. Positive allelic and haplotype association of two 5q 
markers with schizophrenia
L. Kapur1, L. Oruc2, N. Pojskic1, J. Ramic1, N. Lojo-Kadric1, R. Hadziselimovic1;  
1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, 2Psychiatric Clinic, KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The study is based on literature data of genomewide linkage studies 
in numerous families with schizophrenia during the period of 1997-
2001 that identified putative schizophrenia locus at 5q region. Those 
findings were supported with positive associations of chr 5 trisomy 
and schizophrenia occurence. However, limited number of population 
based association studies replicated positive result pinpointing to Ep -
sin4, a plausible functional candidate gene in the 5q region.
In our study, total of 102 age and sex matched individuals donated 
their blood specimens after their informed consent to participate. Pa -
tients fulfiling DSM-IV and ICD-10 criteria for schizophrenia diagnosis 
were recruited. Healthy individuals were evaluated in the interview 
with psychiatric specialist for control grouping. DNA extraction, PCR 
for D5S818 i CSF1PO markers and detection on automated DNA se -
quencer were performed using standard protocols. Data were ana -
lyzed for allelic, genotype and haplotype association.
Case and control groups are in HWE for both analzyed markers 
(P>0.05). Single locus allele case-control test based on Exact P-val -
ue (Nielsen and Weir 1999) showed statistical significance for both 
D5S818(P=0.01) and CSF1PO (P=0.013), but not for genotype level 
association (P=0.226 and 0.337, respectively). These results were 
also confirmed using allelic and genotypic association test based on 
χ2 test. Two locus haplotype trend regression (Zaykin et al. 2002) 
showed significant association based on χ2 test in 1000 permutations 
(P=0.0097).Genetic analysis, linkage, and association22
P1074. Polymorphism of nitric oxide synthases in preeclampsia
G. S. Demin1,2, I. Bouba3, T. E. Ivashchenko1, V. S. Baranov1,2, I. A. Georgiou3;  
1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Uni-
versity of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece.
Preeclampsia is multifactorial disease of third trimester of pregnancy 
affecting up to 15% of women. The etiology of preeclampsia still re -
mains unknown. Pathological changes lead to generalized endothelial 
dysfunction in mother and further complications of pregnancy. Nitric 
oxide plays an important role in regulating vascular processes, act -
ing as a vasodilator and second messenger. Nitric oxide synthases 
(NOS) catalyze nitric oxide production. There are three types of NOS 
encoded by three different genes (NOS1, 2 and 3). Polymorphism of 
these genes correlates with NO level and thus certain genetic alleles 
may predispose to preeclampsia.
DNA samples were obtained from the women with pure preeclampsia 
(n=39) and control group of women without any gynecologic complica -
tions and background disorders (n=98). Polymorphisms of NOS1 (AAT 
repeats), NOS2 (CCTTT repeats) and NOS3 (894G>T and 4a/4b) 
were studied by PCR-RFLP assay.
The distribution of genotypes of all NOS genes was in agreement 
with the HWE law (p>0.05). There was no significant difference in fre -
quency of genotypes of NOS1, NOS2 and NOS3 (894G>T) genes be -
tween studied groups (p>0.05). Although there were some tendencies 
for certain alleles of NOS2 (protective affect of allele 15) and NOS3 
(894G) genes in patients but they were not significant. However the 
frequency of 4b/4b genotype of NOS3 gene was significantly higher in 
preeclamptic women (79.5%) than in controls (59.8%, p<0.05).
In conclusion it can be suggested that NOS1 polymorphism unlikely 
affects preeclampsia and polymorphisms of NOS2 and NOS3 genes 
probably participate in pathogenesis of this disorder what needs veri -
fication in further studies.
P1075. Association studies of candidate genes for Premature 
Ovarian Failure (POF)
S. Bione1,2, F. Rizzolio2, T. Corre2, C. Sala2, M. Testa2, R. Ricotti1, A. Marozzi3, 
L. Persani3, O. Zuffardi4, D. Toniolo2;  
1IGM-CNR, Pavia, Italy, 2DIBIT-San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 
3University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 4University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) is a disorder defined by cessation 
of menses before 40-45 years of age and characterized by elevated 
levels of gonadotropins. POF has an estimated frequency of 1-2% and 
a relevant genetic component. Despite familial segregation of the con -
dition is a frequent finding, its genetic inheritance remains unclear and 
heterogeneous. POF genes identified so far confirmed the heterogene -
ity of the condition as they are responsible of an autosomal recessive 
form (i.e the FSHR gene) or X-linked dominant (i.e the BMP15 gene) 
but they can also contribute as risk-factors (i.e the FMR1 premutated 
allele) thus suggesting a multifactorial inheritance of POF.
To investigate the genetic basis of the condition we evaluated POF can -
didate genes as risk-factors by analysing their association in case-con -
trol studies. To this aim a cohort of more than 500 Italian POF patients 
was established by collaboration with gynaecological and endocrino -
logical clinics. Controls were selected as women with normal age (>48) 
at physiological menopause collected in the same geographic areas. 
Among a number of candidate genes for POF, we started analysing 
genes involved by X/autosome balanced translocations. The analysis 
of the DIAPH2 gene gave us first evidence of its contribution as a 
susceptibility gene. Allelic frequencies at two polymorphic loci showed 
significant enrichment in the POF cohort and defined an associated 
haplotype spanning the proximal portion of the gene. Replication of the 
association results and functional studies are in progress to evaluate 
the prevalence of these variants in the etiology of POF.
P1076. Genome-wide linkage analysis for familial primary 
cutaneous amyloidosis: a comparison between single-
nucleotide polymorphisms and microsatellites assays
M. Lin1,2, C. Lin1, Y. Su1, I. Chen1, D. Lee2, Y. Chang1,2, T. Liu1, C. Wong2, S. 
Tsai1,3;  
1National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Taipei Veterans General Hos -
pital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan Town, Miaoli County, Taiwan.
Primary cutaneous amyloidosis (PCA) is a relatively common skin 
disorder in South America and Southeast Asia. The pathogenesis of 
PCA remains unclear. Most cases of PCA are sporadic but familial 
aggregation has been reported from South America and Taiwan. The 
different susceptibility among ethnic groups suggests that genetic fac -
tor may play an important role in its pathogenesis. In this study, we 
performed genome-wide linkage analysis using both single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) and microsatellites (STRs) assays across nine 
families with familial primary cutaneous amyloidosis (FPCA) to map 
the disease gene(s) for FPCA.
Multipoint linkage analysis of both SNPs and STRs assays identified 
significant lod scores (lod >3) with a peak lod score of 3.73 (NPL score 
= 5.39, p-value = 0.000057) produced by the SNPs assay on chro -
mosome 5q region. However, the critical region of FPCA was further 
narrowed down from 7.25 cM to 2.37 cM by SNPs assay. The linkage 
peaks obtained by both SNPs and STRs sets had a high degree of 
correspondence in general, with SNPs consistently producing higher 
lod scores. Additional lod > 1 regions were observed on chromosome 
2, 11, 15, and 16 with the SNPs set. There are 12 known genes in the 
candidate region of chromosome 5 identified by SNP linkage mapping. 
Re-sequencing of some of these genes are underway to identify the 
possible disease gene of FPCA.
We conclude that genome-wide linkage analysis by using high-density 
SNP markers provided higher lod scores compared with the standard 
10 cM microsatellite marker assays.
P1077. Proopiomelanocortin gene variability and chronic heart 
failure: no association so far
J. A. Bienertova Vasku1,2, L. Spinarova1,3, P. Bienert1,2, M. Forejt1,4, A. Vasku1,2;  
1Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Pathological Physiolo -
gy, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 31st Department of Cardioangiol -
ogy, Masaryk University affiliated Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Department 
of Preventive Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
Background: Chronic heart failure is characterized by persistent ac -
tivation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis where proo -
piomelanocortin (POMC) plays a crucial role. In this study, we there -
fore aimed to investigate possible associations of the POMC RsaI 
(rs3754860) and C1032G (rs1009388) variants in the non-coding re -
gions of proopiomelanocortin gene with chronic heart failure.
Methods: The case-control study comprised a total of 374 patients of 
caucasian origin with chronic heart failure (functional classes NYHA 
II-IV, ejection fraction (EF) < 40%) and 202 age-matched healthy con -
trols. They were genotyped for the POMC RsaI (5´-UTR) and C1032G 
variants (intron 1) by means of PCR-based methodology.
Results: In univariable analyses, neither genotypes nor alleles of both 
examined polymorphisms were associated with BMI, older age, male 
sex, ejection fraction (EF), hypertension, left ventricular hypertrophy 
(LVH), diabetes mellitus (DM), and chronic kidney disease (CKD) 
(P≥0.05 for each); no case-control differerences in genotype distribu -
tions or allele frequencies were observed. We also constructed POMC 
RsaI/1032 C/G haplotypes and have not found a significant associa -
tion with BMI, EF, LVH, DM or CKD.
Conclusions: Our results do not clearly indicate that both the geno -
types of alleles of RsaI and C1032G polymorphisms within the POMC 
genes are associated with chronic heart failure in the Czech cauaca -
sian population.
P1078. Novel associations of several polymorphisms and 
haplotypes in -alpha-reductase gene (SRDA2 ) in Czech 
prostate cancer patients
M. Minarik1, A. Loukola2, L. Fantova1, M. Urban3, J. Heracek3, L. Benesova1;  
1Genomac International, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Finnish Genome Center, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Urology clinic, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, 
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
Introduction & Objectives: SRD5A2 is a key member of androgen 
methabolic pathway converting testosterone to dihydrotestosterone 
and has been suggested to play a role in the transformation of pros -
tate cells. Several SRD5A2 SNPs have previously been desribed as 
potential risk markers. The aim of this study was to evaluate potential 
SNP and haplotype association with prostate cancer.
Material & Methods: The case-control study included 339 unrelated 
individuals with clinically verified prostate cancer and 231 unrelated Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
controls with clinically verified benign prostatic hyperplasia. DNA was 
extracted from venous blood and genotyping of a set of 17 SNPs at the 
SDR5A2  locus was carried out by PCR and cycling-gradient capillary 
electrophoresis (CGCE), a technique based on heteroduplex analysis 
in temperature gradient. Case-control association analyses were per -
formed using PLINK ( http://pngu.mgh.harvard.edu/~purcell/plink/data.
shtml ).
Results: We have identified 5 SNPs showing significant allele frequency 
and genotype distribution differencies between cases and controls. The 
SNP markers with their respective p values are: rs4952219 (p=0.0186), 
rs413836 (p=0.0261), rs2300697 (p=0.0124), rs2208532 (p=0.0142) 
and a novel marker assigned as SRD5A2_SNP4 (p=0,0358). In addi -
tion we have identified 5 haplotypes showing strong association with p 
values between 0,001 and 0,005.
Discussion: Many of the significant SNP markers are from noncoding 
regions, therefore the haplotype association may mostly be related to 
alternate gene regulation. Haplotype analyses on a larger patient co -
horts is desirable in order to evaluate potential of the identified SNPs 
and haplotypes for identification of risk groups.
This project was supported by Czech Ministry of Health grant no. 
8039-3.
P1079. Linkage to 13q in a novel autosomal dominant 
pseudoarthrogryposis-like syndrome
S. A. Ugur1, D. Gul2, A. Tolun1;  
1Bogazici University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, 
Turkey, 2Gülhane Military Medical Academy and Medical Faculty, Department of 
Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey.
Distal Arthrogryposis (DA) Syndromes are characterized by nonpro -
gressive, congenital contractures of two or more different body areas 
without primary neurological and/or muscle disease that affects limb 
function. Features common to all DA syndromes include a consistent 
pattern of distal joint involvement, limited proximal joint involvement, an 
autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, and widely variable expres -
sivity. Mutations in genes encoding the fast skeletal muscle regulatory 
proteins troponin T, troponin I, and beta-tropomyosin have been shown 
to cause DA syndromes. Pseudoarthrogryposis-like syndrome (PAG-
L), a novel disorder, has been observed in a large Turkish kinship. 
Manifesting multiple contractures in patients, and an autosomal domi -
nant mode of inheritance, the syndrome may be classified as a new 
form of DA. However, PAG-L is progressive with a preadolescence age 
of onset, which makes it distinct from DA syndromes. A genome-wide 
scan has identified a locus on chromosome 13q suggestive for link -
age. Further genotyping in the candidate locus with additional family 
members is in progress.
P1080. Genome-wide association studies for complex diseases 
using samples from the Quebec founder population: examples 
with psoriasis and ADHD
B. Paquin , J. Raelson, P. Van Eerdewegh, V. Bruat, P. Croteau, J. Segal, S. 
Debrus, J. M. Vidal, M. Lapalme, S. Kebbache, J. W. Hooper, A. Belouchi, T. 
Keith;  
Genizon BioSciences, St. Laurent, PQ, Canada.
Genizon is involved in the discovery of disease susceptibility genes 
in more than 20 diseases using samples from the Quebec founder 
population (QFP). We have successfully completed nine genome-wide 
association studies for complex diseases. To illustrate our process and 
the evolution of our strategy, examples from the psoriasis and ADHD 
studies are shown. The psoriasis study was performed using 500 trios 
and a custom marker map of 80,654 SNPs spaced according to the 
variation in the extent of local LD across the genome in the QFP. The 
ADHD study was performed using 459 trios with an upgraded custom 
marker map of 374,187 SNPs, consisting of the HAP300 chip from Il -
lumina supplemented by 56,683 SNPs, optimizing the SNP selection 
to the QFP samples. For both studies, single-marker and haplotype 
association analyses were performed and genome-wide significance 
of the obtained P values was evaluated based on permutation tests. 
For both studies, regions with P-values that met the criteria of genome-
wide significance were identified. We describe the identified regions 
and the encoded genes. Many regions contained a single, druggable 
gene representing immediate opportunities for drug development and 
genes with biologically relevant function. Genes in novel pathways 
were identified in both studies. Additional disease genes were also found from conditional and sub-phenotype analyses. The disease 
genes were then used to infer a GeneMap that consists of a network 
of interacting disease genes and their biological pathways. The shown 
GeneMap reveals the genetic etiology of the disease and represents a 
comprehensive tool toward personalized medicine.
P1081. Genetic refinement of PSORS4 and ATOD2 susceptibility 
loci in Italian samples
C. Sinibaldi1, N. Paolillo1, E. Giardina1, C. Peconi1, L. Chini2, V. Moschese2, P. 
Rossi2,3, S. Chimenti4, S. Nisticò4, E. Galli5, G. Girolomoni6, G. Novelli1,5,7;  
1Department of Biopathology, Centre of Excellence for Genomic Risk Assess -
ment in Multifactorial and Complex Diseases, School of Medicine, Tor Vergata 
University, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics, Tor Vergata University, 
Rome, Italy, 3Division of Immunology and Infectious Disease, Department of 
Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital ‘Bambino Gesu, Rome, Italy, 4Department of 
Dermatology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 5San Peter Hospital, Fate -
benefratelli, Rome, Italy, 6Department of Biomedical and Surgical Sciences, 
Section of Dermatology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 7Department of 
Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
rock, AR, United States.
Psoriasis (PS) and atopic dermatitis (ATOD) are chronic inflammatory 
skin disorders triggered by both genetic and environmental factors. A 
susceptibility locus mapped on chromosome 1q21 have been identi -
fied in both the diseases (PSORS4-ATOD2). Recently we refined the 
PSORS4 and ATOD2 susceptibility loci by using a LD approach in two 
cohorts of 128 PS and 120 ATOD Italian trios. We showed that PS and 
ATOD shared a risk-haplotype defined by STRs markers MIDDLE and 
ENDAL16. We failed to reveal evidence of association for LOR gene 
located within the risk-haplotype although a differential gene expres -
sion has been observed in PS and ATOD.
In order to reveal the identity of the susceptibility factor of PSORS4 
and ATOD2 we newly refined the risk haplotype and its surrounding 
chromosomal regions (650 Kb) by typing a selection of 31 SNPs in our 
familial cohorts of trios.
Preliminary statistical analysis identified three distinct associated hap -
lotypes within the selected region: the first, Hap1 (9.7 kb) generated 
significant association in both the diseases (PS p-value 0.0229; ATOD 
p-value 0.0077), the second, Hap2 (8.8 kb) is associated in the only 
ATOD cohort (p-value 0.0257); the third, Hap3 (38.5 kb) generated 
significant p-value in the only PS cohort ( p-value= 0.0270).
The weakness of association data reported could reflect the low pen -
etrance of PSORS4 and ATOD2 but need to be confirmed in additional 
samples. Threfore, an independent set of sporadic psoriatic patients 
(n=300) and further 60 ATOD trios are being typed at the moment.
Acknowledgements: This work was supported by A.DI.PSO 
P1082. Detection of large deletion of 4.5 Mb in PTCH region in a 
Croatian Gorlin syndrome case by semi-quantitative fluorescent 
multiplex PCR
V. Musani1, A. Basta-Juzbašić2, P. Gorry3, S. Levanat1;  
1Department of molecular medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, 10000 Zagreb, 
Croatia, 2Department of Dermatovenerology, University School of Medicine, 
University of Zagreb, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia, 3Laboratoire de Génétique, Dével -
oppement & Cancer, Université V. Ségalen, Bordeaux, France.
Gorlin syndrome or Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS) 
is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by developmental 
abnormalities, cysts of the skin, jaws, and mesentery and cancer pre -
disposition to basal cell carcinomas (BCC), medulloblastomas, menin -
giomas, fibromas of the ovaries and heart.
The syndrome is caused by mutations in the human homolog of the 
Drosophila patched gene, PTCH. PTCH is a tumor supressor gene, 
located at 9q22.3, and encodes a 12 transmembrane glycoprotein that 
acts as an antagonist in the Hedgehog signaling pathway.
We present a Gorlin syndrome patient with typical phenothypical fea -
tures of widespread basal cell carcinomas, jaw malformations, stra -
bismus and mental retardation, with family history that beside basal 
cell carcinomas includes lung cancer and gastrointestinal carcinomas. 
Since we found no mutations in exons of PTCH gene with conventional 
methods of SSCP, dHPLC screening and direct sequencing, we de -
veloped a new method of semi-quantitative fluorescent multiplex PCR 
with polymorphic markers surrounding PTCH gene. With this method 
we defined a deletion of 4.5 Mb in size between markers SHGC-
110746 and SHGC-132418 (9q22.3-9q31.1).Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
Those results confirm previously reported findings that large deletions 
in PTCH region may also cause Gorlin syndrome through haploinsufi -
ciency of PTCH gene.
P1083. Mutation analysis of the PVR and PVRL2  genes in 
patients with non-syndromic cleft lip/palate
M. A. Sözen1,2, J. C. Murray3, J. T. Hecht4, I. McIntosh5, M. M. Talarova6, R. A. 
Spritz2;  
1Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine, Afyonkarahisar Kocatepe 
University, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Human Medical Genetics Program, Uni -
versity of Colorado at Denver and Health Sciences Center, Aurora, CO, United 
States, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United 
States, 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical School, Hous -
ton, TX, United States, 5Institute of Genetic Medicine; Johns Hopkins Univer -
sity, Baltimore, MD, United States, 6Department of Orthodontics, University of 
the Pacific, San Francisco, CA, United States.
Non-syndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (nsCL/P, MIM 
119530) is one of the most common major birth defects. Genetic link -
age and association studies have implicated loci in the 19q13 in nsCL/
P. Several candidate genes in the 19q13 region have been studied 
and allelic associations with nsCL/P reported. We carried out mutation 
analysis of the PVR and PVRL2  genes in this chromosomal region due 
to their close homology to PVRL1 , a gene involved both in an auto -
somal recessive CL/P syndrome, CLPED1, and in nsCL/P in patients 
from northern Venezuela. We screened a total of 73 nsCL/P patients 
and 105 healthy controls from North America, and 94 patients and 94 
controls from Venezuela for sequence variants in PVR and PVRL2 as 
candidate genes for nsCL/P. We detected a total of 10 variants in the 
PVR gene and 2 variants in the PVRL2  gene; however, none of these 
showed individual significant association with nsCLP in cases versus 
controls. Indeed, only one non-synonymous PVR variant, A67T, was 
more frequent in the nsCLP patients than in controls, though this differ -
ence was not significant. Altogether, no variants were significantly as -
sociated with risk of nsCL/P in both populations. Together, these data 
suggest that variants of PVR and PVRL2  genes are not major genetic 
risk factors for nsCL/P, at least in the North American and Venezuelan 
populations studied.
P1084. Gene dosage quantification by using multiplex 
polymerase chain reaction and capillary electrophoresis
C. C. Hung1, W. L. Lin1, Y. N. Su2,3;  
1Institute of Biomedical Engineering, College of Medicine and College of Engi -
neering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Graduate Institute of Clini -
cal Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 
3Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
Many genetic diseases are known caused by the presence of point 
mutations, small insertions and deletions in respective genes; how -
ever, the number of diseases caused by deletions and duplications 
involving large DNA genomes are significantly increasing. It would 
lead to under-express or over-express according to changes in gene 
dosage. In contrast, the methods for the detection of point mutations, 
small insertions or deletions are well established, but the detections of 
larger genomic deletions or duplications are more difficult. Due to the 
lack of efficient and in-house protocol for gene dosage quantification, 
we hereby describe a diagnostic protocol employing a combination of 
available methods. The efficient and accurate gene dosage quantifica -
tion platform is combined the multiplex PCR with capillary electropho -
resis (CE), and applied on several entities of genes, including SMN , 
PMP22  and alpha-globin genes. The reliability of the novel method -
ology demonstrated it is relative speed and low-cost procedure as a 
significant tool in genetic diagnosis. Its sensitivity and specificity for 
identify the deletions and duplications genotypes are 100%. Moreover, 
once we have established this powerful system, we will further apply 
this technique on rapid detection of trisomy syndromes and microde -
letion syndromes, including trisomy 13, trisomy 21, Down syndrome, 
DiGeorge syndrome and others.
P1085. New approaches for the estimation of renin-angiotensin-
bradykinin system genes polymorphism
A. S. Glotov1,2, O. O. Favorova3, A. V. Favorov4, G. I. Obraztsova5, T. E. 
Ivaschenko1, T. V. Nasedkina2, V. S. Baranov1;  
1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics&Gynecology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Engelgardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Cardi -
ology Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Bioinformatics Labora -
tory of GosNIIGenetika, Moscow, Russian Federation, 5Saint-Petersburg State 
Pediatric Academy, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
The rennin-angiotensin-bradykinin system is regulated by the number 
of genes and possesses crucial role in the development of cardiovas -
cular diseases. However, interpretation of multi-gene associations 
usually encounters substantial problems in evaluation of particular 
gene polymorphism contribution in pathogenesis of the disease. So, 
there is a clear cut necessity for the development of new approaches 
for more objective evaluation of gene testing studies.
Present work focuses on the different approaches based on stand -
art χ-test, the “score” analysis with using Mann-Whitney U test and 
Bayesian statistical approaches coupled to Markov chain Monte Carlo 
(MCMC) techniques. Analysis of REN (I9-83G>A), AGT (M235T), ACE 
(I/D), AGTR1 (1166A>C), AGTR2 (3123C>A), BKR2 (-58T>C and I/D) 
genes in children with arterial hypertension was shown that application 
MCMC techniques with/or the “score” analysis can be used for studing 
multi genes associations.
P1086. Association study of IRF5 gene with Rheumatoid Arthritis 
in the TUNISIAN population
M. Ben Hamad1, E. Petit2, G. Chabchoub1, S. Barbet3, S. Marzouk4, Z. Ba -
hloul4, H. Ayadi1, F. Cornelis5, A. Maalej1;  
1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine, sfax, Tunisia, 2Laboratoire de 
Recherche Européen pour la polyarthrite Rhumatoïde, Evry, France, 3Labora -
toire de Recherche Européen pour la polyarthrite Rhumatoïde,, Evry, France, 
4Service de Médecine Interne CHU Hédi Chaker, sfax, Tunisia, 5Laboratoire de 
Recherche Européen pour la polyarthrite Rhumatoïde, evry, France.
Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune, systemic disease which 
is characterized by inflammation of synovial tissues, leading to carti -
lage and bone destruction. It affects ~1% of the general population. 
The susceptibility to RA involves genetic and environmental factors. In 
the present study we have analysed the Interferon Regulatory Factor 
5 (IRF5) which is involved in the production of cytokines implicated in 
RA pathophysiology, such as tumor necrosis factor alpha, interleukine 
6 and type I Interferon. In order to search an association of IRF5 rs 
2004640 T allele in Tunisian population, we have analysed 101 un -
related patients affected with RA with a mean age of 54 years and 
a sex ratio (F/M) of 5.6/1 and 100 healthy controls. DNAs genotyp -
ing was carried out with a TaqMan 5’ allelic discrimination assay on 
an ABI 7500 real time PCR machine (assay:C___9491614_10). Data 
were analyzed by χ2-test, and Odds Ratio (OR) with 95% confidence 
interval (95% IC) was calculated. Our results showed that T/T gen -
otype was more frequent in RA patients compared to controls (44% 
vs 24.7%; p= 0.007) (OR = 0.68; IC = [0.46-1.01]). While in the RF 
positive subgroup the frequency of the T allele and T/T genotype were 
significantly increased compared with the controls (p=0.011; p= 0.003, 
respectively) (OR = 0.57; IC = [0.36-0.88]). In conclusion, our results 
support the involvement of IRF5 gene in the genetic susceptibility to 
RA in the Tunisian population.
P1087. Evidence for Further Genetic Heterogeneity in Restless 
Legs Syndrome
E. B. Skehan , A. Manal, C. K. Hand, N. A. Parfrey;  
University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
Introduction: Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a common neurologi -
cal disorder characterised by a distressing need or urge to move the 
legs, usually accompanied by an uncomfortable sensation in the legs 
described as a crawling, muscle ache or tension. The symptoms follow 
a circadian pattern with a significant increase during the evening or 
night which leads to nocturnal sleep disruption and daytime somno -
lence. Molecular genetic approaches have identified five loci on chro -
mosomes 12q, 14q, 9p, 20p, and 2q, in RLS families from different 
populations. No disease-causing gene has yet been identified.
Aim: The goal of this research was to localise and identify the gene 
responsible for the syndrome in a newly identified Irish autosomal 
dominant RLS family.
Method: Fourteen members of the new RLS3002 family participated in 
the study; ten members are affected and four are unaffected. The five 
current RLS loci were examined for linkage.
Results: The results indicated exclusion of linkage to the five identified 
RLS loci.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
Conclusion: The newly recruited Irish RLS pedigree is not linked to 
the currently described genetic loci. This provides evidence of further 
genetic heterogeneity for RLS. A new unidentified RLS locus there -
fore awaits identification. Future work includes a genome wide scan to 
identify the novel locus in this Irish family.
P1088. Association study in the 5q31-32 linkage region for 
schizophrenia using pooled DNA genotyping and family-based 
controls
I. Zaharieva1, L. Georgieva2, G. Kirov2, D. Toncheva1;  
1Medical Faculty, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia is a common disorder with high herita -
bility and increased risk for relatives of the affected probands. We have 
chosen to study a strong region of linkage to schizophrenia: 5q31-32 
in order to establish polymorphic markers associated with the disor -
der. METHODS: We have undertaken association analyses using 90 
microsatellites markers. We saturated the 14 Mbp area in 5q31-32 re -
gion at 150 kb intervals. We genotyped the microsatellites markers in 
three sets of DNA pools: a proband pool comprising 300 SZ patients, 
a parents pool (N=600) and a control pool comprising 615 health indi -
viduals, all of Bulgarian origin. RESULTS: Nine markers were selected 
for individual genotyping (cut-off p<0.15). Individual genotyping in the 
parent-proband trio sample confirmed the pooling results for two of the 
markers: D5S2017 (p=0.004) and IL9 (p=0.014) located neighbor to 
SPRY4 and IL9 genes. We are now planning detailed investigation of 
these regions and fine mapping with a dense map of additional SNPs 
markers.
P1089. Association analysis of 22 SNPs in the DISC1 gene 
in schizophrenia and bipolar affective disorder in the Polish 
population
P. M. Czerski1, A. Karpushova2, M. Wiłkość3, P. Kapelski1, B. Godlewska4, M. 
Tomaszewska3, A. Leszczyńska-Rodziewicz1, J. Hauser1, J. Landowski4, A. 
Borkowska3, M. Rietschel5, M. M. Nöthen2, S. Cichon2;  
1Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Department of Psychiatry, Poznan, 
Poland, 2University of Bonn, Life & Brain Centre, Department of Genomics, 
Bonn, Germany, 3Nicolaus Copernicus University Torun, Collegium Medicum, 
Clinical Neuropsychology Unit, Bydgoszcz, Poland, 4Medical University of 
Gdansk, Department of Psychiatry, Gdansk, Poland, 5Central Institute of Mental 
Health, Division of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Mannheim, Germany.
Linkage between schizophrenia and chromosome 1q42.2 markers has 
been reported independently in different populations worldwide. This 
region contains the gene Disrupted In Schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) which 
had been found to be disrupted by a balanced translocation and to co-
segregate with schizophrenia in a large Scottish pedigree. Association 
studies investigating DISC1 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
in a number of samples were promising but not yet compelling. In the 
present study, we aimed at investigating the possible contribution of 
DISC1 variants on the pathogenesis of schizophrenia and bipolar af -
fective disorder in the Polish population.
We investigated 22 DISC1 SNPs, chosen on the basis of previous 
association findings, using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry-based 
SNP genotyping (Sequenom’s iPLEX technology). The study sample 
comprised 501 DSM-IV diagnosed patients with schizophrenia, 418 
DSM-IV diagnosed patients with bipolar affective disorder and 530 
controls. All individuals participating in the study originated from the 
Polish population.
When single marker analysis was performed, two DISC1 SNPs 
(rs1000730 and rs1411776) showed association with bipolar affective 
disorder at the genotypic level (p=0.036, and p=0.018 respectively), 
and one DISC1 SNP (rs1000730) was associated with schizophrenia 
(p=0.012). Allelic analysis gave significant result for rs1411776 in bipo -
lar affective disorder only (p=0.009).
Our results provide modest evidence for an involvement of rs1000730 
in the predisposition to both schizophrenia and bipolar affective disor -
der, and for the contribution of rs1411776 to schizophrenia suscepti -
bility. However, these results do not withstand correction for multiple 
testing. More detailed analyses, including haplotype and phenotypic 
subgroup analysis are currently underway and will be presented.P1090. Copy Number Variations in 97 Schizophrenia Patients
D. Gumus1, G. Kirov1, W. Chen2, N. Norton1, M. Sari2, L. Georgieva1, F. Erdo -
gan2, H. Ropers2, M. J. Owen1, R. Ullmann2;  
1Cardiff University Department of Psycological Medicine Neuropsychiatric Ge -
netics Unit, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genet -
ics, Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
Genetic aberrations at the DNA copy number level are common causes 
of human genetic disorders. We have undertaken a genome-wide 
analysis of copy number changes by Tiling Path BAC Array Compara -
tive Genome Hybridisation in a cohort of 97 patients with schizophre -
nia diagnosed according to DSM-IV criteria that were recruited in Bul -
garia. Patients’ DNA was hybridised against reference DNA consisting 
of sex-matched pools. DNA was available on all parents to test fpr 
de novo  formation of chromosomal imbalances. Data were analysed 
with the CGHPRO software that has been described previously (Chen 
et.al, 2005). All data were normalised by subgrid lowess. The log2ratio 
of test to reference intensity was calculated and copy number gains 
and losses were resolved by using a conservative threshold of 0.3 and 
-0.3. Deviant signal intensity ratios involving three or more neighbour -
ing BAC clones were considered as genomic aberrations. To elimi -
nate polymorphic copy number variants, conspicuous findings were 
compared to relevant databases and other cohorts, including several 
hundred healthy controls and patients with unrelated disorders. Aber -
rations were validated with Affymetrix 250K SNP genotyping arrays. 
We identified 18 DNA copy number changes that satisfied the above 
criteria. Their size ranged from 0.1 to 1.4Mb. Two of them are likely to 
be pathogenic: one segregates with the illness in the family, and one 
because it is has arisen de novo  and partially overlaps the Prader-Willi 
critical region.
P1091. Association study of 5‘ end of NRG1 gene 
polymorphisms with schizophrenia in Ahwaz province of Iran
S. Shariati1, M. Behmanesh1, A. Fathian2, H. Galehdari2;  
1Department of Genetics, School of Sciences,Tarbiat Modares University, Teh -
ran, P.O.Box 14115-175, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department Of Genetics, 
School of Basic Sciences, Chamran University, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Schizophrenia is a severe neuropsychiatry disorder with symptoms 
such as hallucination, delusion and thought disorder. It is a complex 
disorder, and genetic components may play a crucial role in its patho -
genesis. The heritability of schizophrenia has been estimated to be 
around 80%. Among candidate genes for schizophrenia, NRG1 is 
one of the most significant which has been confirmed by several stud -
ies. NRG1 is located on 8p a locus which shows a strong linkage to 
schizophrenia. Also NRG1 plays an important role in central nervous 
system especially in signaling and neurotransmission which makes it a 
plausible candidate gene for schizophrenia. Several polymorphisms of 
NRG1 have been shown to be associated with schizophrenia in differ -
ent population. However there isn’t any information from Iranian popu -
lation. We are investigating the association of NRG1polymorphisms 
with schizophrenic patients from Ahwaz province of Iran. To high ex -
tent this is an isolated population from south-western part of Iran which 
makes it appropriate for association studies. Our study includes new 
homogenous Asian population and might bring supportive evidence for 
the association of NRG1 with schizophrenia.
P1092. DNA pooling in myelin-related genes in schizophrenia 
using whole-genome association scan with Affymetrix 500K 
arrays
L. Georgieva , N. Norton, M. J. Owen, M. O’Donovan, G. Kirov;  
Cardiff University, Department of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff, United King -
dom.
Abnormal myelination and oligodendrocyte abnormalities have been 
implicated as pathogenic processes in schizophrenia (SZ) by a diverse 
range of experimental approaches including gene expression analy -
sis, neuropathology, and neuroimaging. With the aim of establishing 
whether such abnormalities are of primary aetiological relevance to 
schizophrenia pathogenesis, we performed a whole-genome associa -
tion study using DNA pooling on Affymetrix GeneChip Mapping 500K 
SNP arrays (250K Sty / 250K Nsp). We constructed pools of ~648 SZ 
cases and ~712 age- and gender-matched controls. Depending on the 
quality of the hybridization we replicated each pool on between 8 and 
11 arrays, which provided from 6 to 8 good replicates for analysis.
We restricted the present analysis to 9985 SNPs within/around genes Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
relevant to myelination and oligodendrocyte function. In order to vali -
date the pooling predictions, we performed individual genotyping of 
54 SNPs from the top 100. This largely confirmed the predicted allele 
frequency differences. Twenty-two of the 54 SNPs showed nominally 
significant levels for association with SZ (p<0.05). The correlation be -
tween the allele frequency differences predicted by pooling and those 
produced by individual genotyping was 0.88. This work demonstrated 
the accuracy of our pooling method. Our results emphasize the fea -
sibility of using genomic DNA pooling in whole genome association 
studies for the detection of association with complex diseases.
P1093. Sequencing and detection of novel single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in the steroid 21-hydroxylase gene and 
association with the C4A/C4B copy number polymorphism in 96 
individuals
B. Blasko1, Z. Bánlaki2, G. Gyapay3, M. Sasvari-Szekely4, G. Füst2;  
1Research Group of Inflammation Biology and Immunogenomics, Budapest, 
Hungary, 23rd Department of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Buda -
pest, Hungary, 3Genoscope - Centre National de Séquençage, Evry, France, 
4Institute of Medical Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Pathobiochemistry, Sem -
melweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
The steroid-21-hydroxylase gene plays a crucial role in the synthesis 
of steroid hormones. There are two 21-hydroxylase genes in man, A 
(inactive) and B (active), and these have been localized at the MHC III 
class region on chromosome 6, in a strongly linked haplotype block. 
This block contains 4 genes: a kinase (RP), complement C4A or C4B, 
21-hydroxylase and tenascin-X. We found that the short term mortal -
ity of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) patients was influenced by the 
copy number of the C4B genes. Carriers of low C4B gene number (0 or 
1) (C4B*Q0) were found to have significantly higher risk for short-term 
mortality of AMI. The aim of the present study was to find a molecu -
lar explanation for this observation. We assumed that C4B*Q0 carrier 
state may result in impaired function of the neighboring CYP21B gene, 
associated with inadequate mobilization of steroid hormones during 
stress in critical situations. We have determined the number of C4A 
and C4B genes, and sequenced the 21-OH active gene from 96 ge -
nomic samples. Sequences were compared to all other published 21-
OH sequences. We found that both the +1106 (A) and +1113 (C) vari -
ant alleles of 21-OH gene were strongly linked to C4B*Q0 (p=0.015, 
p=0.006), respectively. This linkage was independent of the other 
MHC class III gene variants. In addition, five novel polymorphisms 
were found in the 3’-untranslated region for the 21-OH gene.
This observation indicates that the association between AMI mortality 
and C4B*Q0 may be due to the strongly associated SNPs of the 21-
OH gene.
P1094. Integrating the BigDye® XTerminator™ Kit into Various 
Laboratory Workflows
G. Amparo , M. Harrold, D. Rodriguez, E. Foster, S. Pistacchi;  
Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States.
The BigDye® XTerminator™ Kit is a new single-tube method for purify -
ing DNA sequencing reactions prior to electrophoretic analysis. The 
kit strives to not only ensure effective dye terminator removal, but also 
provides flexible protocols to fit into all types of workflows and accom -
modates low to high throughput levels. Advantages of this novel meth -
od include a simple and rapid protocol, less hands-on time allowing re -
searchers more time to focus on their research, quick turn around time, 
improved sample stability, and efficient desalting. BigDye XTerminator 
kit also has unique workflow advantages over conventional purification 
schemes such as ethanol precipitation or spin column purifications. 
Automation issues will also be described.
P1095. Association analysis of the A1438G polymorphism of 
the serotonin receptor gene HTR2A  with level of intellectual 
development (IQ) of the person
O. V. Gumerova , E. V. Lecontsev, E. V. Vorobyova, T. J. Zaripova, O. V. Efre -
mova, V. J. Gorbunova;  
Bashkir State Pedagogical University it. M. Akmulla, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Serotonin receptor gene HTR2A  (13 q14-q21) is one of the basic 
genes, which determine efficacy of serotoninergic neuromediators sys -
tem. We analyzed the associations  between  polymorphism A1438G  
located in promotor area of gene  HTR2A and a level of intellectual 
development (IQ) of at 246 unrelated individuals (18-35 years) by non -verbal Kettel test.
According to the IQ scores examinees were divided into three groups: 
with a normal level of intellectual development (IQ within the limits of 
90-110 points), high (above 110 points) and low (below 90 points). The 
group with normal level IQ has served as control group for two others.
In order to characterize A1438G  polymorphism, we performed PCR 
followed by digestion with restriction enzymes (MspI).
Genotypes *A/*A, *A/*G, *G/*G  met frequency 1) 10 %, 2) 64.67 %, 
3) 25.33 % in group of comparison, 1) 3.33 %, 2) 85 %, 3) 11.67 % in 
group with high parameters IQ and 1) 0 %, 2) 77.78 %, 3) 22.22 % in 
group with low level IQ. The analysis of associations has shown sta -
tistically significant distinctions in distribution of frequencies genotypes 
of gene HTR2A  between control group and group with high IQ scores 
(c2=11.925, P=0.003) via enhancement of frequency of genotype 
HTR2A*A/*G  (85 % against 64.67 % in group of comparison;P=0.021; 
OR=1.315; 95%CI 1.087-1.) and diminution of frequency of geno -
type HTR2A*G/*G  (11.67 % against 25.33 % in group of comparison; 
P=0.046; OR=2.172; 95%CI 1.012-5.166) in group of persons with 
high parameters IQ.
P1096. Serotonin Transporter gene (5-HTT): association analysis 
with Temporal Lobe Epilepsy.
I. Manna1, A. Labate1,2, A. Gambardella1,2, P. Forabosco3,4, A. La Russa1, E. Le 
Piane5, G. Di Palma1, U. Aguglia5, A. Quattrone1,2;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council (CNR), Man -
gone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, University Magna Græcia, Catanzaro, 
Italy, 3Istituto di Genetica delle Popolazioni- National Research Council, Alghero 
(SS), Italy, 4Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King’s College 
London School of Medicine at Guy’s, King’s College and St. Thomas’ Hospitals, 
London, United Kingdom, 5Regional Epilepsy Centre, Hospital of Reggio Cal -
abria, Reggio Calabria, Italy.
Two functional polymorphisms, a 44-base-pair insertion/deletion poly -
morphism in the 5’ regulatory region and a variable number of tandem 
repeat (VNTR) polymorphism in the second intron of the serotonin 
transporter gene (5-HTT), were previously identified and suggested to 
modulate transcription. The current study was designed to determine 
the contribution of these polymorphisms within the 5-HTT gene to sus -
ceptibility to temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE). Two hundred and seventy 
six patients with TLE and 309 age- and sex- matched healthy con -
trols from Calabria (Southern Italy) were studied. Patients and controls 
were genotyped using the WAVE TM DNA Fragment Analysis System 
for the insertion/deletion polymorphism in the promoter region (5-HT -
TLPR) and GENESCAN TM System for the (VNTR) polymorphism 
in the second intron of the 5-HTT gene (5-HTTVNTR). The program 
UNPHASED was used to compare genotype, allele and haplotype 
frequencies between cases and controls, including age and gender 
as covariates in the model. No significant differences were observed 
for 5-HTTLPR, but significant association was obtained for the 5-HT -
TVNTR polymorphism, both modelling genotypes (P-value=0.0145) or 
alleles (P-value=0.0086). Compared with controls, patients with TLE 
showed lower frequencies of the 10 repeat at 5-HTTVNTR (26.2% 
in patients vs. 40.8% in controls). A lower frequency of homozygous 
individuals for the 10 allele was observed among patients compared 
to controls (5.2% of patients were 10/10 vs. 18.8% of controls). Hap -
lotype analysis did not increase the evidence for association. These 
results suggest, for the first time, that the serotonin transporter gene 
may play a role in the aetiology of TLE.
P1097. The most common mutation of SERPINA1  gene PIZ 
molecular analysis in patients with cystic fibrosis.
D. Pilans1, B. Lace1, A. Krumina1, I. Prane1, V. Svabe2;  
1RSU scientific lab. of Molecular genetic, Riga, Latvia, 2RSU department of 
pediatrics, Riga, Latvia.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) and Alpha-1 antitripsin deficiency, are the most 
common genetic diseases, and reason of mortality and decreased life 
quality in Caucasians.
The aim of the study was to analyse PIZ mutation in SERPINA1  gene 
and common polymorphism variants frequency in patients with Cystic 
Fibrosis.
Methods: Analysis was done on 28 CF patients and 111 persons as 
control group. PIZ mutation analysis performed with artificial restric -
tion site creation PCR method. Common polymorphism variants were 
detected by Maldi-Tof technique.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
Results: From 28 CF patients SERPINA1  gene mutation Z was de -
tected in homozygote state in 1 person and heterozygote state in 2 
persons.
SNP g. 135575 in gene SERPINA1  exon III in control group was met 
SNP T/T variant; 66,66%, C/T; 30,63% and C/C; 2,70%.
From CF patients T/T; 60,71%, C/T; 35,71% and C/C; 3,57%. Obvi -
ously, the distribution by SNP groups in both cases is rather similar and 
SNP T/T is most common variant in both groups.
Small sample size does not allow to make any definitive conclusions, 
that presence PIZ mutations in CF patients, does not affect severity 
of disease.
P1098. Early influence of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 
gene promoter polymorphism on the clinical course of sickle 
cell disease
R. Martins1, A. Morais2, A. Dias3, I. Soares4, C. Rolão2, B. Nunes1, I. Picanço1, 
S. Gomes1, A. Miranda1, T. Seixas1, F. Rego2, J. Ducla-Soares2, G. Olim5, J. 
Lavinha1, L. Romão1, P. Faustino1;  
1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Hospital 
de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 3Hospital Fernando da Fonseca, Amadora, 
Portugal, 4Hospital Garcia de Orta, Almada, Portugal, 5Instituto Português de 
Sangue, Lisboa, Portugal.
The accelerated erythrocyte destruction in sickle cell disease (SCD) 
often leads to chronic hyperbilirubinaemia. The hepatic enzyme UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) mediates the conjugation of 
bilirubin into a water-soluble form. A di-nucleotide repeat polymor -
phism (TA)5-8 in the TATA box of UGT1A1  is associated with differential 
gene expression and enzyme level.
The aim of this study was to determine whether this UGT1A1 activ -
ity polymorphism could modify bilirubin metabolism in SCD, thereby 
influencing the development of cholelithiasis subsequently leading to 
cholecystectomy.
We studied 161 SCD patients with an average of 10 years of age. UG-
T1A1 promoter TA repeat number was assessed by PCR and GENE 
SCAN. Steady-state haemoglobin and total bilirubin levels, cholelithia -
sis and cholecystectomy were investigated.
Several UGT1A1  genotypes were found, the most frequent being 5/6 
(n=9), 6/6 (n=37), 6/7 (n=61) and 7/7 (n=29). These groups did not 
significantly differ in age, sex and haemoglobin level. Total bilirubin 
levels were significantly different between groups ( p=0.000) with an 
increased TA repeat number being associated with higher hyperbili -
rubinaemia. Cholelithiasis episodes ( p=0.071) and cholecystectomy 
(p=0.034) were both augmented with TA repetition, although the for -
mer difference was not statistically significant. The odds ratio of having 
cholelithiasis for the genotypes 6/7 (OR=1.455; CI=0.578-3.666) and 
7/7 (OR=2.057; CI=0.708-5.980) were increased when compared to 
6/6. The same comparison for cholecystectomy revealed an increased 
risk for genotype 7/7 only (OR=4.714; CI=0.869-25.581).
In conclusion, the UGT1A1  promoter polymorphism may represent an 
important genetic modifier of SCD even at a young age.
(Work partially supported by FCT grant IME/MGI/49853/2003).
P1099. Familial SIDS caused by LQT Syndrome
M. Akyol1, M. Hempel1, M. Hartig1, B. M. Beckmann2, C. Marschall3, M. F. Sin -
ner2, S. Kääb2, P. Freisinger1, P. Dressel1, T. Meitinger1, A. Pfeufer1;  
1TU Munich, Munich, Germany, 2LMU Munich, Munich, Germany, 3Center of 
Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine, Martinsried, Germany.
On his 17th day of life the first born son of apparently healthy parents 
suddenly experienced syncope, apnea and pulselessness. Resuscita -
tion was unsuccessful. Upon autopsy SIDS was diagnosed, no genetic 
investigation was initiated.
A second son born three years later suddenly lost tone, turned pale 
and stopped breathing on the 27th day of his life. A physician noted 
bradycardic sinus rhythm (10/min), initiated CPR and epinephrin infu -
sion and restored sinus rhythm (160/min). In hospital the child showed 
repolarization disturbances characterized by QTc up to 500ms, multi -
ple T-waves with low amplitudes and severly reduced cardiac function, 
attributed to traumatization during CPR. The boy survived but suffers 
from severe ischemic brain damage.
A marginal prolongation of QTc was noted in the mother (450 ms) 
while the father and the sister showed no abnormalities. Molecular di -
agnostic testing for LQT-Syndrome revealed a novel nonsynonymous 
D259N change in Exon 4 of the KCNH2 (LQT2) gene in our patient and his father in heterozygous state. In the light of the repolarization 
abnormalities in the mother and the uneventful history of the father we 
speculate that the mother may carry another, yet unknown molecular 
variant.
This case exemplifies three lessons for the diagnostic and therapeutic 
management of LQT and SIDS: (a) A proportion of SIDS cases (es -
timated 5-10%) can be attributed to monogenic LQT-Syndrome. (b) 
Sequencing of LQT-disease genes is mandatory in a diagnostic SIDS 
workup. (c) In severe forms of LQT compound mutations (Westenkow 
et al., Circulation 2004) may be more common than generally recog -
nized.
P1100. SimStudy: A simulation program to generate data for 
case-control and quantitative trait studies
S. M. Leal1, X. Zhang1, D. W. Covarrubias2,1;  
1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 2Rice University, 
Houston, TX, United States.
The SimStudy program can generate population based data which 
is extremely beneficial in evaluating tagSNP selection, haplotype re -
construction and population admixture/substructure. Additionally the 
program can be used to assess type I and type II errors of statistical 
methods used to detect gene main effects as well as gene x gene 
and gene x environmental interactions. The SimStudy program can 
generate di-and multiallelic marker loci data which are in linkage equi -
librium or disequilibrium for qualitative (case-control) or quantitative 
trait data. Cases-control status is determined by penetrance models 
or genotypic relative risks under a specified genetic model (i.e. multi -
plicative, additive, etc), or based upon threshold values for a quantita -
tive trait. Quantitative trait loci are generated based upon genotypic 
means, variances and specified distributions (e.g. normal, log normal, 
exponential, etc). For both qualitative and quantitative traits it is pos -
sible to model gene x gene (epsitatis) and gene x environmental in -
teractions as well as locus and allelic heterogeneity. Additionally class 
specific data can be generated based upon for example age, sex, or 
environmental exposures. Missing data and genotyping error may also 
be incorporated in the generation of genotype data. The program can 
quickly generate a large number of replicates for data sets with an 
almost unlimited number of marker and trait susceptibility loci. For the 
simulated data, SimStudy can generate reports with pair-wise r2 and D’ 
values between all marker and susceptibility loci. The SimStudy pro -
gram is written in C and is available free of charge for Unix, Linux and 
Windows platforms.
P1101. Carrier Frequency of Spinal Muscular Atrophy in the 
Iranian Population
M. Hasanzad1,2, B. Shoja Saffar1, A. Aghajani Refah1, Z. Keihanidoust3, K. 
Kahrizi1, E. F. Tizzano4, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center (GRC), University of Social Welfare & Rehabilita -
tion Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Science and Research Cam -
pus, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Imam Khomeini 
Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 
Iran, 4Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
INTRODUCTION: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is the second most 
frequent autosomal recessive disorder. The incidence of SMA is one 
per 10,000 live births with a carrier frequency of 1/50. The SMA deter -
mining gene, called the survival motor neuron (SMN) gene, is pres -
ent on 5q13 in two copies SMN1 (telomeric) and SMN2 (centromeric). 
Homozygous deletions of exons 7 and 8 of SMN1 occur in >95% of 
patients with SMA.
MATERIAL & METHODS: DNA extraction was performed according to 
the standard protocol from 400 normal individuals from different ethnic 
groups of Iran as listed in the WHO report (Persian 51%, Azari 24%, 
Gilak & Mazandaran 8%, Kurd 7%, Arab 2%, Baluch 2%, and Turkmen 
2%). Exon 7 of the SMN gene was analyzed using a PCR-based pro -
tocol followed by digestion using DraI restriction enzyme. A total of 40 
obligate carriers were studied to determine the telomeric centromeric 
ratio for carrier detection.
RESULTS & CONCLUSION: According to the T/C ratio, 52 (13%) indi -
viduals are carriers, while the remaining are normal for the SMN gene 
copy number. In conclusion, our results demonstrated a high frequen -
cy of SMA carriers in the Iranian population, about five times higher 
than that of the European population.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
P1102. A possible association between Bam H1 perlecan gene 
polymorphism and the risk of spinal muscular atrophy in 
Romanian patients
M. F. Stavarachi1, P. Apostol1, D. Cimponeriu1, M. Toma1, N. Butoianu2, C. Bur -
loiu2, L. Dan1, L. Cherry1, S. Magureanu2, I. Radu1, L. Dumitrescu1, L. Gavrila1;  
1Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2Alexandru Obregia Hospital, Bu -
charest, Romania.
Perlecan is a heparan sulfate proteoglycan with various biological 
functions, including the neuromuscular one. Recent data have re -
vealed functional mutations of perlecan gene in disorders character -
ized by severe myotonia. No correlation study between perlecan gene 
polymorphisms and spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) was performed 
before.
The aim of our study was to investigate the correlation between the 
BamH1 perlecan gene polymorphism and the risk for spinal muscular 
atrophy in Romanian patients.
We investigated 63 spinal muscular atrophy patients and 100 normal 
control subjects. The SMA patients were diagnosed according to the 
SMA International Consortium and the informed consent was obtained 
for all the subjects. The Bam H1 perlecan gene polymorphism was 
detected using PCR-RFLP method.
The values obtained for the perlecan genotypes are shown in the 
table.
We performed the χ2 test for both lots, the results confirming that the 
populations are in a Hardy - Weinberg equilibrium (χ2 = 2.73, DF =1, p 
= 0.05 for the SMA patients lot; χ2 = 3.62, DF=1, p = 0.05 for the control 
lot). For the risk genotype G/G we obtained an OR = 1.164.
These are the preliminary results only. Therefore, in a future prospec -
tive study, by increasing the subject number, we hope to establish a 
more accurate correlation between BamH1 gene polymorphism and 
the risk for SMA.
Genotypes SMA patients Control subjects
T/T 31 (49.2%) 53 (53%)
T/G 30 (47.6%) 34 (34%)
G/G 2 (3.2%) 13 (13%)
P1103. Carrier Frequency of Spinal Muscular Atrophy in the 
Largest Island of Persian Gulf (Qeshm)
B. Shoja Saffar1, M. Hasanzad1, R. Vazifemand1, A. Anousheh1, A. Nazeri1, K. 
Kahrizi1, E. F. Tizzano2, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Genetics Research Center (GRC), University of Social Welfare & Rehabilita -
tion Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Hospital de Sant Pau, Barce -
lona, Spain.
INTRODUCTION: Spinal muscular atrophy is a neuromuscular disor -
der caused by the degeneration of α-motor neurons of the spinal cord 
anterior horns. It is an autosomal recessive disorder with an incidence 
of 1/6000 to 1/10000 and a carrier frequency of 1/40 to 1/50. Qeshm 
the largest island of Persian Gulf has population of more than 100,000 
people. The main ethnic group is Persians with minorities of Arabs, 
Balouch, Indians, Portugese and African Blacks. The large size of 
Qeshm, its ethnic variety and tribal life style and relatively large popu -
lation, make this island a proper site for genetic study. MATERIAL & 
METHODS: One hundred seventy eight healthy individuals participat -
ed in this study in order to find carrier frequency of SMA in this in this 
Island. Exon 7 of the SMN gene was amplified, followed by PCR prod -
ucts digestion using DraI restriction enzyme. In our study, analysis of 
the ratio of the telomeric to centromeric portion (T/C ratio) of the SMN 
gene after enzyme digestion was performed using LabWork Software 
in order to differentiate carriers, normal and affected individuals.
RESULT & CONCLUSION: Our result shows 22 out of 178(16%) were 
carriers while the remaining was normal. In conclusion our findings 
indicate SMA carrier frequency in the Island Qeshm is six times higher 
than European and American population.
P1104. Alpha-synuclein promoter haplotypes and dementia in 
Parkinson’s disease
S. Carrideo1, E. V. De Marco1, P. Tarantino1, F. E. Rocca1, G. Provenzano1, D. 
Civitelli1, F. Annesi1, I. C. Cirò Candiano1, N. Romeo1, G. Nicoletti1, R. Marconi2, 
G. Annesi1;  
1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone (CS), 
Italy, 2Department of Neurology, Misericordia Hospital, Grosseto, Italy.
Dementia is a common complication of Parkinson’s disease (PD). It 
correlates significantly with the presence of cortical, limbic or nigral Lewy bodies, mainly constituted of alpha-synuclein. Mutations of the 
alpha-synuclein gene have been linked to rare familial forms of PD, 
while association studies on the promoter polymorphisms have given 
conflicting results in sporadic patients. In a previous study we did not 
find association between the Rep 1 polymorphism of the SNCA  pro-
moter and PD in our population. Since haplotype analysis has proven 
to be a more reliable method in association studies, in this work we 
analyzed a more extended region of the the SNCA  promoter . We per -
formed a case control study to investigate whether genetic variability 
in the promoter of the alpha-synuclein gene could predispose to de -
mentia in PD. A total of 114 demented patients and 114 non-demented 
patients with sporadic PD were included in the study. Six polymorphic 
loci (including the Rep1 microsatellite) in the promoter of the SNCA  
gene were examined. Each marker, taken individually, did not show 
association to dementia and no significant differences were observed 
in the inferred haplotype frequencies of demented and non-demented 
patients (p=0.73). Our data suggest the lack of involvement of the  
SNCA promoter in the pathogenesis of dementia in PD. Further stud -
ies in other populations are needed to confirm these results.
P1105. Further evidence for additional loci for split hand/foot 
malformation in chromosome regions 4q32-q35 and 6q16-q22
D. Niedrist , A. Schinzel;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Switzer -
land.
On the basis of the Human Cytogenetic Database (HCDB) we col -
lected from the literature 102 cases with chromosomal aberrations and 
split hand/foot malformation or absent fingers/toes. Statistical analysis 
revealed highly significant association (p<0.001) between the malfor -
mation and the chromosomal bands 4q32-q35, 5q15, 6q16-q22 and 
7q21-q22 (SHFM1). Considering these findings we suppose additional 
SHFM loci on chromosome 4q, 6q and probably 5q. The regions 4q 
and 6q have already been discussed in the literature as additional 
SHFM loci. We now show further evidence. In the proposed regions 
there are interesting candidate genes such as SNX3, GJA1, HEY1, 
HEY2, Tbx18, HAND2, FGF2, LEF1, BMPR1B, MSX2, FLT4, PTX1 
and PDLIM7.
P1106. Unravelling the genetic aetiology of stroke in Pakistan
P. M. Frossard1, D. Saleheen2, U. Ahmad3;  
1Medical College, Karachi, Pakistan, 2Cambridge University, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom, 3Department of Surgery, Yale University, New Haven, CT, United 
States.
The incidence of stroke is on the rise in developing countries. In search 
of quantitative trait loci at candidate genes underlying the aetiology of 
ischaemic stroke (IS) in Pakistan, we designed an association study 
with 210 IS cases and 350 disease-free controls. Associations of ge -
netic dimorphisms with IS were tested by single-point and haplotype 
analyses. The three following loci were directly associated with clinical 
IS diagnosis:
Phosphodiesterase 4D ( PDE4D ): amongst three PDE4D genetic 
markers (SNP32, 83 and 87, see Gretarsdottir  et al ., Nat Genet. 
2003;35:131-138 ), TT genotypes of SNP83C>T conferred a significant 
risk for IS on both univariate and multivariate analyses ( P<0.005).
Paraoxonase genes ( PON1 , 2 and 3): amongst eight markers, PON1  
192Q>R, PON2 148G>A and PON2 311C>S were associated with IS, 
and QAS haplotypes indicated a 1.87-fold increased risk of developing 
IS (P=0.01).
ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 gene ( ABCA1 ): we studied five 
intragenic markers, and first established that the RL haplotype (com -
bination of R219K and V825L marker mutations) was strongly asso -
ciated with decreased HDL-c levels (OR=8.33, P=0.001). We then 
found that allele 774P of mutation T774P showed the strongest di -
rect association with IS (OR=4.06, P<10-7). We further demonstrated 
that a three-point VPL haplotype (combination of V771M, T774P and 
V825L markers) was indicative of a very strong increased risk for IS 
(OR=10.34, P<10-7).
Upon applying an overall, single multivariate model, we established 
that two major gene effects ( ABCA1  and PON ) and one minor gene 
effect ( PDE4D ) account for 65.3% of IS in the studied Pakistani popu -
lation.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
P1107. Association analysis of the triallelic polymorphism of the 
serotonin transporter gene with suicide
Z. Khalilova , D. Gaysina, E. Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Serotonergic dysfunction has been implicated in the pathophysiology 
of suicidality. The serotonin transporter (5-HTT) strongly modulates se -
rotonin function and is a major therapeutic target in several psychiat -
ric diseases, including anxiety, depression, and suicide. 5-HTTLPR, a 
functional polymorphism of the 5-flanking region of the 5-HTT gene has 
been intensively studied for association with suicidal behaviour. Some, 
but not all, studies using biallelic S/L genotyping have demonstrated a 
higher frequency of the low activity S allele and with suicidal behavior. 
A>G polymorphism (rs25531) has been detected within 5-HTTLPR: 
LG haplotype is equivalent to the lower expressing S allele. The aim 
of our study was to examine the relationship of a triallelic 5-HTTLPR 
polymorphism to suicidal behavior in a gender-specific manner. 231 
suicide attempters (79 men, 152 women) and 264 healthy volunteers 
(160 men, 104 women) without history of suicidal behaviour from the 
general population of Russia were genotyped for the triallelic 5-HT -
TLPR polymorphism using PCR-RFLP technique. All individuals were 
considered as LL carriers (LALA), LS carriers (LAS, LALG) or SS carriers 
(SS, LGS, LGLG). The distribution of allelic and genotype frequencies 
were in accordance with the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. We revealed 
no significant differences in allele and genotype distribution between 
suicide and control groups. In women there was a tendency of a lower 
frequency of the LS carriers in suicide group compared to that in con -
trol group (chi2=3.5; p=0.06; OR=0.62, 95%CI 0.38-1.02). Our findings 
indicate a possible contribution of the 5-HTT gene to susceptibility for 
suicidal behaviour in females only.
P1108. Analysis of type I collagen α1 and α2 chains genes in 
patients with syringomyelia from Bashkortostan
T. N. Mirsaev1, D. V. Islamgulov2, E. K. Khusnutdinova2;  
1Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Bio -
chemistry and Genetics of Ufa Scientific Center of RAS, Ufa, Russian Federa -
tion.
Syringomyelia is a rare disease of the spinal cord that causes neuro -
logical deficit. A mendelian transmission of syringomyelia (autosomal 
dominant or recessive) has been proposed in approximately 2% of 
reported cases. The association of syringomyelia with hereditary dis -
eases (Noonan’s syndrome, phacomatoses) has been mentioned fre -
quently in the literature. However the possible involvement of a genetic 
component in some cases of syringomyelia is debated. In Bashkorto -
stan republic syringomyelia rate is one of the highest around the world 
(3.2 - 130 cases per 100 000 inhabitants).
The aim of the present study was to test two polymorphisms in genes 
encoding proteins of α1 and α2 chains of collagen ( A/Msp I of the Co-
l1A1 gene, B/Msp I of the Col1A2 gene) for association with syringomy -
elia in patients from Bashkortostan. 132 patients presented with mag -
netic resonance imaging (MRI)-proven syringomyelia and 196 controls 
were typed for the above-mentioned gene variants using polymerase 
chain reaction technique.
Our data indicate the contribution of Col1A1 *A (p=0.013, OR=1.28, 
95%CI=1.07-1.99) and  Col1A2 *N (p=0.011, OR=1.37, 95%CI=1.12-
2.03) alleles to susceptibility for syringomyelia in samples from 
Bashkortostan. Further analysis showed overrepresentation of the 
Col1A1 *A/*A (p=0.023, OR=1.6, 95%CI=1.05-1.59) and  Col1A2 *N/*N  
(p=0.007, OR=1.96, 95%CI=0.75-2.4) genotypes  among patients 
compared to controls and these genotypes can be possible markers 
of syringomyelia.
Advances in knowledge about the genetic basis of syringomyelia offer 
the prospect of developing new approaches to treatments of this disor -
der.The work was supported by RSCI grant #05-06-06168a.
P1109. Association of Interferon Regulatory Factor 5 ( IRF ) 
polymorphisms with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
H. Siu1, W. L. Yang1, C. S. Lau2, T. M. Chan2, H. S. Wong1, Y. L. Lau1, M. E. 
Alarcon-Riquelme3;  
1Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of Hong Kong, 
Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 2Department of Paediatrics and 
Adolescent Medicine and Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hos -
pital, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 3Department of Genetics and Pathology#, Unit of Medical Genetics, Rudbcek Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
Background:
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune dis -
ease characterized by the dysfunction of immune cells, leading to hy -
peractivity of B cells and over-production of autoantibodies and the 
formation of immune complexes.
The level of IFN-α, a type I interferon, is correlated with both SLE dis -
ease activity and severity, and is therefore suggested to be involved in 
the pathogenesis of SLE. Activation of transcription factors, including 
Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRFs) 3, 5 and 7 can modulate the ex -
pression of type I IFN genes. IRFs control inflammation, immunity and 
apoptosis. Irf5 knockout mouse also shows reduction of pro-inflamma -
tory cytokines, including IL-6, IL-12 and TNF-a production. Recently 
several association studies in different populations have reported that 
IRF5 gene is a susceptibility gene of SLE.
Methods:
We hypothesized that polymorphisms of IRF5  may affect the suscep -
tibility and severity of SLE in the Hong Kong Chinese population. SNP 
rs2004640 creates a 5’ donor splice site for alternate isoform of tran -
script in exon 1, whereas rs10954213 creates a functional polyadenyl -
ation site in 3’ UTR and affects the expression of transcript variants. 
The 2 SNPs were genotyped in 444 SLE patients and 410 healthy 
controls, using sequencing.
Results:
No association of IRF5 gene polymorphisms with SLE was found. How -
ever, an overall difference in the distribution of the haplotype frequen -
cies between SLE patients and controls was detected. The haplotype 
TA was identified as a probable risk haplotypes associated with SLE.
P1110. Association study of the GABAA cluster on 15q11-13 with 
Tourette Syndrome in the French Canadian population.
J. Riviere1, Y. Dion2, P. Lesperance1, G. Tellier3, F. Richer1, S. Chouinard1, G. 
A. Rouleau1;  
1CHUM Research Centre, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 2McGill University Health 
Centre, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 3Sainte Justine Hospital, Montreal, PQ, Cana -
da.
Tourette Syndrome (TS) is a complex neuropsychiatric disorder mani -
fested by motor and vocal tics and often associated with behavioral 
abnormalities. Various neurotransmitters involved in the cortico-stria -
tal-thalamo-cortical circuits have been implicated in TS, including the 
dopaminergic, glutamatergic, GABAergic, serotonergic, and noradren -
ergic systems. However, most of the genetic studies have focused on 
candidate genes implicated in dopamine neurotransmission. The goal 
of this study was to investigate the genetic association between single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the cluster of GABAA receptor 
subunit genes on 15q11-13 and TS in the French Canadian (FC) popu -
lation. This region has been consistently implicated in several neuro -
developmental disorders and behavioral abnormalities.
With an average spacing of 33 Kb, 26 SNPs spanning the GABAA re-
ceptor subunit genes (GABRB3, GABRA5, GABRG3) were selected 
based on minor allele frequency >0.1, spacing and haplotype blocks. 
We performed a family-based association study by typing these SNPs 
in 212 FC trios with TS. Transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT) and 
haplotype analyses of various SNP-windows were performed using 
the TDTPHASE program. Because these genes may be subject to 
genomic imprinting, we also performed analyses of transmission by 
parental sex.
TDT of individual markers and haplotype analyses did not provide 
positive association results. When analyzed separately, paternal and 
maternal transmissions provided various p values < 0.05, but these 
results did not remain significant after correction for multiple testing. 
These data suggest that the GABAA cluster on 15q11-13 is not a sus -
ceptibility locus for TS.
P1111. Use of SNP array analyses for diagnosis of autosomal 
recessive heterogeneous diseases : identification of the second 
TRIM32 mutation in limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2H
M. Cossée1,2, C. Lagier-Tourenne1,3, C. Tranchant4, C. Seguela1, F. Leturcq5, V. 
Biancalana1,6, N. Dondaine1, C. Stoetzel6, J. Chelly5, E. Flori7, H. Dollfus2,6, M. 
Koenig1,3, J. Mandel1,3;  
1Laboratoire de diagnostic génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, 
Strasbourg, France, 2Service de génétique médicale, Hôpitaux Universitaires 
de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3IGBMC (CNRS/INSERM/ULP), Illkirch, Genetic analysis, linkage, and association20
France, 4Département de neurologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, 
Strasbourg, France, 5Laboratoire de biochimie et génétique moléculaire, CHU 
Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 6Laboratoire de génétique médicale, EA3949, 
Faculté de Médecine, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, 
France, 7Laboratoire de cytogénétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, 
Strasbourg, France.
Molecular diagnosis of rare autosomal recessive diseases with genetic 
heterogeneity represents a real challenge because clinical data do not 
always suggest a particular defective gene. Consanguinity is frequent 
in such families. Genome-wide SNP array is a recent tool that allows, 
by searching for homozygous regions in such patients, to select few 
candidate genes in which to search for mutations. We report the case 
of a 51 years old woman who presents a moderate limb-girdle mus -
cular dystrophy, diagnosed at the age of 37 years. We identified six 
homozygous regions by SNP array analysis (Affymetrix). One of the 
regions, on chromosome 9, contained the TRIM32 gene. This gene 
was previously found mutated in families with limb-girdle muscular 
dystrophy type 2H (LGMD2H), a mild autosomal recessive myopathy 
described in the Manitoba Hutterite population and in two non-Hutterite 
brothers from Germany with sarcotubular myopathy. A single muta -
tion was found in these patients, D487N, located in a conserved do -
main of the C-terminal part of the protein. Haplotype analysis showed 
that Hutterite and German patients shared common ancestry. TRIM32 
was also implicated in Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS11), again based 
on a single missense mutation (P130S, in the N-terminal part) found 
in a consanguineous Bedouin family, rising the possibility that either 
the LGMD or the BBS nucleotide change could be associated with 
disease by linkage disequilibrium rather than being disease causing. 
Sequencing of TRIM32 in our patient revealed a frameshift mutation, 
c.1753_1766dup14 (p.L589fs) in the C-terminal part. This second mu -
tation firmly establishes the role of TRIM32 in LGMD.
P1112. Tumor Necrosis Factor polymorphisms and asthma 
in two international population-based cohorts (ECRHS and 
SAPALDIA studies)
F. Castro-Giner1, R. F. de Cid2, M. Mächler3, M. Imboden3, M. Wjst4, D. Jarvis5, 
M. Kogevinas1, N. M. Probst-Hensch2;  
1Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology, Barcelona, Spain, 2Cen-
ter for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain, 3University of Zurich, 
Zurich, Switzerland, 4GSF-National Research Center for Environmental Health, 
Munich, Germany, 5Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.
Genetic association studies have associated the Tumor Necrosis Fac -
tor (TNF) 308G/A  polymorphism with an increased asthma risk but, 
overall, results are inconsistent. We assessed the prevalence of atopy 
and asthma in adults with two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
of the TNF and lymphotoxin α ( LTA) genes.
The European Community Respiratory Health Survey (ECRHS) and 
the Swiss Cohort Study on Air Pollution and Lung and Heart Disease 
in Adults (SAPALDIA) are two population based cohorts that have 
used comparable protocols including the questionnaires for respira -
tory symptoms and exposures as well as lung function and atopy tests. 
DNA samples from 10,736 participants from both cohorts were geno -
typed for TNF-308  and LTA+252 .
The prevalence of asthma symptoms was 6%. The TNF-308  polymor -
phism was associated with an increased asthma prevalence. The ad -
justed odds ratio (OR) for A allele was 1.30 (95%CI 1.1-1.53) for com -
bined sample, 1.49 (95%CI 1.22-1.81) for ECRHS and 0.94 (95%CI 
0.69-1.29) for SAPALDIA study. Association pattern shows slight differ -
ences between countries. Similar risks were observed in groups strati -
fied by sex, smoking and atopy. The LTA+252  SNP was not associated 
with the prevalence of asthma symptoms or atopy. Haplotype analysis 
of both SNPs didn’t show a combined effect, with an OR for LTA+252  
and TNF-308 rare alleles, 1.29 (95%CI 1.09-1.52).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that genetic variation in TNF may 
contribute to a small extent to asthma risk but that this risk may differ 
between countries.
Funding: MaratoTV3, Catalonia, Spain; Genoma España; Swiss Na -
tional Science Foundation, Switzerland; Lung League Zürich, Switzer -
landP1113. Glucose tolerance test in the Turner syndrome families
L. Salomskienė , A. Sinkus, I. Andriuskeviciute, L. Jurkėnienė;  
Kaunas University of Medicine, Kaunas, Lithuania.
The chromosome diseases are polymorphic because a chromosome 
imbalance lowers the threshold of appearance in family pathology. The 
decreased homeostatic buffering in developmental pathways leads to 
stronger phenotypical expression of multifactorially inherited traits. For 
our investigation were chosen the families with Turner syndrome (TS) 
patients since they show many extragenital pathology. Peroral glucose 
tolerance test (GTT) was made for them because glucose intolerance 
is typically multifactorial trait.
GTT was performed for 37 TS patients, 42 their siblings (21 broth -
er and 21 sister) and 52 parents (32 mothers and 20 fathers). The 
average age of TS patients was 20.8 yrs (ranking from 5 to 46 yrs), 
siblings 20.0 yrs (ranking interval 6-56 yrs), and in parents 48.1 yrs 
(ranking between 27 and 76 yrs). Glucose tolerance was found being 
disturbed in 7 (19.0%) probands, in 4 (9.5%) siblings and in 9 (17.3%) 
parents while in the control Lithuanian population these disturbances 
were found only in 1.7% of people at the age of 24-35 yrs and in 5.0% 
of those who are older than 35 yrs old. Therefore, the GTT shows 
glucose intolerance level being much more higher for TS patients and 
their relatives than in general population. These results allow us to 
affirm that damages of homeostasis usually present in families with 
chromosome diseases. The frequency of GTT disturbances in TS pa -
tients are twice more often than in their siblings.
P1114. Mutations of PEO1 gene encoding Twinkle helicase 
causes mitochondrial DNA depletion
E. Sarzi1, S. Goffart2, D. Chretien1, V. Serre1, A. Slama3, A. Munnich1, J. 
Spelbrink2, A. Rötig4;  
1INSERM U781, Paris, France, 2Institute of Medical Technology and Tampere 
University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 3Hôpital du Kremlin Bicêtre, Paris, 
France, 4INSERM U781, PARIS, France.
Twinkle is a mitochondrial 5’-3’ DNA helicase is important for mitochon -
drial DNA (mtDNA) maintenance. Twinkle dominant mutations have 
been reported in progressive external ophthalmoplegia with multiple 
mtDNA deletions (adPEO) whereas Twinkle recessive mutations are 
associated with infantile onset spinocerebellar ataxia (IOSCA). It has 
been previously shown that Twinkle control mtDNA copy number ren -
ders Twinkle gene (PEO1) a candidate gene for mtDNA depletion. We 
selected a series of 10 patients born to consanguineous parents and 
presenting a severe mtDNA depletion of yet unknown origin. We then 
studied the segregation of microsatellite markers flanking PEO1 in 
these patients. Homozygosity of the microsatellite markers was found 
for two patients of the same family. They presented neonatal lactic aci -
dosis, trunk hypotonia, seizures, cytolysis and cholestasis. A combined 
defect of complexes I, III and IV of the mitochondrial respiratory chain 
was found in liver of both patients as well as severe mtDNA depletion 
(8% of the normal mtDNA content). This prompted us to sequence 
PEO1 and to identify a homozygous mutation at a conserved position 
of the protein (T457I). The similarity of Twinkle and GP4D helicase 
from phage T7 prompted us to model the structure of this human heli -
case using the X-ray coordinates of the homohexameric GP4D protein 
as a tertiary template. Interestingly, the point mutation is located in the 
interface between two monomers of the hexameric enzyme, and can 
probably induce a local conformational change. This work reports the 
first description of a PEO1 mutation responsible for mtDNA depletion 
in human.
P1115. HLA B39 affects the type 1 diabetes predisposing effect 
of DRB1*0404-DQB1*0302 haplotypes in the Finnish population
K. Lipponen1, Z. Gombos1, A. P. Laine1, O. Simell2, M. Knip3,4, R. Hermann1,5, 
J. Ilonen1,6;  
1University of Turku, Immunogenetics Laboratory, Turku, Finland, 2University of 
Turku, Department of Paediatrics, Turku, Finland, 3Tampere University Hospital, 
Department of Paediatrics, Tampere, Finland, 4University of Helsinki, Hospital 
for Children and Adolescents, Helsinki, Finland, 5Semmelweis University, Bu -
dapest, Hungary, 6University of Kuopio, Department of Clinical Microbiology, 
Kuopio, Finland.
An autoimmune attack against the insulin-producing β-cells of the pan -
creas precedes the manifestation of clinical type 1 diabetes (T1D). The 
genetic factors regulating this process are poorly characterised. The 
main factors are DQB1-, DRB1- and DQA1-genes in human leuko -Genetic analysis, linkage, and association21
cyte antigen (HLA) Class II area. However, several studies support 
the modifying role of HLA Class I variants. We aimed to characterize 
Class I modifiers of the DRB1*0404-DQB1*0302 haplotypes in relation 
to T1D risk and to emergence of humoral beta-cell autoimmunity.
We analysed 303 ICA-positive children who were identified in a popula -
tion-based genetic screening. All individuals carried the DQB1*02/*0302 
or *0302/x (x≠*02, *0301, *0602) risk genotypes. Mean follow-up time 
was 5.46 years. Study subjects were further tested for insulin, IA2 
and GAD autoantibodies and genotyped for HLA DRB1-DQA1-DQB1, 
HLA-B and for the insulin gene HphI promoter polymorphism.
The DRB1*0404-DQB1*0302-HLA-B*39 and DRB1*0404-DQB1*0302-
non-HLA-B*39 haplotypes conferred significantly different T1D risks, 
the haplotype carrying HLA-B*39 being more predisposing (HR 7,08; 
p<0,001). These haplotypes also had a differential effect on the ap -
pearance of insulin autoantibodies (p=0,0001). This effect was inde -
pendent of the insulin gene polymorphism. The presence of HLA-B*39 
did not affect emergence of GADA and IA-2A.
For the first time we showed that B*39 allele on the DRB1*0404-
DQB1*0302 haplotype affects appearance of diabetes-related auto -
antibodies and progression to clinical disease. Importantly, its primary 
effect appears to be on insulin-specific autoimmunity. It is further in -
vestigated whether the B*39 allele itself or a gene in the surrounding 
genomic region is responsible for this phenomenon.
P1116. Association of alleles at polymorphic sites in the 
Osteopontin encoding gene in young Type 1 diabetic patients
R. Marciano1, G. D’Annunzio2, N. Minuto2, F. Giacopelli1, A. Santamaria1, M. Di 
Duca3, R. Ravazzolo1, R. Lorini2;  
1Molecular Genetics, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 2Pediatric Clinic of the 
University of Genova, Genova, Italy, 3Lab. Nephrology, G. Gaslini Institute, 
Genova, Italy.
In the complex interplay of genes related to immune response and 
autoimmune process in Type 1 diabetes (T1D), several candidates can 
be envisaged as susceptibility genes. We have studied polymorphisms 
in the Osteopontin (OPN) encoding gene by comparison of genotype, 
allele and haplotype frequencies between T1D cases and unaffected 
controls and immunological characteristics in T1D cases. We evalu -
ated 238 T1D patients (130 male, 108 female), and 137 unaffected 
control individuals (68 males and 69 females). All patients and controls 
were genotyped for three OPN intragenic variants: -156 (G/GG) and 
-66 (T/G) in the promoter region and a biallelic ins/del variant (TG/
TGTG) at +245 in the first intron of the gene. The results of the case/
control association study indicated that the G allele at the -66 SNP had 
significantly higher frequency in controls than cases. Accordingly, the 
B haplotype combination, that includes the -66 G allele, showed signifi -
cantly higher frequency in controls than cases. Interestingly, case-con -
trol comparison in male individuals showed no significant association, 
whereas the association was confirmed in females.
Considering patients with 1 b-cell autoantibody versus those having 
two or more autoantibodies, the T allele at the -66 SNP showed a 
relative increase of genotypic frequency in T1D cases with high num -
ber of autoantibodies. This was also the case in patients with two or 
more b-cell autoantibodies who were carriers of 4 HLA-DQ risk het -
erodimers. These results suggest that Osteopontin can play a role as 
susceptibility gene, possibly by a sex-specific mechanism acting in the 
autoimmune process.
P1117. Gender-Specific effects of cytokine genes on childhood 
vaccine responses
G. S. Baynam1, G. Zhang1, S. Khoo1, P. Sly1, P. Holt1, J. Goldblatt2, P. Le 
Souef1;  
1University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia, 2Genetic Services of Western 
Australia, Perth, Australia.
Background: The effects of cytokine genes on vaccine responses are 
context dependent. Gender-specific genetic effects have been dem -
onstrated on many phenotypes, however, their influence on vaccine 
response is unknown.
Objectives: To investigate gender-specific effects of cytokine gene 
polymorphisms on vaccine response.
Method: In 263 2 year-old subjects selected for parental history of ato -
py, we investigated gene-gender interaction effects on IgG responses 
to diphtheria (DiphTox) and tetanus toxoids (TetTox) using a likeli -
hood-ratio test and comparing an unrestricted (with interaction) and a restricted (without interaction) model. Interactions identified were 
explored by stratification for gender.
Findings: For TetTox responses, an interaction p value <0.15 was 
found for: IL-4 C-589T (p=0.01), IL-4 G2979T (p=0.12), IL-4Rα I50V 
(p=0.04) and IL-10 C-592A (p=0.13). For DiphTox responses, the in -
teraction term for IL4 C-589T was p=0.10. After stratification, we found 
associations with alleles associated with atopy. Boys with IL-4 -589T 
alleles (CT/TT) had increased DiphTox (p=0.011) and TetTox (p=0.042) 
responses compared with CC homozygotes and those with IL-4Rα 
50V alleles (IV/VV) had higher levels of DiphTox (p=0.039) and TetTox 
(p=0.077) responses compared with II homozygotes. Contrastingly, 
girls with IL10 -592C alleles (AC/CC) had significantly lower levels of 
DiphTox (p=0.028) and TetTox (p=0.018) responses compared with AA 
homozygotes. Overall, the most consistent pattern was a reduction in 
TetTox responses in girls with genotypes associated with atopy.
Conclusion: Our findings support the interaction of primary genetic 
and modifying factors on vaccine responses, the importance of atopic 
genetics to vaccine responses and investigation for gender-specific 
effects in genetic association studies.
P1118. The Vitamin D Receptor Gene Polymorphisms are 
associated with diabetes mellitus in Romanian Population
C. Serafinceanu1, D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol2, D. Ungureanu3, C. Moldovan3, 
I. Radu2, A. Craciun1, C. Panaite1, A. Dragomir1, M. Apostol1, P. Cimponeriu1, L. 
Gavrila2, D. Cheta1;  
1N Paulescu Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2Institute of Genetics, Bucharest, 
Romania, 3Titu Maiorescu University, Bucharest, Romania.
Vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene polymorphisms were associated with 
development of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1DM) in some populations. 
In addition vitamin D may influence insulin secretion and insulin sensi -
tivity. Based on these observations the VDR gene polymorphisms are 
considered potential candidate for diabetes mellitus development.
The aim of the present case-control study was to evaluate the impact 
of VDR polymorphisms to the T1DM in Romanian Caucasian popula -
tion.
Clinical information and biological samples from 800 unrelated Roma -
nian Caucasian subjects were collected. They were distributed into 
T1DM (n=200, men: women, 105:95), T2DM (n=200, men: women, 
105:95), HC (n=400 healthy control) groups. These groups were 
matched for age, gender and ethnicity. The VDR Apa, Taq, Fok poly -
morphisms were analyzed using PCR-RFLP method. The distribution 
of genotypes in all groups was in agreement with Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium. Differences in genotypes and alleles distribution between 
the groups were examined by chi-square test. We observed that the 
VDR F, t and A alleles and FF, TT and AA genotypes are more fre -
quent in T1DM patients than in controls. The highest difference was 
observed for VDR Fok (Chi-square =12,8961, p≤0.01). This polymor -
phism is also more frequent in T2DM than in control subjects, but the 
difference is less significant than in T1DM patients.
P1119. Polymorphism of the vitamin D receptor gene and 
osteocalcin gene in insulin-dependent diabetic children with and 
without osteopenia.
O. S. Romashkina , L. V. Tirtova, D. N. Baranov, P. B. Glazkov, V. I. Larionova;  
St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Fed -
eration.
Insulin-dependent diabetes is often associated with osteopenia. The 
mechanism of this association is not yet clear. Genetic factors play an 
important role in the pathogenesis of osteoporosis and osteopenia. 
Recent studies, aimed to identify the genes, involved in this process, 
suggested several candidate genes, among them vitamin D receptor 
gene (VDR) and osteocalcin gene. In this study we investigated the 
allele frequency of the VDR gene polymorphic loci, determined by the 
presence or absence of the restriction sites to ApaI, TaqI and BsmI 
ensimes and allele frequency of the osteocalcin gene polymorphic loci, 
determined by the presence or absence of the restriction site to HindIII 
endonuclease. The aim of this study was to compare the frequency of 
these alleles in the group of children with insulin-dependent diabetes, 
associated and not associated with osteopenia.
In total, 224 children ( 116 boys and 108 girls) with insulin-dependent 
diabetes wereincluded in our study. All the children were living in North-
West region of Russia. Osteopenia was diagnosed in 38 subjects (28 
boys and 10 girls). VDR and osteocalcin gene polymorphism were de -Genetic analysis, linkage, and association22
tected by PCR with restriction assay.
Osteopenia was detected significantly more often among boys with 
diabetes compared to girls (p=0,004). TaqI, BsmI polymorphism of the 
VDR gene and HindIII polymorphism of the osteocalcin gene did not 
influence the frequency of the osteopenia among children with insulin-
dependent diabetes. The A allele of the ApaI polymorphic site of VDR 
gene tended to appear more often in the group of the osteopenic chil -
dren compared with subjects without osteopenia.(p=0,045).
P1120. The age of the founder effect for C598T mutation 
in the VHL gene in the patients with autosomal recessive 
erythrocytosis in Chuvashia.
N. N. Vasserman , R. A. Zinchenko, A. V. Polyakov;  
Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Familial congenital polycythemia (OMIM 263400) - is a rare autoso -
mal recessive disorder that is characterized by erythrocytosis, normal 
leukocyte and platelet counts and usually increased erythropoietin pro -
duction. This disorder is rather frequent in a small region of Chuvashia 
(Russian Federation) with mostly peasant citizens. All patients are 
Chuvashs by nationality and live in the northeastern part of Chuvashia. 
This disorder is caused by mutation C598T in the VHL gene that leads 
to the substitution Arg200Trp. In 2004 Liu et al calculated the age of 
this mutation in the world using 8 SNPs. They estimated the age of the 
founder effect as 14000-62000 years.
We have examined data on six microsatellite markers flanking the VHL 
gene to estimate the age of the founder effect in Chuvash population. 
Mean value of the generations we estimated as 52,67±24,12 genera -
tions. The age of the one generation for Chuvash peasant citizens is 
27.4 years. So the C598T mutation arose in Chuvash population 1445 
years ago. The mean year of the births of patients with autosomal re -
cessive erythrocytosis that we are investigated is 1972. And mutation 
C598T originated from single founder approximately in 527th year.
This work was pertly supported by Russian President‘s grant 
NSh5736.2006.7
P1121. A novel mutation in the VDR gene in an Iranian patient 
with Vitamin D-dependent Rickets type II
V. Hadavi1, N. Almadani1, N. Mirhosseini2, M. H. Kariminejad1, E. Reyniers3, W. 
Wuyts4, H. Najmabadi1;  
1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Welfare Organization of Kerman Province, Kerman, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University & Univer -
sity Hospital of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Department of Medical Genetics, 
University & University Hospital of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
The vitamin D receptor (VDR), is the mediator of all genomic actions of 
vitamin D3 and it’s analogs. Mutations in VDR results in target organ 
resistance to 1alpha,25-dihydroxy vitamin D [1,25(OH)2D3], the active 
form of vitamin D, and cause hereditary 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D resis -
tant rickets (HVDRR). This disease also called vitamin D-dependent 
rickets type II and is transmitted in an autosomal recessive mode.
We report a 5 years old girl affected with type II vitamin D-dependent 
Rickets, who appeared normal at birth but developed the clinical and 
biochemical features of calciferol deficiency with hypocalcaemia and 
rickets in the first year of life. She suffered from total alopecia and 
metaphyseal dysplasia in both hip joints and in pelvic. She was hospi -
talized at the age of four due to Diabetes Mellitus. Sequence analysis 
of all coding exons of VDR gene was performed and revealed a single 
homozygous point mutation in exon 7 causing a premature termina -
tion codon, Tyr295X. The Tyr295X mutation causes a truncation of the 
VDR protein, thereby deleting a large portion of the steroid hormone-
binding domain (amino acids 295-424).
P1122. Polimorphisms of CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genes 
associated with the warfarin metabolism in Hungarian Roma 
population.
C. Sipeky1, V. Csöngei1, B. Faragó1, K. Horvatovich1, L. Járomi1, L. Magyari1, E. 
Sáfrány1, I. Takács2, B. Melegh1;  
1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, University of Pécs, 
Pécs, Hungary, 22nd Department of Internal Medicine and Haematology, Sem -
melweis Teaching Hospital, Miskolc, Hungary.
Warfarin is an oral anticoagulant drug for the prevention and treatment 
of arterious and venous thromboembolic disorders. There is a great 
interethnic and interindividual variability in the required dose. Phar -macogenetic analysis of the S-warfarin metabolic enzyme CYP2C9 
and S-warfarin target protein VKORC1 can help in individualized 
therapy. The aim of our work was to study the allelic frequencies of 
two gene variants, CYP2C9*2 C3608T and VKORC1 G1639A, in a 
Hungarian Roma population in comparison with the average Hungar -
ian Caucasian population. A total of 303 Gypsy cases and 181 Hun -
garian controls were genotyped for the CYP2C9*2 C3608T SNP; and 
for the VKORC1 G1639A SNP 328 Gypsys and 193 Hungarians were 
tested. For genotyping PCR-RFLP assay and direct sequencing were 
used. Our study revealed significant difference in the presence of mu -
tant genotype in case of CYP2C9*2 C3608T (p=0.021) and VKORC1 
G1639A (p=0.012) between the Hungarian Roma and Hungarian 
general population. VKORC1 -1639A allele frequency was 28% in the 
Gypsy group, 41 % in controls, whereas the CYP2C9*2 3608T allele 
was present in 12% of both studied groups. The allele frequencies of 
the Hungarian population of both studied SNPs were very similar to the 
European Caucasian population (CYP2C9*2 C3608T 12%, VKORC1 
G1639A 41%). Genotyping of VKORC1 G1639A SNP could be clini -
cally important for predicting anticoagulant responses to warfarin. 
The results of our studies would provide new insights to the genetic 
variability, and their response to the drug metabolisation of the Roma 
population in Central-Eastern Europe.
P1123. Molecular genetic analysis of PRKAG2 in Tunisians 
families with Wolff Parkinson White Syndrome
S. Nouira1, C. Charfeddine1, F. Ouarda2, H. Ouragini1, F. Abid2, S. Abdelhak1;  
1molecular investigation of genetic orphan disease, Tunis-Belvedere, Tunisia, 
2Cardiology Department, Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
The Wolff Parkinson White (WPW, MIM 194200) syndrome is an au -
tosomal dominant heart disease characterized by the presence of ac -
cessory pathway that arises from an aberrant conduction from atria 
to ventricles. This second pathway causes a premature ventricular 
preexcitation that manifests on the electrocardiography as a short PR 
interval and anomalies of QRS complex. WPW affects 1 to 3 persons 
per 1000 population and is associated with high incidence of sudden 
death in some affected families.
Several mutations within PRKAG2 gene have been shown to underlie 
WPW. This gene encodes the gamma2 regulatory subunit of AMP-ac -
tivated protein kinase, which functions as a metabolic sensor in cells, 
responding to cellular energy demands by regulating diverse ATP-us -
ing pathways and ATP-generating pathways.
We report here clinical and molecular investigation of 3 unrelated 
Tunisian families including 6 affected members. All patients were di -
agnosed on the basis of clinical symptoms and electrophysiological 
features of WPW. Families were genotyped with two polymorphic mic -
rosatellite markers overlapping the PRKAG2 gene.
Haplotype analysis showed that this cases are likely linked to PRKAG2 
gene. Two different haplotypes have been identified suggesting that 
there is no evidence for a founder effect to WPW in the studied fami -
lies and is suggestive of mutational heterogeneity of this conduction 
system disease. None of the previously reported mutations within 
PRKAG2 gene was observed in Tunisian patients.
To our knowledge, this is the first report of a molecular study of WPW 
in North Africa population.
P1124. The CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 genotypes are possible factors 
causing chemical induced abnormal liver function
O. Kochetova , T. V. Viktorova;  
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Hepthyle, ethylebenzene-styrene, benzene are hepatotoxic in humans. 
In vivo, these substances are metabolized by cytochromes P450 to 
form the electrophilic metabolites, which may either cause cell damage 
or be further metabolized and detoxified by glutathione S-transferases 
(GSTs) and other enzymes.
The aim of this study was to estimate the predisposition of influenc -
ing possible factors causing chemical induced abnormal liver function 
on the basis of studying the genotypes CYP1A1 and CYP1A2. For 
this study, 330 workers from the petrochemical plant were enrolled. 
The genotypes CYP1A2 (-164C→A and -2464T→delT) and CYP1A1 
(A2455G and T3801C) were determined by polymerase chain reac -
tion and restriction fragment length polymorphism on peripheral white 
blood cell DNA from 73 incident cases of toxic hepatitis, 163 “groups 
of risk” on development of a toxic hepatitis, 94 healthy workers and Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
335 controls. The activity of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST) and bilirubin was used as the parameter of 
liver function.
No significant association was found between all groups of petrochem -
ical workers among themselves.
We found that the CYP1A1*2C were associated with a 2.09 -fold (95% 
CI: 1.1-4.21) increased AST and CYP1A2*1D  were associated with 
a 8.5-fold (95% CI: 1.1-75.0) increased AST and a 1.6-fold bilirubin 
(95% CI: 1.0-2.9). Gaplotype CYP1A2*1L had an OR (95% CI) of 14.5 
(1.8-31.0), 13.1 (1.6-28.7), 44.4 (5.5-97.1) on abnormal bilirubin, AST 
and ALT, respectively.Our results were shown that CYP1A2*1A  is a 
protective variant (OR=0.17; 95% CI: 0.9-0.27).
P1125. Molecular characterization of α-thalassemia and 
phenotype-genotype correlation in Sicily (Italy).
C. Di Bella , M. La Rosa, B. Piraino, V. Procopio, C. Cuppari, K. Alessio, C. 
Salpietro, L. Rigoli;  
Department of Pediatrics, Medical School, Messina, Italy.
We analyzed the α-thalassemia mutations and the genotype-to-pheno -
type correlations in 131 Sicilian subjects with reduced MCV and MCH, 
normal HbA2 and HbF, and normal serum iron. Six different genotypes 
were detected, the most common (44,3% of the cases) being the het -erozygous state for -α3.7 Kb deletion (-3.7α/α). The -α 3.7/-α 3.7 homozy -
gotes had a frequency of 19.8%.
Ten percent of the patients was --MED/αα heterozygotes and 9.1% was 
-α 20..5/α heterozygotes.
The α HphI mutation was found at the heterozygous state (αHphIα /αα ) in 
8.4% of the patients and 6.1% was αHphIα /αHphIα homozygotes. The -α 
3.7/α HphI α genotype was found in 2.3% of the patients.
The values of Hb and RBC were statistically significant different be -
tween the males and the females (p<0.01). Significant differences were 
found for the haematological parameters among subjects with different 
genotype groups. Reductions of MCV and MCH were found in those 
subjects with the following genotypes: -α 3.7/αα ; -α 3.7/-α 3.7 ; --MED /αα and 
- α 20.5 /αα . This reduction was more evident in both heterozygotes and 
homozygotes for αHphI mutation.The highest values of RBC were found 
in the carriers of --MED/α, -α 3.7/αα and αHphIα /α HphIα genotypes. Hemo -
globin levels were reduced only in α HphI homozygous subjects.
Our data underline that in Sicily populations, the molecular screening 
of α-thalassemia is useful to better characterize the clinically asymp -
tomatic subjects with a slightly reduced MCV and MCH and normal 
iron status.Genetic analysis, linkage, and association2
Po07. Normal variation, population 
genetics, genetic epidemiology
P1126. Metabolic and physiological changes in muscles of 
mice lacking alpha-actinin-3 explains the association between 
a common null allele in the ACTN  gene and human athletic 
performance
K. G. R. Quinlan1, D. G. MacArthur1,2, J. T. Seto1,2, J. M. Raftery1, N. Yang1, K. 
N. North1,2;  
1Institute for Neuromuscular Research, The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, 
NSW, Australia.
The protein α-actinin-3, encoded by the ACTN3  gene, is a highly con -
served component of the contractile machinery in fast skeletal muscle 
fibres. Intriguingly, homozygosity for a common nonsense variant in 
the human ACTN3 gene (R577X) results in complete deficiency of α-
actinin-3 in ~18% of the general population - more than one billion 
individuals worldwide. We and other groups have demonstrated that 
the ACTN3  577XX null genotype is under-represented in elite sprinters 
and over-represented in endurance athletes, and is associated with 
poorer muscle strength and sprint performance in non-athletes. The 
577X allele also shows a strong genetic signature of recent positive 
natural selection, suggesting that α-actinin-3 deficiency conferred an 
adaptive benefit during the evolution of modern humans.
To explore the mechanisms underlying the effect of R577X on muscle 
function we have generated an Actn3  knockout (KO) mouse model of 
α-actinin-3 deficiency. We have shown that α-actinin-3 deficiency is 
associated with increased mitochondrial density and altered activity 
of metabolic enzymes, consistent with a shift in muscle metabolism 
towards the more efficient aerobic pathway. We have also demonstrat -
ed a specific reduction in the diameter of fast muscle fibres, reduced 
muscle bulk and grip strength and an increase in fatigue resistance 
in KO mice. These phenotypic differences provide a physiological ex -
planation for the differing ACTN3  genotype frequencies in sprint and 
endurance athletes, and may help to explain the adaptive benefit of the 
577X allele during the evolution of modern humans.
P1127. Epidemiological study of progressive autosomal-
dominant spinocerebellar ataxias in the Bashkortostan Republic
E. Mingazova1, I. Khidiatova1, R. Magzhanov2, E. Khusnutdinova1;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir 
State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Progressive autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxias (AD SCAs) 
are genetically heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative diseases, 
clinical characteristic of which is the disturbance of motor coordination, 
appearing as a result of the defeat of the cerebellum. There is sig -
nificant population heterogeneity for the prevalence of AD SCAs and 
the molecular- genetic reasons of the disease. We have analyzed the 
prevalence of AD SCAs in the Bashkortostan Republic (Russia, territo -
ry of South Ural). At present in the Bashkortostan Republic (population 
4069784 people) 82 patients (45 males and 37 females) from 69 fami -
lies with AD SCAs were revealed. Irregular distribution of AD SCAs on 
the territory of the Bashkortostan Republic (2:100000 on average) is 
noted. The disease is registered in 22 of 54 districts and in 12 of 21 
towns. The prevalence of AD SCAs in different districts varies from 0, 
63 to 17, 7 per 100000. The molecular- genetic study of AD SCAs in 
the Bashkortostan Republic has begun. We carried out the analysis of 
the number of (CAG)n- repeats in the gene SCA1 in 19 unrelated fami -
lies since it is one of the most frequent types of AD SCAs in Russia. 
However, not a single of the examined families revealed the expansion 
of (CAG)n- repeats. Further conducting of studies is planned.
P1128. Fine mapping of susceptibility locus for ADHD on 
chromosome 5p
J. M. Ekholm1, M. Ogdie1, B. Merriman1, J. T. McCracken2, J. J. McGough2, S. 
Smalley2, S. F. Nelson1;  
1Department of Human Genetics, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2De-
partment of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, 
United States.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a behavioral diagno -
sis based on the presence of developmentally inappropriate levels of 
impulsivity, overactivity, and inattentiveness. The disease prevalence for ADHD ranges from 5%-10%, and is found to be four times as preva -
lent in males as in females. It is a familial condition with a complex 
pattern of inheritance.
Thus far five genome-wide scans have been conducted worldwide 
and of these two were carried out in US study samples by our group. 
These screenings and subsequent fine-mapping yielded four signifi -
cant linkage peaks on chromosomes 5p, 6q, 16p and 17p. Chromo -
some 5p produced strong linkage also in two of the other genome-wide 
scans that were carried out in the European populations. Due to the 
overwhelming evidence for this particular chromosome locus we have 
here screened 3200 SNPs in 170 ADHD trio families. The 15 Mb wide 
fine-mapped chromosomal region had on average one SNP every 4.8 
kb. In our preliminary analyses we found three SNPs with p-values < 
0.00008. An increased frequency of haplotypes resulting in p-values < 
0.01 were found on chromosome 5q11.2, all subsiding in the ARL15 
gene where also the most significant single SNP (p = 0.00001) was 
found. The function of this gene is largely unknown.
P1129. Partially isolated communities founded by Azoreans in 
the Santa Catarina Island, Southern Brazil
Y. C. N. Muniz1, I. R. Souza2, A. L. Simões1;  
1Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 2Universida -
de Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil.
Costa da Lagoa (CLG) and São João do Rio Vermelho (SJRV) are 
communities located on Santa Catarina Island (Southern Brazil), set -
tled on the XVIII century by immigrants came from Azores Archipelago. 
Demographic and genetic studies have also been indicated the pres -
ence of African and Amerindian components. CLG is considered genet -
ically isolated due to its localization and isolate breaking is occurring in 
SJRV due to the increase migration to the local. Eight autosomal and 
five Y-linked STRs and YAP were analyzed in CLG (n=119) and SJRV 
(n=163) to verify the hypothesis of their different degrees of isolation. 
Genotyping was performed by PCR/PAGE/Silver staining and statisti -
cal analysis by ARLEQUIN, DISPAN, GDA, PHYLIP and ADMIX. The 
Y-linked loci were unable to distinguish the communities ( FST=-0,001 
p>0,05), but were more effective  on the differentiation between them 
and Amerindians and Africans (0,16> GST>0,215). The communities 
showed more similarity in relation to Y haplotypes ( FST=0,007; p>0,05), 
what might indicate an interchange mainly male-mediated between 
them. The autosomal STRs were more effective on the differentiation 
between these communities of recent and common origin ( FST=0,005, 
p<0,01). Autosomal loci detected a major Portuguese/Azorean admix -
ture (CLG=93,5%, SJRV=80,6%), followed by an African (CLG=4,1%, 
SJRV=12,6%) and a low Amerindian. The Y-linked loci showed a pre -
ponderantly Portuguese/Azorean (CLG=95,6%, SJRV=94,1%) and no 
Amerindian component. These data showed that these communities 
were genetically related to the Azores population. Thus, random genet -
ic drift may have had an important effect on the CLG community, while 
gene flow might be the predominant evolutionary factor on  SJRV.
Financial support: CNPq-Brazil
P1130. Analysis of CYP1A1, CYP2D, GSTM1, GSTT1, NAT2, 
CYP2C and CYP2C1  gene polymorphisms in newborn and 
elderly people from North-West region of Russia
O. S. Glotov1, A. S. Glotov1, G. S. Demin1,2, M. V. Moskalenko2, N. U. Shved1, 
V. G. Vakharlovsky1, V. G. Vakharlovsky1, T. E. Ivashchenko1, T. E. Ivashchen -
ko1, V. S. Baranov1,2;  
1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russian 
Federation, 2St-Petersburg State University, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Using pharmacy biochip specially constructed for population stud -
ies, 13 polymorphisms of 7 genes: CYP1A1(C4887,A4889G,T6
235C), CYP2D6(G1934A,DelA2637), GSTM1(del), GSTT1(del), 
NAT2(C481T,G590A,G857A), CYP2C9(C430T,A1075C) and 
CYP2D6(G681A) were investigated in 2 groups: 109 newborns 
(Group1) and 148 unrelated individuals over 70 years (Group 2) from 
North-West Region of Russia.
Low frequency of null allele homozygotes for GSTT1 gene in Group1 
(14%) and high frequency in Group2 (28%) were obtained. The fre -
quencies of GSTM10/0 genotype were significantly different for men 
in Group1 and Group2 (30.4%, 53.6%, respectively, p=0.049). The fre -
quencies of deletion homozygotes (GSTT10/0, GSTM10/0) increased 
with aging from 6.5% in Group1 up to 21.4% in Group2 (p=0.058). 
The distribution of genotypes of NAT2 gene was significantly different Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology2
between groups (p=0.011). The frequency of N allele increased with 
aging from 16.8% in Group1 to 28.6% in Group2 (p=0.008). The fre -
quency of C allele (A1075C) of CYP2C9 gene significantly increased 
in female from Group1 compared to Group2 (13.7%, 4.8%, respec -
tively, p=0.009).
For estimation of combined effect of GSTM1, GSTT1 and NAT2 genes 
we used “score method”. The carriers of 0/0(GSTM1), 0/0(GSTT1) and 
N/N(NAT2) genotypes were given a score of 2, N/S carriers (NAT2)-a 
score of 1 and carriers of S/S(NAT2), n/n(GSTM1) and n/n(GSTT1)-
zero score. Combined analysis revealed significant prevalence of 
frequency of “score sum ≥3” in Group2 compared to Group1 (60.7%, 
19%, respectively, p=0.0009).
It might be speculated that people who have certain genotypes of 
GSTM1, GSTT1, NAT2 genes for men and GSTT1, CYP2C9, NAT2 
genes for women have some metabolic advantages for their longer 
survival.
P1131. Allele high-specific amplification for detection of LCT 
C/T-13910 SNP associated with adult-type hypolactasia
M. Sokolova , K. Ignatov, S. Borinskaya, V. Kramorov, N. Yankovsky;  
Institute of General Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Adult-type hypolactasia limits the use of fresh milk due to lactase non-
persistence that causes lactose intolerance. As found recently, the CC 
genotype of the DNA variant -13910 T/C upstream of the lactase  (LCT) 
gene is associated with lactase non-persistence [Enattah et al., 2002]. 
Frequency of hypolactasia varies from 2-3% in North West Europe to 
more than 90% in East Asia.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the applicability of LCT C/T(-
13910) SNP detection as a diagnostic test for adult-type hypolactasia 
in Russia and neighboring countries.
We used allele specific amplification for determination of allele and 
genotype frequencies in populations of Russians, Ukrainians, Belo -
russians, Komi, Pamirs, Udmurt, Chukchi, Kazakh, Uigur, Buryat and 
Iranians. Thus, DNA diagnostics for carrying the C/C genotype of the 
locus C/T-13910 in individuals from populations of the European part 
of Russia can be considered a predictive test for development of the 
primary adult hypolactasia long before its phenotypic detection.
Allele specific amplification was performed by real-time PCR with Syb -
rGree and SNPase DNA polymerase (“Bionem” Russia) which can 
extend a perfectly matched primer only. The obtained results have 
showed that the used enzyme (SNPase) provides allele high-specific 
amplification and can be used for SNP genotyping. In future we pro -
posed to use this high specific enzyme for large-scale high-throughput 
SNP genotyping.
Application of the described method and enzyme for SNP diagnos -
tics will be an important step toward development of the individualized 
medicine in Russia.
P1132. Studying Alleles Frequencies of 16 Short Tandem 
Repeats (STRs) Zones in Iranian Population for the First Time
M. A. Saremi1, M. Tavallaei (Ph.D.)1, M. Sajedifar2, S. Zeinali (Ph.D.)3;  
1Imam Husein University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kawsar Human 
Genetic Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Pasteur Institute, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Using of molecular methods such as DNA typing has a special place 
in studying populations and identification of anonymous people and 
corpses.
Tandemly repeated DNA sequences, which are widespread through -
out the human genome, are polymorphic in nature, making them im -
portant genetic markers for mapping studies, disease diagnosis, popu -
lations consideration and human identity testing. Short tandem repeats 
(STRs) contain repeat units that are 2-6 bp in length and can be readily 
amplified with the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). STRs have be -
come popular in human genetic laboratories because low amounts of 
DNA, even in a degraded form, can be successfully typed. Sample 
mixtures can be more readily resolved with STR results than with pre -
viously used DNA typing technologies.
We have used Genetic Analyzer device to determine STR profiling of 
400 DNA samples from Iranian population of different ethnic origin.
For this subject, after DNA extraction from samples by selecting mo -
lecular markers and using molecular methods such as PCR, specific 
places in DNA must be reproduced to obtain specific personal profile 
by examination and sequence determination.Following running of the above system which is based on Capillary Ar -
ray and Fluorescent Labeled Primers, the frequency of different alleles 
over different Iranian populations, determination of paternal relation -
ship, diagnosis as a consequence of natural catastrophes like flood, 
earthquake as well as unnatural events like war.
More over, studying Iranian populations will help approved research -
ers to develop new and better ways of preventing, diagnosing and 
treating different illnesses.
P1133. Ancestry Informative Markers (AIMs) in Amerindians from 
Brazilian Amazon
M. Rizzatti Luizon1, C. Mendes-Junior2, S. De Oliveira3, A. Simões1;  
1Departamento de Genética, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Uni -
versidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 2Departamento de Clínica 
Médica, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, 
Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 3Departamento de Genética e Morfologia, Instituto de 
Ciências Biológicas, Universidade de Brasília, Brasília, Brazil.
Ancestry Informative Markers (AIMs) are genetic loci with large fre -
quency differences between the major ethnic groups and are very 
useful in admixture estimation. However, their frequencies are poorly 
known within South American indigenous populations, making it diffi -
cult to use them in admixture studies with Latin American populations, 
such as the tri-hybrid Brazilian population. To minimize this problem, 
the frequencies of the AIMs FY-null, RB2300, LPL, AT3-I/D, Sb19.3, 
APO and PV92 were determined via PCR and PCR-RFLP in four 
tribes (n=309) from Brazilian Amazon ( Tikúna , Kashinawa , Baníwa 
and Kanamarí ), in order to evaluate their potential for discriminating 
indigenous populations from Europeans and Africans, as well as dis -
criminating each tribe from the others. Although capable of differentiat -
ing tribes, as evidenced by the exact test of population differentiation, 
a neighbor-joining tree suggests that the AIMs are useless in obtaining 
reliable reconstructions of the biological relationships and evolutionary 
history that characterize the villages and tribes studied. The mean al -
lele frequencies from these AIMs were very similar to those observed 
for North American natives. They discriminated Amerindians from Af -
ricans, but not from Europeans. On the other hand, the neighbor-join -
ing dendrogram separated Africans and Europeans from Amerindians 
with a high statistical support ( bootstrap = 0.989). The relatively low 
diversity ( GST =0.042) among North American natives and Amerindians 
from Brazilian Amazon agrees with the lack of intra-ethnic variation 
previously reported for these markers. Despite genetic drift effects, the 
mean allelic frequencies herein presented could be used as Amerin -
dian parental frequencies in admixture estimates in urban Brazilian 
populations.
P1134. Haplotypes in SLC24A5 gene as Ancestry Informative 
Markers in different populations
I. Pietrangeli1, C. Martone1, I. M. Predazzi1, E. Giardina1, C. Martínez-Labar -
ga2,3, F. De Angelis2, A. Spinella4, G. De Stefano2, O. Rickards2, G. Novelli1,5;  
1Centre of Excellence for Genomic Risk Assessment in Multifactorial and 
Complex Diseases, School of Medicine, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 
2Department of Biology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 3Centre of Molecu -
lar Anthropology for Ancient DNA Studies, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 
4Direzione Centrale Anticrimine, Servizio di Polizia Scientifica, Rome, Italy, 
5Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States.
Although it has been hypothesized that many genes contribute to 
produce different color shades in skin pigmentation, almost nothing 
is known about the biology of these genes. Recent work shows that 
the SNP rs1426654 within the SLC24A5 gene encoding for a pro -
tein belonging to the family of potassium-dependent sodium/calcium 
exchangers varies in frequency among several population samples 
according to skin pigmentation. Because of these observations, 
rs1426654 together with two additional intragenic markers (rs2555364 
and rs16960620) have been evaluated in 471 unrelated individuals 
originating from three different continents (Africa, Asia and Europe), 
as Ancestry Informative Markers (AIMs) for forensic and evolutionary 
purposes.
This study supports the role of human SLC24A5 gene in skin pigmen -
tation suggesting that variations in SLC24A5 haplotypes can corre -
late with human migration and ancestry. The most of haplotypes as 
well as combined genotypes with unknown phase analyzed exhibited 
dissimilar frequencies between different populations. For example Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology2
samples homozygous for the allele 2 at the rs2555364, homozygous 
for the allele 1 at the rs1426654 and homozygous for the allele 1 at 
the rs16960620, on the basis of present data could unlikely have Afri -
can ancestry and show 9% and 91% of possibility to have Asian and 
Italian ancestry respectively. This analysis also revealed 8 combined 
unphased genotypes selectively found in Asian populations represent -
ing the 17.2% of the total. Haplotype analysis of SLC24A5 improved 
previous single allele results and can provide significant information 
about ancestry of unknown samples.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by EU FP6 projects NACBO (contract no. 
NMP4-CT-2004-500804).
P1135. Y chromosome analysis in subpopulations of Bashkirs 
from Russia
A. S. Lobov1, B. Marina1, K. Ildus1, K. Rita1, K. Irina1, R. Siiri2, U. Rinat3, K. 
Elza1, V. Richard4;  
1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Estonian 
Biocentre, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 33Institute of History Language 
and Literature, Ufa, Russian Federation, 42Estonian Biocentre, University of 
Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
The Volga-Ural region which is located between Europe and Asia 
has been the arena of permanent genetic exchanges among Sibe -
rian, Central Asian, Eastern European populations. We have sampled 
seven Bashkir subpopulations from different parts of the Volga-Ural 
region and neighboring areas of Russia: Orenburg (N=79), Perm 
(N=72), Samara and Saratov (N=51), and from Bashkortostan Re -
public: Abzelilovskiy (N=152), Sterlibashevskiy (N=54), Baimakskiy 
(N=95), and Burzaynskiy area (N=82). These samples are currently 
being analyzed using 24 diallelic markers of Y-chromosome (M89, 
M9, M20, M48, M73, M130, M170, M172, M175, M201, M207, M214, 
M217, M231, M253, M269, M306(M173), P15, P37, P43, SRY1532, 
Tat, 92R7(M74), 12f2). According to our preliminary findings Turkic-
speaking Bashkirs are characterized by prevalence of R1b3 and R1a 
lineages. Among all subpopulations, Perm and Baimakskiy area rep -
resent with hight frequency (0.748 0.769,).It indicate there closeness 
with West European populations. Haplogroup R1a have frequency val -
ue 0.486 in Samara and Saratov’s Bashkirs and frequency value 0.370 
Bashkirs from Sterlibashevskiy area. The N3 characterize for subpop -
ulation Bashkirs from Sterlibashevskiy area (0.537), Orenburg (0.342). 
Bashkirs from Abzelilovskiy area have main frequency (0.474). These 
differences possibly indicate that different subpopulations of Bashkirs 
have different origin. We found that Bashkirs from Perm district were 
characterized by relatively low genetic diversity, which could be ex -
plained by founder effect. Bashkirs from Orenburg region which are 
anthropologically closer to Ugro-Finnic populations are characterized 
by high frequency of N3 haplogroup. We will try to compare our results 
with archeologycal, historycal and anthropological data in discussed 
about of origin of different groups Bashkir
P1136. Studying unanimous role of MCH, MCV and HbA2 blood 
factors on the affecting possibility to beta thalassemia in south 
west of Iran.
G.H. Mohammadian1, H. Galehdari2, A.M. Foroughmand2, S. Kazemi-Nezhad2, 
M. Oraki2, R. Hashemi3;
1Welfare Organization, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Shahid Chamran Uni -
versity, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Razi University, Kermanshah, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Thalassemia disease is the most common human disorder in the 
world, and controlled by one gene. Thalassemias are group of 
Hemoglobin(Hb) synthesis disorders. It is basal deficiency is in the 
reduction of β and α chains synthesis. β thalassemia (βT) as an auto -
somal recessive disorder increases in familial marriages. Today about 
220 different mutations that causes βT have been known this disorder 
affect the blood indexes of defected people like CBC and Hb electro -
phoresis factors and cause them to increase or decrease out of normal 
ranges. Some of the impressed factors are HbA2, MCV and MCH. In 
βT patients the mount of HbA2 factors are higher and MCV and MCH 
factors are lower than the limit. Khuzestan state in the south west of 
Iran close to Persian golf with about 4 million people has the fourth 
degree in βT prevalence. In this study blood factors of 2000 people 
(1000 couple) from who referred to the counseling centre and genetic laboratory of welfare organization of Ahwaz were studied. This re -
search had taken place at years of 2003 to 2005. The age of men and 
women were between 21 to 31 and 17 to 27 respectively and notice -
able number of them had abnormal ranges for mentioned factors using 
statistical and logistic regression method for diagnosis probability of 
normal and abnormal individuals. Achieved data from normal peoples 
and liable individuals to βT show the MCV range for Iranian peoples is 
lower than internationl standard suggestion and it is 77 .
P1137. Improved beta-thalassemia genotyping by means of 
population-specific reverse-hybridization teststrips
H. Puehringer1, H. Najmabadi2, W. Krugluger3, H. Y. Law4, V. Viprakasit5, C. 
Oberkanins1;  
1ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Genetics Research Center, 
Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences University, Tehran, Islamic Republic 
of Iran, 3Department of Clinical Chemistry, Rudolfstiftung Hospital, Vienna, 
Austria, 4Genetics Service, KK Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Singapore, 
Singapore, 5Dept. Paediatrics, Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, 
Thailand.
Beta-thalassemia is among the most common inherited diseases 
throughout the Mediterranean area, parts of Africa, the Middle East, 
India and Southeast Asia. Mutations in the beta-globin gene may lead 
to structural abnormalities (e.g. Hb S, Hb E, Hb C) or to haemoglobin 
imbalance due to the reduced synthesis or complete absence of beta-
globin chains. In each at-risk population beta-thalassemia results from 
a limited number of common mutations and a larger, more variable 
number of rare mutations.
We have improved an existing reverse-hybridization assay (Beta-Glo -
bin StripAssay), originally designed for Mediterranean countries, to 
make it more globally applicable. Three separate teststrips, specific 
for the most prevalent mutations in Southeast Asia, the Middle East 
plus India and the Mediterranean region, have been designed. Each 
teststrip comprises 22 variants and represents an allele coverage of 
>90% in the respective area. Comprehensive beta-thalassemia geno -
typing is achieved by a single multiplex DNA amplification reaction and 
subsequent hybridization to the adequate teststrip. The entire proce -
dure from blood sampling to the identification of mutations requires 
less than 6 hours, and hybridization/detection may be automated using 
robotic instrumentation. Proprietary software (StripAssay Evaluator) is 
available to scan, interpret and electronically archive StripAssay re -
sults. The test is simple and convenient, and requires only very small 
amounts of samples, which is of particular importance for prenatal di -
agnosis. The broad range of beta-thalassemia mutations covered by 
the extended StripAssay should make it an attractive and globally use -
ful diagnostic tool. (oberkanins@viennalab.co.at)
P1138. Admixture dynamics in Brazilian afro-derived populations 
revealed by genetic and demographic data
A. Luiz Simões1, M. Rizzatti Luizon1, I. Rainha de Souza2, A. L Barbosa3, K. 
Abé-Sandes4, S. Sousa3;  
1Departamento de Genética, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Uni -
versidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 2Departamento de Biologia 
Celular, Embriologia e Genética, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, 
Florianópolis, Brazil, 3Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade 
Estadual do Sudoeste da Bahia, Jequié, Brazil, 4Departamento de Ciências da 
Vida, Universidade do Estado da Bahia, Salvador, Brazil.
Brazilian remnant quilombo populations (Afro-derived) have hetero -
geneous origins depending on their region and founding groups. The 
Northeast semi-isolated communities of Barra (BR) and São Gonçalo 
(SG) exhibit reduced migration rates and high frequency of consan -
guineous marriages. The Southern isolated community of Valongo 
(VAL), formed by only seven black and one white individual, exhibit 
a high degree of intermarriage and a very low migration rate. Four 
AIMs (Ancestry Informative Markers; AT3-indel, Sb19.3-Alu, APO-Alu 
and PV92-Alu) and the allele CYP1A1*2C were used to investigate the 
histories of formation of BR (n=39), SG (n=28) and VAL (n=29). We 
have also examined the urban population samples of Jequié (n=44) 
and Florianópolis (n=31), and indigenous tribes from Brazilian Amazon 
(n=300). Genotyping was performed by PCR, PCR-RFLP, PAGE 6% 
and silver staining. Statistical analysis were performed by GENEPOP, 
GDA and ADMIX. CYP1A1*2C was observed in Brazilian amerindi -
ans (95%), europeans (2,8-5,8%) and africans (1,3%). Associations 
between unlinked markers (p<0,05) indicate a recent admixture in Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology2
SG (African/European=79%/21%, R2=0.983) and BR (68%/32%, 
R2=0.989). These results are not in agreement to demographic history 
and previous studies showing tri-hybrid admixture, which may be ex -
plained by the different nature of markers analyzed. On the other hand, 
those associations were not observed in VAL, probably due to its isola -
tion and no recent admixture. The coefficient of local inbreeding (Fis=-
0,136, p<0,05) indicate endogamous marriages. Admixture estimates 
indicate an equal african/european contribution (50%, R2=0.997) and 
the absence of CYP1A1*2C indicates no Amerindian contribution. 
These results corroborate the demographic history of formation of the 
VAL community.
P1139. NOTCH3 mutations in Portuguese patients with Cerebral 
Autosomal Dominant Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts and 
Leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL): implications for diagnostic 
strategies
S. Ferreira1, M. Viana-Baptista2, P. Costa1, M. Venâncio3, S. Fernandes1, F. 
Carvalho1, J. Ferro4, J. Oliveira1, on behalf of the PORTYSTROKE Study Group;  
1Serviço de Genética Médica, Faculdade de Medicina, Porto, Portugal, 2Serviço 
de Neurologia, Hospital Garcia de Orta, Almada, Portugal, 3Serviço de Gené -
tica Médica, Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 4Serviço de 
Neurologia, Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal.
CADASIL is caused by mutations of the Notch3 gene, on chromosome 
19p13. A cluster of mutations in exons 3 and 4 was originally reported 
and molecular analysis restricted to these exons has been suggested 
for diagnostic purposes. We aimed to identify the spectrum of Notch3 
mutations in Portuguese patients with CADASIL and set up an algo -
rithm for sequential exon analysis.
One hundred consecutive patients with the clinical diagnosis of CADA -
SIL or, at least, one of its typical clinical or neuro-radiologic features, 
were included in this study. DNA was extracted from leukocytes and 
amplified by PCR according to standard methods.
Based on published mutation data, sequence analysis of exons 3, 4, 
5/6, 11, 18/19 and 22/23 was done in all patients and in exons 2, 8, 
14 and 20 only in negative cases with strong clinical suspicion of CA -
DASIL.
Ten pathogenic mutations were found in 27 patients of 16 different 
families: p.R141C, p.R153C, p.R169C, p.R207C (exon 4); p.G420C 
(exon 8); p.R558C, p.C568Y, p.R578C (exon 11); p.W1028C (exon 
19); p.C1099Y (exon 20). Mutations p.R153C, p.R207C and p.R558C 
were found in more than one family. Mutations p.C568Y, p.W1028C 
and p.C1099Y have not been previously described.
About 80% of Notch3 mutations in Portuguese patients with CADASIL 
were found in exons 4, 11, 18/19, but these comprise only ~58% of 
mutations reported worldwide. Limited screening of exons 3 and 4 is 
clearly not appropriate in CADASIL cases of Portuguese origin. The 
weak criteria for patient inclusion may explain the low rate of Notch3 
mutations found.
P1140. CC-Chemokine receptor CCR5 and Hereditary 
haemochromatosis mutations associations in viral hepatitis C 
patients in Latvia.
L. Piekuse1, M. Kreile1, B. Lace1, J. Keiss2, V. Sondore2, A. Krumina1;  
1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Riga Stradins University, Riga, 
Latvia, 2Infectology Center of Latvia, Riga, Latvia.
Background. CC - chemokine receptor CCR5 has a critical role in reg -
ulating T cell functions by mediating recruitment, polarization, activa -
tion and differentiation of antiviral type 1 cytokine secreting T helper 
and cytotoxic T cells. As this receptor is involved in T cell mediated im -
mune response it could be involved in susceptibility of viral infections 
and later to modify organism response to antiviral therapy. Hereditary 
haemochromatosis (HH), which is characterized with abnormal body 
iron storage, has been suggested to be one of VHC worsening factors. 
The most frequent mutations are C282Y, H63D.
Objectives. Detect frequency of Δ32 CCR5, C282Y, H63D mutations 
between VHC patients in Latvia and to compare its frequency in 
healthy individuals of neighboring populations.
Subject and methods. This study included 63 individuals with chronic 
viral hepatitis C (VHC), which where discovered in Infectology Center 
of Latvia. Mutations were detected using PCR and RFLP.
Results. The frequency of Δ32 CCR5 between VHC patients is 20 to 
100 alleles (in Lithuania 11.3 to 100 alleles, in Russia - 13.9 to 100 
alleles). C282Y frequency is 6 to 100 alleles, H63D is 7 to 100. There was no correlation found between Δ32 CCR5 and HH mutations.
Conclusion. Among VHC patients Δ32 CCR5 is more frequent than in 
neighboring populations of Latvia, suggesting necessity to continue 
study including clinical data and possible replay to antiviral therapy. 
Δ32 CCR5 and HH mutations are mutually independent worsening 
factors of VHC.
P1141. The need for a well characterised UK Control Population
B. Winney1, I. Evseeva1, S. Tonks2, A. Boumertit1, X. Yang1, C. Echeta1, W. 
Bodmer1,2;  
1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Cancer Research UK, Oxford, 
United Kingdom.
There have been many problems replicating significant associations 
between gene variation and complex diseases and population struc -
ture is widely considered to be the most significant reason. To address 
this problem, there are statistical methods available that attempt to 
allow for the effect of population structure. However, these are not re -
ally satisfactory and so the only suitable alternative is to design the 
studies with greater care. A powerful approach may be to characterise 
genetically both the cases and controls. Individuals from the controls 
can then be chosen to match the cases so as to minimise the stochas -
tic differences between the two populations.
We are assembling a UK control population as a resource for future 
studies. It will comprise 3,500 samples (1,700 collected so far), which 
will have been carefully selected from throughout the UK. Rural re -
gions are targeted to avoid the admixture observed in large urban envi -
ronments and volunteers are sought who were born in the same place 
as their parents and grandparents to ensure historical integrity. The 
collection will be genotyped for around 3,000 markers, with the aim of 
identifying about 200 ancestrally informative markers, which will then 
be used to match controls to cases.
An initial pilot project on about 400-500 samples, using a variety of 
markers, indicates that this approach is valid. MC1R data suggest 
structure differentiating the Celtic Fringe from Eastern England, whilst 
NRY data show evidence of Norse incursions into Orkney. Preliminary 
admixture analyses suggest that there is an east-west gradient of An -
glo-Saxon ancestry across England.
P1142. Investigation of COX-2 polymorphisms among different 
Iranian ethnic groups
M. Soltani , F. Biramijamal, M. Sanati, E. Nazari;  
National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, 
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Cyclooxygenases-2 enzyme (COX-2) converts arachidonic acid to 
prostaglandins. COX-2 plays an important role in inflammation and 
carcinogenesis. It is shown that COX-2 -765G > C promoter polymor -
phism have lower promoter activity and result in decreased COX-2 ex -
pression. Also, it is reported that this type of polymorphism may have 
important role in increased risk of several types of cancers. In addition, 
genetic polymorphisms of COX-2 gene could alter enzyme expression 
and the response to Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). 
In this investigation, we assessed allele frequency of COX-2 poly -
morphism among different Iranian populations. The genetic polymor -
phisms of COX-2 -765G > C promoter has not been reported among 
the Iranian population so far. We initiated a study to examine COX-2 
-765G > C promoter genotype in different Iranian ethnic groups. The 
samples were collected from healthy population from three different 
ethnicity groups (Fars, Turk and Rashti). We assessed the genotype 
patterns of COX-2  among Iranian Fars, Turk and Rashti ethnic groups 
in five regions. The COX-2 -765G > C promoter genotypes were de -
termined by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length 
polymorphisms (PCR-RFLP) analysis in 90 Iranian healthy individuals. 
Allele frequency of COX-2 -765G > C promoter for above populations 
were similar and the G allele was significantly higher than C allele.
P1143. Genetic polymorphisms associated with cardiovascular 
disease in the Azorean population
P. A. S. Sousa1, A. R. Couto1, S. Nemeth2, J. P. O. Pinheiro1, C. Oberkanins2, J. 
Bruges-Armas1;  
1SEEBMO, Angra do Heroísmo, Portugal, 2ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vi -
enna, Austria.
Background: Research on cardiovascular disease (CVD) has revealed 
several candidate genes associated with the worlds first cause of dis -Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology2
ability and mortality. The global distribution of the genetic polymor -
phisms associated with cardiovascular diseases has been widely in -
vestigated and regional variations have been observed. The Azorean 
population is known to be of heterogeneous origin and represents the 
Portuguese region with the highest mortality rate caused by CVD. 
Based on this fact we have analysed allelic and genotypic frequencies 
in 10 candidate genes.
Material and Methods: A representative sample of the population was 
obtained by randomly recruiting 155 unrelated subjects from Terceira 
Island. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole peripheral blood by 
salting-out. Identification of genetic polymorphisms was performed by 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by reverse hybridization 
(CVD StripAssay, ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH). Genotype distribu -
tions were tested for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Chi-square tests 
were used to evaluate statistical significant differences between our 
population and other Caucasian populations.
Results: Allelic and genotypic frequencies are presented in table 1.
Genetic polymorphism Alleles % Genotypes %
FV G1691A (leiden) A 0.97GA 
AA1.94 
0.0
FV H1299R (R2) R 9.68HR 
RR18.06  
0.65
PTH G20210A A 1.94GA 
AA3.87 
0.0
FactorXIII V34L V 75.48VL 
VV41.29  
54.84
FGB-455G-A A 18.06GA 
AA30.97  
2.58
PAI-1 4G/5G 4G 45.484/5 
4/443.23  
23.87
HPA-1a/b b 18.71ab 
bb28.39  
4.52
MTHFR C677T T 30.97CT 
TT46.45  
7.74
MTHFR A1298C C 32.58AC 
CC47.10  
9.03
ACE I/D D 61.61ID 
DD53.55  
34.84
ApoB R3500Q Q 0RQ 
QQ0 
0
Apo EE2 
E3 
E46.13 
81.29  
12.582/2 
2/3 
2/4 
3/3 
3/4 
4/41.29 
9.03 
0.65 
65.81  
21.94  
1.29
Conclusion: We report the prevalence of various genetic CVD risk factors for the first 
time in the Azorean population. The frequencies obtained in our population are within 
the range of frequencies reported on other European populations. The high frequency 
of cardiovascular disease may be possibly related with other genetic or environmental 
factors not evaluated in this report.
P1144. Carrier frequency of cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator gene mutations in the general Moroccan 
population
I. Rratbi1,2, M. Legendre3, A. Le Floch3, S. Deqaqi Cherkaoui1, C. Costa3, M. 
Goossens3, A. Sefiani1, E. Girodon3;  
1department of medical genetic, rabat, Morocco, 2Service de Biochimie et 
Génétique, AP-HP et INSERM U654, Hôpital Henri-Mondor, Creteil, France, 
3Service de Biochimie et Génétique, AP-HP et INSERM U654, Hôpital Henri-
Mondor, creteil, France.
OBJECTIVE: Epidemiology of cystic fibrosis (CF), the most common 
lethal genetic disease in the Caucasian population, is poorly known in 
North African populations. No data is available on the native Moroc -
can population. We aimed to identify possible CF carriers in a sample 
of the general Moroccan population. METHODS: Blood samples from 
150 unrelated healthy Moroccans with no symptoms of CF were tested 
for 33 frequent CF mutations and the intron 8 polyT variant using a 
commercial assay. RESULTS: Two subjects were found to be carriers 
for the F508del mutation and eight others were heterozygous for the 
(T)5 variant of intron 8. CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that 
the Moroccan population is at risk for CF and related diseases. The 
CF incidence could be in the range of that found in European popula -
tions. Larger studies are necessary to identify the clinical pattern and 
accurately determine the incidence and the molecular basis of CF in 
Morocco.P1145. The frequency of CFTR mutations at patients from 
Romania - a collaborative study
L. Pop1, L. Tamas2, I. Popa1, Z. Popa3, C. Samoila2, M. Motoc2, E. Seclaman2, I. 
M. Popa1, G. Benga4, L. Dracea5, S. Mosescu6, E. Tomescu7;  
1Clinic II of Pediatrics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Roma -
nia, 2Biochemistry Department - University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timiso -
ara, Romania, 3National Center of Cystic Fibrosis from Timisoara, Timisoara, 
Romania, 4Departament of Genetics and Molecular Biology – University of Medi -
cine and Pharmacy, Cluj Napoca, Romania, 5Pediatric Clinic – Faculty of Medi -
cine, Brasov, Romania, 6Children Emergency Hospital “Grigore Alexandrescu”, 
Bucharest, Romania, 7Hospital Children “Alfred Rusescu”, Bucharest, Romania.
Objectives: The aim of this study was to estimate the frequency of 
cystic fibrosis mutations detected in patients from the National Center 
of Cystic Fibrosis from Timisoara (NCCFT).
Method
Based on clinical findings and pathological sweat test values, 120 
patients (240 alleles) were selected. DNA was isolated from biologi -
cal samples (blood, amniotic fluid) and the genetic analysis was per -
formed using the Elucigene CF29 kit, direct PCR products sequencing 
and RFLP. 74 patients were investigated in collaboration with Royal 
Manchester Children’s Hospital - Genetic Unit (UK) and 46 patients by 
our own laboratory (Biochemistry Department - UMF Timisoara)
Results
21 CFTR mutations (ΔF508, 2183 AA>G, W1282X, 1898+1G>A, I148T, 
621+1G>T, G576X, 1717-2A>G, R553X, R735K, CFTRdel2,3(21kb), 
G542X, G817V, 3272-26A>G, 457TAT>G, 3849+10kbC>T, R1162X, 
N1303K, 3849G>A, S1235R, R117H) and four polymorphic variants - 
2694T/G, 2694T/C, IVS8-5T, IVS8-7T were identified (2 new mutations 
- R735K and 1717-2A>G).
Conclusions
The most frequent mutations in Romania are ΔF508 (51,66%), G542X 
(2,91%), 621+1G>T (1,65%) and N1303K (1,25%). The rest of non-
ΔF508 mutations had a frequency lower than 1%. The results show 
a similarity with the situation from Western Europe and the rest of the 
world where the most frequent mutations are also ΔF508 and G542X. 
However, the lower frequency for ΔF508 mutation and the great num -
ber (30%) of the alleles who could not be identified (from heterozygous 
patients with one identified mutation) are probably due to the genetic 
heterogeneity of Romanian population and to incomplete genetic anal -
ysis for rare mutations.
(Study performed through Research Grants - CEEX 5855 and CNC -
SISA/1188/2004-2006)
P1146. Genetic variation at D3S1358, D5S818 and D13S317 loci 
in Russian Siberian population
O. Odinokova ;  
Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, Tomsk, Russian 
Federation.
STR loci represent a rich source of highly polymorphic markers for 
medical, forensic and population studies. There are notable differ -
ences in allele frequencies and heterozygosities between population 
groups. We present here characteristics of the allelic polymorphism for 
three STRs loci: D3S1358, D5S818 and D13S317 in Russians (Cau -
casians) living in South-West Siberia.
Allele typing was performed using PCR and subsequent high-resolu -
tion PAAG electrophoresis. We have analysed DNA samples from un -
related subjects: 262 individuals were tested for D3S1358, D13S317 
STR-systems and 360 individuals were tested for D5S818. Eight al -
leles were identified in D3S1358 (13-20 repeats, 118-146 bp) and 
D13S317 loci (8-15 repeats, 169-197 bp); and nine alleles were note 
in D5S818 (7-15 repeats, 134-166 bp) locus. Genotype frequency 
distributions were consistent with Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for 
every STR-systems. The level of observed heterozygosity was high: 
0,821 (D13S317), 0,782 (D3S1358), and 0,769 (D5S818). Polymor -
phism information content (PIC) and discrimination power (pD) were: 
PIC=0,76, pD=0,923 for D13S317; PIC=0,74, pD=0,913 for D3S1358; 
and PIC=0,70, pD=0,891 for D5S818; power of exclusion (W) and 
marching probability (pM) - 0,638 and 0,077 in D13S317; 0,567 and 
0,087 in D3S1358; 0,544 and 0,109 in D5S818, consequently.
The frequency data obtained can be used for comparison to other pop -
ulations. Forensic efficiency data suggest that investigated markers 
D3S1358, D5S818 and D13S317 are very discriminating in Russian 
Siberian population.Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology2
P1147. Social aspects of deafness in the Republic Altai (south 
Siberia, Russia)
O. L. Posukh ;  
Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
Hereditary hearing impairment is a heterogeneous disability with dif -
ferent pattern of inheritance. The GJB2 (Cx26)  mutations account for 
more than a half of recessive deafness in many populations. Preva -
lence of particular GJB2 mutations depends on ethnic origin, specific 
structure and history of population. Specific social traditions, e.g. the 
assortative marriage rates among deaf people, have been suggested 
to influence frequency of Cx26 deafness. Previously, we revealed the 
GJB2 mutational diversity in Altai Republic which population (~200,000) 
includes three major ethnicities: indigenous Altaians (~60,000), Rus -
sians (~120,000), and Kazakhs (~12,000). Mutations c.35delG and 
c.235delC were found to be causative factors among Russian and 
Altaian patients, respectively. Cx26 deafness was detected in consid -
erable proportion of affected Russian families whereas many Altaian 
multiplex families were found to be Cx26-negative. High carrier rate of 
c.235delC was detected in Altaian hearing controls. This study firstly 
evaluates the marriage patterns in deaf and hard hearing population 
in Altai Republic. Informative data was obtained on 112 adults with 
early onset of hearing impairment equally represented citizens (57) 
and villagers (55). Rural people constitute 3/4 of total Republic Altai 
population whereas the others live in the capital Gorno-Altaisk, the 
only city in the Republic. We revealed assortative mating rate of 0.45 in 
rural sample, much lower as compared to 0.84 in urban sample. Ethnic 
diversity, traditional Altaian marriage pattern reducing consanguinity 
rate, and social differences between urban and rural population could 
influence the prevalence of deafness in Republic Altai.
This work is supported by the Russian Foundation for Humanitarian 
Research (07- 06-00765a).
P1148. Case-Control Study of Libyan and Maltese Patients with 
Type II Diabetes Mellitus
A. A. Al Ashtar1, J. Azzopardi2, S. Bezzina Wettinger1, J. Borg1, W. Cassar1, R. 
Galdies1, C. A. Scerri1,3, J. Vassallo2, A. E. Felice1,3;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Msida, Malta, 2Diabetes Clinic, St Luke’s 
Hospital, G’Mangia, Malta, 3Thalassaemia Clinic, Div. of Pathology, St Luke’s 
Hospital, G’Mangia, Malta.
Type II Diabetes Mellitus (DMTypeII) is a common disease with onset 
in middle-aged  individuals, caused by an imbalance between insulin 
production and action.  Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)  and 
mutations in different genes may be implicated in developing DMTyp -
eII. In this study we analyzed 9 such genes that include IPF, MTHFR,  
mitochondrial tRNA, Resistin, PPP1R3, ADRABbeta2, MIF, PTPN1 
and TLR4. SNPs were chosen from each gene according to stringent 
criteria  based on developing DMTypeII in other populations. SNPs 
were  genotyped in the Libyan and Maltese patients and compared 
with healthy  Maltese citizens. DNA was extracted from whole blood, 
and genotyping  of each gene determined by PCR-RFLP. Concurrently, 
pools of DNA from  random Maltese newborn were carried out using 
fluorometry for accurate  quantification. All genes were in Hardy-Wein -
berg Equilibrium and statistical  analysis was carried out by SPSS (stu -
dent package 12). Chi square analysis of  all data in between popula -
tions and across populations revealed a significant  association of the 
ADRABbeta2 gene of both Libyan and Maltese DMTypeII patients with 
healthy Maltese controls (p < 0.05 for both). There  is no difference be -
tween Libyan and Maltese Diabetics (p=0.07) indicating  that this gene 
has a common predisposition to both populations. On the  other hand, 
IPF gene was only associated with the Libyan DMTypeII and not with 
the Maltese population (p < 0.05). All other genes were not  statistically 
significant associated with DMTypeII. The results show  a strong as -
sociation of the ADRABbeta2 (Arg16Gly) and IPF (missense  mutation 
Cys18Arg) genes with DMTypeII.
P1149. Cytogenetic and cancerogenic effects of low dose 
radiation among liquidators in the Chernobyl accident area
E. Dyomina ;  
R.E. Kavetsky Institute of Experimental Pathology, Oncology and Radiobiology 
, Kyiv, Ukraine.
The purpose of the presented study was to estimate influence of the 
absorbed dose values on the cytogenetic effects and risk of malignant 
formation (MF) in group of liquidators.The method of “internal comparison” made it possible to study epide -
miological parameters in dependence with the documented exposure 
doses for 17 thousand liquidators. The cytogenetic examinations of 
500 liquidators were carried out. The dose dependence of MF fre -
quency was studied with the application of piecewise-linear splines 
and hypothesis about the equality of two probabilities on the basis of 
the statistical criterion 2S.
Tendency toward reduction in the frequency of MF with increase of 
the dose in the interval of 1-85 cGy for both the age groups (younger 
and older than 40 years) was observed. Probability of random event 
when the liquidators with MF were exposed to dose in the ranges from 
1 to 3 cGy or from 3 to 5 cGy statistically significantly exceeds the 
appropriate probability for the whole cohort . Statistically significant dif -
ferences in the probabilities for other classes of diseases within dose 
ranges were not observed. In spite of the promote terms of cytogenetic 
analysis and partial elimination of dicentric chromosomes from blood 
„dose- effect“ dependence for aberrations remains in the group of liq -
uidators with MF.
Our cytogenetic investigations revealed the tendency to increasing of 
MF frequency in group of liquidators exposed to low doses. The reten -
tion of „dose- effect“ dependence for the dicentrics in lymphocytes of 
liquidators with MF within promote postradiation periods was estab -
lished.
P1150. Allele frequencies for the fifteen short tandem repeat loci 
in Croatian population
V. Skaro1, P. Projic1, N. Pojskic2, A. Durmic2, L. Kovacevic2, S. Haveric2, D. 
Primorac3, D. Marjanovic1,2;  
1Center for Integrative Genomics, Molecular Diagnostics, Cell and Gene Thera -
py, “Rudjer Boskovic” Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Institute for Genetic Engineer -
ing and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 3Medical School at 
Osijek University, Osijek, Croatia.
We have analyzed the distribution of allele frequencies at fifteen auto -
somal short tandem repeats loci in the representative sample of Croa -
tians. A total of 110 unrelated individuals (Caucasians) born in Croatia 
have been sampled for the analysis. All of them have been voluntary 
donors. Buccal swab have been used as the DNA source. Specimens 
were air-dried, placed in 1,5 ml tubes, and immediately transported to 
the laboratory. The samples have been stored at -20oC until beginning 
of DNA analysis. The Qiagen DnaeasyTM Tissue Kit was used for DNA 
extraction. The AmpFlSTR® Identifiler® (ABI, Foster City, CA) has been 
used to simultaneously amplify by PCR 15 STR loci. The STR loci are: 
D3S1358, TH01, D21S11, D18S51, D2S1338, D5S818, D13S317, 
D7S820, D16S539, CSF1PO, D19S433, vWA, D8S1179, TPOX, and 
FGA. Similar amount of DNA (approx. 1 ng) was used in all PCR re -
actions. Total reaction volume was 12,5 μl. The PCR amplification 
has been carried out in PE Gene Amp PCR System Thermal Cycler 
(ABI, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer’s recommenda -
tions. Electrophoresis of the amplification products was preformed on 
an ABI PRISM 3130 genetic analyzer Raw data have been compiled, 
analyzed and numerical allele designations of the profiles were ob -
tained by using the accessory software: ABI PRISM® Data Collection 
Software v3.0 and GeneMapperΤΜ ID Software v3.1. Deviation from  
Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, observed and expected heterozygosity, 
power of discrimination and power of exclusion were calculated. Also , 
we have compared our data with data obtained from geographically 
neighboring European populations.
P1151. Gene expression variation of HSA21 genes in normal and 
Down syndrome (DS) individuals: understanding phenotypic 
variability in DS patients.
P. Prandini1, S. Deutsch1, R. Lyle2, M. Gagnebin1, C. Delucinge Vivier3, M. 
Delorenzi4,5, C. Gehrig1, P. Descombes3, S. Sherman6, F. Bricarelli7, C. Baldo7, 
A. Novelli8, B. Dallapiccola8, S. E. Antonarakis1;  
1University of Geneva, Geneva 4, Switzerland, 2Department of Medical Genet -
ics, Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3NCCR Frontiers in Genetics, 
Genomic Platform, Geneva 4, Switzerland, 4Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics 
(SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Swiss Institute of Experimental Cancer Re -
search (ISREC), Epalinges, Switzerland, 6Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, GA, United States, 7E.O. Ospedali Galliera di Genova, Genova, Italy, 
8University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.
Down Syndrome (DS) individuals display considerable phenotypic 
variability. Since DS is a disease caused by alterations of gene dos -Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology20
age, gene expression variation of human chromosome 21 (HSA21) 
genes in DS is likely to have a substantial impact on the penetrance 
of DS phenotypes.
We studied gene expression variation in 14 lymphoblastoid (LCLs) and 
17 fibroblast cell lines from DS individuals and an equal number of 
age, sex and ethnic matched controls. Gene expression was assayed 
using Taqman qRT-PCR on a total of 100 and 106 HSA21 and on 26 
non-HSA21 genes in LCLs and fibroblasts respectively.
Around 42% and 62% of genes in LCLs and fibroblasts were signifi -
cantly overexpressed in the DS population (KW, p<0.005). Accord -
ing to the degree of overlap in the distribution of expression values 
between euploid and trisomic individuals, we could broadly classify 
genes in three categories: (a) genes with non-overlapping distributions 
(b) genes with partially overlapping distributions (c) genes with largely 
overlapping distributions. We hypothesize that genes in category (a) 
are the most sensitive to the extra copy of HSA21 and thus probably 
involved in the constant features of trisomy 21, those in category (b) 
might be involved in the determination of variable DS traits, whereas 
those in category (c) are not dosage sensitive and are less likely to be 
involved in DS pathology.
This study provides the first extensive data set on HSA21 gene ex -
pression variation in DS and addresses its potential role in underlying 
phenotypic variability observed in this disorder.
P1152. Birth of child with numerical chromosomal aberrations 
as a possible consequence of irradiation of vulnerable stages of 
human oogenesis
I. O. Zatsepin1, P. Verger2, E. Robert-Gnansia3, B. Gagnière4, M. Tirmarche5, R. 
D. Khmel1, I. L. Babicheva1, G. I. Lazjuk6;  
1Belarusian Research and Healthcare Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belar -
us, 2Southeastern Health Regional Observatory, Marseilles, France, 3REMERA 
Faculté RTH Laennec, Lyon, France, 4Cellule Inter Régionale d’Épidémiologie 
Ouest, Rennes, France, 5Institute for Radioprotection and Nuclear Safety, Fon -
tenay aux Roses Cedex, France, 6Belarusian State Medical University, Minsk, 
Belarus.
Surveillance of Down syndrome (DS) prevalence at birth has been 
performed in Belarus since 1981 using a population-based registry of 
congenital malformations. A significant cluster was observed in Janu -
ary of 1987, 9 months after the Chernobyl accident (31 cases versus 
13.2 expected, P<10-3). The registered increase was highest in Gomel 
oblast, the mostly contaminated region (8 cases versus 2.4 expected, 
P<0.05). The period of birth of the cases fits with an estimated time of 
conception within the first two weeks after Chernobyl accident, period 
of highest radiation dose rates (1-3 orders of magnitude over the natu -
ral background level).
The stochastic nature of the cluster cannot be completely excluded. 
However, experimental data provide evidence that the “diakinesis” 
stage of mammal oogenesis immediately presiding conception is a 
period a high sensitivity to ionizing radiation. Several epidemiological 
studies have detected enhanced prevalence rates among newborns 
conceived within the periods of increased radioactivity i.e. after atmo -
spheric nuclear weapon tests and Chenrnobyl accident.
Thus, enhanced risk of giving birth to aneuploid child by woman ex -
posed around the time of conception could be suspected. Therefore 
it seems reasonable for women planning a pregnancy to restrict con -
tacts with sources of ionizing radiation at least in the middle of ovarian 
cycle as well as to recommend to postpone conception in case of ex -
posure of the lower part of abdomen and organs located in small pelvis 
within the given time period. Highly efficient multi-parametric prenatal 
screening programs might be recommended to women at supposed 
high risk.
P1153. The G894T polymorphism of the eNOS gene and 
atherosclerosis precursors in Serbian child population
T. M. Damnjanovic , I. Novakovic, V. Bunjevacki, S. Nedeljkovic, M. Vukotic, S. 
Simeunovic, L. Lukovic;  
Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, Belgrade, Serbia.
As it is known, nitric oxide play an important role in physiological reg -
ulation of vascular tone and blood pressure. Endothelial nitric oxide 
synthase (eNOS) is the key enzyme responsible for basal vascular 
wall production of nitric oxide. Some data suggest eNOS role in serum 
lipide level also. The G894T polymorphism at exon 7 in the gene en -
coding for eNOS is associated with altered plasma nitric oxide levels.The aim of this study was to determine G894T genotype in 467 healthy 
children 15 years old and investigate a possible influence of this poly -
morphism on blood pressure, BMI and serum lipid level. G894T poly -
morphism was genotyped by PCR amplification of specific fragment of 
genomic DNA followed by digestion with the Mbo I restriction enzyme. 
The mean values of blood pressure (systolic and diastolic), BMI and 
serum lipid level (LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol and triglycerides) 
between different genotypes were compared by analysis of variance 
(ANOVA). We detected wild type GG genotype in 186 (39, 9%), hetero -
zygous GT in 210 (45,0%) and homozygous mutant TT in 71 (15,1%) 
children. Multiple comparisons showed significant difference (p < 0,05) 
of diastolic blood pressure between TT and GG or GT group of children 
(74,1 +8,42 mmHg, 72,9 +8,42 mmHg and 71,6 +8,4 mmHg respective -
ly) . Also, TT genotype was associated with significantly lower HDL 
cholesterol (F= 4,759, p<0, 009) and triglyceride (F= 3,380, p< 0,035) 
level. We did not find significant association between the mutant TT 
genotype and systolic blood pressure or BMI in our group.
P1154. Investigation of the eotaxin gene -426 C>T, -384 A>G 
AND 67 G>A SNPs and atopic dermatitis in Italian children using 
family-based association methods .
L. Rigoli , C. Salpietro, C. Di Bella, V. Procopio, L. Caminiti, C. Cuppari, G. 
Barberio, G. Pajno;  
Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, MESSINA, Italy.
To learn whether eotaxin gene single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) are associated with the atopic dermatitis, we investigated the 
genotype and allelic frequencies of -426 C>T, -384 A>G, and 67 G>A 
SNPs in 130 Italian families.
From these families, we recruited 130 Italian children suffering from 
either allergic extrinsic form of atopic dermatitis (EAD) or intrinsic non-
allergic form of atopic dermatitis (IAD). Genotyping was performed us -
ing the PCR-RFLP method and automatic sequencing.
A significant difference was observed in the genotype frequency of 
-426 C>T SNP between EAD and IAD children (p=0.01); and between 
EAD and controls (p= 0.01). The frequency of this SNP was no different 
between the IAD children and the control group (p=0.52 ). In the EAD 
children, the frequency of -426 C>T SNP was no different between the 
groups of mild, moderate and severe SCORAD Index (p=N.S.).
The -426 C>T polymorphism was significantly associated with the re -
lapse of the disease (p<0.01) in the EAD children. No significant as -
sociation was observed between the -384 A>G and 67 G>A SNPs and 
the two groups of extrinsic and intrinsic atopic dermatitis children in 
respect to control group. In 48 trios selected from 68 EAD families, the 
transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) showed a preferentially trans -
mission of -426 T allele from the parents to affected offspring.
In our Italian children, the -426 C>T of the eotaxin gene was associ -
ated with extrinsic atopic dermatitis. Therefore, the eotaxin gene might 
contribute to a characteristic “signature” for the two types of AD.
P1155. The load of Mendelian pathology in the Siberian 
indigenous populations
L. P. Nazarenko , O. A. Salyukova, L. I. Minaycheva, S. V. Fadyushina;  
State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Summarized data of medical genetic study of some Siberian indige -
nous populations (tuvinians, altayans and khakasians) are presented. 
Uniformity of the methodical principles of investigation allows compar -
ing the load of hereditary diseases between the populations. The load 
of diseases with autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-
linked inheritance is, respectively, 0.58, 0.92 per 1000 people and 0.49 
per 1000 men in tuvinian; 0.75, 1.22 per 1000 people and 0.11 per 
1000 men in altayans; 1.09, 0.81 per 1000 people and 0.65 per 1000 
men in khakasians. Rare genetics syndromes are observed in each 
population. However, familiar cases of microtia with meatal atresia and 
conductive deafness are accomulated predominantly in the tuvinians 
and altayans. Factors that play a role in the unequal distribution of 
hereditary diseases in Siberian indigenous populations are under way 
of investigation.
P1156. STR markers in ethnic admixture studies
R. G. M. Ferreira1, M. M. Moura2, R. C. Pagotto2, L. M. A. Camargo1, B. 
Beiguelman1, H. Krieger1;  
1Departmento de Parasitologia, Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade 
de São Paulo, Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Universidade Federal de Rondônia, Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology21
Porto Velho, Brazil.
A small riverine community, Portuchuelo (8o37’S, 63o49’W) in the 
State of Rondônia, Brazil, was studied with the aim to ascertain its 
health conditions and the causes of the variability of some infectious 
diseases. Almost all individuals (181) of Portuchuelo were included 
in the sample. Data on 11 STRs markers along different autossomes 
(UNISTS: 19943; 21182; 67015; 74530; 67557; 53216; 81816; 14863; 
82795; 45947; 63378) were used to determine its ethnic composition. 
The contributions of Amerindian, African and European genes to the 
ethnic composition of the studied population are shown bellow, as well 
as those estimates based on classic markers (Ferreira et al., 2002). 
Although the ethnic proportion estimates are apparently different they 
do not show statistical significance. The face values of the standard er -
rors of the ethnic proportion estimates are higher than those based on 
classical ones, as well as some goodness of fit tests of the genotype 
frequency distribution. Therefore, due to poorly studied ancestral gene 
frequencies, higher mutation rates and heterogeneity among systems, 
classical markers seems to provide better estimates of ethnic compo -
sition of tri-hybrid populations.
Ethnic composition of Portuchuelo, Brazil, 
based on STR and classical markers data.
Ancestry STR (P ± s.e.) Classical (P ± s.e.) t p
Ameridian 0.317 ± 0.087 0.444 ± 0.064 1.182 0.240
African 0.118 ± 0.059 0.210 ± 0.046 1.224 0.224
European 0.565 ± 0.106 0.346 ± 0.069 1.732 0.086
Supported by CNPq, FAPESP
P1157. How old is the Val30Met mutation in transthyretin familial 
amyloid neuropathy?
C. Zaros1, E. Genin2, U. Hermann3, M. Saporta4, L. Languille5, M. Waddington-
Cruz4, O. Suhr3, M. Misrahi6, V. Plante-Bordeneuve1;  
1Department of Neurology, UMR U788, CHU Bicêtre, Assistance Publique Hôpi -
taux de Paris, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 2INSERM UMR-S 535, University 
Paris Sud, Villejuif, France, 3Department of Internal Medicine, University hospi -
tal of Umeå, Umeå, Sweden, 4Department of Neurology, University Hospital of 
Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 5Department of Neurology, UMR U788, 
CHU Bicêtre, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, 
France, 6Department of Molecular Biology, CHU Bicêtre, Assistance Publique 
Hôpitaux de Paris, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
Transthyretin familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) is a severe au -
tosomal dominant neuropathy of adulthood, linked to the pathogenic 
TTR-Val30Met variant. This mutation is the only one identified in Por -
tugal where the affection was initially described and in Sweden the 
second most important area of FAP in Europe. The hypothesis of a 
common ancestor for Val30Met kindred has been debated for years. 
This study analyzed such hypothesis in Val30Met carriers from Por -
tugal, Brazil and Sweden and estimated the occurrence of the most 
recent common ancestor (MRCA) in each population.
Individuals from 18 Portuguese and 15 Swedish families along with 28 
unrelated probands (15 from Sweden, 13 from Brazil) and 66 controls 
were studied. Eleven microsatellites were genotyped, 13 Mb around 
TTR gene. To estimate the age of the MRCA, we performed haplotype 
reconstructions and applied a previously described likelihood based 
method. In Portuguese, the longest common haplotype was 237-143-
271-291-311-202, between markers L1 and D18S47 (700 kb). The Bra -
zilian shared the same alleles encompassing a shorter distance (215 
kb) and bounded by microsatellites L1 and L9. In contrast, Swedish 
presented different alleles and a common haplotype between mark -
ers D18S49 and D18S47 (1500 kb). The length of the shared regions 
provided age estimates of 750, 350 and 650 years for Portuguese, 
Swedish and Brazilian Val30Met mutation, respectively.
Our work strengthens the hypothesis of two different founders in Por -
tuguese and Swedish Val30Met carriers and suggested a Portuguese 
origin of the Brazilian mutation. Moreover, it allows estimate the age of 
the FAP-Val30Met variant in these populations.P1158. STRs ( introns 13 and 22) of Factor VIII gene in Brazilian 
populations: allele and haplotypic frequencies and forensic 
parameters
J. D. Massaro , A. L. Simões;  
Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil.
Hemophilia A is a X-linked bleeding disorder caused by a defect in 
Factor VIII protein. Direct analysis of Factor VIII gene (FVIII) mutations 
is difficult due its great number and heterogeneity. Therefore, most of 
the tests for the detection of the carrier and prenatal diagnosis use 
the study of DNA polymorphisms linking with FVIII  locus . We char -
acterize here the distribution of allele and haplotypic frequencies of 
introns  13 and 22 STRs of FVIII gene in samples of unrelated indi -
viduals of São Paulo (SP), Rio Grande do Sul (RS) and Pernambuco 
(PE) states. Genotyping was performed by PCR, denaturing PAGE 
12% and 11,25% and silver staining. The Intron  13 distribution in the 
three samples studied here  is centered in allele Intron  13*20, differing 
from Chinese and a sample of São Paulo city. Intron  22 distribution is 
centered in allele Intron  22*26, also differing from Asians and that São 
Paulo city. The more frequent haplotype based in Introns  13 and 22 for 
both populations are the 20/26. The haplotypes composed by alleles 
24/25 and 21/24, respectively, do not occur in RS and SP samples, 
opposed to what it would be expected by the frequency of them in the 
other samples. The forensic parameters indicate that both the mark -
ers are significantly informative and can be used in forensic situations 
where the genetic identification is necessary, respecting the character -
istics of being on to chromosome X and considering the use of markers 
genetically linked.
P1159. Detection of gene-environment interaction: a new test 
based on sibling recurrence risks
R. Kazma1,2, C. Bonaïti-Pellié2,1, J. M. Norris3, E. Génin2,1;  
1Univ Paris-Sud, UMR-S 535, Villejuif, 94817, France, 2INSERM, UMR-S 535, 
Villejuif, 94817, France, 3Department of Preventive Medicine and Biometrics, 
University of Colorado at Denver and Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO, 
United States.
Gene-environment interactions may play important roles in complex 
disease susceptibility but their detection is often difficult. Here we 
show how gene-environment interactions can be detected by inves -
tigating the degree of familial aggregation according to the exposure 
of the probands. In case of gene-environment interaction, the distribu -
tion of genotypes of affected individuals, and consequently the risk in 
relatives, depends on their exposure. We developed a test compar -
ing the risks in sibs according to the proband exposure. To evaluate 
the properties of this new test, we derived the formulas for calculating 
the expected risks in sibs according to the exposure of probands for 
various values of exposure frequency, relative risk due to exposure 
alone, frequencies of latent susceptibility genotypes, genetic relative 
risks and interaction coefficients. We find that the ratio of risks when 
the proband is exposed and not exposed is a good indicator of the 
interaction effect. We evaluate the power of the test for various sample 
sizes of affected individuals. We conclude that this test is valuable for 
diseases with moderate familial aggregation, only when the role of the 
exposure has been clearly evidenced. Since a correlation for exposure 
among sibs might lead to a difference in risks among sibs in the dif -
ferent proband exposure strata, we also add an exposure correlation 
coefficient in the model. Interestingly, we find that when this correlation 
is correctly accounted for, the power of the test is not decreased and 
might even be significantly increased. An application to type 2 diabetes 
will be presented.
P1160. Genetic epidemiology of the Trypamosoma cruzi 
infection
C. E. M. Kawamata1, M. F. Feitosa2, R. G. M. Ferreira1, A. La Luna1, H. Krieg -
er1;  
1Instituto de Ciencias Biomedicas, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2Washington University of 
Saint Louis, Saint Louis, MO, United States.
At least 100 million people are living in risk areas of Trypanosoma cruzi  
infection, around 3 million of them are living in Brazilian risk areas. It is 
estimated that 17 million are infected by T. cruzi  infection. Usually, the 
areas of the T. cruzi  infection are linked to poverty and poor housing 
conditions. The present sample comprised 4697 individuals belonging 
to 886 nuclear families originated mostly from the Northeastern Brazil 
at the ancient “Hospedaria de Imigrantes do Departamento de Imigra -Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology22
ção e Colonização do Estado de São Paulo” in the early 70´s of the 
last century. From the collected data, information on gender, familial 
relationship, housing conditions, age and serological diagnostics were 
used. Statistical analyses were performed using some lab made pro -
grams, as well as SPSS and POINTER programs. Multiple regression 
analyses showed that gender have no influence on T. cruzi infection, 
while age and housing conditions presented significant effects. Cor -
relation of related pairs of individuals, showed consistent positive and 
significant values, indicating familial aggregation. Complex segrega -
tion analysis, suggested that the best model is the dominant one, but 
the environmental influence cannot be excluded. The current study 
provides evidence of a major gene for T. cruzi  infection, suggesting 
that it is an appropriate trait for further genetic analysis on the causal 
factors acting on the variability of Chagas disease.
Model d t q Hτ1τ2τ3-2 ln L χ2P test ep AIC
1.Mixed* 1.000 2.096 0.605 0.421 [1][0.5] [0]672.40 - - -4680.397
2.Sporadic [0] [0] [0] [0] ---838.63 166.238 0.000 2vs1 0838.635
3.No major effect** [0] [0] [0] 0.995 [1][0.5] [0]696.37 23.974 0.000 3vs1 1698.372
4.No multifatorial 0.097 3.250 0.296 [0] [1][0.5] [0]712.27 39.869 0.000 4vs1 3718.266
5.Recessive (d=0) [0] 2.389 0.383 0.279 [1][0.5] [0]682.78 10.381 0.001 5vs1 3688.778
6.Aditive (d=0.5) [0.5] 2.782 0.454 0.019 [1][0.5] [0]674.09 1.688 0.194 6vs1 3680.085
7.Dominant (d=1) [1] 2.096 0.605 0.421 [1][0.5] [0]672.40 0.000 1.000 7vs1 3678.397
* „d“ value was set to upper limit. **Model estimated by lower „-2 ln L“.
Supported by CNPq, FAPESP.
P1161. Genetic-epidemiology study of reported number of 
malaria episodes in a sample from Monte Negro, RO, Brazil.
A. La Luna1, R. G. M. Ferreira1, C. E. M. Kawamata1, M. M. Moura2, L. M. A. 
Camargo1, H. Krieger1;  
1Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Universidade Federal de 
Rondonia, Porto Velho, Brazil.
Malaria is one of the main human infectious disease that affects 300 
to 500 million people per year, causing the death of 1.5 to 2.7 million 
people in Africa, Asia and the Americas. In Brazil around 70% of the 
cases are due to Plasmodium vivax  infection. The reported number 
of malaria episodes was studied on a sample of 924 individuals from 
Monte Negro/RO, Brazil (malaria hypo-endemic region) in order to test 
previous reports on a riverine population from the Western Amazonian 
Region (Portuchuelo, RO). The effects of gender, inbreeding, age were 
evaluated before a correlation study of pairs of relative was conducted. 
All estimates were relatively high and statistically significant showing 
a significant familial aggregation. It could be observed that the great -
est number of malaria episodes occurs in male individuals with more 
than 45 years of age, probably due to a longer exposition to the causal 
agent. Complex segregation analysis was applied to the data, and al -
though the free τs model showed the best fit, with somewhat non-men -
delian τs values, the action of a heritable multifactorial component has 
to be present in order to explain the familial aggregation. The results 
are the same whether Duffy negative individuals are excluded from the 
sample or not. Further linkage studies are being conducted in order to 
identify probable genetic mechanisms associated to this treat.
Model D t q H τ 1τ2τ 3-2 ln L χ 2 P test AIC
1.Mixed 1.000 1.513 0.230 0.065 [1] [0.5] [0]1179.38 1187.380
3.No major effect [0] [0] [0]0.435 [1] [0.5] [0]1229.74 50.360 0.000 3 vs. 1 1231.740
4.No multifactorial 0.092 1.510 0.623 [0] [1] [0.5] [0]1201.29 21.910 0.000 4 vs. 1 1207.290
5.Recessive (d=0) [0]3.065 0.211 0.259 [1] [0.5] [0]1170.99 8.390 0.004 5 vs.1 1176.990
7. Dominant (d=1) [1]1.515 0.230 0.065 [1] [0.5] [0]1179.48 0.100 0.752 7 vs. 1 1185.480
8.Free τs 1.000 1.332 0.301 0.447 1.000 1.000 0.000 962.30 208.690 0.000 8 vs 5 976.300
Supported by CNPq, FAPESP
P1162. Uncovering German genetic landscapes of Y-
chromosome
A. N. Diaz Lacava ;  
Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics, and Epidemiology, University of 
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
Widespread population data on Y-chromosomal short tandem re -
peats (STR) haplotypes are public available. World-wide as well as 
continent-wide studies of Y-STR haplotypes confirm its applicability to 
quantification of population genetic differentiation.Europe evidences Y-chromosomal diversity in form of clines, primarily 
influenced by geography (Rosser et al., 2000). While genetic differ -
entiation has been accounted between major European populations 
(Ploski et al., 2002), along present-day political borders (Kayser et al., 
2005) or even between micro-geographic regions (Brion et al., 2004), 
Germany is regarded as quite homogeneous. Small but statistically 
significant differences were detected between Eastern and Western 
Germany (Kayser, 2005).
German genetic landscapes of Y-chromosome are assessed. A ge -
netic geographical Information system (GenGIS) was built. Y-chromo -
somal geographical patterns were portrayed examining 7 STR (3070 
samples, recruited along 12 German locations; http://www.yhrd.org). 
Following the stepwise mutation model (SMM), thus taking haplotype 
molecular distance into account, haplotype groups were defined. First, 
most frequent haplotypes were identified, and then nearest neigh -
bours, in terms of mutation steps, were clustered. Genetic landscapes 
were built based on spatial interpolation of haplotype and haplotype-
group frequencies with GRASS GIS. Regional patterns are analyzed. 
The relatively genetic homogeneity attributed to German population 
may be interpreted as a product of superimposed genetic landscapes. 
GenGIS assessment of genetic landscapes provides an insight into 
the spatial composition of extant, highly admixed German population.
References
Brion et al., Gene. 2004;329:17-25.
Kayser et al., Hum Genet. 2005;117(5):428-43.
Ploski et al. Hum Genet. 2002;110(6):592-600.
Rosser et al., Am J Hum Genet. 2000;67(6):1526-43.
P1163. Genetic polymorphism of Y chromosome short tandems 
repeats (Y-STRs) in the Latvian population
L. Pliss1, A. Puzuka2, L. Timsa1, I. Pelnena1, V. Baumanis1, A. Krumina2;  
1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga Stradins 
University, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Riga, Latvia.
Biallelic loci and short tandem repeats (STRs) positioned in the non-
recombining part of Y chromosome and paternal inheritance make it a 
powerful tool for studying population genetics and evolution.
The aim of the present study was to evaluate Y-STRs variation in two 
haplogroups, I and R1a1 that form 46.6% from the total Latvian sam -
ple.
A sample of 74 paternally unrelated Latvians belonging to haplogroups 
(hgs) I and R1a1 were analyzed at 12 Y-STR loci. One trinucleotide 
STR (DYS392) and 11 tetranucleotide STRs (DYS19, DYS385a, 
DYS385b, DYS389I, DYS389II, DYS390, DYS391, DYS393, DYS437, 
DYS438, and DYS439) were determined using PowerPlex® Y System 
(Promega, USA). Haplotype diversity was calculated using the Arle -
quin 2.0 package.
Y-STR analyses of Latvian hg I lineages revealed 12 different hap -
lotypes (haplotype diversity: 0.957±0.016), 14-13-14-12-28-22-10-11-
13-16-10-11 (defined by DYS19-385a-385b-389I-389II-390-391-392-
393-437-438-439) of which occurred more frequently (25%). Among 
hg I Y-STRs two microsatellites were less diverse and only one allele 
for each of them was found (DYS392 locus-11 repeats, DYS438-10 re -
peats). In contrast to hg I, the haplotype diversity of haplogroup R1a1 
was 0.986±0.003, where 51 distinct haplotypes were detected and six 
of them were found in more than one individual, comprising 11.8% of 
hg R1a1 Y chromosomes in Latvian males. We have detected two pre -
dominant alleles at DYS392 and DYS 393 loci (11 and 12) that make 
up 94% of the total microsatellite variation in the Latvian population.
The analysis of associated Y-STRs revealed differences between mi -
crosatellite diversity within two distinct phylogenetic branches, hap -
logroups R1a1 and I, in the Latvian population.
P1164. The association of gene variants with physical 
performance in middle school-age children
I. V. Astratenkova , I. I. Ahmetov, D. N. Gavrilov, A. M. Druzhevskaya, A. V. 
Malinin, E. E. Romanova, V. A. Rogozkin;  
St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
The aim of the study was to determine the association between ACE 
I/D, ACTN3  R577X and PPARA  intron 7 G/C gene variants and anthro -
pometrical  and performance-related traits in 457 middle school-age 
children. The assessment of physical performance and anthropom -
etry was conducted with a number of physical and physiological tests. Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology2
Gene variants were determined by PCR. The discovered correlations 
concerned primarily sprint performance traits, being in agreement with 
the generally accepted data: the ACE D, ACTN3  R and PPARA  C al -
leles and their different combinations were associated with the maxi -
mal values of height, weight, BMI, standing long-jump and handgrip 
strength, increased resting heart rate (RHR) and systolic blood pres -
sure (SBP), whereas the ACE I and PPARA  G alleles correlated with 
decreased RHR and SBP. In conclusion, ACE, ACTN3  and PPARA  
gene variants are strongly associated with several anthropometrical  
and performance-related traits in physically active middle school-age 
children.
P1165. Investigating human genome-wide heterozygosity and its 
effects on health-related quantitative traits using dense genome-
wide scans
O. Polasek1, A. Carothers2, A. Vorko-Jovic1, Z. Biloglav1, I. Kolcic1, L. Zgaga1, 
N. Hastie3, C. Hayward3, A. Wright3, H. Campbell2, I. Rudan2;  
1Faculty of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom, 3MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Aim. To investigate concordance of different measures of human het -
erozygosity (internal relatedness, multilocus heterozygosity - MLH) us -
ing genome wide scans of 800 STR and 317.000 SNP genetic mark -
ers; to study patterns of heterozygosity in the human genome and 
investigate effects on health-related traits.
Materials and methods. A sample of 1026 examinees from isolated 
island of Vis, Croatia, with high prevalence of consanguinity was stud -
ied. Genome-wide scan using 800 STR markers was performed in all 
examinees, and using 317.000 SNP markers in a subset of examin -
ees. A set of 31 health-related quantitative phenotypes was measured 
(e.g. blood pressure, anthropometric measurements, spirometry and 
biochemical parameters).
Results. The average MLH (standard deviation) in 1026 examinees 
was 0.754 (±0.020) using STR markers (range 0.693 - 0.810), and 
0.343 (±0.006) using SNP markers (0.317 - 0.352). The correlation 
between genealogical and marker-based (STR, SNP) estimates of in -
dividual genome-wide heterozygosity was statistically significant in all 
cases, but generally weaker than expected. The coefficient of correla -
tion between residuals of estimates based on STR and SNP markers 
from the linear fit was r=0.434 (p<0.0001). Of all measured quantitative 
traits, the strongest correlation with MLH (after correction for potential 
confounding factors) was observed for biceps, triceps, subscapular 
and suprailiac skinfolds (p-values all <0.01), and hip, waist and bra -
chial circumference (p-values <0.05).
Conclusions. Patterns of individual genome-wide heterozygosity in the 
human genome differ substantially when measured using STR ver -
sus SNP marker sets, and with varying density of genome scans. Ge -
nome-wide heterozygosity is associated with levels of certain human 
quantitative traits.
P1166. Applicability of commercially available dense genome-
wide scans for genetic association studies: a comparison of 
CEPH and Croatian island founders
L. Zgaga1, P. Navarro2, C. Hayward3, D. Juricic1, I. Rudan4, A. Wright3, H. 
Campbell4, N. Hastie3, S. Knott2;  
1Faculty of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Institute of Evolutionary Biology, Edin -
burgh, United Kingdom, 3MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United King -
dom, 4Faculty of Medicine, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Aim. To investigate the performance of two commercially available 
dense genome-wide genotyping arrays (Illumina BeadChip ~317.000 
SNP markers and Affymetrix GeneChip ~250.000 SNP markers) in a 
population sample from the Croatian Island of Vis.
Materials and methods. We genotyped 63 individuals who were care -
fully chosen to be unrelated and to represent the founders of the pres -
ent island population. In addition, genotypes were obtained for 60 un -
related CEPH individuals.
Results. The proportions of loci that were polymorphic among all mark -
er loci were 99.74% (Vis, Illu), 99.93% (CEPH, Illu),85.36% (Vis, Affy) 
and 85.85% (CEPH, Affy). The proportion of markers with a minor allele 
frequency below 5% was 5.77% (Vis, Illu), 0.38% (CEPH, Illu), 28.75% 
(Vis, Affy) and 24.74% (CEPH, Affy). Estimated FST values between 
the two population were 0.012 (Illu) and 0.015 (Affy). The proportion of 
marker loci showing departure from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium at the 
significance level of p<0.01 was 2.66% (Vis, Illu), 0.43% (CEPH, Illu), 6.47% (Vis, Affy) and 1.13% (CEPH, Affy). The proportion of homozy -
gous genotypes in the whole dataset was 65.79% (Vis, Illu), 64.88% 
(CEPH, Illu), 72.99% (Vis, Affy) and 69.31% (CEPH, Affy).
Conclusion. The genetic distance between CEPH and this isolated 
Croatian island population is small, given the FST estimates obtained 
with the two different arrays. However, the significant effects of genetic 
drift in isolated populations can be noted as increase in proportion of 
markers with minor allele frequency approaching 0%. The Illumina ar -
ray provides a higher proportion of informative markers for genetic as -
sociation studies.
P1167. A recurrent mutation in Italian Gitelman patients is linked 
to a specific haplotype, suggesting a founder effect
M. Syrén1,2, N. Borsa1, C. Radaelli1, C. Melotti1, A. Orrico3, D. Coviello1, S. Te -
deschi1;  
1Fondazione IRCCS Opedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, 
Milan, Italy, 2Dept. of Pediatrics and Neonatology, University of Milan, Milan, 
Italy, 3Dept. of Molecular Medicine, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
Gitelman’s syndrome (GS) is one of the hereditary renal tubulopathies, 
characterised by hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, hypomagnesemia, 
hypocalciuria, hypermagnesiuria, and hyperreninemia with normal or 
somewhat lower blood pressure. GS is caused by inactivating muta -
tions in the SLC12A3  gene localised to chromosome 16. It encodes 
the thiazide-sensitive NaCl-cotransporter.
In our cohort of Italian patients with a clinical and molecular diagnosis 
of GS we found 66 mutations distributed between missense, nonsense, 
insertions and deletion mutations. They were spread along the gene 
without any hot spot. Especially one mutation, c.1202_1203ins7bp in 
exon 10 (p.Ala401Alafs>X1), was relatively frequent: it was found in 
ten apparently unrelated alleles (~15%).
The subjects that carried the c.1202_1203ins7bp mutation were char -
acterised, except one which was not available, by extensive genotyp -
ing with seven intragenic polymorphic markers/SNPs flanking exon 
10. A multiallelic polymorphism in intron 8 of the gene revealed 100% 
segregation of the 258 bp allele with the mutation even though this 
allele was found to be linked with wild type as well. Furthermore, a 
specific haplotype in linkage to the mutation was demonstrated in all 
the patients and parents carrying the insertion.
Our centre receives samples from all over Italy and also from abroad 
but the geographic distribution of patients carrying p.Ala401Alafs>X1 
is, at the moment, circumscribed to the northern regions of Italy.
We hypothesize that this mutation might be the result of a founder ef -
fect that originated in a common ancestor in the north of Italy.
P1168. T8T and other GJB2  unclassified or controversial 
sequence variants identified in Portuguese families
A. Rodrigues1, G. Fialho1, H. Caria1,2;  
1CGBM, Lisbon, Portugal, 2College of Health Care, Polytechnic Institute of 
Setúbal, Setubal, Portugal.
Mutations in GJB2  are the most common cause of nonsyndromic sen -
sorineural hearing loss (NSSHL), being recessive cases by far more 
frequent than dominant ones. To date, more than 100 mutations, poly -
morphisms and unclassified variants have been reported in GJB2 . The 
identification of known mutations in this gene allows definitive etiologi -
cal diagnosis of GJB2 -based hearing loss and improves the precision 
of genetic counselling and risk assessment for patients and families. 
The identification of novel or unclassified variants, or controversial 
variants with unclear pathogenicity, complicates the interpretation of 
DNA tests results and require further analysis of this variants among 
different populations.
The present study represents a new contribution for the characteriza -
tion of hereditary hearing loss in the Portuguese population. DNA-
based sequencing of GJB2  coding region was utilized in the molecular 
diagnostic of 50 patients with NSSHL, from 40 different affected fami -
lies being analysed for the first time.
The results obtained provided relevant information. They therefore 
contribute for a better characterization of the GJB2  variation spec -
trum, including the novel T8T and the nt-34 C>T variants, both found 
in heterozigosity, in two different families. The role of these and other 
unclassified or controversial variants is discussed according to geno -
type/phenotype analysis, their frequency in the Portuguese impaired 
and control population, and comparison with other populations.
These new data support and extend prior studies of the association Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology2
between GJB2 and NSSHL in Portuguese families. They also contrib -
ute for a more precise risk prediction and genetic counselling.
P1169. Glutathione S-transferase polymorphisms in Russian 
populations of European part of Russia
A. V. Khrunin , S. A. Limborska;  
Institute of Molecular Genetics of Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 
Russian Federation.
Cytosolic or soluble glutathione S-transferases (GST) - are a super -
family of multifunctional proteins with fundamental roles in the cellular 
detoxification of a wide range of exogenous and endogenous com -
pounds. Like many other genes, genes for GSTs display polymor -
phisms which, as have been shown can contribute to interindividual 
differences in responses to xenobiotics. The allele distribution for 
some of frequently tested in association studies GST polymorphisms 
(SNPs at codons 105 and 114 for GSTP1, -69 C/T polymorphism for 
GSTA1, three nucleotide deletion for GSTM3 and gene deletions for 
GSTM1 and GSTT1) were studied in seven geographically different 
Russian populations (from Tver, Smolensk, Kursk, Ivanovo and Arch -
angelsk regions) and in one Yakut population. Yakuts were used as a 
reference population. The analysis of GSTP1 polymorphisms did not 
demonstrate any statistically significant differences in allele/haplotype 
distribution among the most of Russian populations. At the same time 
all Russian populations significantly differed from Yakut population. 
Similar results were for GSTM3, GSTA1 and GSTM1 polymorphisms, 
but not for GSTT1. The frequency of GSTT1 null genotypes was sub -
stantively lower in Archangelsk population (9%) compared with other 
Russians (16-24%). The significance of this difference was verified 
with the test for homogeneity of Russian samples (we had p = 0.035 for 
all Russian populations tested and p = 0.64 when Archangelsk sam -
ples were excluded from the total Russian pull). Based on previously 
published data one may suppose that the lower frequency of GSTT1 
0/0 homozygotes is an attribute for the Russian people of Archangelsk 
region.
P1170. Cis-Trans  Interplay at the β Globin Locus using β Globin 
Gene Models from the Maltese Population
A. E. Felice1,2, J. Borg1, R. Galdies1,2, W. Cassar1,2, S. Bezzina Wettinger1,2, M. 
R. Caruana2, C. A. Scerri1,2;  
1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, 
University of Malta, Msida, Malta, 2Thalassemia and Molecular Genetics Clinic, 
Division of Pathology, St. Luke’s Hospital, Department of Health, G’Mangia, 
Malta.
The quantification of normal and abnormal globins of HbF-Malta-I 
[Gγ117(G19)His→Arg] heterozygotes which are in tight linkage disequi -
librium with Hb Valletta [β87(F3)Thr→Pro], together with haplotyping 
of homozygotes and heterozygotes including the XmnI dimorphism in 
the Gγ promoter and the (AT)XTY polymorphism 5’ to the β globin genes 
had suggested that the XmnI dimorphism was largely inactive in the 
normal newborn whilst the HbF levels and the proportion of Gγ globin 
in anemic adult β-thalassemia homozygotes and compound hetero -
zygotes differed significantly. Here, we document the occurrence of 
eight newborns who were heterozygous at three globin loci permitting 
quantification by RP-HPLC of the six globin products in the context of 
genotypic variation at the XmnI and (AT)XTY sequences. Results were 
compared with newborn HbF-Malta-I-Hb-Valletta heterozygotes and 
anemic adult β-thalassemia homozygotes/compound heterozygotes. 
The globin quantification together with haplotype data were analysed 
using the general linear model by SPSS V.12. The data excluded sig -
nificant effect of the XmnI dimorphism alone on relative γ/β globin gene 
expression in the newborn. Conversely, the (AT)XTY with BP1 binding 
sites of 19 (AT)7T5, 21 (AT)7T7, 23 (AT)9T5, or 25 (AT)11T3 nucleotides 
in trans  supersede XmnI. In contrast, it is the XmnI dimorphism that 
over-rides the (AT)xTy diversity in the anemic adult β-thalassemia ho -
mozygotes or compound heterozygotes. The GγFMalta-I/Gγ0 ratio of 
the newborn heterozygotes with HbF-Malta-I and the AγT/AγI ratio of the 
newborn heterozygotes with HbF-Malta-I and HbF-Sardinia suggested 
that the developmental regulation of the XmnI site may be subject to 
cis/trans  interplay with the (AT)XTY sequences.P1171. High Frequency of 35delG GJB2  mutation and absence 
of del (GJB-D1S10)  in Greek Cypriot patients with non-
syndromic hearing loss
V. Neocleous1, A. Aspris2, V. Shahpenterian3, V. Nicolaou3, C. Panagi4, I. Ioan -
nou3, Y. Kyamides2, V. Anastasiadou5,6, L. A. Phylactou1;  
1Department of Molecular Genetics C, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and 
Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Nicosia General Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Limas -
sol General Hospital, Limassol, Cyprus, 4Larnaca General Hospital, Larnaca, 
Cyprus, 5Department of Pediatrics, Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 6De-
partment of Clinical Genetics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, 
Nicosia, Cyprus.
Mutations in the GJB2  (Connexin 26) gene are responsible for more 
than half of all cases of pre-lingual recessive inherited non-syndromic 
deafness in Europe.
This work presents a mutation analysis of the GJB2  and GJB6  (Con -
nexin 30) genes in thirty six Greek Cypriot patients with sensorineural 
non-syndromic hearing loss compatible with recessive inheritance. 
Fourteen of the patients (38.9 %) had the 35delG mutation in the GJB2  
gene. Moreover, eleven of these were homozygous for the 35delG mu -
tation, whereas two patients were in the compound heterozygous state 
with the L90P missense mutation and one with the E47X nonsense 
mutation. Another patient with severe sensorineural hearing loss was 
heterozygous for the V153I missense mutation. Finally, no GJB6  muta -
tions or the known del (GJB6-D13S1830)  were identified in any of the 
investigated Greek Cypriot non-syndromic hearing loss patients. This 
work confirms that the GJB2  35delG mutation is an important patho -
genic mutation for hearing loss in the Greek Cypriot population and the 
findings will be used towards the effective diagnosis of non-syndromic 
hearing loss, improve genetic counselling and used as a potential ther -
apeutic platform in the future for the affected patients in Cyprus.
P1172. The monogenic pathology in rural districs of Buryatia 
Republic
L. Minaycheva1, L. Nazarenko1, O. Salyukova1, S. Fadyushina1, E. Eremina2, 
V. Cyrenova2, V. Ayushina2, B. Tugdumov2, E. Batuev2, N. Sanzhizhapov2, V. 
Cybicova2;  
1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Buryat Branch of 
Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk Research Centre, Siberian Divi -
sion, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Ulan-Uda, Russian Federation.
The medical genetic study of the population of four districts (Okinsky, 
Kyakhtinsky, Eravnensky, Kizhinginsky) of Buryatia Republic (Russia) 
was performed, totally there live 85.01 thousand people. Most of the 
natives in these districts are Buryats.
Buryatia Republic is situated in the southern part of East Siberia. To -
tal population is 974.3 thousand people. The most numerous ethnic 
groups are Russians (67.8%), Buryats (27.8%), Ukrainians (0.98%), 
Tatars (0.83%) and Germans (0.16%).
As a result of the study the 96 patients from 66 families with mono -
genic hereditary diseases were revealed. Thus, the 57 patients from 
37 families were found with autosomal dominant diseases; the 15 
patients from 14 families had autosomal recessive pathology; the 24 
patients from 15 families were revealed with X-linked forms. The 74 
patients from 47 families were Buryats, the 22 patients from 19 families 
were Russians. The group of hereditary syndromes predominated in 
the structure of autosomal recessive and X-linked pathology (37.5% 
and 50% respectively). The group of skeletal and connective tissue 
disorders (35.3%) was more often among autosomal dominant pathol -
ogy. The inborn metabolism defects (37.5%) were the most prevalent 
among autosomal recessive diseases.
The X-linked diseases predominated in Okinsky district, the 16 pa -
tients from 9 families were revealed with this pathology. The diagnosis 
of X-linked ichthyosis was made in 8 families. The founder effect can -
not be excluded in these cases.
The studies of the structure of hereditary diseases in Buryatia Republic 
are continued.
P1173. The medical genetic study of inherited pathology in 
Khakasia Republic
O. Salyukova1, L. Minaycheva1, L. Nazarenko1, S. Fadyushina1, O. Togocha -
kova2, A. Dergunova2, S. Kokova2, E. Kozhevnikova2;  
1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Khakas 
Republican Centre of Family Planning and Reproduction, Abakan, Russian Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology2
Federation.
Khakasia Republic is situated in the centre of South Siberia; the to -
tal population is 542.7 thousand people (the urban population - 336 
thousand, the rural population - 206.7 thousand). The most numer -
ous ethnic groups are Russians (79.5%) and Khakasses (11.1%). The 
epidemiological study of congenital malformations among newborns 
during 19-years period in Khakasia was performed (1986-2004). Total 
spectrum of congenital malformations was registered. The overall rate 
of all birth defects was 32.72‰ and varied from 17.22 to 57.98‰ in 
some years. The structure of congenital malformations was revealed, 
the defects of musculoskeletal, urogenital and cardiovascular system 
were more prevalent. The frequency of Down syndrome and multiple 
congenital malformations was 1.42 and 2.46‰, respectively.
The load Mendelian pathology with different types of heredity was de -
termined for each ethnic group, taking into account the territorial dis -
tribution: town, village. In the urban population, the load of autosomal 
dominant, autosomal recessive, X-linked pathology were: Russians - 
0.51; 0.23 per 1000 individuals respectively, and 0.13 per 1000 male; 
Khakasses - 1.22; 0.87; per 1000 individuals respectively. No one case 
of X - linked pathology was found in Khakasses. In the rural population, 
the load of autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, X-linked pathol -
ogy were: Russians: 0.65; 0.27 per 1000 individuals respectively, and 
0.04 per 1000 male; Khakasses - 0.97, 0.76 individuals respectively, 
and 0.65 per 1000 male. The load and the prevalence of hereditary 
pathology in Khakasia Republic were described for the first time.
P1174. HLA haplotypes associated with HFE C282Y mutation in 
São Miguel Island population (Azores)
C. T. Gomes1, P. R. Pacheco1,2, M. São-Bento1, R. Cabral1,2, C. C. Branco1,2, L. 
Mota-Vieira1,2;  
1Mol Genetics & Pathology Unit of the Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo, Ponta 
Delgada - Azores, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.
Hereditary Hemocromatosis (HH) is an autosomal recessive disor -
der of the iron metabolism. In the majority of HH cases, the defect is 
a single missense mutation, cystein replaced by tyrosine at the 282 
position, in the HFE gene. Generally, the C282Y mutation lies within 
a celtic ancestral HLA-A*03-B*07 haplotype. In addition, other haplo -
types associated with HH have been found.
Here, we infer the HLA haplotypes associated with the HFE C282Y 
mutation in São Miguel Island population. All samples were genotyped 
for HLA-A and -B by PCR-SSP and for HFE mutations (C282Y, H63D 
and S65C) by PCR-RFLP. Allele and haplotype frequencies were esti -
mated by Arlequin 3.1 version software.
The sample was composed of 88 individuals divided into two groups: 
47 were homozygous and carriers for the HFE C282Y mutation, while 
41 had no mutations. The data show that alleles HLA-A*03, HLA-A*29, 
HLA-B*37 and HLA-B*45 are in higher frequency in the C282Y patients 
and carriers group ( p<0.01), whereas alleles HLA-A*30, HLA-A*32, 
HLA-B*08 and HLA-B*44 are the most frequent in the control subjects 
(p<0.01). Moreover, results demonstrate that haplotypes HLA-A*29-
B*45 (7.5%) and HLA-A*02-B*58 (5.3%) are detected only in individu -
als with the C282Y mutation ( p<0.001). The ancestral haplotype HLA-
A*03-B*07 is present in both groups, but at a higher frequency (5.3%) 
in the C282Y patients and carriers group ( p<0.01). Taken together, the 
data suggest that these three haplotypes are associated with the HFE 
C282Y mutation, indicative of a multiple founder effect responsible for 
HH in the São Miguel Island population.
P1175. Establishment of a Human DNA Bank: the case of the 
Azorean population
M. São Bento1, P. R. Pacheco1,2, R. Cabral1,2, C. T. Gomes1, C. C. Branco1,2, L. 
Mota Vieira1,2;  
1Molecular Genetics and Pathology Unit – Hospital of Divino Espírito Santo 
(Ponta Delgada), Ponta Delgada - Azores, Portugal, 2Instituto Gulbenkian de 
Ciência, Oeiras, Portugal.
In order to characterize the genetic background of the Azorean popula -
tion, a human anonymized DNA bank was built. Initiated in 2002, this 
DNA bank consists in 1556 DNA samples from individuals that inhabit 
the nine islands of the Azorean archipelago.
The strategy used consisted of blood collection from healthy, not fam -
ily-related, individuals in the Hematology Department of the Divino 
Espirito Santo’s Hospital (for the São Miguel Island) or in the Health 
Centres of their residence (concerning the other eight islands), after presenting the project and receiving their written informed consent. To 
guarantee individual ancestral origin, the blood was preferably taken 
from individuals whose parents were born in the same island. Never -
theless, the bank includes DNA samples from 69 individuals whose 
parents were born in different archipelago islands, 58 individuals with 
only one Azorean parent and finally 59 individuals with no Azorean 
parents.
In regards to the genetic characterization of the Azorean population 
project, the bank is composed of 1370 DNA samples from individuals 
(whose parents were born in the same island) with an average age of 
42 years old (18 - 88 y), mostly men (71%). Up to the present moment, 
the bank includes a populational representativity between 0.2% (Ter -
ceira Island) and 7% (Corvo Island; Census  2001 - INE).
This DNA bank was used for Azorean genetic diversity studies (based 
on Y, Alu and STRs polymorphisms) and represents an essential re -
source for the analysis of genes responsible for diseases, as well as 
for the development of forensic and farmacogenomic studies.
P1176. Ibreeding depression in the Spanish kings of the Austrian 
Dynasty
F. C. Ceballos , G. Alvarez;  
University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
Even though inbreeding in the Spanish-Austrian dynasty (That extends 
since 1550 till 1700, when the last Spanish-Austrian king, Charles II, 
died without descendents) has been considered by historians as one 
of the causes of the disappearance of such, no genetic analysis of the 
Spanish-Austrian dynasty, to calculate the inbreeding coefficients and 
to detect its possible effects, has been carried out.
To estimate the inbreeding coefficients of the kings of the Spanish-
Austrian dynasty two approaches have been followed: on the one 
hand, a 16 generations, 153 individual pedigree of the descents of 
the Spanish-Austrian kings and queens has been reproduced. On the 
other, a 2300 individuals of the different European dynasties, database 
has been created. Data of the family relationships extracted from these 
two approaches was processed with the Fast Inbreeding Computa -
tion Software FSpeed 2. Consanguinity of Spanish-Austrian kings is 
between F = 0,024 (Philip I) and F = 0,25 (Charles II).Table 1 for some 
results.
The effects of the inbreeding in the dynasty of the Spanish-Austrians 
have been studied by analyzing the pre-reproductive survival of the 
descendents of the royal families, until they were 10 years old. This 
quantitative character has been used to detect an inbreeding depres -
sion in the Spanish Austrian dynasty. By applying different regression 
models a significant negative regression between the survival of the 
infants and its inbreeding coefficients has been found.
Inbreeding Coefficient
Philip I (1478-1506) 0,024
Joana I (1479-1555) 0,034
Charles I (V of Germany) (1530-1558) 0,035
Isabella of Portugal (1503-1593) 0,095
Philip II (1527-1598) 0,120
Mary of Portugal (1527-1545) 0,120
Elisabeth of Valois (1545-1568) 0,001
Anna of Austria (1549-1580) 0,105
Philip III (1578-1621) 0,216
Margaret of Austria (1584-1661) 0,138
Philip IV (1605-1665) 0,115
Elisabeth of Bourbon (1603-1644) 0,005
Mariana of Austria (1634-1696) 0,154
Charles II “The Bewitched” (1661-1700) 0,025Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology2
P1177. Retrospective study of Clinical and histological 
manifestations of IP in Adults
S. Hadj-Rabia1, A. Rimella1, S. Fraitag2, Y. de Prost1, A. Smahi3, C. Bodemer4;  
1Dermatology, Necker-Enfants malades Hospital, France, 2Dermatopathology, 
Necker-Enfants malades Hospital, France, 3INSERM-U781, Necker-Enfants 
malades Hospital, France, 4Dermatology, Centre Maladies Genetiques à Ex -
pression Cutanée, Necker-Enfants malades Hospital, France.
Introduction. Incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is a rare X dominant genoder -
matosis related to mutations of NEMO gene. It affects mostly female 
patients and is usually lethal for males in utero. The skin lesions may 
occur in 4 classically successive diagnostic stages: erythema and ve -
sicles, (stage 1); verrucous (stage 2); linear hyperpigmentation (stage 
3); and pallor and scarring (stage 4).In adults, manifestations are skin 
involvement (stage 4) and teeth and nail anomalies.
Patients and Methods
25 adults patients with molecular diagnosis of IP, were enrolled for 
clinical examination. Skin, ocular, neurological and stomatological ma -
nifestations were recorded using a standard form. Skin biopsy was 
performed.
Results. 25 patients fulfilled the criteria : the diagnosis was made in 
adulthood in 52%of the patients. Stage 4 was constant (100%) stage 
3 and 2 were found in 11 and 1 patients respectively. Other manifesta -
tions were: woolly hair (44%), nails (84%), teeth (92%), ocular (48%), 
mammary (28%) and neurological (12%) anomalies. Histology shows 
apoptotic kératinocytes, absence of follicles and sweat glands (stages 
3 and 4), hypopigmentation and atrophic epidermis (stage 4).
Discussion. Diagnosis of IP was delayed in 52% of the patient and 
based on the constant association of stage 4 lesions and teeth anoma -
lies. Interestingly, apoptosis persists in adulthood and was associated 
to absence of both sweat glands and follicles. Dermatological exami -
nation of patients with several miscarriages may be helpful to detect IP 
as a rare cause of spontaneous abortion. Moreover, histology confirms 
clinical suspicion of the disease and should be include in IP criteria. 
P1178. The role of Toll-like Receptor 4 polymorphisms and 
CARD15/NOD2 mutations in the susceptibility and phenotype 
in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: reports of a survey in Southern 
Italy population.
L. Rigoli1, C. Romano1, C. Di Bella1, V. Procopio1, M. Amorini1, G. Lo Giudice1, 
D. Magnoli1, C. Salpietro1, W. Fries2;  
1Department of Pediatrics, Medical School, University of Messina, Messina, 
Italy, 2Department of Medicine, Medical School, University of Messina, Messina, 
Italy.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the Toll-like Receptor 4 (TLR4) 
and CARD15/NOD2 genes have recently been shown to be associ -
ated with Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD), but whether this suscep -
tibility extends to all ethnic groups remains unknown. The aim of our 
study was to evaluate the CARD15/NOD2 and TLR4 gene mutations 
in a Southern Italy population.
Thirty two ulcerative colitis (UC) patients (mean age, 47 yrs), 79 Crohn’s 
disease (CD) patients (mean age, 46 yrs) and 103 healthy ethnically 
matched controls were genotyped for three CARD15/NOD2 variants 
(R702W, G908R, and L1007finsC) and for TLR4 gene polymorphisms 
(D299G and T399I). The allele frequency of the different genotypes 
was compared and genotype-phenotype correlation was performed. 
Comparison of the frequency between patients and controls and the 
association to the phenotype was performed by chi-square test or 
Fisher’s exact test where appropriate.
No significant association of the two TLR4 gene mutations with UC or 
CD was observed (allele frequency: D299G- controls 3.5%, UC 3.6%, 
CD 3.3%; T399I- controls 2.9%, UC 2.8%, CD 2.9%). The frequency of 
the frameshift mutation L1007finsC of the CARD15/NOD2 gene was 
significantly higher in CD patients (9.3%; p=0.0001) compared with 
controls (2.9%) or patients with UC (2.7%). In CD patients the fre -
quency of R702W mutation was significantly higher (8.3%; p<0.001) 
than in controls (3.4%) and in UC (3.7%). No significant association of 
the CARD15/NOD2 gene G908R mutation was found in UC.
Our preliminary results implicate the CARD15/NOD2 gene in suscepti -
bility to Crohn’s disease also in a cohort of patients of Southern Italy.P1179. Variability in inflammatory immune response genes in 
human populations of North Eurasia
V. A. Stepanov1, S. Khoo2, J. Bizzintino2, C. McLean2, H. Clifford2, I. Laing2,3, C. 
Hayden2, P. Candelaria2, J. Goldblatt2, A. Bittles4, M. Black4, V. Puzyrev1, P. N. 
LeSouef2,3;  
1Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2School of Paediat -
rics and Child Health, University of Western Australia, Princess Margaret Hos -
pital, Perth, Australia, 3Institute for Child Health Research, Subiaco, Australia, 
4Centre for Comparative Genomics, Murdoch University, Perth, Australia.
Inflammatory immune responses play a crucial role in the interaction 
of humans with the environment, and genes which mediate immunity 
in humans are a possible target for natural selection during human 
evolution and migrations. The aim of this study was to estimate the ge -
netic diversity of immune response-related genes in populations living 
under either moderate or Arctic climatic conditions in North Eurasia. 
Ten populations, 3 Eastern European (2 Russian, 1 Komis), 2 Central 
Asian (Kirghiz), 5 Siberian (2 Buryat, 2 Altay, 1 Khant) were genotyped 
for SNPs in genes involved in Th2 response (CD14 C-159T, SCGB1A1 
A38G, CMA1 A-1903G, ADRB2 Arg16Gly, ADRB2 Glu27Gln).
Allele frequencies of the CD14 and CMA1 genes showed significant 
departure from selective neutrality expectations in most of study popu -
lations. A high total level of genetic diversity in inflammatory immune 
response genes was found in the North Eurasian populations. Irre -
spective of ethnic and linguistic affiliation and geographical location, 
9 of the 10 populations were characterized by high average expected 
heterozygosity (0.45-0.49). The degree of genetic differentiation of 
North Eurasian populations exhibited by Th2-related genes was rela -
tively low (Fst=2.4%) compared to ‘neutral’ markers (autosomal Alu 
Fst=6%, Y-chromosome Fst=18%). The patterns of genetic relation -
ships between populations revealed by phylogenetic analysis seemed 
not to correspond with those obtained for ‘neutral’ genetic systems 
(Alus, Y-chromosome, mtDNA). In general, a significant correlation of 
‘proinflammatory’ allele frequency and total genetic diversity with ge -
ography and climate was revealed.
P1180. Analysis of Interleukin 10 -1082 gene polymorphism in 
hemodialysis patients
N. Maksimovic1, I. Novakovic1, B. Jekic1, L. Lukovic1, V. Lezajic2, S. Simic-
Ogrizovic1;  
1Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia 
and Montenegro, 2Institute of Nephrology, CCS, Belgrade, Serbia and Monte -
negro.
Introduction: Interleukin 10 (Il-10) is an important constituent of im -
mune response and has regulatory function on inflammatory and cell 
mediated immunological mechanisms.
Production of Il-10 is under strong genetic influence. One of the most 
studied regulatory DNA sequences is single nucleotide polymorphism 
A/G at position -1082 from the Il-10 gene transcriptional start site. 
Studies of Il-10 and its genetics are of particular interest in hemodaly -
sis (HD) patients due to the possible role of this cytokine in the patho -
genesis of disorders associated with chronic HD such as atheroscle -
rosis and depression.
Aim: The aim of our study was determination of Il-10 -1082 genotype 
and its correlation with Il-10 serum level in a group of hemodialysis 
(HD) patients.
Methods: We assessed 70 patients on chronic HD due to the end stage 
renal disease. IL-10 -1082 genotyping was performed by PCR method 
followed by digestion with Mnl1 restriction enzyme. Il-10 serum level 
was determined by immuno assay.
Results: DNA analysis showed that 31/70 (44.29%) patients were with 
AA genotype, 28/70 (40.0%) with AG genotype and 11/70 (15.71%) 
with GG genotype at position -1082 of the Il-10 gene. There is no differ -
ence between genotype frequencies in HD patients and control group 
of healthy subjects. HD patients with GG genotype had higher mean 
Il-10 level compared to both AG and AA group of patients, but without 
statistical significance.
Conclusion: Further investigations will show weather Il-10 -1082 geno -
type and Il-10 serum level could be used in prevention of disorders 
affecting life quality in HD patients.Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology2
P1181. Disease frequency of Inborn Errors of Metabolism in the 
Irish Traveller Community
A. Murphy1,2, S. Lynch1, A. Monavari2, P. Mayne2, E. P. Treacy2;  
1National centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady’s Hospital for Sick children, 
Crumlin Dublin 12, Dublin, Ireland, 2National Centre for Inherited Metabolic 
Disorders, Dublin, Ireland.
The frequency of Inherited Metabolic Disorders (IEMs) varies between 
ethnic groups, reflecting founder effect, genetic isolation, and the po -
tential effects of consanguinity. These disorders are a major cause of 
morbidity and mortality in “Irish Travellers“, an endogamous group of 
nomads.
We aimed to compare the birth prevalence of IEMs in Traveller with 
non-Traveller children attending a tertiary level metabolic centre and to 
examine possible genetic factors contributing to observed differences. 
A retrospective review of diagnoses in Travellers was performed for 5 
years (2002-2006). Mean birth prevalence was calculated and com -
pared with overall figures for IEMs in the total population.
Travellers constitute 9% of the total patient group, but only 0.6% of the 
Irish population. 15 IEMs were noted, Galactosaemia, MPS 1, Mito -
chondrial cytopathies, Glutaric Aciduria Type 1(GA1),GSD Type 111a, 
Mucolipidosis Type 11, Hyperprolinemia Type 11 being the common -
est. The birth prevalence of IEMs in the Traveller group for this pe -
riod was estimated to be 1/80,Whereas that for the total population for 
2006 approximates 1/500. Carrier frequency for the common galacto -
saemia mutation (Q188R) is 1/11. The W402X homozygous mutation 
explains all cases of MPS 1. All GA1 patients are homozygous for the 
E365K mutation. Hyperprolinemia Type 11 is caused by one mutation 
(G521fs(+1)) in an extended pedigree.
We propose that the high incidence of IEMs in Irish Travellers may 
reflect initial founder effects and the increased rate of consanguinity.
P1182. Mosaic imprinting aberrations at H19, SNRPN and 
KvDMR1 are not common after in vitro fertilisation.
V. F. Oliver1, W. S. Cutfield2, H. L. Miles2, P. L. Hofman2, I. M. Morison1;  
1University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand, 2Liggins Institute, University of 
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
In vitro fertilisation (IVF) potentially provides a profoundly abnormal 
environment for an embryo. Studies with mice, sheep and cattle have 
indicated that the culture environment of the embryo can affect the 
imprinting of genes and the phenotype of the animal. Recent studies 
have suggested that IVF causes a small but increased risk of imprint -
ing aberrations such as Angelman syndrome and Beckwith-Wiede -
mann syndrome. Given that mosaicism for the imprinting defect has 
been observed in Angelman syndrome and Beckwith-Wiedemann syn -
drome, we hypothesised that low-level, mosaic imprinting defects may 
be present in phenotypically normal individuals conceived using IVF.
DNA samples from peripheral blood were obtained from 70 IVF-con -
ceived pre-pubertal children and 70 matched controls. DNA methyla -
tion of CpG sites within the H19, SNRPN and KvDMR1 loci was accu -
rately quantified using methylation-sensitive restriction digest followed 
by real-time quantitative PCR (MSQ-PCR). Global DNA methylation 
was also examined by using MSQ-PCR on the Satellite 2 repeat re -
gion. No differences in the percentage of methylation between the IVF-
conceived and control children were observed at the examined CpG 
sites.
We concluded that low-level imprinting errors are not a common occur -
rence in children conceived using IVF. Our data provides reassurance 
that IVF-associated imprinting errors are sporadic and rare.
P1183. A novel variant E43K found in  KCNE1  gene
N. Correia1, H. Caria1,2, G. Fialho1;  
1Center of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Sciences, University 
of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 2College of Health Care, Polytechnic Institute of 
Setúbal, Setúbal, Portugal.
KCNE1  gene encodes a K+ channel ß-subunit (mink or KCNE1) that 
modulates voltage-gated potassium channels in various organs, 
namely heart and cochlea. A functional K+ channel requires coexpres -
sion of this transmembrane protein and a α-subunit, usually KCNQ1, 
coded by gene KCNQ1 . In the inner ear, the KCNE1/KCNQ1 channels 
play a key role in ensuring K+ homeostasis. Loss of functional channels 
leads to a reduction of endolymph potencial, which can originate hear -
ing loss. Mutations in KCNE1 are also responsible for the prolongation of the action potential in the heart, which leads to a prolonged QT 
interval and to a cardiac disease known as long QT syndrome (LQTS), 
associated or not to severe congenital bilateral hearing loss.
In the present study we report a novel heterozygous 127G>A muta -
tion in KCNE1  gene. This variant was detected in a healthy individual 
of our control population by direct sequencing in both directions. The 
mutation results in an acid to basic amino acid substitution in the extra 
cellular domain of the protein at codon 43 (E43K), a position highly 
conserved among MinK proteins of different vertebrates.
Recent findings suggest that common variants located in the KCNQ1, 
KCNE1, KCNH2  and SCN5A  genes might influence the QT interval in 
healthy individuals and might also represent risk factors for arrhyth -
mias or cardiac sudden death. We have thus investigated whether 
variant E43K could influence, by itself or in association with other vari -
ants, the channel function and, as a consequence, the length of the QT 
interval, leading to LQTS expression.
P1184. Genetic susceptibility to legionnaires‘ disease
V. Romano-Spica1, F. Impagnatiello1, G. Gianfranceschi1, A. Bargellini2, L. 
Cauteruccio2, P. Borella2;  
1University of Rome - IUSM, Rome, Italy, 2University of Modena and Reggio, 
Modena, Italy.
Legionnaires’ disease is a bacterial pneumonia due to Legionella 
pneumophyla . Given the reported wide exposure to this pathogen, 
behavioural, microbial and environmental risk factors might not fully 
explain the limited known number of pathological cases thus suggest -
ing the involvement of differences in host susceptibility.
With the aim of addressing the potential role of genetic polymorphisms, 
a case-control study was recently realised within the nationwide re -
search network. Candidate genes included interleukins and respective 
receptors.
Herein we report on the analysis of genetic polymorphisms at CCR 
and TLR. Specifically, patients (n=96), exposed subjects (n=106) and 
controls (n=320) were recruited based on stringent inclusion criteria. 
Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood cells and mutation 
detection by polymerase chain reaction. We report a significant (<0.05) 
association for CCR264I, a Single Nucleotide polynorphism where a 
G190 is substituted by an A190 in the Chemokine Receptor-2 gene. Our 
data together with available epidemiological and clinical evidences 
support the potential role for this specific polymorphism in the suscep -
tibility to legionnaires’ disease. Additional in vitro studies indicate that 
macrophage phagocytosis, chemokine production as well as cytotox -
icity may play a role . Another SNP (CCR5D32) also resulted associ -
ated to bacterial pneuomonia but it was not specific to legionnaires’ 
disease. Genetic polymorphisms may open up new perspectives for 
preventive medicine approaches in high risk human subjects exposed 
to Legionella pneumophyla .
P1185. Parametric linkage analysis of large complex pedigrees
T. I. Axenovich , I. V. Zorkoltseva;  
Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
Due to computational limitations, it is impossible to perform exact para -
metric linkage analysis in large pedigrees with multiple loops. Usu -
ally, a pedigree is split to multiple small fragments. This enables ex -
act likelihood calculations using Lander-Green algorithm. Alternative 
method is to break all loops and apply Elston-Stewart algorithm for 
approximate likelihood calculation. We compared the linkage power of 
two approaches using a large complex human pedigree with multiple 
loops. Two pedigree structures were derived from the initial pedigree: 
1) single pedigree constructed by breaking loops and 2) a set of the 
non-overlapping fragments of limited size. Quantitative trait and geno -
types for the set of five-allelic markers were simulated based on initial 
pedigree and ascribed to the corresponding individuals in two derived 
pedigree structures. We performed multipoint linkage analysis for each 
of two structures. For the linked markers the average values of Lod 
score were significantly higher for the first pedigree structure. How -
ever, it is known that simplification of pedigree structure may increase 
type 1 error (false positives) of linkage analysis. This may lead to an 
overestimation of power, when tabulated threshold values are used. 
To test for this possibility we simulated unlinked markers. Empirical 
threshold level was lower for the first pedigree structure, than for the 
second one. This means that increase of power observed in analysis 
of pedigrees with broken loops compared to analysis of pedigree frag -Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology2
ments is determined by higher portion of linkage information remaining 
in the former structure but not by a higher increase in type I error.
P1186. Human pigmentation genes and genetic susceptibility to 
melanoma.
L. P. Fernandez1, R. L. Milne1, J. A. Aviles2, M. I. Longo2, P. Lazaro2, J. 
Benitez1, G. Ribas1;  
1Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain, 2Hospital 
Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain.
The aetiology of malignant melanoma (MM) remains unclear but it is 
known that both genetic and environmental factors influence the de -
velopment of sporadic disease. The main reason for the increasing in -
cidence of MM is greater sun exposure. Epidemiologic studies confirm 
that ultraviolet B radiation is the main factor involved in the pathogen -
esis of the disease. Among phenotypic factors, fair pigmentation and 
low tanning ability are the most important risk factors. MM predisposi -
tion is highest in fair skinned, blond or red haired individuals who never 
tan and always burn.
Human pigmentation and consequently sun sensitivity are complex 
characteristics. In humans there is a long list of genes known to be 
involved in rare pigmentary disorders such as albinism. These genes 
contribute most of the variation in pigmentation phenotypes seen in 
human populations, and they do this by regulating the level of synthe -
sis, chemical composition, packaging and distribution of melanin.
This case-control study included 120 consecutive Spanish MM pa -
tients from the Dermatology Unit of the Gregorio Marañón Hospital and 
240 control subjects frequency matched for sex and age. Phenotypic 
information was colleted using a standardized questionnaire.
Forty-five SNPs in seven genes belonging to the pigmentation path -
way ( MC1R, OCA2, ASIP, TYR, TYRP1, SLC45A2 and SILV ) were 
genotyped. The selection of the candidate SNPs was carried out us -
ing a gene-based approach. We are able to identify several individual 
SNPs associated with MM. Possible interactions among them will be 
discussed.
These results confirm the contribution of pigmentation genes to ge -
netic predisposition to MM in Spain.
P1187. Low density microarrays for forensic DNA analysis.
O. N. Mityaeva1, D. O. Fesenko2, T. V. Nasedkina2;  
1Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow, Russian Federation, 
2Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation.
We suggest to use SNP analysis on microarrays for forensic studies 
of DNA. Microarray for SNP-analysis of three loci (HLA-DQA1 (6p21), 
ABO(9q34), AMEL(Xp22)(Yp11)) has been developed. The microar -
ray allows the detection of nine groups of alleles of HLA-DQA1 gene 
(group 1 -0101XX, 0104XX, 0105, 0107 alleles; group 2 - 0102XX; 
group 3- 0103; group 4 - 0106; group 5 - 0201; group 6 - 03XXXX, 
group 7 - 04XXXX; group 8 - 05XXXX; group 9 - 06XXXX), five groups 
of alleles ABO gene (A, B, O1, O1V and O2 groups) and 2 alleles 
of AMEL gene (AMELX and AMELY), thus we are able to divide all 
people in to 1350 groups. The procedure take about 24 hours and 
includes multiplex two-stage PCR with fluorescently labeled primers 
and hybridization with oligonucleotide microarray. The fluorescent sig -
nals are analyzed using a chip-reader equipped with CCD-camera. 
The microarray has been tested with DNA samples isolated from fresh 
blood and saliva. The sensitivity of the method is about 25-100 pg per 
reaction. We tested the microarray with degraded DNA isolated from 
spots of blood from dead body, spots of saliva from cigarette end and 
glass. Allele frequencies and population genetic parameters for HLA-
DQA1 and ABO loci were obtained. The presented microarray could 
be applied in forensic study to confine the number of suspects. It could 
replace blood group serological test which may give mistakes when 
degraded samples are studied. Probability of identification could be 
increased by adding other loci located on the different chromosomes.
P1188. Predictive factors of migraine in a sample of Portuguese 
families
C. Lemos1, M. J. Castro1, I. Alonso2, J. Barros3, J. Sequeiros1, J. Pereira-Mon -
teiro4, D. Mendonça5, A. Sousa1;  
1IBMC and ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 2IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 3Dept. Neurology, 
HGSA, Porto, Portugal, 4Dept. Neurology, HGSA and ICBAS, Porto, Portugal, 5ICBAS, Porto, Portugal.
Migraine is a highly prevalent disease, reducing quality of life of mi -
graineurs and their relatives. In a previous study, we found evidence of 
familial aggregation in a sample of Portuguese families. Proband’s age 
of onset has also been associated with familial aggregation in other 
studies.
Our aim was to evaluate if proband’s age of onset, relative’s age at 
contact and gender were predictive factors of migraine.
We analyzed a sample of 133 Portuguese families (a total of 492 first-
degree relatives of probands with migraine, from which 317 were af -
fected and 175 were healthy).
Similarly to what was described, proband’s age of onset was dichoto -
mized (<16, 16+ years). Relatives were divided in two groups accord -
ing to their age at contact (<40, 40+ years) and were also separated by 
gender, since this is an age and gender-dependent trait.
We performed a logistic regression analysis to evaluate if any of these 
variables could predict relative’s affection status.
After adjusting for the remaining variables, while gender was found 
to be a risk factor for migraine (OR=2.74; 95% CI= 1.87- 4.01), with 
females being more affected than males, proband’s age of onset and 
relative’s age at contact were not. No significant interactions were 
found between these variables.
Our findings showed that, as expected, females had a higher risk of 
migraine than men. Unlike previous descriptions, however, variation in 
age of onset was not a predictive factor of migraine.
P1189. Analyzing of mitochondrial polymorphisms in southwest 
ethnics of Iran
H. A. Hosseini1, A. Foroughmand2, M. Hooshmand3, H. galehdari4, E. 
Davoodi4;  
1Jondishapoor university of medical science, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
2Shahid chamran University, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3National institue 
of genetic engineering and biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
4Shahid chamran university, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mitochondrial polymorphisms are useful tool for investigations involv -
ing in the genetic structure and the history of human populations. mtD -
NA characteristics such as maternal inheritance, high mutation rate, 
high copy number and lack of recombination, produce it as a good tool 
to this propose. The highest degree of polymorphism in mtDNA lies 
in two hyper variable non-coding region, HV-I and HV-II that can be 
amplified and sequence separately.
In this study, three ethnical subgroups of southwest of Iran have been 
analyzed at HV-I sequence of mtDNA. Populations of this study were 
48 cases of unrelated individuals in three groups of Arab, Bakhtiyary 
and Persian. Based on 59 variable positions, 44 different haplotypes 
were founded. The genetic diversity in Persian, Arab and Bakhtiyary 
were 0.918, 0.930 and 0.945 respectively. Haplotype diversity in all 
three populations was high and probably this is because of historical 
role of this area as a common population immigrant place to many of 
tribes and ethnics. Surprisingly, in this study we found four new vari -
ations that have not been reported in this region (HV-I) at mitomap 
previously. These variations are insertion of one G after 16336, one 
(C) after 16188 and two transversion (A to C) in 16258 and 16318 
positions.
P1190. Mitochondrial DNA coding and control region 
polymorphisms associated with a prolonged life span in the 
Latvian population
A. Krumina1, L. Pliss2, A. Zeltina1, V. Baumanis2;  
1Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 2Latvian Biomedical Research and 
Study Centre, Riga, Latvia.
There is evidence that some mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) coding 
region and control region HVSI polymorphisms are associated with 
longevity in humans. These findings allowed to suggest that the asso -
ciation of mtDNA variability with longevity may be population specific, 
depending on both genetic and environmental background. Studies of 
the control region HVSII polymorphism in association with longevity so 
far are very limited.
The aim was to verify if there is any association between mtDNA cod -
ing and control region polymorphisms and longevity in the Latvian 
population.
Objects were 351 healthy unrelated Latvians 18 - 40 years old and 
98 aged 74 - 89 years. MtDNA haplogroups were determined by PCR Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology2
- RFLP analysis. Control regions HVSI and HVSII were analysed by 
direct sequencing.
The frequency of haplogroup J was significantly higher in the older 
age group (13.3%) than in younger individuals (6.6%). Subhaplogroup 
J2b in particular was more frequent in older individuals (3.1%) than 
in the younger age group (0.3%). Statistically significant differences 
were found for mutation frequencies in HVSII at sites 150 (more fre -
quent among the older individuals and in haplogroups H and U4, less 
frequent - in the haplogroup J), 152 (more frequent among the older 
individuals in haplogroups T and U4, less frequent - in the haplogroup 
U2), 195 (more frequent among the older individuals in the haplogroup 
T, less frequent - in haplogroups J and U4).
Our results support hypothesis that certain inherited mtDNA polymor -
phisms via interaction with other loci in mtDNA may promote human 
longevity.
P1191. Analysis of mitochondrial DNA polymorphism in four 
Siberian ethnic groups
M. V. Golubenko1, S. V. Buikin1, E. R. Eremina2, N. R. Maximova3, V. N. Tadi -
nova4, V. P. Puzyrev1;  
1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Buryat Branch of 
the Institute of Medical Genetics, Ulan-Ude, Russian Federation, 3Yakut Scien -
tific Center of RAMS and Sakha Republic, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 4Altay 
Republic Children’s Hospital, Gornoaltaysk, Russian Federation.
Mitochondrial DNA polymorphism was studied in 1130 individuals from 
12 populations of the most numerous Siberian peoples - Altaians (4 
populations), Tivinians (3 populations), Yakuts (2 populations) and 
Buryats (3 populations). 308 different HVS1 haplotypes were revealed 
in total which belong to 34 different mtDNA haplogroups, mainly of 
East-Eurasian origin. Portion of “West-Eurasian” mtDNA haplogroups 
was the highest in Altaians (up to 46%) and Buryats (up to 20%). 
AMOVA analysis has shown that 95,78% of HVSI variation was within 
populations, 2.09% could be explained by inter-population differentia -
tion and 2.09% was variability between ethnic groups. Test on differen -
tiation of polymorphism in population pairs has shown that in all cases 
except the pair of Yakut samples the differentiation was significant. 
AMOVA analysis for separate ethnic groups revealed the highest de -
gree of intraethnic differentiation for Altaians (3.78%), followed by Tu -
vinians (2.61%) and then Buryats (0.43%). Comparison of spectrum of 
haplogroups and individual haplotypes in the populations under inves -
tigation also shows significant differentiation of native Siberian popula -
tions. Only two haplotypes from haplogroup C and one haplotype from 
D could be considered as common for all four ethnicities. One more 
haplotype from C was abundant in Tuvinians, Yakuts and Buryats but 
rare in Altaians. Substantial number of haplotypes was population-spe -
cific. Analysis of migrations and interethnic marriages revealed vari -
ous effects of these factors depending both on ethnicity and particular 
population. The results suggest considerable ethnic differentiation in 
the studied Siberian peoples, as well as geographic differentiation.
The study was supported by RFBR grant 04-04-48792.
P1192. Paleomolecular genetic analyses (mitochondrial and 
nuclear DNA polymorphisms) on some Thracian populations 
from Romania, dating from the Bronze and Iron Age
G. M. Cardos1,2, N. Miritoiu3, A. Soficaru3, A. Kroll4, A. Rodewald4;  
1”Victor Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 2Faculty of Biology, 
University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 3Institute of Anthropology, Bu -
charest, Romania, 4Department of Human Biology, Univ. Hamburg, Hamburg, 
Germany.
We have performed this study on the skeletal remains of some old 
Thracian populations from Romania, dating from the Bronze and Iron 
Age. Therefore, within our research we analysed mtDNA (HVR I and 
HVR II regions) and nuclear DNA (vWA31A Microsatellite) polymor -
phisms in order to show the degree of their genetic kinship with other 
old and modern European populations, especially with nowadays Ro -
manian population. We also amplified the Amelogenin gene to identify 
the genetic sex of old individuals. We have used three methods for 
DNA-extraction from human fossils and adapted them on the degrada -
tion state of the biological material: the phenol-chloroform DNA extrac -
tion method, the DNA extraction method with guanidine-tiocianate and 
silica-particles, and the DNA-extraction method with Invisorb Forensic 
Kit I.
After amplifying by PCR, the mtDNA sequences were sequenced by the Sanger method. The nuclear vWA31A Microsatellite polymor -
phisms and the Amelogenin gene sequences were demonstrated on 
PAA gel, Ag-stained.
We have compared the mtDNA sequences of 50 old Thracian individu -
als with mtDNA sequences of the present-day Romanian population 
and other European, Asian and African modern and old populations. 
The frequencies of vWA31A Microsatellite were compared with similar 
genetic data of other modern populations from all over the world.
Our results suggest that the old Thracian populations might have made 
an important contribution to the foundation of the modern genetic Ro -
manian pool and also reflect an evident genetic similarity between the 
old Thracian populations and other modern populations from South-
East Europe.
P1193. Analyses of mitochondrial and Y-chromosomal 
lineages in modern Hungarian, Szekler and ancient Hungarian 
populations
B. Csányi1, G. Tömöry2, E. Bogácsi-Szabó1, Á. Czibula1, K. Priskin1, M. 
Mórocz1, A. Szécsényi1, A. Csősz2, B. Mende2, P. Langó2, K. Csete3, A. Zsol -
nai4, I. Raskó1;  
1Institute of Genetics,Biological Research Center, Hungarian Academy of Sci -
ences, Szeged, Hungary, 2Archaeological Institute, Hungarian Academy of 
Sciences, Budapest, Hungary, 3Department of Forensic Medicine, University of 
Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, 4Research Institute for Animal Breeding and Nutri -
tion, Herceghalom, Hungary.
Hungarian population belongs linguistically to the Finno-Ugric branch 
of the Uralic language family.
High-resolution mtDNA analysis of 27 ancient samples (10th-11th cen-
turies), 101 modern Hungarian, and 76 modern Hungarian-speaking 
Szekler samples was performed. Only two of 27 ancient Hungarian 
samples are unambiguously Asian: the rest belong to one of the west -
ern Eurasian haplogroups. Statistical analyses, including 57 European 
and Asian populations, revealed that some Asian affinities and the 
genetic effect of populations who came into contact with ancient Hun -
garians during their migrations are seen. Though strong differences 
appear when the ancient Hungarian samples are analyzed according 
to apparent social status, as judged by grave goods. mtDNA results 
demonstrate that significant genetic differences exist between the an -
cient and recent Hungarian-speaking populations.
The Y-chromosomal base substitution ”Tat”, proved to be a valuable 
marker in the Finno-Ugric context. The Tat C allele is widespread in 
many Uralic-speaking populations, while it is virtually absent in recent 
Hungarians.
To further elucidate this finding we studied this polymorphism on 100 
modern Hungarian, 97 Szekler and 4 ancient Hungarian samples. Our 
data revealed that only one Szekler men carries the C allele among 
the modern individuals, whereas out of the four skeletal remains two 
possess the mutation.
Furthermore we examined 22 Y-chromosomal binary markers to ana -
lyze the paternal genetic diversity of the two recent populations.
Our results show that Hungarians and Szeklers share basically the 
same genetic components found in other European populations, ge -
netically closely related and close to other populations from Central 
Europe and the Balkan.
P1194. Polymorphisms in the methylenetetrahydrofolate 
reductase gene and methotrexate efficacy and toxicity in 
rheumatoid arthritis
L. Lukovic1, M. Stefanovic1, V. Milic2, B. Jekic1, T. Damnjanovic1, V. Bunje -
vacki1, N. Damjanov2, J. Milasin3, M. Krajinovic4;  
1Institute of biology and human genetics, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia, 
2Institute of Rheumatology, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute of biology and human 
genetics, School of Dentistry, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Research Center of St-Justine 
Hospital, University of Montreal, Montreal, PQ, Canada.
Polymorphisms of the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) 
gene can influence the methotrexate (MTX)-related metabolic path -
ways. The aim of this study was to determine a possible relationship 
between polymorphisms C677T and A1289C of the MTHFR gene and 
toxicity and efficacy of MTX in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. A total 
of 47 patients fulfilling American College of Rheumatology criteria and 
on MTX therapy (7,5-15 mg/week), were evaluated. Clinical efficacy 
was assessed using the Disease Activity Score in 28 joints (DAS 28) at 
day 0 and 6 months after initiation of therapy. Drug toxicity was evalu -Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology00
ated by blood count, liver and renal function tests. Genotype analysis 
of C677T and A1289C mutations of the MTHFR gene was investigated 
by PCR and restriction analysis of DNA extracted from the patients’ 
lymphocytes. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 
11.5 (ANOVA, χ2 test). 17% of patients had genotype T/T, 47% C/T and 
36% C/C for the C677T polymorphism. For the polymorphism A1289C 
the findings were as follows: 38% AA, 48% AC and 14% CC. We did 
not find significant difference in relative DAS28 decrease between 
genotype groups 6 months after initiation of MTX therapy. MTX-re -
lated toxicity was identified in 17 patients. According our findings the 
A1289C polymorphism rendered patients sensitive to MTX toxicity.
The polymorphisms in MTHFR were not associated with any differ -
ence in efficacy parameters during methotrexate treatment. Further 
prospective studies including new genetic polymorphisms and larger 
group of patients will be necessary in order to precisely assess drug 
efficacy and its toxicity.
P1195. Mutation patterns of mtDNA: empirical inferences for the 
coding region
C. Santos1, R. Montiel1, A. Arruda1, L. Alvarez2, M. Aluja2, M. Lima1;  
1Department of Biology/CIRN, University of the Azores, Ponta Delgada, Por -
tugal, 2Department BABVE, Faculty of Sciences, Autonomous University of 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
Human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) has been extensively used in 
population and evolutionary genetics studies. Thus, a valid estimate of 
human mtDNA evolutionary rate is important in many research fields. 
We analysed a portion of the coding region of mtDNA between posi -
tions 3230 and 4331 (tRNALeu, ND1 and tRNAIle genes), using individu -
als belonging to extended families from the Azores Islands (Portugal) 
with the main aim of providing empirical estimations of the mutation 
rate of the coding region of mtDNA under different assumptions, and 
hence to better understand the mtDNA evolutionary process. Hetero -
plasmy was detected in 6.5% (3/46) of the families analysed. In all of 
the families the presence of mtDNA heteroplasmy resulted from three 
new point mutations, and no cases of insertions or deletions were 
identified. Major differences were found in the proportion and type of 
heteroplasmy found in the genes studied when compared to those ob -
tained in a previous report for the D-loop. Our empirical estimation of 
mtDNA coding region mutation rate, calculated taking into consider -
ation the sex of individuals carrying new mutations, the probability of 
intra-individual fixation of mutations present in heteroplasmy and, to 
the possible extent, the effect of selection, is similar to that obtained 
using phylogenetic approaches. Based on our results, the discrepancy 
previously reported between the human mtDNA coding region muta -
tion rates observed along evolutionary timescales and estimations ob -
tained using family pedigrees can be resolved when correcting for the 
previously cited factors.
P1196. Allele frequencies for 150 genetic markers of oxidative 
stress and myocardial infarction in Lithuania
K. Končiūtė1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2, R. Janavičius1,2, Z. A. Kučinskienė3, A. Timins -
kas4;  
1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius 
University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2The Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius Univer -
sity Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Department of Physiology, 
Biochemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, 
Vilnius, Lithuania, 4Institute of Biotechnology, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Myocardial infarction is a complex multifactorial and polygenic disor -
der, therefore large scale association studies that examine many poly -
morphisms simultaneously are required to allow reliable prediction of 
the genetic risk for myocardial infarction (MI).
After the large scale analysis of literature and bioinformatic databases 
150 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 89 candidate genes, 
mostly involved in oxidative stress regulation and oxidative homeosta -
sis, were selected to develop a microarray for arrayed primer exten -
sion (APEX) resequencing technology (Asper Biotech, Estonia). Most 
of the selected SNPs were in promoter regions or exons that might be 
expected to cause changes in the function or level of expression of the 
encoded protein.
The group of 49 persons from Lithuania having offspring(s) with myo -
cardial infarction were initially analyzed to detect the allele frequen -
cies for the SNPs of the candidate genes in MI. Chi square analysis 
was carried out to test deviations of genotype frequencies from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.
38 SNPs were not polymorphic in the studied group. The genotype 
frequencies of SNPs of APOA5 , ADRB2 , LGALS2 , GP1BA , ITGB3 , 
PDE4D , GNG12 , GPX4  and NFKB1  genes deviated significantly from 
those predicted by the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (p<0,05). The small 
sample size could cause this deviation. The estimated allele frequen -
cies of tested SNPs were similar to those detected in other European 
populations. In conclusion 112 SNPs were selected to be informative 
for further association studies.
P1197. How a mutation associated with Myotonic Dystrophy 
Type 1 migrates in Bashkortostan (Russia)
L. Akhmadeeva1, B. Veytsman2, C. Derevyanko1;  
1Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2George Mason 
University, Fairfax, VA, United States.
Myotonic Dystrophy is a disorder with an autosomal dominant mode 
of inheritance. Anticipation phenomenon is well known in families with 
Myotonic Dystrophy type1 (DM1). This means that a half of the offspring 
of an affected parent could get this mutation and have more chances 
to suffer from a more severe clinical condition than their parents. Pre -
natal testing for DM1 is still not available in Bashkortostan (Russia) as 
a routine procedure. The territory of Bashkortostan is 143.600 square 
kilometers and the population is over 4 million people. We were in -
terested to find out how population (and their genes) migrates within 
our Republic and to predict the mean distance for migration of DM1 
mutation per generation. We performed a study of places of birth of 
inhabitants of Bashkortostan for calculating the coefficient of diffusion. 
We analyzed 875 births in our Republic and calculated the distances 
between places of birth of parents and their children. Our mathemati -
cal model shows that mutation associated with DM1 in Bashkortostan 
migrates for 120 km per generation.
This research was supported by the grant for young scientists from the 
President of Russian Federation MD-4245.2006.7
P1198. Genetic Variation Controlling Cellular Traits related to 
Down Syndrome: Reactive Oxygen Species
H. Attar1, K. Bedard2, H. Prokisch3, T. Meitinger3, E. Wichmann4, D. Mehta5, E. 
T. Dermitzakis6, K. H. Krause2, S. E. Antonarakis1;  
1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva 
Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Biology of Aging Laboratory, University 
Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland, 3GSF National Research Center, Institute of Hu -
man Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany, 4Institute of Epidemiology, GSF National 
Research Center, Neuherberg, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, GSF 
National Research Center, Neuherberg, Germany, 6Population and Compara -
tive Genomics, The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome 
Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Understanding the genetic basis of susceptibility to complex disorders 
is one of the major aims in medical genetics today. The availability of 
the genome sequence and variation allows now to study quantitative 
cellular phenotypes closely related to clinical manifestations. Produc -
tion of reactive oxygen species (ROS) may be involved in a number of 
human disorders including Down Syndrome (DS). We measure ROS 
production with an enzymatic assay in lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL) 
from several human populations, either as families or unrelated indi -
viduals, to assess the genetic architecture of this trait.
There was substantial inter-individual variation in cell lines from un -
related CEPH individuals and heritability estimates were 45% as as -
sessed with 10 CEPH families. Genome-wide linkage analysis on 
these families showed 2 significant linkage signals on Hsa12 and 
Hsa15. In a genome-wide association analysis, we measured ROS 
production in Caucasian HapMap individuals (N=58) and associated 
this trait to 2.2 million SNPs from HapMap. Results confirmed previ -
ously detected linkage signals; in addition 8 new significantly asso -
ciated loci were detected. We repeated a genome-wide association 
analysis in an independent population of LCL of healthy German indi -
viduals (KORA project). Preliminary analysis of the first 87 individuals 
confirmed the locus on Hsa15 and replicated two previously associ -
ated loci on Hsa4 and Hsa6. The comparison of ROS production of DS 
individuals (N=34) to either HapMap or KORA populations revealed a 
significant ROS decrease.
Cellular phenotypes could be used as proxies for complex disorders, 
and the approach described here may contribute to the genetic dissec -
tion of these traits.Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology01
P1199. Epidemiology of oculo-aruiculo-vertebral spectrum 
(OAVS): a registry-based study on European population
I. Barisic1, V. Tokic1, M. Loane2, F. Bianchi3, E. Calzolari4, E. Garne5, D. Welles -
ley6, H. Dolk2;  
1Childrens Univ. Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2EUROCAT Central Reg -
istry, University of Ulster, Newtonabbey, Co Antrim, Northern Ireland, United 
Kingdom, 3Unit of Epidemiology, CNR Institute of Clinical Physiology, Pisa, 
Italy, 4Department of Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine, Division of Medi -
cal Genetics, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, 5Epidemiology, University of 
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark, 6Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, 
Princess Anne Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom.
Oculoariculovertebral spectrum (OAVS) is a phenotypically and ge -
netically heterogenous disorder grouping together different conditions 
thought to be caused by impaired development of the first and second 
branchial arches including Goldenhar syndrome, facioauriculoverte -
bral syndrome, hemifacial microsomia, and otomandibular dysostosis. 
We present the results of the population-based epidemiological study 
on the severe end of OAV spectrum.
The data were extracted from the database of EUROCAT (European 
Surveillance of Congenital Anomalies), a large European network of 
birth defect registries that use the same epidemiological methodolo -
gies. Based on data collected during the 1980-2004 period, we found 
the prevalence of the severe OAVS cases to be 2.63/100 000 births 
or 1/38022. The most frequently associated congenital malforma -
tions were major ear malformations that accounted for 30% of cases 
(68/224). Vertebral anomalies were reported in 30% of cases (67/224), 
and cardiac defects were present in 25% of cases (57/224). Severe 
central nervous system involvement was rare (17/224 - 8%). Prenatal 
ultrasound examination in the period 2000-2004 detected abnormali -
ties in 15% (16/111) of cases. Live born infants with OAVS have a high 
first week survival (98.5%). Maternal and paternal ages do not seem 
to be risk factors for OAVS. Almost 35% of patients, born after the 37th 
week of gestation, weighed less than 2500 g. Among 272 patients, 
consanguinity of parents was registered in 5 cases. OAVS among sibs 
was found in 4 cases, while family history for OAVS was positive in ad -
ditional 10 cases. No evidence of exposure to consistent teratogenic 
agents including maternal diabetes was noted.
P1200. Bone mineral density variation related to islet amyloid 
polypeptide (amylin) haplotypes in young and elderly women in 
Southern Sweden
S. Gebre-Medhin1, P. Gerdhem2, M. Callreus2, K. Åkesson2, H. Luthman3;  
1Dept Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden, 2Dept of Or -
thopedics, Malmö University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden, 3Dept of Endocrinology, 
Malmö University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
BACKGROUND AND AIM: The candidate hormone islet amyloid poly -
peptide (IAPP or amylin) is predominantly expressed by the pancreatic 
beta cells and cosecreted with insulin in response to food intake. Sev -
eral studies have implied a physiological role for IAPP in bone remod -
eling. For example, IAPP knockout mice exhibit increased numbers 
of bone-resorbing osteoclasts and develop an osteporosis-like pheno -
type in adulthood. However, the importance of IAPP in bone remodel -
ing in humans is not clear. In the present work we have investigated 
whether different IAPP haplotypes are associated with bone mineral 
density (BMD) in young women at peak bone mass and elderly wom -
en at high risk of fracture. MATERIALS AND METHODS: 1005 young 
women from the Malmö Peak-study (age 25±0.1 yrs, BMI 23.0±3.7 
kg/cm2) and 1044 elderly women (Malmö OPRA-study; age 75±0.1 
yrs, BMI 26.2±4.2 kg/cm2) were recruited. The primary phenotype was 
BMD assessed by DXA. Body composition data, calcaneus ultrasound 
estimates and fracture data (OPRA-study) were also available. Short 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the vicinity of the IAPP gene 
were retrieved from the International HapMap Genotype Database and 
genotyped by PCR using the ABI SNP genotyping assay. RESULTS 
AND DISCUSSION: Obtained data and an update of this study will be 
presented.
P1201. Model free Lods for linkage analysis of large complex 
pedigrees
I. V. Zorkoltseva , T. I. Axenovich;  
Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation.
Parametric linkage analysis is a powerful tool for mapping genes for 
complex traits. When mode of inheritance is unknown, it was suggested to use model free Lod score for linkage analysis. The statistical proper -
ties of different parametric linkage tests have been compared for small 
pedigrees, but remain unknown for large extended pedigrees.
We compared model based and model free Lod score statistics for 
multipoint linkage analysis in a large complex human pedigree with 
multiple loops. We simulated quantitative traits with dominant, addi -
tive or recessive major gene effect and genotypes for a set of five-al -
lelic markers. Three linkage statistics were compared: Lod, using true 
underlying QTL model parameters; PLod, based on the estimations 
of model parameters coming from complex segregation analysis and 
MFLod, estimating model parameters and the QTL position simultane -
ously. We used approximate likelihood calculation based on the loop 
breaking (Stricker et al., 1995).
For all analyzed models average values of the test statistics and the 
portion of experiments in which the test was >3, were highest for 
MFLod and lowest for the PLod. However, it is known that the dis -
tribution of multipoint Lod score under H0 depends on frequencies of 
alleles, mode of inheritance, and so on. We analyzed type I errors for 
used linkage statistics and demonstrated that they are similar for Lod 
and PLod, but higher for MFLod. Nevertheless linkage power calcu -
lated on the base of empirical threshold level was higher for MFLod 
than for Plod or Lod.
P1202. Combinatorial genetic analysis of physical performance 
in athletes
I. I. Ahmetov , I. V. Astratenkova, A. M. Druzhevskaya, V. A. Rogozkin;  
St Petersburg Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
It has been shown physiologically that for rowing at least 70% of the 
energy requirement comes from aerobic metabolism; the remainder 
comes from anaerobic sources. Accumulating evidence suggests that 
polymorphisms of ACE, ACTN3  and PPARA  genes are strongly influ -
ence human physical performance. ACE I and PPARA  G alleles are 
supposed to be favorable for endurance-oriented athletes, whilst ACE 
D, PPARA  C and ACTN3  R alleles are thought to enhance power per -
formance. The purpose of this study was to determine genotype and 
allele frequencies of ACE I/D, ACTN3  R577X and PPARA  G/C poly -
morphisms in rowers and to detect genotype combinations that are 
prevalent in elite, sub-elite and non-elite rowers compared to controls. 
173 male and female Russian elite, sub-elite and non-elite rowers and 
842 controls were recruited for the study. Genotyping was carried out 
by RLFP. We found that frequencies of ACE D and PPARA  C alleles 
were the lowest in elite level rowers compared to other rowers and con -
trols. ACTN3  X allele frequency tended to decrease with athletes’ im -
provement of elite status. When all endurance-associated alleles were 
combined, we determined common endurance alleles frequencies in 
different groups. The highest value of endurance alleles frequency was 
observed in male elite (72.2%) and female sub-elite rowers (70.5%), 
compared to male (66.0%) and female controls (66.1%), respectively. 
The prevalent combination of genotypes in all groups was ID-RX-GG. 
The frequency of this combination was highest in elite rowers (28.6%); 
the lowest was found in controls (17.3%).
P1203. POLG disease mutations in Europe, Australia, New 
Zealand, and the USA explained by single ancient European 
founders
A. H. Hakonen1, G. Davidzon2, R. Salemi3, L. A. Bindoff4, G. Van Goethem5,6, 
S. DiMauro2, D. R. Thorburn3, A. Suomalainen1,7;  
1Research Program of Molecular Neurology, Biomedicum-Helsinki, University 
of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Neurology, Columbia University 
Medical Center, New York, NY, United States, 3Murdoch Children’s Research 
Institute, Royal Children’s Hospital and Department of Paediatrics, University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 4Department of Neurology, Institute of Clinical 
Medicine, University of Bergen & Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Nor -
way, 5Division of Neurology and the Neuromuscular Reference Center, Univer -
sity Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 6Department of Molecular Genetics, 
Neurogenetics group, VIB and University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 7De-
partment of Neurology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
Mutations in the catalytic subunit of the mitochondrial DNA polymerase 
gamma (POLG) have been found to be an important cause of neu -
rological disease. We and collaborators have identified the POLG 
W748S mutation as the underlying cause of mitochondrial recessive 
ataxia syndrome (MIRAS) and found it to be among the most common Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology02
genetic causes of inherited ataxia in Finland - with a carrier frequency 
in the general population of 1:125. The characteristic clinical features 
in our patients included ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, dysarthria, mild 
cognitive impairment, involuntary movements, psychiatric symptoms, 
and epileptic seizures. Here, we show that the W748S mutation has 
a common ancient founder for all the disease chromosomes in Aus -
tralia, New Zealand, Finland, Norway, United Kingdom, and Belgium. 
Furthermore, we show that a second common POLG mutation, A467T, 
also shows common European ancestry: patients from Australia, New 
Zealand, and the United States share a common haplotype with Eu -
ropean patients. These data of ancestral haplotypes indicate that the 
POLG  locus is quite stable and that the recessive W748S and A467T 
mutations have occurred once in history. They have effectively spread 
to populations of European descent with carrier frequencies up to 1% 
in several populations. Our data predict that these mutations are com -
mon causes of ataxia and Alpers disease in the Western world.
P1204. The analysis of the nuclear genes polymorphism’s in 
Kazakhs
G. M. Berezina , G. S. Svyatova;  
Scientific Center of the obstetrics, gynecology and perinatology, Ministry of 
Public health care of Kazakhstan Republic, Almaty, Kazakhstan.
The polymorphic nuclear locus in human genome are the objective ge -
netic markers for the analysis of hereditary polymorphism of the mod -
ern human populations and evolution. A total of 324 unrelated healthy 
Kazakh people were studied. A portion of ACE, TPA25, PV92, eNOS3, 
APOA1, YaNBC148, YaNBC27 genes and deletion 32 b.p. of CCR5 
gene from genomic DNA was amplified by PCR and analyzed on a 6% 
polyacrylamide gel. Each fragment was classified according to geno -
types. Genotypes and allelic frequencies were revealed: for ACE gene 
- 27,2% (II), 21,3% (DD), 51,5% (ID), 52,9% (I), 47,1% (D); for TRA25 
gene - 22,8% (II), 26,9% (DD), 50,3% (ID), 47,8% (I), 52,2% (D); for 
PV92 - 26,2% (II), 23,5 (DD), 50,3% (ID), 51,4% (I), 48,6% (D); for 
eNOS3 gene - 1,9% (AA), 18,2% (AB), 79,9% (BB), 11,0% (A), 89,0% 
(B); for APOA1 gene - 58,6% (II), 14,8% (DD), 26,5% (ID), 71,9% (I), 
28,1% (D); for YaNBC148 gene - 8,3% (II), 46,9% (DD), 44,8% (ID), 
30,6% (I), 69,4% (D); for YaNBC27 gene - 9,9% (II), 53,4% (DD), 
36,7% (ID), 28,2% (I), 71,8% (D); for CCR5 gene - 0,62% (D/DEL), 
92,3%(N/N), 7,1% (N/DEL), 4,2% (D), 95,8% (N). The distribution of 
the empirical genotypes and allelic frequencies and the indexes of het -
erozygosity of all genes were completely conformed to theoretical de -
viation of Hardy-Weinberg (p>0,05), except for APOA1 gene (χ2=37,2; 
p<0,001).
P1205. Association between platelet GPIIb-IIIa polymorphism 
(PlA1/A2) and atherosclerosis obliterans in diabetes mellitus 
type 2
L. Pina-Cabral , V. Carvalhais, B. Mesquita, L. Avidos, M. Portela, A. Almeida-
Dias, B. Criado;  
CESPU, Vila Nova de Famalicão, Portugal.
Epidemiologic studies show that thromboembolic diseases are the re -
sult of complex interactions between genetic factors and the chronic 
influence of the environment. Diseases like diabetes may worsen this 
picture and enhance the appearance of thromboembolic diseases. 
Thus, isquemic events like atherosclerosis obliterans are among the 
major causes of morbidity and mortality in patients with diabetes mel -
litus type 2. Recent studies suggest that platelet polymorphisms may 
act like risk factors for the development of such events.
The aim of this work is to study the association between platelet GPIIb-
IIIa polymorphism PlA1/A2 and atherosclerosis obliterans in patients 
with diabetes mellitus, type 2.
Allelic frequencies will be studied in 3 different groups. 1 group of pa -
tients with diabetes that suffer isquemic events, 1 group of patients 
with diabetes that did not suffer isquemic events and 1 normal group. 
Relationship between allelic frequencies and clinicopathologic vari -
ables will also be studied.
Results and discussion of the results aren’t available yet. However, 
results of, at least, 20 samples for each group will be accessible at the 
time of the congress.
Mikkelsson J, Pérola M, Laippala P et al. Glycoprotein IIIa PI(A) poly -
morphism and sudden cardiac death. J Am Coll Cardiol 2000, 36:13.
Nolan RD, Vinik AI. Pathogenesis of platelet dysfunction in diabetes. 
Eds. Philadelphia, Lippincott-Raven. 1996, 832.Nomura S, Shouzu A, Omoto S et al. Genetic analysis of HLA, NA and 
HPA typing in type 2 diabetes and ASO. Int J Immun. 2006, 33:117.
myocardial infarction. Cardiovasc J S Afr. 2005, 16, 5:266.
Vinik AI, Erbas T, Park TS et al. Platelet dysfunction in type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetes Care. 2001, 24, 8:1476.
P1206. ACTN and ACE  genotypes in Greek elite athletes
I. D. Papadimitriou, C. Papadopoulos, A. Kouvatsi, C. Triantaphyllidis ;  
Aristotle University, Thessaloniki, Greece.
Only a few attempts have been made to shed light upon the influence 
of genes in making an Olympic champion. The aim of our study is to 
elucidate the genetic differences among a group of 101 elite Greek 
power-oriented track and field athletes and a random representative 
sample (181) of the Greek population by analyzing ACTN3  and ACE  
genotypes. Athletes were defined as elite and included to the sample 
if they had represented Greece at the international level. Standard 
molecular genetic methodologies were followed. Genotype and allele 
frequencies were compared between elite athletes and controls by the 
Chi-squared test using the statistical package GENEPOP V. 3.4. Pre -
liminary results for ACE locus indicated that the gene frequencies in 
the Greek elite athletes are similar to other northern European popula -
tions. Furthermore, concerning the ACTN3  locus, it was showed that 
ACTN3 genotype and allele frequencies in the top power-oriented ath -
letes were statistically significantly different from those in the random 
sample of the Greek population: the frequency of the RR ACTN3  geno -
type in power-oriented athletes vs. the general population was 47.94% 
vs. 25.97%. The difference was even more prominent for comparison 
of the subgroup of sprinters to controls. The results suggest an overall 
strong association between the presence of the RR genotype and elite 
power performance. Therefore, the ACTN3  gene might be used as a 
molecular genetic marker to at least partially predict an athlete’s ability 
to achieve peak power and sprinting performance.
P1207. Patterns of genetic diversity of populations of the 
Caucasus, Volga-Ural, Central Asia, and Siberia
I. Kutuev , R. Khusainova, V. Akhmetova, E. Khusnutdinova;  
Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation.
A total of 1049 individuals from Volga-Ural region of Russia (Turkic 
speaking Bashkirs, Tatars, and Finno-Ugric speaking Komis, Maris, 
Mordvins, and Udmurts), Central Asia (Turkic-speaking Kazakhs, 
Uzbeks, and Uighurs), the North Caucasus (Turkic speaking Kara -
chays, Kumyks, Kuban Nogays, and Karanogays), and Siberia (Turkic 
speaking Yakuts, Tungusic speaking Evenks, and Mongolic speak -
ing Kalmyks) were analyzed using eight Alu loci (ACE, ApoA1, PV92, 
TPA25, NBC27, NBC102, NBC148, and NBC182). Genetic differen -
tiation in various regions of the world was fairly substantial. Basing 
on 8 Alu loci data Gst value for the world dataset was 0.089. Geo -
graphic divide between Europe and Asia, e.g. the Ural Mountains and 
the Caspian Sea, can also be considered as a genetic boundary. The 
North Caucasus populations demonstrated genetic pattern which is 
very close to Near East populations. European populations reflect nei -
ther geographic nor linguistic relationships. The data indicates that the 
populations of the two boundary regions between Europe and Asia, 
the Volga-Ural region of Russia, and populations of the North Cauca -
sus are more similar to European than to Asian populations. Siberian 
and Central Asian populations are genetically closely related to each 
other. The fact that populations of the four regions analyzed fit the 
genetic variation throughout Eurasia attests that they were involved 
in the same major demographic processes that took place within the 
continent no matter what genetic differences or similarities the popula -
tions demonstrate.
P1208. Regional differences in the genetic variability of Finno-
Ugric speaking Komi populations
D. A. Verbenko , A. V. Khrunin, S. A. Limborska;  
Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation.
The Komi (Komi-Zyryan) people are one of the most numerous ethnic 
groups belonging to the Finno-Ugric linguistic community. They occupy 
an extensive territory in north Russia to the west of the Ural Mountains, 
in the northeast of the East European Plain. This is an area of long-term 
interactions between Europeans and North Asians. Genetic variability 
was evaluated in two geographically distinct populations, the Izhemski 
and Priluzski Komi. We searched for polymorphisms of the TP53  gene Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology0
(a 16-bp duplication in intron 3 and three RFLPs: for Bsh1236I at co -
don 72, for MspI in intron 6 and for BamHI in the 3´ flanking region) and 
for variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphisms of locus 
D1S80  and of the 3´ untranslated region of the gene for apolipoprotein 
B (ApoB) . Some data from our previous studies of TP53 , 3´ApoB and 
D1S80  variability were involved in the comparison of Komi with other 
Eastern European populations. Multidimensional scaling analysis of 
genetic distances was used for the evaluation of genetic relationships 
between populations. The results revealed some affinity between Pri -
luzski Komi and Eastern Slavonic populations, and significant segre -
gation of Izhemski Komi from other ethnic groups studied. The unique 
genetic features of Izhemski Komi may have been determined by their 
ethnogenesis or the pressure of environmental factors, such as special 
nutrition and adaptation to extreme climatic conditions.
P1209. Mapping quantitative trait loci (QTL): Is it worth investing 
in repeated phenotype measurements to improve genotype-
phenotype correlations?
I. Kolcic1, O. Polasek1, A. Vorko-Jovic1, Z. Biloglav1, L. Zgaga1, I. Rudan2;  
1Faculty of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
Aim. In any attempt to identify alleles associated with human quantita -
tive traits (QT), the investigators will use measurements of phenotype 
of interest in the recruited set of examinees and their individual geno -
types. The power of any association study to detect human QTL will 
rapidly diminish if initial phenotype measurements are not accurate 
and repeatable.
Materials and methods. We investigated the 14 QT’s in a sample of 
people from an isolated population of Croatian island of Vis. The mea -
surements were performed by the same field crew using the same 
methods in February 2002 and May 2003, in total of 74 examinees. 
Phenotypic measurements were analyzed with paired parametric or 
non-parametric statistical tests, depending on the data distributions.
Results. Most traits exhibited significant differences between two 
measurements: urate (P=0.004; paired t-test), systolic blood pressure 
(P<0.001), diastolic blood pressure (P=0.001), creatinine (P=0.001), 
cholesterol (P<0.001), triglycerides (P=0.018), HDL (P=0.039), LDL 
(P<0.001), and glucose (P=0.002; all Wilcoxon). Only three traits did 
not exhibit significant differences; height (P=0.319), weight (P=0.055), 
and body mass index (P=0.784; all paired t-test).
Conclusion. Despite of assumed reduced genotypic and environmen -
tal variance in an isolated island population, measuring a single phe -
notypic value does not seem to be very reliable method for mapping 
QTLs. This study raises the issue of whether increasing sample size or 
repeating (some) phenotypic measurements is better research option 
in budget-restrained settings.
P1210. A population-based epidemiological and genetic study of 
X-linked retinitis pigmentosa
H. Prokisch1,2, M. Hartig1, R. Hellinger1, T. Meitinger1,2, T. Rosenberg3;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University of Munich, München, Ger -
many, 2Institute of Human Genetics, GSF-National Research Center, Munich, 
Germany, 3Gordon Norrie Centre for Genetic Eye Diseases, National Eye Clinic 
for the Visually Impaired, Hellerup, Denmark.
PURPOSE: To perform a nation-wide elucidation of the prevalence 
and the mutation spectrum in X-linked Retinitis pigmentosa (XLRP), 
and to make genotype-phenotype comparisons.
METHODS: Our study comprised 96 affected males and 150 female 
carriers from 42 families representing all identified XLRP individuals in 
the Danish population (5.4 million inhabitants). RPGR and RP2 were 
screened for mutations, and the medical files of the patients were scru -
tinised and phenotype data extracted.
RESULTS: Prevalence of affected males was estimated to be 1:24.500 
and 1:18.000 of female carriers. Cumulated life-risks for developing 
XLRP between 0.22 and 0.59 per 10,000 males were calculated. Mo -
lecular analysis of RP2 and RPGR uncovered 28 different mutations in 
33 of 34 index cases analysed. 12 patients carried a mutation in RP2, 
12 in exons 1-14 and 9 in ORF15 of RPGR. Males with RP2 mutations 
tended to have higher degrees of myopia, lower visual acuities, and 
better preserved visual fields than males with RPGR mutations at the 
same age.
CONCLUSIONS: A very high mutation detection rate in familial cases 
makes genetic testing a highly valuable clinical tool for genetic coun -selling and prenatal testing which is regularly demanded by Danish 
XLRP carriers. The proportion of RP2-mediated XLRP in the Danish 
population is higher and the proportion of RPGR-ORF15 is lower than 
reported in other studies. Thus, strategies for diagnostic procedures 
should take into account the population-specific mutation spectrum.
P1211. Genomic sequence analysis reveals a complex 
segmental duplication superstructure on human chromosome 
17q arm
V. Leppä1,2, D. Chen3, T. Miettinen2, A. Palotie2,4, L. Peltonen1,4, J. Saarela1;  
1National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland, 2Finnish Genome Center, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Human Genetics, David 
Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 4The 
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States.
Human chromosome 17 is associated with several types of cancer and 
genetic diseases, such as neurofibromatosis and breast cancer. Chro -
mosomal instability is one underlying cause of these disease mani -
festations. A major mechanism resulting in chromosomal instability is 
the non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR). It has been shown 
that the chromosome 17 is enriched with inter- and intra-chromosomal 
segmental duplications.
We conducted a genome-wide sequence alignment using expressed 
transcripts mapping within the previously identified duplicated do -
mains to determine the full extent and architecture of the duplicated 
segments on chromosome 17q. This analysis identified a duplication 
superstructure (SDS) on 17q arm, consisting of 13 discrete domains, 
which share sequence homology. A similar structure was found on the 
syntenic chimpanzee chromosome.
Analysis of the genomic sequences of the duplication domains re -
vealed the most highly copied sequences to be retrotransposable 
sequence elements. Twelve retrotransposable mRNAs and their se -
quence copies were found almost exclusively within the SDS, both 
in the human 17q and the chimpanzee 19q. The highest numbers of 
sequence alignments were observed with two transcripts, AK125814 
and AK125932. Interestingly, the AK125814 transcript was found to be 
expressed in 5/6 healthy human and two chimpanzee PBMC samples. 
Sequencing of the rt-PCR products showed that AK125814 was pref -
erentially expressed from one of the duplicated locations, which varied 
between individuals.
The complex duplication architecture on 17q may predispose to chro -
mosomal instability via NAHR and possibly lead to disease causing 
copy number variation. The potential functional role of the actively 
transcribed, SDS-associated retrotransposable elements is an intrigu -
ing question.
P1212. Segregation patterns of CAG repeats in the MJD locus: a 
study in normal families from the Azores Islands (Portugal)
C. Bettencourt1, R. N. Fialho2, R. Montiel1, C. Santos1, P. Maciel3, J. Bruges-
Armas2, M. Lima1;  
1Department of Biology/CIRN, University of the Azores, Ponta Delgada - 
Azores, Portugal, 2Specialized Service of Epidemiology and Molecular Biology 
(SEEBMO), Hospital of Santo Espirito, Angra do Heroismo - Azores, Portugal, 
3Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sci -
ences, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal.
Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) is an autosomal dominant neurode -
generative disorder of late onset, caused by an expansion of a CAG 
repeat motif in the coding region of ATXN3  gene. In the Azores, MJD 
reaches the highest worldwide prevalence (1/103). Previous studies 
devoted to segregation ratio distortion (SRD) in the MJD locus are 
controversial both in patients and in normal individuals. The aim of 
this work is to investigate the existence of SRD upon transmission of 
wild-type MJD alleles, in order to contribute for the understanding of 
the dynamics of triplet repeat loci. The number of the CAG repeats at 
the ATXN3  gene was determined for 69 normal Azorean sibships (total 
of 364 transmissions). Sixteen allelic variants were observed, varying 
between 14 and 39 repeats. Alleles with 23 and 14 repeats were the 
most frequent, in agreement with previous population studies. From 
segregation analysis, our data suggest the occurrence of SRD, with 
distortion towards the transmission of the smaller alleles in paternal 
(p=0.037), but not in maternal transmissions. Furthermore, the differ -
ence in the number of repeats between the two alleles that constitute 
the transmitters’ genotype (AL-AS), seems to have an effect on this dis -
tortion. With the exception of cases with AL-AS=1 or AL-AS≤2, the ten -Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology0
dency is for preferential transmission of the smaller allele or absence 
of preference. Excluding such cases, SRD becomes significant in both 
paternal and maternal transmissions. This evidence suggests that the 
transmitters’ genotypic composition may act as a confounding factor in 
studies of SRD for wild-type MJD alleles.
P1213. Analysis of the population heterogeneity in East Slovakia 
using fifteen STR markers.
J. Bernasovská , I. Bernasovský, I. Boroňová, E. Petrejčíková;  
Institute of Biology, FHPV, University of Presov, Presov, Slovakia.
The presented study has shown that population analyses in East Slo -
vakia can be of great importance from the viewpoint of the examination 
of population differentiation. This study provides additional population 
genetic data of the four East Slovakian populations (Slovak Cauca -
sians, Romanies from region Spiš, Olachian Romanies and Romanies 
called Labances) on the thirteen CODIS core STR loci with the highest 
proportion in the case of the Slovak population-Romanies Labances 
pair (all analysed 15 loci) and with the lowest portion in the Romanies 
from the Spiš region-Romanies Labances pair (4 out of 15 loci). In ad -
dition, considerable heterogeneity was detected between the Romany 
populations where ten out of fifteen STR markers showed significant 
differences in the allele frequency distributions. The high FST values 
detected between ethnic groups with different origin or between iso -
lated populations can be explained the diverse genetic history and the 
isolation of the Slovakian subpopulations.
P1214. A case control study: no association between SLC6A3 
(DAT1) with schizophrenia
A. M. Foroughmand , H. Galehdari, A. Fathian, B. Andashti, H. A. Hosseini;  
Shahid chamran university, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran.
According to the dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia‘ schizophrenia 
is associated with increased activity in dopaminergic neurons. Dys -
function of central dopaminergic neurotransmission has been suggest -
ed to play an important role in the etiology of schizophrenia.
The Na+_Cl- dependent dopamine transporter (DAT1) is a central regu -
lator of the time and course and synaptic concentration of released 
dopamine by rapid reuptake of dopamine into synaptic terminals and 
mediating synaptic re accumulation of dopamine. In this study we 
thought to determine the possible association between the SLC6A3 
gene (DAT1) core promoter diallelic polymorphic site -67 A/T and 
schizophrenia in western south of Iran.We use the case control study 
to determine possible association between -67A/T SNP and schizo -
phrenia. Fifty unrelated male patient affected with schizophrenia were 
recruited for the study from golestsn and salamat hospitals in Ahwaz. 
Also fifty unrelated male controls were randomly selected as control 
group. Subsequently the allele and genotype frequencies of the poly -
morphism in two groups were studied. The genotype frequencies in 
the patient group were as follows: AA 68%, AT 24% and TT 8% versus 
the genotype frequencies in the control group were AA 78%, AT 10% 
and TT 12%. Based on this data alleiic frequency were 83% for A, 17% 
for T in control group and 80% for A, 20% in patient group. Accord -
ing to this data and x2 test there is no association between DAT1 and 
schizophrenia.
P1215. Tracing the Origins of Romanies in Central Europe: 
preliminary mitochondrial and Y chromosomal data of Romani 
populations in Slovakia
M. Baldovic1, A. Ficek1, G. Minarik1, H. Polakova2, E. Ferakova1, T. Kivisild3, E. 
Metspalu3, V. Ferak1, R. Villems3, L. Kadasi1,2;  
1Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius Uni -
versity, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, 
SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Department of Evolutionary Biology, University of 
Tartu and Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia.
Since many linguistic and genetic studies placed origin of Romanies to 
Indian subcontinent, some attempts have been made to characterize 
mitochondrial and Y-chromosomal DNA variability, date exodus from 
homeland, trace migration routes, and estimate source and extent of 
non-Indian component within Roma populations. In order to contribute 
completing the outlined picture we analyzed 193 samples from Slovak 
Romani individuals for mitochondrial control and coding region mark -
ers as well as for Y-chromosomal SNP and STR markers. The mtDNA 
haplotypes detected in this sample fall into the common Eurasian 
mitochondrial haplogroups (H, U, K, J1, X, I, W, HV, T, C, M5, and M35) except of African L2a haplogroup (2.1 %), with the most frequent 
haplogroups M (24.4 %), H (22.3 %), and I1 (16.6 %). For Y-chromo -
somal DNA analysis haplogroup H1 of Indian origin has been found as 
most common (35.8 %). Other common haplogroups included E3b1 
(13.7 %), J2 (18.9 %), R1a (13.2 %), and I (10 %), less frequent hap -
logroups were R1b3, R2, J1, G, and N. Variability of haplogroups and 
diversity found were lower comparing to European populations. Co -
alescence times calculated using HVS1 and 17 Y-chromosomal STR 
loci for paternal (H1 - 3035 ± 1115 YBP), and maternal (M5 - 3100 ± 
1400 YBP) lineages of probable south-Asian origin indicated earlier 
isolation within indigenous inhabitants of Indian subcontinent. AMOVA 
using haplogroup frequencies of analyzed European Romanies popu -
lations suggested recent gene flow and low differentiation of Roma 
subpopulations.
Supported by grant VEGA 1/3245/06.
P1216. DHCR7 mutation carrier rates in Europeans - Significance 
for the Prevalence of the Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome
M. Witsch-Baumgartner1, J. Bertranpetit2, E. Bieth3, X. Estivill4, P. Gasparini5, 
M. Krajewska-Walasek6, D. Schönitzer7, E. Seemanova8, K. Sperling9, M. Syr -
rou10, P. Talmud11, G. Utermann1, B. Wollnik12;  
1Dep for Medical Genetics, Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Innsbruck, 
Austria, 2Biologia Evolutiva, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 
3Hopital Purpan, Service de Génétique médicale, Toulouse, France, 4Genes 
and Disease Program, Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 5Unit 
of Medical Genetics, Department of Reproductive Science and Development, 
Instituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico-Burlo Garofalo, University 
of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Children’s Memorial 
Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 7Central Institute for Blood Transfusion and 
Immunological Department, General Hospital and University Clinics Innsbruck, 
Innsbruck, Austria, 8Oddeleni klinicke genetiky Ustavu biologie a lekarske ge -
netiky 2. LF UK, Prague, Czech Republic, 9Institut fur Humangenetik, Charite, 
Universitatsmedizin, Berlin, Germany, 10Genetics Unit, Department of General 
Biology, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, 11Division of Cardiovascular 
Genetics, Department of Medicine, Royal Free and University College Medical 
School, London, United Kingdom, 12Center for Molecular medicine Cologne, 
Institute of Human genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome (SLOS, MIM270400) is a mental retarda -
tion and malformation syndrome with variable clinical severity. SLOS 
is caused by mutations in the delta7sterol-reductase gene (DHCR7, 
E.C.1.3.1.21), which impairs cholesterol biosynthesis.
The prevalence of SLOS has been estimated to range from 1:20.000 
to 1:60.000 in European populations. Mutational spectra analysed in 
SLOS patients were different across populations with frequency maxi -
ma of common mutations in East-Europe (p.W151X, p.V326L), North-
West-Europe (g.IVS8-1G>C), and South-Europe (p.T93M).
In order to compare prevalence and incidence of SLOS we estimated 
carrier frequencies of most common DHCR7 mutations in European 
Populations.
Nearly 8.000 chromosomes of Austrian, British, Czech, French, Ger -
man, Greek, Italian, Polish, Spanish and Turkish origin were screened 
for the frequencies of the common mutations c.IVS8-1G>C, p.W151X, 
and p.T93M.
For the null mutations c.IVS8-1G>C and p.W151X a carrier frequency 
of about 1:60 was found, varying from 1:30 (Turkey) to 1:200 (Spain). 
These two null mutations plus the missense mutation p.T93M yield a 
carrier rate of 1 in 54 in Europeans. This results in an expected inci -
dence for SLOS of 1:2.940 Europeans, varying from 1:1500 (Austria) 
to 1:9217 (Spain).
The discrepancy between the expected incidence and the prevalence 
is most likely due to neonatal and infancy death of the most severely 
affected children with SLOS and ascertainment bias of mild and atypi -
cal cases. SLOS syndrome may be responsible for a high number of 
miscarriages.
Thanks to all collaborators for population DNAs.
P1217. Frequencies of spinocerebellar ataxia subtypes support 
admixture with Indian population in Thailand
T. Sura1, J. Eu-ahsunthornwattana1, S. Youngcharoen1, M. Busabaratana1, D. 
Dejsuphong1, O. Trachoo1, S. Theerasasawat1, C. Noparutchanodom2, S. Tuly -
adachanon1;  
1Ramathibodi Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand, 2Ratchaburi Hospital, Ratchaburi, Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology0
Thailand.
Background: While there are strong genetic evidences linking the 
population in the Indochina peninsula with the Chinese, this was not 
the case with the Indians despite the proximity of the region to both 
populations. Using the heterogeneity of the spinocerebellar ataxias, 
a group of neurological disorders with different subtype frequencies 
among different populations, we looked for the evidence supporting 
relationship between the Thai population and both the Chinese and 
Indian populations.
Methods: We searched for spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) type 1, SCA3 
and SCA6 mutations in 340 patients from 182 families, in which at least 
one person had a clinical diagnosis of SCA, using GeneScan analysis. 
We analysed the relative frequencies of SCAs subtypes on a family 
basis, and compared these to the data in the related populations.
Results: SCA3 was the commonest, with a relative frequency of 17.0% 
(Agresti-Coull 95% C.I.: 12.2%-23.2%), followed by SCA1 at 10.4% 
(6.7%-15.8%). SCA6 was found in three families, with a relative fre -
quency of 1.6% (0.3%-5.0%). When compared to the related popula -
tions, the Thai SCA3 frequency was less than that of the Chinese while 
higher than that in most of the Indian studies. The reverse is true for 
the SCA1. A similar study in Singapore, where the pattern of popula -
tion admixture was clear, also showed somewhat similar results, al -
though more inclined toward the Indians.
Conclusion: Our results supported some degree of admixture with the 
Indians in Thai population, and should encourage further study in the 
area.
P1218. Population study at fifteen short tandem repeat loci in 
the representative sample of Bosnia and Herzegovina residents 
- contemporary data
D. Marjanovic1,2, A. Durmic-Pasic1, N. Pjanic1, N. Bakal1, L. Kovacevic1, V. 
Skaro2, P. Projic2, S. Haveric1, K. Bajrovic1, R. Hadziselimovic1, D. Primorac3, 
N. Pojskic1;  
1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, 2Center for Integrative Genomics, Molecular Diagnostics, Cell and 
Gene Therapy, “Rudjer Boskovic” Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Medical School at 
Osijek University, Osijek, Croatia.
In our previous population studies of B&H human population, we used 
17 autosomal and 12 Y-chromosomal STR loci, as well as 28 NRY 
bi-allelic markers to generate referent database. Wishing to test our 
database in order to obtain specific results in various DNA analysis, we 
have decided to analysis additional individuals, firstly at fifteen autoso -
mal STR loci (D3S1358, TH01, D21S11, D18S51, Penta E, D5S818, 
D13S317, D7S820, D16S539, CSF1PO, Penta D, vWA, D8S1179, 
TPOX, FGA). Therefore, we have tested additional group of 100 un -
related healthy individuals born in B&H. Qiagen DnaeasyTM Tissue Kit 
was used for DNA extraction from buccal swabs and bloodstains and 
PowerPlex 16® System  for amplification and detection. The total vol -
ume of PCR reaction was 5μl and PCR amplifications were carried 
out in PE GeneAmp PCR System Thermal Cycler. Electrophoresis of 
the amplification products was preformed on an ABI PRISM 310 ge -
netic analyzer. The raw data were compiled and analyzed using Gen -
emapper® v3.2. Deviation from  Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, observed 
and expected heterozygosity, power of discrimination and power of 
exclusion were calculated. Statistical differences between the new 
set of data and the data at same loci published earlier (based on 100 
tested individuals) indicated the advantage of using recently obtained 
frequencies, especially as it pertains to the forensic-genetic statistical 
analysis. In addition , we compared B&H data with the data obtained 
from geographically closer European populations. The results of this 
study will be used as guidelines in additional improving of investigation 
of recent B&H human populations, initiated in our previous studies.
P1219. Possible common origin for the Tibeto-Burman and 
Austro-Asiatic speaking populations of India: a Y-chromosome 
study
S. Krithika1, A. Singh2, S. Sahoo2, R. Trivedi2, V. K. Kashyap3, T. S. Vasulu1;  
1Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India, 2National DNA Analysis Centre, 
Central Forensic Science Laboratory, Kolkata, India, 3National Institute of Bio -
logicals, Noida, India.
The geographic contiguity and the morphological similarity of the Ti -
beto-Burman speaking populations with the Austro-Asiatic speaking 
groups of India provide hints for the origin of the two linguistic families from a common stock in the remote past. However, this intriguing as -
pect of genetic relationship between the Tibeto-Burman and Austro-
Asiatic speaking populations of India is little investigated and warrants 
further discussion through molecular genetics.
In this regard, we analyzed 38 biallelic and 20 short tandem repeat 
polymorphisms on the Y-chromosome in 293 male individuals of 22 
different populations belonging to Tibeto-Burman (12) and Austro-
Asiatic (10) linguistic families, inhabiting northeastern, eastern and 
central regions. Among the 14 haplogroups observed, subclades of 
haplogroup O were predominant (~83.96%) of which O2a, showing the 
highest frequency of ~ 55%, was the major common subclade present 
in both Tibeto-Burman (41.3%) and in Austro-Asiatic (73%) popula -
tions. AMOVA results indicated a higher degree of genetic differentia -
tion (31.95%) among populations within the two linguistic groups than 
among the two groups (13.10%). The neighbor-joining tree and the 
PCA plot shows clustering of some Austro-Asiatic populations (mainly 
from Jharkhand) with few Tibeto- Burman populations from Arunachal 
Pradesh and Mizoram suggesting possible shared common ancestry 
of some Tibeto-Burman with a few of the Austro-Asiatic populations. 
STRUCTURE analysis is also in congruence with the genetic com -
monality between the studied linguistic groups. To get further insight 
into the issue, a median-joining network was constructed based on the 
haplotypes that fall into haplogroup O2a and the time of divergence for 
the haplogroup was also estimated.
P1220. Thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) 
pharmacogenetics: genotype-phenotype comparison and 
haplotype analysis in Estonian population
R. Tamm1, K. Oselin2, K. Kallassalu1, K. Anier2, R. Magi1, A. Metspalu3;  
1IMCB, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Pharmacology, Tartu, Estonia, 
3IMCB,EBC, Tartu, Estonia.
Thiopurine methyltrasferase (TPMT) is a cytoplasmic enzyme catalys -
ing the S - methylation of thiopurine drugs. Thiopurines exert cytotox -
icity after metabolism to thioguanine nucleotides and they are turned 
into inactive metabolites by TPMT. To date, at least 23 single nucleo -
tide polymorphisms/mutations have been reported in TPMT gene, 22 
of them are or may be associated with low enzyme activity.
The aim of the present study was to measure erythrocyte TPMT ac -
tivity in Estonian population, to genotype Estonian population using 
PCR-RFLP method for known alleles (TPMT*2, *3A, *3B, *3C, *3D, 
*8) and to sequence the whole coding region of TPMT (exons 3-10) 
to find novel sequence variants. Of 253 healthy subjects, 15 were het -
erozygous for TPMT*1/*3A (3%), two for TPMT*1/*3C (0.4%) and two 
for TPMT*1/*2 (0.4%). No subjects were detected with TPMT*3B, *3D 
and *8. Several others previously described intronic and exon muta -
tions/polymorphisms were found via sequencing. Three novel muta -
tions T30A in exon 3, A10G in intron 3 and A145G in intron 10 were 
detected. Association and haplotype analysis was carried out to find 
SNP differences between low (enzyme activity £58.8 ng/ml/h), inter -
mediate and high (enzyme activity ³130 ng/ml/h) metabolizers. Four 
SNPs were present together (T114A, T94A, G460A, A719G) and were 
more significantly (P < 0.001) represented in low metabolizers com -
pared to intermediate and high ones.
According to our study several markers predict low enzyme activity, but 
any specific markers were not correlated with high enzyme activity .
P1221. Analysis of three Microsatellite Markers (vWA31A, 
CSF1PO and TPOX) of two Romanian population groups and 
their genetic relationships to European populations
A. Rodewald1, A. Kroll1, S. Mueler-Scholtz1, A. Lungeanu2, G. Cardos2,3, D. 
Banica4;  
1Department of Human Biology, Univ. Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, 2”Victor 
Babes” National Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 3Faculty of Biology, University 
of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 4”Marius Nasta” Institute of Pulmonary Dis -
eases, Bucharest, Romania.
In this research 3 different DNA-polymorphisms (Microsatellites: 
vWA31A, CSF1PO and TPOX) have been detected and analysed in a 
sample of 110 individuals from Prahova Valley (Carpathian Mountains) 
as well as in a sample of 200 individuals from the Romanian capital, 
Bucharest. Further, we investigated the extent of genetic influences of 
European neighbour populations on the Romanian genetic pool.
The results reveal that there were not any significant differences in 
the allele frequencies in the three Microsatellite markers from the pan -Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology0
mictic population of Bucharest and the partial isolated population from 
Prahova Valley.
Genetic distance analysis showed a close genetic relationship with 
Italian population as well as with Greek population groups.
Historically this could be the result of intense trading activities of Thra -
cian tribal groups and Greek population groups who established trad -
ing colonies at the west coast of the Black Sea (actually East-Romania) 
during the 7th- 8th century. The most of the Italian influence is thought 
to be the result of the occupation of the Danube region during the time 
of the Romanian Empire. A small Slavic influence was also found. The 
genetic distance between Romanian and German, Croatian, as well as 
Hungarian populations were more significant.
The results can also be used for paternity and forensic analyses in the 
Romanian population.
P1222. Beta Thalassemia in Iran: Genetic admixture, new 
theories for origin and migration of some mutations
M. M. Banoei , M. Houshmand, M. Shafa Sharait Panahi;  
National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran.
Background: Iran as one of the Middle East country consists of mul -
tiethnic groups that have been influenced by various invasions and 
migration throughout history. In the eastern Mediterranean region, Iran 
is one of the major centers for the prevalence of β- Thalassemia. This 
review is an attempt to study the origin of β- Thalassemia mutations in 
different parts of Iran.
Methods:  Through review and discussion of research literature and 
referred patients to our center, we compared the frequencies of β - 
globin mutations in different regions of Iran with those derived from 
neighboring countries.
Results:  The analysis provided evidence of new theories about the 
origin and migration of some mutations like -25bp del, CD36/37, CD30 
and introduction of IVSI-5 to outside, as well as, the remarkable ge -
netic classification of the Iranian people and ethnic groups.
Conclusions:  This review represents reflection of historic events due 
to genetic admixture and roles of invasions and migrations in this phe -
nomenon. Also distribution of β- globin gene mutations in Iran showed 
high heterogeneity among the population in comparison with other 
population that this heterogeneity has been derived originally from a 
population with an ethnic Aryan background.
P1223. A Novel β-thalassemia mutation in the distal promoter of 
the β-globin gene
I. Agouti1, C. Badens2, F. Sayah1, A. Barrakat1, M. Bennani1;  
1laboratoire de Biologie Appliquée, Faculté des Sciences et Techniques, Tan -
ger, Morocco, 2Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital de d’Enfant de la 
Timone, Marseille, France.
A patient with β-thalassemia intermedia of Moroccan descent was 
found to be compound heterozygous for a novel β-thalassemia muta -tion G→A at position -190 5’ to the β-globin gene and a previously 
described β0-thalassemia allele frame shift codon 6 (-A). The novel 
mutation was found to be associated with the Mediterranean β haplo -
type IX [- + - + + + +].
The mother, who has the -190 G→A mutation as the sole abnormality 
of the β-globin gene, had normal hemoglobin, red blood cell indices 
and HbA2 levels. Thus the -190 G→A mutation is silent.
The possibility that the novel -190 G→A substitution is a simple poly -
morphism in the β-globin gene was considered, but is unlikely given its 
presence in a region (-50 to -300) where other promoter elements im -
portant for differential control of gene expression have been described 
and the absence of this substitution in 80 other normal chromosomes. 
Although functional tests of the cloned gene in suitable expression as -
says will be needed to prove that the change at position -190 is a muta -
tion rather than a simple polymorphism.
P1224. Allele frequencies of two novel tandem repeat 
polymorphism of the 5’-untranslate region of the human  CYP2E1  
gene
C. Gräbsch , O. Herbarth, H. E. Wichmann, U. Krämer, M. Bauer, the LISA 
study group;  
Helmoltz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Department for Human 
Exposure Research and Epidemiology, Leipzig, Germany.
The ethanol inducible human cytochrome P4502E1 (CYP2E1) plays 
a key role in the metabolic activation of procarcinogens like aniline, 
vinyl chloride as well as acryl amide. CYP2E1 activity depends on 
inter-individual genetic polymorphisms as well as on interactions at 
translational level. Homozygotes for CYP2E1*1D  allele have got an 
increased enzyme activity compared to the CYP2E1*1C  allele.
In order to examine the relationship between pollutant -induced clinical 
outcomes and genetic polymorphisms 1003 Caucasians of the LISA 
epidemiological study were genotyped for enzymes of biotransforma -
tion. Regarding CYP2E1, a repeat in the 5’-untranslated region at -2178 
to -1945 bp has been analyzed in more detail by allele specific PCR. 
Besides the expected alleles CYP2E1*1A (5 repeats), CYP2E1*1C  (6 
repeats, wt) and CYP2E1*1D  (8 repeats) with a frequency of 0.4%, 
97.4% and 2.1%, two novel alleles could be described by the present 
work.
The first novel allele (Acc-No. AM503355) contains 7 repeats and ap -
pears with a frequency of 0.05%. This allele is heterozygous expressed 
with the CYP2E1*1C.
The second novel allele contains 8 repeats and exclusively appears 
concomitantly with the CYP2E1*1D allele (frequency 2.1%), which is 
heterozygous expressed mainly with the CYP2E1*1C  or rarely with 
the CYP2E1*1A allele . At the moment it is not clear whether the novel 
polymorphisms of the 5’-flanking region alter the CYP2E1 expression.Normal variation, population genetics, genetic epidemiology0
Po08. Genomics, technology, bioinformatics
P1225. Human APP overexpression causes neurodegeneration 
and synaptic loss in neural cells in transgenic Drosophila.
S. Sarantseva1, O. Bolshakova1, S. Timoshenko1, M. Vitek2, A. Schwarzman1,3;  
1Petersburg Institute of Nuclear Physics Russian Academy of Sciences, Gatchi -
na, Russian Federation, 2Division of Neurology, Duke University Medical Cen -
ter, Durham, NC, United States, 3Institute for Experimental Medicine, Russian 
Academy of Medical Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder character -
ized by the loss of neocortical and hippocampal synapses that pre -
cedes amyloidosis and neurodegeneration and closely correlates with 
memory impairment. Mutations in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) 
cause familial AD and result in the increased production of amyloid-β-
protein (Aβ). However, it is not still clear how Aβ contributes to synaptic 
abnormalities in AD.
In our study, transgenic Drosophila melanogaster was established as 
a model to analyze AD pathology caused by APP and Aβ. Drosophila  
has α- and γ-secretases and does not have activity of β-secretase 
(BACE). Therefore, flies do not generate Aβ. We expected that overex -
pression of human APP in neural tissues could induces specific effects 
of APP independently from Aβ secretion. In contrary, double transgenic 
flies expressing human APP and BACE should generate Aβ and Aβ-
specific phenotypes. To induce expression of APP in neural cells, we 
used elav-GAL4c155 driver and UAS-APP695 expressing system. As 
expected, only BACE-containing lines displayed Aβ. Orexpression of 
APP resulted in morphological changes and formation of abnormal be -
havioral fly phenotypes independently from Aβ generation . Most these 
phenotypes has been characterized by progressive neurodegenera -
tion with numerous vacuoles in the cortex and neuropil and loss of 
synaptic density detected by decreased accumulation of presynaptic 
protein synaptotagmin in mushroom bodies. Thus, we observed a 
classical AD pathology in the absence of Aβ. We suggest that impair -
ment of cellular functions of APP and secretion of neurotoxic forms of 
Aβ may independently contribute to the pathogenesis of AD.
P1226. Performance Comparison of BigDye® XTerminator™ Kit & 
Conventional DNA Sequencing Purification Methods
S. Pistacchi , G. Amparo, A. Wilson, K. Vashi, M. Harrold;  
Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States.
BigDye® XTerminator™ is a new post-DNA sequencing reaction pu -
rification kit that removes unincorporated dye-labeled terminators 
and salts from completed DNA sequencing reactions prior to electro -
phoretic analysis. Adequate removal of these components is crucial 
in maximizing high-quality basecalls and useable data. Compared to 
conventional purification methods such as ethanol precipitation or spin 
columns, DNA sequencing reactions purified with BigDye XTerminator 
exhibit very few artifacts from residual dye-labeled terminators (dye 
blobs). Read lengths using the BigDye XTerminator kit are also com -
parable. Here, the performance of BigDye XTerminator will be com -
pared to that of other purification techniques across a wide variety of 
DNA sequencing reactions.
P1227. Easy-to-use bioinformatic tools for individualized 
analyses and data mining in disease gene identification
D. Seelow1, T. H. Lindner2, S. Mundlos1,3, K. Hoffmann1,3;  
1Institute of Medical Genetics, Charite University Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 
2Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, University of Erlangen-Nurem -
berg, Nuremberg, Germany, 3Department Development and Disease, Max 
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
Our aim is to create comfortable tools for performing and interpreting 
linkage and association analyses, for data mining and expression stud -
ies. Steps that are repeated in several projects are (semi)automated 
so that they can be performed by the biologist, student or technician 
in charge.
Automated single-/multipoint linkage analysis for microsatellites and 
large-scale SNP data: easyLINKAGE Plus is an interface for auto -
mated setup and performance of linkage analyses. We implemented 
Allegro, Merlin, SimWalk, GeneHunter, SuperLink, FastSLink, and ver -
sions for several species. Results are given as text files and graphical 
outputs.
Web-based exploration of genomic association: Genome-wide asso -
ciation studies are a challenge to graphically display and interpret the results. AssociationDB allows interactive graphical exploration of the 
results integrating related gene information, tissue-specific expression 
and microRNAs. Association results can be imported from other pro -
grams or get calculated within the database.
Automated collection and integration of gene information from multiple 
databases: The user can enter a region of interest or a list of genes. 
OMIM reports, expression, SNPs etc. are displayed for all candidate 
genes at once on a single HTML page or PDF. Results are ready to be 
read and discussed with a cup of coffee.
Automated generation of primer sequences for in situ  probes: This pro -
gram creates primers for either transcript-specific or universal probes 
and checks specificity by BLAST.
P1228. “VALAPODYN: Validated Predictive Dynamic Model 
of Complex Intracellular Pathways Related to Cell Death and 
Survival.”
A. Depaulis1, E. Vafiadaki2, P. Jackers3, D. A. Arvanitis2, O. Kel-Margoulis4, E. 
Wingender4, T. Vujasinovic5, D. Greenberg6, H. Soreq6, E. De Pauw3, J. B. Du -
mas Milne Edwards5, D. Sanoudou2;  
1Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale, Grenoble, France, 
2Foundation for Biomedical Research, Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece, 
3University of Liege, Liege, Belgium, 4Biobase, GmbH, Wolfenbuettel, Germany, 
5HELIOS, Paris, France, 6Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
VALAPODYN is a research network funded by the European Commis -
sion (6th Framework Program) which is developing an original systems 
biology approach focused on the development of multidisciplinary 
functional genomics related to complex biological processes and cel -
lular networks. The aim is to generate an innovative approach to model 
the dynamics of molecular interaction networks (MIN) in relation to cell 
death and survival to detect new therapeutic targets to treat human 
brain diseases. The project consists of fundamental genomics re -
search which is integrating statistical data analysis with real biological 
data in order to functionally annotate genes and proteins. Specialized 
genomics and proteomics databases for MIN modeling are being used 
along with leading microarray and proteomics platform systems to in -
vestigate protein-protein interactions and regulation networks. This will 
help to identify and validate biological targets in complex intracellular 
pathways to cure multifactorial diseases. Dynamic modeling specifi -
cally addresses the systems biology of complex cellular pathways and 
transcriptional networks. The novel dynamic models will be validated 
by testing the selected drug targets on innovative in vivo  and in vitro  
models of CNS pathologies.
As opposed to most current biological data analysis methods, VAL -
APODYN develops a dynamic and quantitative analysis method for 
new therapeutic targets through MIN dynamic models. It will provide 
a cutting-edge highly accurate in silico  tool for identifying novel and 
effective therapeutic targets in a much faster, more efficient and more 
economical way than it is possible today. (www.valapodyn.eu).
P1229. Evaluation and introduction of new techniques in the 
genetic testing service by EuroGentest Unit 5.
N. van der Stoep1, C. D. M. Paridon2, M. Macek3, G. Matthijs4, B. Bakker1;  
1Center for Human and Clinical Genetics (EuroGentest), Leiden, The Neth -
erlands, 2Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, The Netherlands, 
3Department of Molecular Genetics and National Cystic Fibrosis Centre (Euro -
Gentest), Prague, Czech Republic, 4Center for Human Genetics (EuroGentest), 
Leuven, Belgium.
At present, the field of genetics is witnessing a fast expansion of new 
technologies that could have a strong potential for application in ge -
netic testing. Unfortunately, implementation of these novel technolo -
gies is often hampered by the lack of complete evaluation of their 
technical performance in a diagnostic setting. EuroGenTest (EUGT) is 
a European Network of Excellence aiming at harmonizing genetic test -
ing services throughout Europe. One key objective is to bridge the gap 
observed in the chain of new technology-transfer from research into 
implementation and ultimate accreditation in genetic diagnostics.
EGT-Unit 5 is specifically involved with the coordination and guidance 
of activities required for complete technical evaluation, validation and 
subsequent implementation of emerging technologies into diagnostic 
application.
In this respect we recruit new techniques in genetic testing at our 
EUGT-Unit 5 Website with our “call for technology” and present them 
at our Satellite-meeting during the ESHG-conference. As a follow up Genomics, technology, bioinformatics0
several new approaches in genetic testing are selected for further eval -
uation and validation in collaboration with their manufacturers and in -
ventors.Currently we are evaluating several new techniques including 
High-Resolution Melting-Curve Analysis (HR-MCA) and Conformation 
Sensitive Capillary Electrophoresis (CSCE), two fluorescent hetero -
duplex-based mutation scanning-methods in collaboration with Idaho 
Technologies and NGRL-Wessex together with Applied Biosystems re -
spectively and Pyrophosphorolysis Activated Polymerization (PAP), a 
very sensitive detection method for the presence of low mutation levels 
in the presence of excess wt-allele, in collaboration ServiceXS. More 
details on ongoing and new evaluation projects will be shown also at 
the EUGT-Unit 5 Satellite-meeting during this conference.
P1230. Comprehensive human genetic analysis using 454 
Sequencing™ technology
B. Taillon ;  
454 Life Sciences Corporation, Branford, CT, United States.
454 Life Sciences has developed a revolutionary technology that can 
produce up to 100 megabases of sequence data on a single instru -
ment. Many biologically meaningful and complex regions of the human 
genome can now be analyzed with this system without the time or cost 
constraints of conventional DNA sequencing methods.
We will demonstrate how this technology can be applied to the study of 
the cancer genome through ultra-deep sequencing of genes involved 
in oncogenesis. The technology also allows researchers to conduct 
studies of human genetic variation (SNPs, indels and rearrangements) 
from a complex population. We will also discuss applications in the 
study of gene regulation through sequencing of microRNA, transcrip -
tome and gene copy numbers.
The large sequencing capacity of the 454 Life Sciences technology 
platform, combined with the flexibility and versatility of sample han -
dling and data output makes it a method of choice for human molecular 
genetics.
P1231. Characterization of a human fetal cartilage EST library 
focussing on transcription factors
P. Hermanns1, C. Stelzer2, J. Busch2, A. Imm1, S. Schlaubitz2,3, B. Lee3,4, B. U. 
Zabel1;  
1Centre for Youth and Adolescence Medicine, Freiburg, Germany, 2Children’s 
Hospital of the University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 3Baylor College of Medi -
cine, Houston, TX, United States, 4Howard Huges Medical Institute, Houston, 
TX, United States.
Skeletogenesis in part takes place in the growth plate where chon -
drocytes undergo a coordinated and highly regulated process of cell 
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis at which stage vascular in -
vasion brings osteoblasts that replace the cartilage extra cellular ma -
trix with trabecular bone. Disruptions to these extremely coordinated 
processes result in a group of genetic bone diseases. These highly 
diverse groups of disorders have a complex aetiology. Some of the 
involved signalling pathways and gene interactions are known but 
many molecular mechanisms that might explain the pathophysiology 
of numerous skeletal dysplasias that result from mutations in genes 
important for normal bone development still remain unknown. While 
the sequence of the human genome has been completed, many genes 
are still uncharacterized. Despite the huge number of ESTs in the pub -
lic domain, there are still genes to be identified in rare tissues that are 
under-represented. To find cartilage-specific genes a human cartilage 
cDNA library was generated and 5000 ESTs are sequenced, compu -
tationally characterized. We and others have already characterized 
novel and tissue specific genes. Based on in silico  motif searches 49 
putative transcription factors have been identified. The temporal and 
spatial expression patterns of these transcription factors will be de -
termined via in situ  hybridization. Those transcription factors that are 
predominantly expressed in developing cartilage will be further charac -
terized to elucidate their role during cartilage and bone development. 
This way we hope to identify new genes that are important for bone 
development and deregulation of those genes might be responsible for 
causing skeletal dysplasias.P1232. The human CDK5R1 3‘UTR contains distinct subregions 
affecting transcript stability
S. Moncini1, M. Venturin1, A. Bevilacqua2, A. Ratti3,4, A. Nicolin2, P. Riva1;  
1Department of Biology and Genetics, Medical Faculty, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy, 2Department of Pharmacology, Chemotherapy and Medical Toxicol -
ogy, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Neurological Sciences, 
University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Neuroscience, `Dino Ferrari’ 
Centre, University of Milan-IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Cusano Milanino 
(MI), Italy.
Human CDK5R1 encodes for p35, a neurone-specific activator of 
CDK5, which is involved in neuronal migration and differentiation 
during CNS development. CDK5R1 has been implicated in neurode -
generative disorders and proposed as a candidate gene for mental 
retardation. The remarkable size of CDK5R1 3’UTR suggests a role 
of this region in the control of CDK5R1 expression by post-transcrip -
tional regulatory elements modulating mRNA stability or translation ef -
ficiency. Bioinformatic analysis showed a high conservation degree in 
mammals and predicted several AU-Rich Elements (AREs). CDK5R1 
3’UTR was cloned in pGL4.71 at the 3’ end of the Renilla luciferase re -
porter gene to perform Dual Luciferase assays: the construct showed 
a decreased luciferase activity in six transfected cell lines. The quan -
titative analysis of luciferase mRNA suggests that CDK5R1 3’UTR af -
fects mRNA stability. We identified five 3’UTR subregions reducing the 
luciferase activity in some instance with a cell line-dependent way. A 
region showed a significantly low halflife, suggesting an accelerated 
mRNA degradation. We also identified, by deletion analysis, a type I 
ARE displaying a stabilizing effect in two neuroblastoma cell lines. Our 
findings evince the presence of both destabilizing and stabilizing regu -
latory elements in CDK5R1 3’UTR. We are now attempting to identify, 
by REMSA and immunoprecipitation assays, stabilizing neuronal pro -
teins that specifically bind the type I ARE, with the final aim of verifying 
the functionality of this element. The fine tuning of CDK5R1 expression 
by 3’UTR may play a role in CNS development and functioning, with 
potential implications in neurodegenerative and cognitive disorders.
P1233. Cells to Ct: Direct gene expression analysis from cell 
lysate
J. F. Stevens1, S. Dong1, C. Liu1, R. Fekete2, A. Nguyen2, L. Chapman2;  
1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Applied Biosystems, 
Austin, TX, United States.
Real-Time reverse transcription (RT)-PCR is a robust, simple and 
quantitative method for gene expression analysis in biological sam -
ples. Traditionally, RNA has been isolated from the sample to remove 
genomic DNA, RNases, and reverse transcriptase inhibitors before be -
ing used as substrate for RT-PCR. RNA isolation is fairly time-consum -
ing and it can lead to loss of RNA in flow-through or incomplete elution 
with small samples. Direct cell-to-Ct gene expression analysis enables 
reverse transcription and real-time PCR analysis of RNA from 10-105 
cultured cells without RNA isolation or purification. By eliminating the 
RNA isolation step, gene expression analysis of cultured cell line is 
substantially expedited and simplified. The unique Cells-to Ct lysis pro -
cedure allows the concurrent preparation of cell lysate and removal of 
genomic DNA in less than ten minute. The lysis procedure takes place 
at room temperature, allowing simple scale-up to robotic platforms for 
high-throughput applications.
P1234. Theoretical and functional analysis of expressing region 
of ceruloplasmin pseudogene
S. Klotchenko1, N. Tsymbalenko1, N. Platonova1, L. Puchkova2;  
1Research Institute for Experimental Medicine, St. Petersburg, Russian Fed -
eration, 2St. Petersburg State Polytechnic University, St. Petersburg, Russian 
Federation.
Previously using computer analysis we showed that human (NG_
001106) and chimpanzee (XM_516813) pseudogene of ceruloplasmin 
(pCp) contain region encoded Cp-like protein. The MitoProt program 
predicted that putative protein consists from N-terminus (66 aa) cor -
responding to signal peptide for mitochondrial protein import (SPMPI). 
Remaining region corresponds to domains 5 and 6 of blood Cp. In 
HepG2 and HuTu80 cells, pCp transcripts were detected by RT-PCR. 
pCp polypeptide was found in mitochondrial matrix by Western-blot.
To check the biological significance of predicted SPMPI-sequence 
it was cloned in vectors pEGFP-N3. HEK293 cells were transfected 
with pEGFP-N3-pCpSPMPI construct. The confocal microscopy data Genomics, technology, bioinformatics0
showed that GFP was localized in the same intracellular compartments 
as Mito-dsRed. Also HepG2 cells were transfected with this construct. 
The cells were collected and subcellular fractions were isolated by dif -
ferential centrifugation. Western-blot analysis with antibodies to GFP 
revealed GFP in mitochondria. Population comparative analysis of 
Cp gene 5’-UTR and translated pCp region in DNA isolated from 117 
human blood samples by PCR with following PRLF analysis using of 
restriction enzymes set was carried out. The insertions or deletions as 
well as mutations in restriction sites in pCp gene amplicons were not 
found. At the same time a lot of changes were detected in Cp gene 
promoter. These data suggest conservatism of pCP region. In rat, ex -
pression of mitochondrial Cp has tissue specific pattern, not expresses 
in newborn and adult animals with copper deficiency, induced by Ag-
feed. The biological role of putative protein product of pCp in copper 
metabolism is discussed.
P1235. Functional interactions of conserved non-coding 
(CNCs) sequences with other CNCs using circular chromosome 
conformation capture (4C)
D. Robyr , G. Duriaux-Sail, S. Polti, C. Wyss, S. Deutsch, S. E. Antonarakis;  
University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland.
The comparison of human chromosome 21 (Hsa21) with the mouse 
syntenic regions led to the identification of roughly 3500 regions dis -
playing an identity of >70% over a length of a least 100 nucleotides 
of ungaped alignment. About 65% (~ 2300) of these are conserved 
non-coding sequences (CNCs). Very little is known about the function 
of most CNCs. We speculated that a functional CNC would interact 
with its genomic target (i.e. an enhancer would bind to it’s cognate 
gene promoter). Thus, the identification of any part of the genome that 
interacts directly with a CNC could provide clues on the function of the 
latter. We have generated libraries of CNC-interacting DpnII fragments 
by circular chromosome conformation capture (4C) whose identity is 
determined by subsequent sequencing. We have generated initial re -
sults concerning crosslinking of 18 Hsa21 CNCs with DNA fragments 
mapping hundreds of kilobases away from the “bait” on the same 
chromosome, or with fragments on other chromosomes. A total of 87 
such potentially interacting DpnII DNA fragments have been identified. 
Interestingly, the median distance from the cloned DpnII fragments to 
the nearest conserved region is 661bp with a pvalue < 0.0003 when 
compared to the distribution of the median of the distances of 3000 
random samples of 87 fragments. These results provide initial evi -
dence that the function of CNCs is mediated by their interaction with 
other conserved regions.
P1236. EM algorithm for gene copy number estimation using 
TaqMan® Assays
C. Barbacioru , K. Li, R. Samaha, K. Lazaruk;  
Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States.
Recently, multiple studies have discovered an abundance of copy 
number variation of DNA segments ranging from kilobases (kb) to 
megabases (Mb) in size. Copy number variations can cause disease, 
as in microdeletion or microduplication disorders, or confer risk to com -
plex disease traits such as HIV-1 infection and glomerulonephritis.
TaqMan® gene copy number assays have been developed for ac -
curate detection of genetic variation at gene level using primers and 
probes designed for genomic DNA. Each well is duplexed with two 
assays, a FAM™ dye-based assay designed to detect the genes-of-
interest and a VIC® dye-based assay for reference gene. In this study, 
we present an algorithm for gene copy number estimation based on 
EM algorithm for mixtures of normal distributions. The algorithm finds 
maximum likelihood estimates of parameters in probabilistic models, 
where the model depends on unobserved samples copy number of 
the gene-of-interest. Under current protocols, we are capable of dis -
tinguishing up to 8 copies of the gene of interest with at least 95% 
confidence.
To evaluate this algorithm, we present experimental results for 5 im -
portant drug metabolism genes (CYP2D6, CYP2E1, CYP2A6, GSTM1 
and GSTT1) on 270 individual samples from International HAPMAP 
Project representing 4 different populations. Copy number analysis for 
these genes shows perfect consistency for sample duplicates. Copy 
number variations are observed for these genes, with significant dif -
ferences between these populations. Furthermore, combining this data with SNP data, we demonstrate that departures from diploidy can 
cause apparent genotyping failure and give inaccurate genotyping.
P1237. A computational method to test for genetic relatedness in 
unrelated individuals
L. Xumerle , G. Malerba, P. F. Pignatti;  
Biology and Genetics, Verona, Italy.
Discovering susceptibility loci in complex disease requires a large 
number of individuals characterized by several thousand markers. An 
association between gene and disease may be incorrectly estimated 
if the allele frequencies differ among cases and controls depending on 
factors other than gene-phenotype correlation, i.e. inbreeding, geno -
typing errors, unrecognized population stratification, etc.
We present a computational method - available in the Jenoware library 
(http://medgen.univr.it/jenoware/) - designed to compute the probabili -
ty of genetic relatedness in pairs of individuals. The program computes 
the likelihood of a pair of individuals to be unrelated over the likeli -
hood to be relatives of I, or II degree respectively, conditional to the 
genotype. The program works with microsatellites and/or SNPs. False 
positive rate and power were assessed by simulation in unrelated in -
dividuals and in pedigrees. E.g. in order to estimate the support for I 
degree relatedness (power 80%, and false positive 5%), 10 microsat -
ellites having heterozygosity >= 70% or 25 SNP having heterozygosity 
>= 15% are needed. We are extending the method to associated DNA 
markers that can be included as inferred haplotypes in the models to 
be tested.
P1238. Genome-wide analysis of copy number variations 
in patients with mental retardation by single nucleotide 
polymorphism arrays
J. Wagenstaller1, S. Spranger2, B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, B. Kazmierczak2, M. 
Nathrath3, D. Wahl4, B. Heye5, D. Gläser6, V. Liebscher7, T. Meitinger1,5, T. M. 
Strom1,5;  
1GSF - National Research Center, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Ger -
many, 2Praxis für Humangenetik, Bremen, Germany, 3Technical University, 
Department of Pediatrics, Munich, Germany, 4Praxis für humangenetische Be -
ratung, Augsburg, Germany, 5Technical University, Institute of Human Genetics, 
Munich, Germany, 6Zentrum für Humangenetik, Neu-Ulm, Germany, 7University 
of Greifswald, Institute of Mathematics, Munich, Germany.
We investigated 67 children with unexplained mental retardation who 
had additional, but often mild symptoms. All children had inconspicu -
ous high resolution banding analysis. The DNAs were analyzed using 
the Affymetrix GeneChip 100K arrays. Data analysis was performed 
with median normalization and genotype-specific dosage calculation 
using R-scripts and revealed 12 copy number variations (CNVs), 9 
deletions and 3 duplications, that are most likely causative for men -
tal retardation because they either arose de novo or are larger than 
known polymorphisms. One of those was a maternally inherited 1.4 
Mb duplication in Xp22.31 in a male patient which includes the STS 
gene. The chromosome carrying the duplication was non-randomly 
inactivated in the mother. Two of the CNVs were de novo deletions 
affecting only a single gene. All CNVs were confirmed by quantitative 
PCR. They varied in size from 200 kb to 8 Mb. Five of the CNVs were 
flanked by low-copy number repeats. Three of them were known mi -
crodeletion syndromes. The fourth one is a deletion on chromosome 
15q25.2 that was not described before. The fifth one is the duplication 
in Xp22.31. We compared different array types. The signal-to-noise 
ratio (SNR) of the 500K Affymetrix array was lower than the SNR of 
the 100K Affymetrix array. The SNR of the 300K Illumina arrays was 
in between. The increase of the number of features and a new design 
should improve the resolution and allow the reliable detection of gain 
and losses of single genes.
P1239. Multiplex Amplicon Quantification, a novel method for 
PCR based, high-throughput copy number variation analysis.
D. Goossens1,2, P. De Rijk1,2, L. Heyrman1,2, B. Harding3,2, W. Glassee3,2, J. 
Del-Favero1,2;  
1Applied Molecular Genomics Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, VIB, 
Antwerp, Belgium, 2University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of 
Molecular Genetics, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium.
Recently, a striking abundance of copy number variation (CNV) was 
discovered throughout the human genome. Although it has been sug -Genomics, technology, bioinformatics10
gested that CNVs contribute significantly to the occurrence of disease 
phenotypes, analysis of CNVs has been hampered so far by the lack of 
suitable methods. Indeed, none of the currently available methods for 
quantitative DNA analysis combines flexible assay design, user friend -
liness and high throughput with robustness and cost effectiveness.
Here we present such a method, designated Multiplex Amplicon Quan -
tification (MAQ), that essentially consists of the simultaneous PCR 
amplification of fluorescently labeled target and control amplicons 
in a ‘one step, closed tube’ reaction, followed by fragment analysis. 
The PCR primers for MAQ assays are designed straightforwardly us -
ing proprietary software allowing a very high (> 40) multiplexing de -
gree. The resulting amplification products, covering genomic regions, 
genes or exons of interest, are subsequently analysed using standard 
fragment analysis equipment. The comparison of normalized frag -
ment peak areas obtained from test individuals and from reference 
individuals results in a dosage quotient indicating the copy number 
of the target amplicon. To automate the analysis step we developed 
a program for straigthforward data analysis, MAQs, which calculates 
and visualizes the dosage quotients of each amplicon starting from the 
chromatogram files.
The combination of fast assay development, quick experimental pro -
cedure and data analysis, sensitivity and robustness makes the MAQ 
technology the method of choice for large scale, high thoughput analy -
sis of any discovered or hypothesized CNV, either for diagnostic or for 
research purposes.
P1240. Determination of copy number changes in the MHC gene 
region and in genes associated with drug metabolizing enzymes 
using multiplexed oligonucleotide ligation assays
M. Wenz1, R. Koehler1, F. Hyland1, J. Briggs1, K. Li1, T. Karlsen2, A. Franke3, F. 
De La Vega1;  
1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Rikshospital et University 
Hospital, Institute of Immunology, Oslo, Norway, 3Christian-Albrechts-University, 
Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology, Kiel, Germany.
Genome copy number variations (CNVs) are far more frequent than 
originally expected, and many of them affect gene copy numbers. It 
has been suggested that CNVs could have functional significance in 
complex disease, however because of technical limitations, the ex -
tent to which such contribute to phenotypic variations is only slowly 
coming into focus. We previously developed the SNPlex™ Genotyp -
ing System to address the need for accurate genotyping data, high 
sample throughput, study design flexibility, and cost efficiency. The 
system uses oligonucleotide ligation/polymerase chain reaction (OLA/
PCR) and capillary electrophoresis (CE) to analyze single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) genotypes. We have extended this system to 
permit the analysis of CNVs by comparing the intensity of signal ra -
tios encoded through the ligation reaction between test and reference 
regions. This allows us to simultaneously address at least 72 loci in a 
single multiplex assay and to ensure high quality data normalization 
and assay controls are included. Here, we demonstrate feasibility of 
this method by addressing CNVs within the MHC region. By analyzing 
cell line derived DNAs with known copy numbers, CNV genotypes are 
determined for the RCCX module. Additionally the assay was able to 
detect differences in copy numbers between the highly homologous 
C4A and C4B genes. We also analyzed copy number variations in 
drug metabolizing enzyme (DME) encoding genes that have been pre -
viously shown to affect phenotype. Here we will show correlation in ob -
served copy number variations between the multiplex OLA/PCR assay 
and single tube real-time PCR assays with TaqMan® probes.
P1241. Copy Number Variation Analysis Using Quantitative 
TaqMan® Copy Number Assays
K. Li1, A. J. Broomer1, Y. Wang1, C. Xiao1, C. Barbacioru1, I. R. Casuga1, A. J. 
Sharp2, E. E. Eichler2, C. Chen1;  
1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, University of Washington School, Seattle, WA, United States.
Recent whole-genome studies have identified 1447 CNV regions 
(CNVRs) that cover about 12% of the human genome. Some of CNVR 
may contain disease loci/genes, whose copy number changes could 
impact gene activity and disease susceptibility. Copy number changes 
are also detected in microdeletion/microduplication syndromes, which 
are associated with genomic disorders. Although array-based technol -
ogies are powerful for large-scale CNV discoveries and microdeletion/microduplication syndrome screening, more quantitative technologies 
with higher sample throughput are required to validate newly identified 
CNVs and to detect deletions/duplications for a large sample size in 
candidate regions/genes. To meet these challenges and demands, Ap -
plied Biosystems has developed TaqMan® based real-time quantitative 
copy number assays. Here, we report the development of the TaqMan® 
copy number assay design pipeline and validation of TaqMan® copy 
number assays. We used this proprietary pipeline to design assays 
targeting the chromosomal regions associated with genomic disorders 
and CNV-associated OMIM genes. The assays were tested with DNA 
sets for validation, HAPMAP DNA collection as well as samples with 
known deletions/duplications. The TaqMan® copy number assay is a 
duplex reaction with a FAM™-assay targeting the gene of interest and 
a VIC®-assay targeting the reference gene (two copies per diploid ge -
nome) in the same well. The copy number is determined by relative 
quantification using a reference sample known to have two copies of 
the gene of interest. Our validation data demonstrate a high success 
rate of assay design and excellent assay performance. TaqMan® copy 
number assays are quantitative and robust, with high reproducibility, 
specificity, and sample throughput.
P1242. In silico search for cRSS near exon/intron borders of 
human genes
A. Y. Gubsky1, V. G. Zinkovsky2;  
1Odessa National I.I. Mechnikov University, Odessa, Ukraine, 2University of 
Opole, Opole, Poland.
The recombination signal sequences (12RSS, 23RSS) are unique 
structures of Ig, TCR genes of jawed vertebrates. They are located 
on the borders of V, D, J segments and are target-sites of RAG1/2 
proteins of the V(D)J recombination system. Nowadays, there is wide -
spread that RSSs were derived from terminal inverted repeats of an -
cient transposons (Transib, etc) which were accidentally inserted into 
a gene ancestral to Ig and TCR.Our research of human genome in 
silico shows that structures which can be possible targets of RAG1/2 
proteins (cRSSs) are very widespread near exons (±5 bp from 3’ 
and/or 5’ boarders) of proteincoding genes. In the structure of 11 % 
genes (2586), we have revealed 1949 12cRSS and 1393 23cRSS. 483 
genes have cRSSs flanking different exones from 2 to 7, which can 
theoretically participate in the formation of intragenic deletions (using 
12/23-bp spacer rule) in 29 of such genes. Only 2 % cRSSs are the 
structural elements of repetitive DNA sequences. Having compared 
the experimental data to the results of theoretical research, we have 
reached a conclusion that cRSSs in the considered intragenic areas 
were derived from random nucleotide combinations. Consequently, we 
can suppose that RSSs of Ig and TCR genes weren’t derived from ter -
minal inverted repeats of ancient transposons. The original RSS-like 
sequences in the precursor of Ig and TCR genes are more than likely 
to have appeared at random long before the appearance of RAG1/2 
genes themselves.
P1243. Investigating human disease using mouse mutant 
phenotypes in the Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) Database
M. Tomczuk , A. Anagnostopoulos, R. Babiuk, S. M. Bello, D. L. Burkart, H. 
Dene, I. Lu, H. Onda, B. Richards-Smith, C. L. Smith, M. A. Updegraff, L. L. 
Washburn, J. T. Eppig;  
The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, United States.
Mammalian models of human disease are critical to increasing our 
understanding of disease mechanisms and discovering potential new 
therapies. The laboratory mouse is an exceptional model of disease 
processes in humans due to the wealth of available genetic tools. The 
Mouse Genome Informatics Database (MGI, http://www.informatics.
jax.org) is a free resource that provides integrated access to data on 
the genomics, genetics, gene expression, phenotype, and biology of 
the laboratory mouse. Via this extensive mutant data set, MGI be -
comes a natural tool for comparative phenotyping. Mining of MGI data 
in the context of human disease can reveal new or suggestive caus -
ative mutations for testing in each species.
In MGI, models of a disease are annotated to the Online Mendelian 
Inheritance in Man (OMIM) term for that disease. Additionally, a de -
tailed phenotypic description of the model is entered using the Mam -
malian Phenotype ontology, a vocabulary of phenotypic traits. These 
human disease relationships can be searched by phenotypic or OMIM 
disease terms or by browsing the vocabularies. Information on mouse Genomics, technology, bioinformatics11
models includes genes involved, their function, site and timing of ex -
pression and sequence data. Over 1,900 mutant phenotypes currently 
are associated with human disease phenotypes, representing ap -
proximately 12% of OMIM terms with one or more associated mouse 
models. These data and new mouse model data that continue to ac -
cumulate provide fertile ground for selecting appropriate experimental 
mice, as well as identifying potential mouse targets that may be used 
to explore new models.
Supported by NIH grant HG000330.
P1244. Specific features of dermatoglyphics problems in 
different diseases
D. Noje , I. Tomulescu, E. Laslo, C. Pusta;  
University of Oradea, Oradea, Romania.
This paper is an application of the concept of a Genetic Algorithm, 
modified to approximate certain functions. The classical problem of 
the dermathogliphic recognition has a settlement in different modes 
existing at this time very strong real time applications.
What we want to bring something new in this article is a possible solu -
tion of the dermatoglyphic recognition even if they are damaged by 
some typical diseases or lightly damaged by will.
The application has been built on a certain method of recognition of 
some essential items in the symbolism of the human dermatoglyphics 
those through genetic approximation techniques we complete those if 
there is the case and that follows a search in the data base to identify 
the owner.
P1245. Development of TaqMan® SNP and DME Genotyping 
Assays on TaqMan® Low Density Arrays
T. Hartshorne , R. Padilla, J. Au-Young, T. Ceccardi, J. Ziegle;  
Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States.
Applied Biosystems’ TaqMan® Low Density Arrays (TLDAs) are 384-
well micro fluidic cards that provide a convenient low- to medium-
throughput platform for TaqMan® Gene Expression Assay panels. 
TLDAs are pre-loaded with assays, which greatly reduces experiment 
preparation time and eliminates the need for liquid-handling robots or 
multi-channel pipettors. Towards the goal of providing TaqMan® DME 
Genotyping Assay panels on TLDAs, we conducted benchmark tests 
to compare the performance of genotyping assays run on TLDAs and 
on conventional 384-well plates. TLDA cards contained 8 x 48 distinct 
TaqMan® Validated SNP and Drug Metabolism (DME) Assays, which 
were previously validated on sample sets including 45 Caucasian and 
45 African American Coriell genomic DNAs. These same sample sets 
were run on the TLDAs and the resulting genotyping data were com -
pared to data from the 384-well plate assay validation studies. Assay 
performance was found to be equivalent between platforms: all as -
says performed successfully on TLDAs (100% pass rate), call rate was 
greater than 99.0%, and accuracy was greater than 99.6%. Experi -
ments are underway to define the lower limit number of DNA samples 
required for sample clustering and accurate genotyping in the absence 
or presence of control DNA samples. An interactive data analysis soft -
ware tool, Autocaller™ software, is also in development. This software 
tool enables overlaying and viewing cluster plots from multiple plates 
or cards and is used to facilitate analysis of genotyping data from TLDA 
cards. Genotyping DME SNPs using TLDAs will streamline studies of 
drug metabolism and response variation among patients.
P1246. Fast, reliable and very cost-effective method for DNA 
extraction from bioptic specimen
J. Ramic , L. Kapur, N. Lojo, D. Macic, N. Pojskic, A. Durmic-Pasic, K. Bajrovic;  
Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina.
Procedure of DNA isolation is a basic step for molecular-genetics re -
search as well as for archiving for future reference. Therefore, the pro -
tocols that guarantee optimum quality and quantity should be used in 
order to ensure long-term storage of DNA samples.
Three diferent protocols for DNA extraction from tumor tissue speci -
men obtained in biopsy, have been compared trough evaluation of 
following parameters: time-consumption, feasibility, DNA quality and 
quantity and cost of procedure.
Protocol for DNA isolation using salting out method by Miller et al. 
(1987) that was modified in our lab showed to be the fast, reliable in 
terms of DNA quality, quantity and long-term stability as well as highly cost-effective and applicable for archiving of DNA for future research 
using large-scale genetic analysis technology.
P1247. CpG islet methylation in the human genome
N. C. Wong, M. Qazag, P. Canham, J. M. Craig, K. A. Choo, R. Saffery ;  
The Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children’s Hospital, Mel -
bourne, Australia.
DNA methylation of CpG islands is widely studied in higher eukary -
otes and has been found to regulate gene expression, imprinting and 
cancer progression. Yet within the human genome, only 8% of all CpG 
dinucleotides reside within a CpG island. As DNA methylation is the 
addition of a methyl moiety to cytosine residues within a CpG dinu -
cleotide, a large pool of genomic methylation resides outside of CpG 
islands and remains uncharacterised. CpG islets have the same DNA 
sequence characteristics as CpG islands in terms of GC-content, but 
are shorter in length and are thus more abundant within the genome 
(Wong et al, 2006). We have recently shown that methylation of these 
islets can vary in association with modified chromatin states, however 
the extent to which CpG islet methylation plays a role in other epigen -
etic phenonmenon such as gene regulation or X-inactivation has yet to 
be determined. To start to address this, we are investigating the rela -
tionship between the methylation status of CpG islets associated with 
known genes and expressed sequence tags (ESTs) and gene expres -
sion level. Preliminary results implicate CpG islet methylation in the 
regulation of some gene regulation, thereby suggesting an essential 
role for CpG islets within the mammalian genome.
P1248. Detection and mapping of partial trisomy and partial 
monosomy of HSA21 using BAC tiling arrays
R. Lyle1, F. Bena2, C. Gehrig2, G. Lopez2, S. Gagos2, J. M. Delabar3, A. 
Schinzel4, J. Lespinasse5, A. Bottani2, S. Dahoun2, L. Taine6, M. Doco-Fenzy7, 
P. Cornillet-Lefebvre8, A. Pellet9, A. Toutain10, L. Colleaux9, J. Horst11, I. Ken -
nerknecht11, L. Florentin12, S. Kitsiou13, E. Graison14, M. Costantine3, P. Sinet14, 
S. E. Antonarakis2;  
1Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2University of Geneva Medical 
School, Geneva, Switzerland, 3EA 3508 University Paris Denis Diderot, Paris, 
France, 4Institute of Medical Genetics, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, 5Cy-
togenetic Laboratory, General Hospital, Chambery, France, 6Department of 
Genetics, CHU Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 7Department of Genetics, IFR53, 
Reims, France, 8Department of Hematology, Reims Hospital, Reims, France, 
9INSERM U781 Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 10CHU Hôpital Breton -
neau, Tours, France, 11Institute of Human Genetics, University of MÃ¼nster, 
MÃ¼nster, Germany, 12AlfaLAB Molecular Biology and Cytogenetics Center, 
Athens, Greece, 13Department of Medical Genetics, Aghia Sophia Children’s 
Hospital, Athens, Greece, 14CNRS UMR7637, Paris, France.
Down syndrome (DS) is one of the most frequent congenital birth de -
fects, and the most common genetic cause of mental retardation. Af -
fected individuals share certain clinical features such as mental retar -
dation, congenital heart disease and characteristic facial and physical 
apparance. In most cases, DS results from the presence of an extra 
copy of chromosome 21. A major goal of understanding the molecular 
pathology of DS is the identification of HSA21 genes or other function -
al genomics elements that contribute to specific aspects of the pheno -
type. Rare cases of partial trisomy 21 could identify genomic regions 
associated with specific DS phenotypes.
In order to establish high resolution mapping of pathogenic partial an -
euploidies and unbalanced translocations involving HSA21, we con -
structed a BAC microarray covering 21q. The array consists of 411 
HSA21 BACs with a mean overlap of 85 kb giving an approximatively 
2-fold tiling path.
Our study includes identification and mapping of 45 pathogenic chro -
mosomal aberrations of chromosome 21 including 8 complete HSA21 
trisomy and 32 partial aneuploidies for different segments of HSA21. 
In each case, the size of the segmental aneuploidy has been esti -
mated and in 20 cases confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR. The 
breakpoints have been mapped to within 200kb on average. We also 
tested 5 cases with a normal karyotype on the basis of clinical find -
ings indicative of a Down syndrome phenotype. Correlations of par -
tial 21q duplication and monosomies with phenotypic features will be 
presented and contribute in the understanding of genotype-phenotype 
correlations in Down syndrome physiopathology.Genomics, technology, bioinformatics12
P1249. Impact of Histone Modifications on Gene Expression and 
Differentiation
J. F. Fischer1, J. Toedling2, T. Krueger1, M. Schueler1, W. Huber2, S. Sperling1;  
1Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany, 2European Bioin -
formatics Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
Histones together with DNA form the nucleosome that provides the 
scaffold for the compaction of DNA. Histone tails are susceptible to 
a wide variety of modifications and the type of histone modification 
contributes to the degree of DNA accessibility and gene transcription. 
However, it is not clear whether histone modification marks are primary 
or secondary to transcription, whether histone modifications act syn -
ergistically to form a histone code and to what extent they function as 
signaling marks for the recruitment of effectors.
We investigated the relationship between transcript levels and four his -
tone modifications (H4ac, H3ac, H3K4me2, H3K4me3). We performed 
ChIP-chip and expression array analysis in two independent mouse 
cell lines (C2C12, HL-1), and C2C12 in two differentiation stages.
Our results revise previous findings, based on univariate data, which 
had led to the belief that all of these modification marks are associated 
with elevated expression levels. The apparent positive effect of his -
tone-3-lysin-4-dimethylation is caused by its correlated co-occurrence, 
and an effect that disappears when it is present by itself. Our results 
suggest that histone modifications form a code, as their combinato -
rial composition is associated with distinct read-outs. We show that 
modifications are highly dynamic during differentiation. Upregulation of 
transcripts is associated with a gain of histone-4-acetylation, but many 
modification conversions occur without a change of transcript levels.
This indicates that histone modifications precede transcription, rather 
than being a consequence of it, and primarily function as signalling 
marks for specific effectors, but are not by themselves a sufficient driv -
ing force for transcription.
P1250. DS5: Biological storage and retrieval: Bringing e-Science 
to embryo bioinformatics resources.
M. K. Scott1, J. van Hemert2, Y. Chen2, X. Wang1, S. Lisgo1, S. Lindsay1, M. 
Atkinson2, R. A. Baldock3;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2National 
e-Science Centre, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3MRC Human Genetics Unit, 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
The current technologies for storage, accession and manipulation of 
biological data have focused on efficient management, curation and 
analysis of data in terms of a centralised resource, by enabling large-
scale data-download for analysis. Bio-resources that require a more 
distributed approach (e.g. for shared material, inter-institute collabora -
tion or large volume data-analysis) are currently unacceptably low in 
power for the tasks required, or suffer limitations affecting usability and 
usefulness. These types of requirements are a central concern of de -
velopment in e-Science and therefore, as part of the FP6 funded DGE -
Map (Developmental Gene Expression Map) project we are assessing 
the current architectures to improve on restrictions experienced. This 
is a collaborative effort between the e-Science Institute, the Institute of 
Human Genetics and the MRC-Wellcome Trust Human Developmen -
tal Biology Resource. The three main areas of focus have been: a) a 
database for the storage and access of internal experimental details, 
specimen records and users details, with an emphasis on upgrading 
the current technology to utilise web portal access, b) 3D mapping 
and visualisation software to increase accuracy and automation for 
data mapping, including inter-stage and inter-species analysis, and c) 
establishing a web presence equipped with search, analysis and data-
mining tools, for the dissemination of data to the wider community.
P1251. Development and validation of the “chromosome X 
exon-specific array” that enables identification of copy number 
changes in genes of the X chromosome
L. K. Kousoulidou1, S. Bashiardes1, H. van Bokhoven2, H. Ropers3, J. Chelly4, 
C. Moraine5, A. de Brouwer2, H. Van Esch6, G. Froyen7, P. C. Patsalis1;  
1Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Department of 
human genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre., Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands, 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Human Molecular 
Genetics Department, Berlin, Germany, 4INSERM U129-ICGM, Faculte de 
Medecine Cochin., Paris, France, 5Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Tours, 
Service de Genetique, Hospital Bretoneau., Tours, France, 6Centre for Human 
Genetics, University Hospital Gasthuisberg., Leuven, Belgium, 7Human Ge -nome Laboratory, VIB, Dept. Human Genetics, K.U.Leuven., Leuven, Belgium.
The aim of this study was to design and produce a specialized and novel 
chromosome X exon-specific oligonucleotide microarray for screening 
of all X-chromosomal genes and detection of copy number changes. 
Identification of genetic alterations is extremely important for research 
and clinical purposes. Recent studies have indicated that microdele -
tions and microduplications occur at a high frequency in the human 
genome, while advances in high-density oligonucleotide arrays have 
paved the way with unparalleled resolution. The new “chromosome 
X exon-specific array” contains about 22,000 60mer oligonucleotides 
covering more than 92% of all chromosome X exons and miRNA re -
gions, as well as control regions from other chromosomes. Two known 
abnormal control samples, one with a well-characterized isochromo -
some X and another with a Xp22.2 duplication were interrogated on 
the array to test its efficiency and identify probes that do not perform 
efficiently. Modifications were carried out and the final “chromosome 
X exon-specific array” was used for screening of 20 XLMR families 
from the EURO-MRX Consortium. One out of the twenty families was 
identified by array-CGH as having a 1.78-kb deletion involving all ex -
ons of one gene and a second family was found to carry a 27-kb dele -
tion involving all exons of two contiguous genes. The above genetic 
changes were confirmed with PCR. The “chromosome X exon-specific 
array” could be utilized to detect genetic changes in X-linked disorders 
and other chromosome X abnormalities. The “chromosome X exon-
specific array” will become available from “Oxford Gene Technology” 
(OGT) biotechnology company within the next months.
P1252. Validation of a commercially available PCR kit for 
diagnostic testing for Fragile X CGG repeat
P. A. van Bunderen , M. M. Weiss, E. Bakker;  
Laboratory for Diagnostic Genome Analysis, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Almost all cases of Fragile X syndrome are caused by an expansion 
of a CGG repeat in the 5’ UTR of the FMR1 gene to more than 200 re -
peats. Molecular testing is usually performed by both PCR of the CGG 
repeat (up until 100 repeats) and Southern blot analysis.
We are currently validating a new kit from Abbott. With this kit it should 
be possible to detect large expanded CGG repeats. By calculating a 
peakheight ratio of the CGG repeat and of a control X fragment, in -
formation is gained about the status “heterozygous or homozygous” 
in female samples. We tested 39 known samples (13 female and 26 
male) including full expanded alleles, homozygous normal females, 
and premutations.
Of the 13 females analysed, two homozygous and two full mutations 
were confirmed. Of the 26 males, one showed a full mutation and two 
had premutations. Of the 3 full mutations, 2 were visible in raw data.
Using the Abbott kit in Fragile X diagnostic testing is fast and only a 
small amount of DNA is necessary. There are no discrepancies in all 
39 samples. Two of three full mutations were visible in the raw data. 
However, interpretation of peak ratios is sometimes difficult because 
the reliability of the ratios is dependent on the size of the normal allel. 
At this moment the size standard is not suitable for full mutation sizing, 
so checking the raw data is necessary.
P1253. A PCR-based assay detecting pre- and full mutations of 
the FMR1  gene
M. Pomponi, R. Pietrobono, E. Tabolacci, G. Neri ;  
Università Cattolica del S. Cuore, Roma, Italy.
We evaluated the Fragile X PCR Assay (Abbott Molecular, Inc.) ef -
fectiveness in distinguishing the size of FMR1  alleles. The assay is 
based on fluorescent multiplex PCR where the CGG repeat sequence 
is co-amplified with undisclosed gender-specific targets. We tested 
122 samples, whose FMR1  status had been ascertained by South -
ern blotting (HindIII/EagI digestion , hybridization with probe Ox1.9). 
The samples included 93 females (31 wt homozygotes, 24 wt hetero -
zygotes, 20 premutations, 18 full mutations) and 29 males (10 wt, 7 
premutations, 3 full mutations, 2 mosaics wt/full mutation, 8 mosaics 
premutation/full mutation). Results obtained with the PCR assay coin -
cided with those obtained by Southern blotting. The determination of 
female zygosity was done through the calculation of the TR/X ratio, 
comparing the height of the peak corresponding to the CGG sequence 
with that of the gender-specific target. A ratio>1 indicates wt homozy -
gosity. Of 31 homozygous females, 23 (74%) had TR/X>1, 7 (23%) 
TR/X<1 and 1 (3%) TR/X 0.9-1 (intermediate zone). Therefore TR/X Genomics, technology, bioinformatics1
ratio does not appear to be entirely reliable and needs refinement. 
However, in all cases with expanded alleles a peak was visible after 
capillary electrophoresis. The largest allele amplified was about 300 
CGGs, although the resulting peak was small and difficult to interpret. 
The amplification products could also be separated on a 2% agarose 
gel. In conclusion, although some cases will require Southern analysis 
(e.g. very large expansions and methylation mosaics), this PCR assay 
is capable of resolving most cases referred to the laboratory.
Partially supported by Abbott Molecular, Inc.
P1254. EURExpress, a web-based transcriptome atlas of the 
developing mouse embryo
G. Diez Roux , and the EURExpress consortium;  
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy.
Genome-wide expression analyses have a crucial role in functional 
genomics. RNA in situ  hybridization (ISH) provides an accurate spa -
tio-temporal description of the distribution of transcripts at cellular 
resolution. The EU-funded EURExpress consortium is generating a 
transcriptome-wide acquisition of expression patterns by means of 
ISH with non-radioactive probes and using this data to establish a 
web-linked, interactive digital transcriptome atlas (www.eurexpress.
org). The goal of EURExpress is to generate the expression data of 
> 20,000 genes on sagittal sections from E14.5 wild type murine em -
bryos. EURExpress has generated over 9000 expression patterns, in -
cluding the entire set of ENCODE genes, which have been thoroughly 
annotated using a special interface for high-throughput annotation. 
This interface includes 1420 anatomical structures and correlative 
trees regarding ontological (embryological) and topological relations 
allowing advanced queries. The analysis of the data produced so far 
has determined that 30-40% of genes show a specific/regional pattern 
of expression at E14.5. Interestingly, 20% of these are unknown genes 
of which a large percentage show restricted expression patterns in 
single tissues such specific structures of the CNS, eye, skin, liver, skel -
etal muscle and salivary glands. The potential impact on these data on 
the study of human development and disease is enormous allowing to 
identify tissue specific markers to characterize disease phenotype, to 
evaluate disease prognosis, to measure therapeutic benefits and to 
help identifying genes whose mutations lead to disease phenotypes. 
Future plans include studying other developmental stages and analyz -
ing the mutant mice resources generated by the mutagenesis projects 
in USA and Europe.
P1255. Gene expression changes in rat brain under the action of 
peptide drug “Semax”, an analogue of ACTH(4-10)
P. A. Slominsky , T. Agapova, M. Shadrina, J. Agniullin, S. Shram;  
Institute of Molecular Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation.
The heptapeptide “Semax”, an analogue of the N-terminal adrenocor -
ticotropic hormone fragment (4-10) (ACTH4-10), has been shown to 
exert a number of neuroprotective effects. There are some investiga -
tions that connected these effects with the increase of neurotrophin 
NGF and BDNF gene expression under the peptide drug application 
in neuronal and glial cell cultures and in rat brain in vivo. In this work, 
we examined the action of “Semax” on rapid gene expression of 84 
key gene, representative of 18 different signal transduction pathways. 
Male Wistar rats were treated for one hour with “Semax” (50 µg/kg, 
single intranasal application) and gene expression in rat brain hip -
pocampus was analyzed by RT Profiler PCR Array Rat Signal Trans -
duction PathwayFinder. It was found that under “Semax” treatment a 
significant (at least two-fold) changes in gene expression observe for 
twenty seven genes from sixteen signal pathways. Nine genes was up-
regulated and eighteen was down-regulated. Most significant changes 
was found in Wnt pathway (down-regulation of peroxisome proliferator 
activated receptor gamma, vascular endothelial growth factor. cyclin 
D1, cadherin 1 genes), JAK-STAT pathway (up-regulation inducible 
NO synthase and Cxcl9 chemokine ligand genes and down-regulation 
of matrix metallopeptidase 10 gene). Also significant (almost five-fold) 
up-regulation was found for heat shock 27kDa protein. Thus, “Semax” 
induces rapid and wide changes in expression of key genes of some 
signal transduction pathways and it may be related to neuroprotective 
effects of “Semax”.P1256. Ultra-Deep Digital Analysis of the Transcriptome
I. Khrebtukova , S. Luo, L. Zhang, J. Yan, E. Vermaas, V. Quijano, T. Kerelska, 
G. P. Schroth;  
Illumina, Inc., Hayward, CA, United States.
We have used the Illumina Genome Analysis System, based on Solexa 
sequencing technology, to study very deep digital profiles of messen -
ger RNA in a variety of biological samples. This approach allows us to 
study the transcriptome with unparallel depth, specificity, and sensitiv -
ity. For instance we show examples in human brain and the Universal 
Human Reference (UHR) RNA where more than 30 million sequence 
tags have been analyzed in a single experiment. Our approach can be 
used as a quantitative profiling tool, and also as a powerful discovery 
tool to find evidence of novel transcription. Unlike microarrays, the digi -
tal approach does not require a priori  knowledge of the genome, so it 
can be used to study complete expression in any organism.
P1257. Genetic Algorithm in anthropological pattern recognition
E. Laslo, D. Noje, I. Tomulescu , C. Pusta;  
University of Oradea, Oradea, Romania.
In this paper we have proposed to build a connection among the fields 
of bioinformatics, anthropology and artificial intelligence on the base 
of our research in this area. We have created a pattern that gives the 
possibility to extend a Genetic Algorithm like an optimization method 
and to turn it into an approximation method.
The program constructed on the base of these concepts gives an 
optimization of the anthropological human structures making a char -
acteristic function for every individual or community partly. Having at 
our disposition an extended database that contains the characteristics 
of every individual of the stock community we can determine a few 
characteristics of a new individual. The application is to support the 
anthropological research through the intelligent interrogation of some 
individual-data versus a database-community to interpret more and 
more efficiently the appartenance of those data.
A special feature of this application is the construction in the back -
ground of a neuronal network for the continual learning and upgrade 
of the database.
Key words: genetic algorithm, pattern recognition.
P1258. The Serbian National Mutation frequency database
D. Radojkovic1, S. Pavlovic1, S. van Baal2, G. P. Patrinos2;  
1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia, 
2Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
The National and Ethnic Mutation databases (NEMDBs) are continu -
ously updated mutation depositories, which contain extensive infor -
mation over the described genetic heterogeneity of a population or 
ethnic group. These resources have recently emerged, mostly driven 
from the need to document the varying mutation spectrum observed 
for any gene (or multiple genes), associated with a genetic disorder, 
between different population and ethnic groups. We report the con -
struction of the Serbian National Mutation frequency database (http://
www.goldenhelix.org/serbian), derived from an academic effort to 
provide high quality and up-to-date information on the underlying ge -
netic heterogeneity of inherited disorders in the Serbian population. 
The Serbian NEMDB Database contains brief summaries of the vari -
ous genetic disorders prevalent in Serbia and studied for the Serbian 
population, namely beta-thalassemia, cystic fibrosis, phenylketonuria, 
thrombophilia, hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin and Y-linkled 
spermatogenic failure. Database core engine has been built and main -
tained online using the specialized ETHNOS software (Patrinos et al., 
Hum Mutat , 2005; 25:327-333, Kleanthous et al., Hum Mutat  2006; 
598-599). An easy-to-use query interface provides instant access to 
the list and frequencies of the different mutations responsible for the 
inherited disorders in the Serbian population. Furthermore, numerous 
links to the respective Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) 
entries fruitfully integrate the database’s content into a single web 
site. This database can serve as a valuable online tool for molecular 
genetic testing of inherited disorders in Serbia and could potentially 
motivate further investigations of yet unknown genetic diseases in the 
Serbian population.Genomics, technology, bioinformatics1
P1259. Estimating the predictive value of genomic profiling in 
modeling studies: a proof of principle
A. C. J. W. Janssens , C. M. van Duijn;  
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
Genomic profiling is anticipated to improve prediction of complex dis -
eases and lead to personalized medicine, in which preventive and 
therapeutic interventions are targeted to the individuals´ genetic risk 
profiles. Whether profiling can yield the required predictive value is 
to be investigated in clinical-based empirical studies. We developed 
a modeling approach that estimates the predictive value based on lit -
erature data (Janssens et al. Genet Med 2006). Our simulation model 
constructs a dataset based on epidemiological information about the 
frequencies and effects of single genotypes and the population risk of 
disease, and calculates measures of predictive value in this dataset. 
We investigated the validity of the model by replicating two published 
empirical studies on the discriminative accuracy of genomic profiling. 
Discriminative accuracy is the degree to which genomic profiles can 
discriminate between subjects who will and who will not develop dis -
ease, assessed as the area-under-the-receiver-operating-characteris -
tic-curve (AUC).
The first study was a large case-control study in type 2 diabetes report -
ing that the combined AUC of PPARG , TCF7L2  and KCNJ11  was 0.55 
(Weedon et al. PLoS Med 2006). Our model estimated a similar AUC 
of 0.56. The other investigated IL-6, ICAM1  and SELE  for the predic -
tion of myocardial infarction after cardiac surgery and found an AUC of 
0.695 (Podgoreanu et al. Circulation 2006), compared to 0.691 using 
the modeling approach. Our findings suggest that the discriminative 
accuracy of genomic profiling may well be estimated in simulated data. 
Estimating the predictive value of genomic profiling prior to data-col -
lection could guide translational research in promising directions.
P1260. A GPCR brain map using Taqman Low Density Arrays
D. Keys, C. Barbacioru, F. Chan, R. Samaha ;  
Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States.
The G Protein-Coupled Receptors (GPCRs) are a broad class of trans -
membrane proteins. A large percentage of successful small molecule 
drugs specifically target proteins in this class. Our study is designed to 
generate an expression map of 368 GPCR genes in the human brain. 
We used the Applied Biosystems Human GPCR Panel Taqman® Low 
Density Array (TLDA) and RNA samples from 29 different regions of the 
brain to generate this map. A total of 62 TLDA cards, 23,808 individual 
qRT-PCR reactions, were run in this study. To make it possible to run 
this large number of qRT-PCR assays from limited starting samples, 
we used a multiplex preamplification strategy (Taqman® PreAmp Mas -
ter Mix & TLDA matched oligos). We present a performance analysis 
for the GPCR TLDA and preamplification methodology as well as the 
GPCR brain map. Several genes show interesting tissue distributions 
constituting potentially interesting drug targets.
P1261. MicroRNAs in the developing inner ear
L. M. Friedman1, G. Toren1, R. Hertzano1, M. Irmler2, J. Beckers2, E. Hornstein3, 
K. B. Avraham1;  
1Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2GSF-National Research Center for En -
vironment and Health, GmbH, Neuherberg, Germany, 3Weizmann Institute of 
Science, Rehovot, Israel.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are 17-23 nt double-strand RNAs that can in -
hibit the translation of target mRNAs and affect, directly or indirectly, 
the expression of a large part of the protein-coding genes. miRNAs 
are expressed differentially in different tissues. During the last years, 
miRNAs have been discovered as having important roles in develop -
ment and disease of plants and animals. The vertebrate ear expresses 
specific miRNAs, as was suggested by recent studies in zebrafish and 
mice. Our goal is to identify miRNAs that contribute to the development 
and function of the mouse inner ear and may be involved in hearing 
and deafness in mammals, as well as their target mRNAs.
We have used bioinformatics and other prediction tools to identify po -
tential miRNAs that may control inner ear development or function. 
Using expression microarrays and real time qRT-PCR to profile the 
miRNAs of the mouse inner ear, we deciphered the expression of 
miRNAs in cochleae and vestibules at various ages. Although most of 
the inner ear-specific miRNAs are expressed similarly in the cochlea 
and vestibule from the same age, some miRNAs have a different ex -
pression pattern. The differential expression of miRNAs in the cochlea and vestibule may be responsible for some of the differences in the 
cochlear and vestibular transcriptomes and functions. MiRNAs with 
expression levels that changed over time or were different in cochleae 
and vestibules were selected for further study, including localization by 
in situ  hybridization and a search for their targets, using bioinformatics 
tools and mRNA microarray expression data.
P1262. Mutation scanning using high-resolution melting on the 
LightCycler® 480 Real-Time PCR System
J. Hurlebaus , C. Weilke, M. Hoffmann;  
Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Penzberg, Germany.
Established methods for PCR-based genotyping using dye-labeled 
probes only allow the detection of expected sequence variations. To 
screen for unknown mutations across DNA amplicons, sequencing is 
state of the art. Since sequencing is still expensive and not well-suited 
for high throughput analysis, other methods ( e.g., dHPLC, DGGE) 
have been established for pre-screening samples in order to identify 
those that contain sequence variants.
We describe a novel, homogeneous post-PCR method based on high 
resolution melting (HRM) of amplicons that enables pre-screening. 
Prerequisites to use this method are:
• a high-end realtime PCR instrument ( e.g., the LightCycler® 480 Sys -
tem)
• a target-specific pair of PCR primers
• PCR reagents containing an optimized intercalating dye
• a special software for HRM data analysis.
After PCR, sample-derived amplicons (up to 600 bp) are subjected to 
high resolution melting. For amplicons with sequence variations the 
melting curves differ in shape. A specific software algorithm analyzes 
these small differences and groups samples of similar curve shape. 
Using samples with known sequence as standards, other samples in 
the same group can be assigned to this sequence.
The new method thus enables detection of any sequence variation in 
the amplified DNA section. It is cost-effective, needs little optimization 
and hands-on time, and allows for high throughput screening (96/384 
samples).
The LightCycler® 480 System now offers PCR and HRM-based mu -
tation scanning on an integrated platform in multiwell plates. It also 
provides a master mix containing a novel fluorescent HRM dye.
P1263. High resolution melting curve analysis for CFTR alleles 
using the LightCycler©480 instrument
S. Beck-Woedl, P. Bauer ;  
Department of Medical Genetics, Tübingen, Germany.
High resolution melting curve analysis (HRM) is a fast method to de -
tect sequence variants in human genomic DNA.
In order to asses the feasibility of HRM screening in CFTR genotyping, 
we have set up PCR protocols for CFTR exons 4, 7, 10, 11, 14b, 19, 
20, and 21 allowing the analysis of the most prevalent CFTR mutations 
in Germany.
While heterozygous CFTR mutations (R347P, F508del, I507del, 
G542X, R553X, G551D, 1717-1G>A, 2789+5G>A, W1282X, N1303K) 
could easily be detected by standard PCR conditions, homozygosity 
for F508del and heterozygous R117H alleles escaped detection.
Therefore we decided to spike our PCR assays with “unlabeled 
probes”, short oligonucleotides complementary to the R117H and the 
F508del loci, respectively. This greatly enhanced the sensitivity of the 
PCR-melting system and allowed unequivocal calls of all pathological 
CFTR alleles tested so far.
In conclusion, we can demonstrate that HRM on the new LightCy -
cler©480 instrument is a fast and accurate method to screen for the 
most prevalent CFTR mutations in Germany. Analysis time could be 
reduced to less than 2 hours (PCR amplification and melting curves).
P1264. Embryonic expression of OTX2  and DMBX1 in human 
brain
C. Ramos , D. Vouyiouklis, M. Scott, A. Andras, S. Lindsay;  
Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
Genes of the homeobox superfamily encode a common 60 amino-
acid homeodomain motif. Most homeobox genes act as transcription 
factors, regulating gene expression during development. Mutations 
can lead to severe alterations in the genetic programmes of a wide 
range of organisms, including humans. Among homeobox genes, the Genomics, technology, bioinformatics1
orthodenticle group comprise the Drosophila  orthodenticle  (Otd) and 
the vertebrate Otx1 and Otx2  genes. These play major roles in the 
specification and regionalization of the anterior neuromeres. The Otx2  
expression domain includes the forebrain and midbrain neuroecto -
derm, and marks a sharp boundary at the midbrain-hindbrain junc -
tion. This constitutes a cardinal signalling centre for brain patterning. 
In concordance with their expression pattern, inactivation of Otd and 
Otx2  in Drosophila and mouse  embryo s, respectively, leads to total 
loss of the anterior part of the brain. Furthermore, experimental mouse 
models show that the Otd and Otx2 proteins are functionally equiva -
lent, in spite of the different CNS architectures between Drosophila 
and mouse. However, this equivalence is still subject to differential 
transcriptional and translational control. In vertebrates, Otx gene du -
plication and corresponding modification in genetic control may have 
resulted in novel morphogenetic pathways, including the modification 
in shape and size of different brain areas. The analysis of the devel -
opmental expression of OTX genes in human embryos may therefore 
reveal possible innovative roles in brain organogenesis and potential 
links with neurological disorders. This may be particularly relevant in 
the cases of OTX2  and DMBX1 , the latter of which functions as a tran -
scriptional repressor.
P1265. The importance of bioinformatics and DNA Banks for 
Human Genetics
M. A. Saremi1, M. Tavallaei (Ph.D. )1, M. Saremi2;  
1Imam Hussein University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Reference Labora -
tories of Iran - Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Over the past few decades, major advances in the field of molecu -
lar biology, coupled with advances in genomic technologies, have led 
to an explosive growth in the biological information generated by the 
scientific community. This deluge of genomic information has, in turn 
led to an absolute requirement for computerized databases to store, 
organize and index the data, and for specialized tools to view and ana -
lyze the data.
Bioinformatics is a new scientific discipline that combines biology, 
computer science, mathematics, and statistics into a broad-based field 
that will have profound impacts on all fields of biology.
bioinformatics presents mathematical models along with biological 
problems and computer science tools necessary to cope with data. 
bioinformatics applications in genomics and proteomics and later-gen -
eration techniques, etc are important, which attempts at linking genetic 
information with structure and function of molecules, metabolic pro -
cesses and whole cells.
DNA bank is a global life sciences centre that creates and develops 
innovative product-driven biotechnology ventures.
Moreover, Establishment of DNA banks will help approved researchers 
to develop new and better ways of preventing, diagnosing and treating 
different illnesses.
The establishment of DNA banks and the development of bioinformat -
ics are the most Important strategies for the future of Human Genetics. 
It should be said that different DNA banks have now been established 
in our country. We have established a human genomic DNA bank for 
working on human genetic diseases. In the context of this human ge -
nomic DNA bank, we further developed new bioinformatics software in 
Imam Hussein University.
P1266. Genomic biomarkers for Huntington‘s disease
L. Lovrecic1, A. Kastrin1, J. Kobal2, B. Peterlin1;  
1Division of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, 
Slovenia, 2Department of Neurology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Lju -
bljana, Slovenia.
The aim of our study was to validate previously published [1] gene 
expression signatures in blood as a biomarker set for Huntington’s 
disease (HD) and to test its potential clinical utility. By QRT-PCR we 
tested 61 Slovenian patients and 30 healthy controls and showed that 
11 out of 12 candidate genes were significantly overexpressed in HD 
samples (p<.05) with a fold change ranging from 1.40 to 1.91.
Additionally, 24 patients with Parkinson’s disease (PD) and 10 patients 
with fresh cerebrovascular insult (CVI) were included in the study. To 
estimate diagnostic performance of the 12 genes biomarker set we 
used k-nearest neighbor (kNN) classifier. The validation of the model 
was done using 10-fold cross-validation. Table 1 presents the perfor -
mances of the experiment in terms of sensitivity, specificity and F-mea -sure.
We conclude that we confirmed overexpression of 11 out of 12 genes 
of the proposed HD biomarker set, however the differences in expres -
sion were too small to reach an acceptable diagnostic performance.
Table :  Performance measures of the kNN algorithm.
Sensitivity Specificity F-measure
HD group ( N=61 ) .71 .77 .72
PD group ( N=24 ) .75 .88 .67
CVI group ( N=10 ) .70 .98 .74
Control Group ( N=30 ) .60 .90 .62
[1] Borovecki F, Lovrecic L, Zhou J, Jeong H, Then F, Rosas HD, et al. Genome-wide 
expression profiling of human blood reveals biomarkers for Huntington‘s disease. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Aug 2;102(31):11023-8.
P1267. Evaluation of in silico  splice tools for decision-making in 
molecular diagnostic
C. Dehainault1, D. Michaux1, V. Caux-Moncoutier1, S. Pagès-Berhouet1, C. 
Mattler1, D. Stoppa-Lyonnet1,2, M. Gauthier-Villars1, C. Houdayer1,3;  
1Institut Curie, Paris, France, 2INSERM U509, Paris, France, 3UMR INSERM 
745, Paris, France.
It appears that all type of genomic nucleotide variation can be deleteri -
ous by affecting normal pre-mRNA splicing via disruption/creation of 
splice site consensus sequences. Since it is neither pertinent nor re -
alistic to perform functional testing for all these variants, it is important 
to find out which ones could lead to a splice defect in order to restrict 
transcript analyses to the appropriate cases. Web-based tools aiming 
at providing such predictions are available. We evaluated the perfor -
mance of 5 of them (Splice Site Prediction by Neural Network, Splice 
Site Finder, MaxEntScan, ESE Finder and RESCUE-ESE) using 36 
unrelated retinoblastoma patients without a clear deleterious mutation 
but carrying different RB1 variants (28 intronic and 8 exonic). These 
patients were screened for abnormal splicing using puromycin-treated 
cell lines and the results were compared to the predictions.
As expected, 18 variants impacting canonical AG/GT splice sites were 
correctly predicted as deleterious. Eighteen variations occurring at 
loosely defined positions (+/- 60 nucleotides from an AG/GT site) lead 
to a splice defect in 16 cases and 13 of them were classified as delete -
rious by at least one tool. In other words, 3 variants escaped detection 
and the remaining 2 were correctly predicted as neutral.
Overall our results suggest that a combination of complementary in 
silico  tools is necessary to take the most appropriate decision (bal -
ance between the time and cost needed by RNA analysis and the risk 
of missing a deleterious mutation) because the weaknesses of one in 
silico  tool may be overcome by another one.
P1268. Protein profile analyses indicate possible implication of 
terfenadine in Ca++ channel inhibition
S. Kim1, H. Jeong1, H. Lee2, J. Kim1, H. Chung1;  
1National Institute of Toxicological Research, Seoul, Republic of Korea, 2Col-
lege of Medicine University of Ulsan, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
Drug safety prediction with biomarker is essential in drug evaluation 
as well as drug development. Terfenadine, a nonsedating histamine H1 
receptor blocker, cause a well-known adverse effect related in cardiac 
arrhythmia by prolonged QT interval, unlikely fexofenadine, its meta -
bolic derivative. We found that terfenadine suppressed calcium chan -
nel current upto 90% at 3uM as well as delayed rectifier potassium 
channel. In contrast, fexofenadine was almost 100 times less effective 
in suppressing channel currents by conventional electro-physiology 
study. Cardiomyocytes were treated with 0.5, 1, 5, 10, 50uM of terfena -
dine and fexofenadine for 24hrs. Then, each cell lysate was subjected 
to 2-DE analysis to detect markers for the adverse effect caused by 
terfenadine using fexofenadine as a control. The proteins with more 
than 3 times up/down expression in each drug concentration were su -
jected to peptide ID. The expression of proteins involved in the calcium 
transporting/signaling were mainly changed by terfenadine treatment, 
on the other hand, the expression of proteins involved in the potas -
sium transporting were changed by fexofenadine treatment. According 
to our results, terfernadine treatment has major effect on the expres -
sions of calcium channel-related protein rather than potassium chan -
nel-related protein whereas fexofenadine affected mostly potassium 
channel-related protein expressions. This observation might shed light Genomics, technology, bioinformatics1
on the inhibitory effect of terfernadine on calcium channel, besides 
its well-known effect on HERG channel. Further investigation on the 
inhibitory effect of terfenadine might help elucidating the mechanism of 
cardiac adverse effect caused by some antihistamine drugs.
P1269. Impact of arachidonic acid and moderate and high 
docosahexaenoic acid formulas on hepatic gene expression 
profiles in baboon neonates
K. S. D. Kothapalli1, J. C. Anthony2, B. S. Pan1, A. T. Hsieh1, P. W. Nathan -
ielsz3, J. T. Brenna1;  
1Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States, 2Mead Johnson and Company, 
Evansville, IN, United States, 3University of Texas Health Science Center, San 
Antonio, TX, United States.
Long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LCPUFA), DHA and ARA, 
are recent dietary components in infant milk formula but vary in con -
centration because optimal levels have not yet been established. In 
this study, we utilized high-density Affymetrix oligonucleotide arrays 
(“U133 plus 2.0” with >54,000 probesets) to monitor changes in he -
patic mRNA expression levels in baboon neonates, supplemented for 
twelve weeks with DHA at two levels (0.33% and 1.0%) and ARA at 
one level (0.67%). Twelve baboon neonates were randomized into 
three groups (n=4 per group): Control (C, no DHA-ARA); 1 x DHA 
(L, 0.33% DHA-0.67% ARA); 3 x DHA (L3, 1.00% DHA-0.67% ARA). 
Significance analysis (P<0.05), identified differential changes in gene 
expression among 1726 probe sets (ps). Gene ontology annotations 
assigned differentially expressed ps to a broad spectrum of biological 
processes, including lipid metabolism and transport, cell proliferation, 
signal transduction and development. Genes associated with PUFA 
metabolism, namely SCD1 and FADS1, were significantly downregu -
lated. Most significantly upregulated was TOB1, a novel multifunctional 
protein which acts as a tumor suppressor in the liver. Transcripts (PPA -
RA, FABP1, ACACA and ACSL3) regulating lipid metabolism, transport 
and oxidation were subtly downregulated, whereas, PPARD is upregu -
lated. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) identified six highly significant 
transcriptional networks associated with functions implicated in cellular 
growth and proliferation, tissue development, tissue morphology, cell 
to cell signaling, cancer and gene expression. Dietary DHA and ARA 
within normal ranges found in human and baboon breastmilk altered 
mRNA expression of a wide array of genes, including many genes as -
sociated with PUFA metabolism.
P1270. The UMD Central system: a tool to address genetic 
heterogeneity from LSDB
D. Hamroun1,2, G. Collod-Béroud1,3, M. Claustres1,2, C. Béroud1,2;  
1INSERM, U 827, Montpellier, F-34000, France, 2CHU Montpellier, Hôpital 
Arnaud de Villeneuve, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, F-
34000, France, 3Université Montpellier1, UFR Médecine, Montpellier, F-34000, 
France.
Recent progress in molecular genetics led to the identification of thou -
sands of mutations associated with human genetic diseases. To ana -
lyze this flow of information, Locus Specific Databases (LSDB) have 
been created. They are maintained by curators (experts of a specific 
gene or disease), who perform a meticulous annotation of genotype 
and phenotype associated with each mutant. Today, hundreds of LS -
DBs have been created worldwide and generic softwares have been 
designed to set up LSDBs and standardize the information description. 
One of these, the UMD software (http://www.umd.be), is widely used. 
LSDB are frequently referred as ‘inch wide and mile deep’ as they 
deal only with a single gene in opposition to Central databases ‘mile 
wide and inch deep’, which collect mutations for almost all the genes 
but with minimal annotation for each mutant. To fill the gap between 
these two approaches, we developed the UMD central system (http://
www.umd.be:2200). This tool is able to query simultaneously various 
UMD-LSDBs and to display a summary of any relevant information 
from these various databases. This is particularly useful to address the 
genetic heterogeneity (one disease - several alternative genes). The 
user can select one or more symptoms and one or more genes and 
UMD-central will display for each gene, the number of mutants associ -
ated with these phenotypes. This tool can also be used for mutation 
distribution analysis, mutational events studies or insertions deletions 
and splice mutations analysis. This tool should be very useful for dis -
eases involving different genes such as myopathies, breast cancers, 
cardiovascular diseases...P1271. 3D modelling and gene expression mapping in the 
developing human brain
A. Andras1, J. Kerwin1, M. Scott1, S. Lindsay1, R. Baldock2, D. Vouyiouklis1;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2MRC 
Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
Human brain architecture and function are linked, and defined by dis -
tinct classes of neurons and support cells. Embryonic brain develop -
ment is characterized by dramatic changes in shape and size. Detec -
tion methodologies such as in situ hybridisation (ISH) and computer-
based image manipulation help define the gene expression patterns 
underlying these tremendous changes. A set of three-dimensional 
(3D) models have been generated using optical projection topography 
(OPT), which serve as the framework onto which expression patterns 
are mapped with custom designed software (MAPaint).
In order to visualise and interpret developmental changes, the expres -
sion patterns of two genes WNT1 and FGF8, were compared at Carn -
egie stage 15 (CS15; 33 days post conception). WNT1 and FGF8 are 
key signalling components of the isthmic organiser, and are involved in 
structural differentiation, patterning and organogenesis. WNT1 is ex -
pressed in the midbrain and the midbrain/hindbrain/ boundary. FGF8 
is expressed in the isthmus (the hindbrain/ midbrain boundary) and the 
apical ectodermal ridge of the fore and hind limbs. Physical sections 
stained by ISH for WNT1 and FGF8 were mapped against digital sec -
tions of the CS15 OPT model. Gene expression patterns, and selected 
structures or boundaries, could be visualised either independently or in 
combination.The 3D models and the application of complex software 
proved an invaluable tool in the visualisation of gene expression pat -
terns during early human brain development. These techniques can 
be applied further, in order to study gene expression during different 
developmental stages, or the development of other complex structures 
such as the heart.
P1272. Identification of altered promoter methylation in non-
small cell lung cancer
N. Tõnisson1,2, K. Fellenberg2, R. Kuner2, M. Meister3, Y. Riazalhosseini2, T. 
Vooder4, K. Välk1, K. Kirotar1, V. Beier2, A. Metspalu1, J. D. Hoheisel2;  
1IMCB, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2German Cancer Research Center 
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, 3Thorax Clinic, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Lung 
Clinic, Tartu University Clinics, Tartu, Estonia.
Aberrant promoter methylation of tumour-related genes is a rela -
tively common and stable finding in various malignancies, including 
non-small cell lung cancer. It is believed that some of the methylation 
changes, altering gene expression, occur already before the cancer 
may be clinically found. This makes methylation an attractive biomark -
er for early detection.
We have performed the retrospective analysis of 48 genes in 60 surgi -
cally treated lung adeno- and squamous cell carcinoma patients, us -
ing oligonucleotide microarrays as the screening platform. The lung 
cancer samples were analysed for promoter methylation, as well as 
the corresponding gene expression changes. The analysis included 
known and putative tumour suppressor genes controlling cell growth 
and differentiation, antiangiogenetic factors, genes participating in cell 
to cell and cell to extracellular matrix connections and metabolic de -
toxication processes.
During the setup and validation of microarrays, series of in vitro gen -
erated methylated and unmethylated sequences were used for the 
selection and calibration of oligonucleotide probes. A panel of tumour-
free lung tissue was used as the negative control to distinguish the 
tumour-related methylation changes from the possible tissue-specific 
methylation.
The study will be further expanded to include a larger patient group 
from a different clinical centre.
P1273. Mutation screening in the human β-globin gene using a 
flow-through microarray platform
M. Mommersteeg1, Y. Wu1, R. van Beuningen1, T. Piskackova2, P. Kollia3, C. L. 
Harteveld4, P. Giordano4, G. P. Patrinos5;  
1PamGene BV, ‘s-Hertogenbosch, The Netherlands, 2Charles University, Uni -
versity Hospital Motol and 2nd School of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 
3Department of Biology, School of Medicine, University of Thessaly, Larissa, 
Greece, 4Leiden University Medical Center, Hemoglobinopathies Laboratory, Genomics, technology, bioinformatics1
Leiden, The Netherlands, 5Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
The panoply of human globin gene mutation detection methods has be -
come significantly enriched with the advent of microarray-based geno -
typing platforms. So far, a handful of microarray-based methods have 
been described for mutation screening in the human globin genes re -
gion, namely a microelectronic array, arrayed primer extension-based 
(APEX) systems and microarrays involving tagged single-base exten -
sion (SBE) with hybridization to universal glass microarrays. We report 
here a new flow-through microarray for human β-globin gene mutation 
detection. This microarray has a porous surface and uses Al2O3 as 
a solid support, which allows not only diffusion-independent binding 
kinetics, but also monitoring of hybridization of the extended primers 
in real-time by repeated cycling of the sample through the array. The 
hybridization process is therefore fully reaction-rate limited and com -
pleted within a few minutes. The microarray is read by a dedicated 
instrument (PamStationTM), while data are analyzed using specialized 
software. The microarray is being developed to screen for both caus -
ative β-globin gene mutations leading to β-thalassemia and associ -
ated SNPs for haplotype analysis. For this reason, 20 different β-globin 
gene mutations and 15 SNPs located in the human β-globin locus can 
be currently addressed using this platform (Phase I) with the ultimate 
goal to expand the microarray’s capacity to screen for a total of 108 
causative mutations and 30 SNPs (Phase II). Taken together the low 
analysis costs (i.e. 50-70€ per patient), this platform might develop into 
an option for numerous potential applications from human molecular 
diagnostics to pre-implantation genetic diagnosis and non-invasive 
prenatal diagnosis of hemoglobinopathies.
P1274. Microarray analysis of bone metabolism genes in 
patients with osteoporosis
D. N. Ghorab1, M. V. Moskalenko1, A. S. Glotov2, E. S. Vashukova2, L. B. Po -
lushkina2, T. E. Ivaschenko2, M. V. Assev2, V. G. Pinelis3, V. S. Baranov2;  
1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s 
Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion, 3Scientific Center of Children Health RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation.
Osteoporosis is a complex desease with a strong genetic component. 
Various genes encoding bone associated proteins, cytokines and re -
ceptors, have been shown to contribute to genetic basis of the disease. 
For analysis following loci were selected: Col1a1 (-1997 G/T, 1245 G/
T), BGP (-198 C/T), IL-6 (-174 C/T), TNFα (-308 G/A), VDR (-3731 
A/G, 61968 C/T), ER (36627 C/T, 36673 A/G) and GR (N363S A/G). 
These loci feature significant genetic polymorphism, and are thought 
to be associated with genetic predisposition to osteoporosis. A genetic 
study of predisposition to the osteoporosis is believed to extend our 
knowledge about the disease and to determine the optimal terms for 
antiosteoporotic therapies.
We have started to introduce in practice a new molecular approach, 
developed with using of multiplex PCR followed by allele-specific hy -
bridization on biochip for SNPs detection. Amplified DNA with fluores -
cent labels was hybridized with oligonucleotide DNA probes immobi -
lized in gel pads on a biochip. The efficiency of the protocol was tested 
in our laboratory. The results showed 100% concordance between the 
biochip-based approach and the established PCR protocol.
The genotyping procedure, which is faster, reliable and can be used for 
rapid screening on the biochip is suggested for the analysis of genetic 
predisposition to multifactorial diseases, including osteoporosis.
P1275. A new method for separation and characterization of 
small RNA by On-Chip Electrophoresis
R. Salowsky1, C. Tissot1, M. Valer2, Y. Filaudeau3;  
1Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany, 2Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa 
Clara, CA, United States, 3Agilent Technologies, Nice, France.
MicroRNAs have just been recognized to play important roles in regu -
lation in the genomes of animals and plants. To understand and de -
scribe their functional roles many questions still have to be answered.
A major drawback for current experiments is the lack of adequate ana -
lytical methods for the analysis of small RNA samples and understand -
ing on how RNA integrity and different purification protocols affect its 
qualitative and quantitative analysis.
Here we describe a novel Microfluidic assay that is able to perform 
very sensitive high resolution analyses of small RNA samples on a 
commercial lab-on-a-chip platform commonly used for RNA QC analy -
sis. The assay delivers information about size and concentration of small RNA species like miRNA, siRNA, t-RNA etc, in the range from 
10 to 150nt. Purified or enriched small RNA fractions, as well as total 
RNA samples with miRNA concentrations down to 50 pg/µl can be 
analyzed.
Verification of quality and quantity of miRNA after extraction protocols 
is a major application for this Assay. Capability for separation and ef -
ficient detection of both single- and double strand nucleic acids widens 
the range for sensitive analysis with this On-Chip assay.
P1276. Functional assessment of DNA loop repair in human 
nuclear extracts
S. Jaroudi , J. C. Harper, S. B. SenGupta;  
University College London, London, United Kingdom.
Introduction:  Mismatch repair (MMR) corrects small base mismatches 
and insertion/deletion loops that arise within microsatellite repeats. 
Current repair assays predominantly rely on cloning techniques. We 
have designed an alternative functional assay for MMR.
Methods:  Heteroduplex DNA molecules containing an insertion loop 
were created by hybridisation of purified complementary single strands 
of DNA from PCR products of the DMPK1  trinucleotide repeat locus 
from separate homozygous samples. A nick was introduced 5’ to the 
heterology to direct the repair to a specific strand. Heteroduplex con -
structs were exposed to nuclear extracts from HeLa (MMR efficient) 
and LoVo ( MSH2  deficient) cells to repair the insertion loop. Using 
semi-quantitative fluorescence analysis, the ratio of fluorescence from 
the nicked strand and the complementary un-nicked strand could be 
determined (R-value). Repair efficiency was assessed by comparing 
R-values before and after exposure to nuclear extracts.
Results: Exposure of heteroduplexes to HeLa nuclear extracts result -
ed in change in the R-value, indicative of repair. Repair was indepen -
dent of loop size (2, 21 and 24-bases) and nick directed. Little or no 
repair was detected for 2-base loops in absence of a 5’-nick, however, 
for larger loops repair was nick independent. Change in the R-value 
was proportional to the duration of exposure to nuclear extracts. LoVo 
nuclear extracts showed little repair for large loops and no repair was 
detected for the 2-base loops.
Conclusion:  This construct is easily generated and modified to vary the 
size of the insertion loop. The same approach can be used to assess 
repair of base-base mismatches.
P1277. The mitochondrial DNA content per cell in human cord 
blood leukocytes gradually decreases during gestation
M. Pejznochova , M. Tesarova, T. Honzik, H. Hansikova, M. Magner, J. Zeman;  
Dept. of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic.
Most diseases in premature neonates are secondary to immaturity of 
various organ systems. In addition, the inadequate capacity of mito -
chondrial energy production may play an important role in the neonatal 
morbidity. Isolated human cord blood leukocytes (HCBL) contribute 
very little to the overall metabolic turnover, but they may serve as eas -
ily available marker cells for studying the changes of mtDNA amount 
during fetal development. Therefore the aim of our study was to ana -
lyze the amount of mitochondrial DNA in HCBL during the gestation.
HCBL were isolated from blood samples of 107 neonates born be -
tween 25th and 41st week of gestation. Blood samples were obtained 
after the delivery from placental part of umbilical cord. The mtDNA 
amount was analyzed by the real-time PCR method on the instrument 
Chromo4 (Bio-Rad) using SybrGreen I.
The significant negative correlations were found between the relative 
mtDNA amount in HCBL and gestational age (r = - 0,54; p < 0,01) and 
birth weight (r = - 0,43; p < 0,01), respectively.
The results revealed that the mtDNA content per cell decreases in 
HCBL with onward fetal development. This may be explained by grad -
ual shift of the hematopoiesis from fetal liver to bone marrow during the 
second half of pregnancy presumably accompanied by decreasing cell 
volume of HCBL as it was shown similarly in red blood cells.
This work was supported by grant GACR 303/03/H065.Genomics, technology, bioinformatics1
P1278. Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification 
(MLPA), a new assay for the molecular diagnosis of Duchenne 
and Becker muscular dystrophies
L. Adala1, M. Gribaa1, H. Elghezal1, J. Bouguila2, H. Ajina3, A. Saad1;  
1Cytogenetics, Molecular genetics and human Reproduction Biology labora -
tory Farhat HACHED Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Pediatric department Farhat 
HACHED Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Pediatric department Sahloul Hospital, 
Sousse, Tunisia.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is one of the most common and 
severe inherited neuromuscular diseases, affecting 1 in 3500 live born 
males.
Both of the DMD and BMD (Becker muscular dystrophy), a milder and 
less prevalent form of the disease, are X-linked recessive disorders 
caused by mutations of the dystrophin gene located at Xp21.
Mutation detection in the DMD gene defective in these diseases is a 
problematical trial complicated by the large size of the gene, which 
consists of 79 exons and 8 promoters spread over 2,2 Mb of genomic 
DNA. Hence, a molecular diagnosis should be proposed to the fami -
lies in order to detect the carrier women and to suggest an antenatal 
diagnosis.
On this aim, we developed a protocol which is based on the semi-
quantitative technique of diagnosis; the MLPA (Multiplex Ligation-de -
pendent Probe Amplification) and the linkage analysis by tripled prim -
ers PCR (Reaction of polymerization in chain). These 2 techniques al -
lowed us to study 13 cases including 7 clinically suspected DMD/BMD 
patients, 4 antenatal diagnoses and 2 girls suspected to be carrier.
The results showed that 5 of these cases have dystrophin’s anoma -
lies (38,4%); in four of them it is a deletion and only one is carrying 
duplication.
The maternal profile was studied in 9 cases. Three of them showed 
heterozygous deletions and only one, showed duplication.
This protocol allowed us the identification of homozygous and het -
erozygous deletions and duplications of dystrophin gene in only one 
step.
P1279. Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) 
- an interlaboratory collaborative validation study
T. Janssens , A. Corveleyn, F. Le Calvez, E. Dequeker, G. Matthijs;  
Center for Human Genetics, EuroGentest, Leuven, Belgium.
The EU Network of Excellence EuroGentest aims to improve and har -
monize the overall quality of genetic services throughout Europe. The 
thorough validation of new methods is one of many contributions to 
accomplish this, and Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification 
(MLPA) is the first technology to be validated in this context.
MLPA is a relatively new method to determine the copy number of 
nucleic acid sequences by hybridisation of specific MLPA probe pairs 
that bind to adjacent sites and are joined by a ligation reaction before 
PCR.
A plethora of popular MLPA kits for different genetic diseases are avail -
able from the manufacturer. But even if their performance was already 
established in different molecular diagnostic laboratories, so far no 
major nor interlaboratory collaborative programs have been under -
taken to fully validate MLPA.
Therefore, a validation study was set up, including 13 international 
diagnostic laboratories. Questionnaires were answered by the par -
ticipants to evaluate the variability concerning MLPA protocols and 
analysis tools, with the remarkable outcome that the majority had 
adapted the original protocol. Furthermore, the P002 BRCA1 MLPA kit 
(MRC-Holland) was used on 10 wildtype DNA samples and 3 deletion 
or duplication samples to evaluate the performance and the precision 
of the method itself. Finally, a data set of 89 MLPA files for DMD was 
analysed by different software tools for the evaluation of performance 
and internal quality control.
We will present an analytical and diagnostic validation report and a 
generic standard operating procedure (SOP), and propose guidelines 
for diagnostic laboratories to successfully implement MLPA.
P1280. MS-MLPA (Methylation Specific Multiplex Ligation-
dependent Probe Amplification) in the diagnosis of Angeman 
Syndrome
M. Gribaa1, S. Kacem1, H. Elghezal1, M. Yaacoub2, N. Gaddour3, A. Saad1;  
1Service de Cytogénétique et de Biologie de la Reproduction. Hôpital Farhat 
Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Service de Pédiatrie. Hôpital Farhat Hached, Sous -se, Tunisia, 3Service de Psychiatrie. Hôpital Fattouma Bourguiba, Monastir, 
Tunisia.
Angelman Syndrome (AS) is a complex neurobehavioral disorder as -
sociated with loss of function of differentially expressed imprinted gene 
at the region 15q11-q13. It is a rare disorder. It occurs in one of 20 
000 live births. It is due either to a microdeletion in the 15q11 locus 
(65-75%), or to uniparental disomy (5%), or to UBE3a gene mutations 
(10%), or to an anomaly of printing center (5%). In the 10% remainders 
cases, the cause still unknown.
The molecular study of the patients appear with a great importance 
with an aim of being able to conclude about the parental origin and, 
therefore, about the disease.
In this work, we developed an experimental protocol able to ensure 
the molecular detection of this pathology. It is based on the MS-MLPA 
technique (Methylation Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe 
Amplification), which is able to detect abnormal methylation of imprint -
ed genes as well as deletion occurring at 15q11-q13 locus. The study 
of STRs markers of chromosome 15 allowed us to distinguish between 
uniparental disomy and microdeletion when abnormal methylation was 
detected.
These two complementary techniques allowed us to study 8 suspected 
AS patients. Only one of them showed a deletion in the 15q11-q13 
region. This anomaly was confirmed with FISH (Fluorescent In Situ 
Hybridysation).
The combination of these two techniques, in the diagnosis of AS, 
represents a very good strategy to find more than 85% of causative 
anomalies. It can easily be used in the majority of laboratories because 
of its low price and simplicity.
P1281. Evidence for a degenerating X chromosome in the rodent 
species Ellobius lutescens
A. Süß1, J. Högel1, I. Bakloushinskaya2, W. Just1;  
1Inst. of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 2Koltzov Inst. of Developmental Biol -
ogy Russ. Acad. Sci, Moscow, Russian Federation.
The mole vole Ellobius lutescens is an exceptional mammal with an 
odd karyotype of 2n = 17,X with a single X chromosome in both sexes. 
We postulate that the single X of E. lutescens will degenerate in conse -
quence of its lacking partner for recombination. In analogy to the fate 
of the Y chromosome of male mammals we suggest an accumulation 
and fixation of non-deleterious mutations that will finally lead to the 
inactivation of X-chromosomal genes. This proceeding accumulation 
of mutations may cause the extinction of the species E. lutescens.
To test this hypothesis we compared sequences of essential ( Zfx, Atrx, 
Flna) and non-essential ( Opn1mw, Nr0b1, Xist, Mecp2 ) X-chromo -
somal genes to orthologous sequences of other mammals; as con -
trol for the mutation rate of recombining chromosomes we analysed 
regions of the autosomal genes Sfrs3 (essential) and App (non-es -
sential). We compared the ratio of accumulated mutations in essential 
versus non-essential X-chromosomal genes to the ratio of autosomal 
essential versus non-essential genes.
The results confirmed our hypothesis of a degenerating X chromo -
some. A comparison of the sequence conservation of the studied es -
sential X-chromosomal genes between E. lutescens and E. fuscocapil -
lus showed a highly significant accumulation of mutations in non-es -
sential X-chromosomal genes (p = 1.95 · 10-9) whereas the analysis of 
autosomal genes did not show significant accumulation of mutations (p 
= 0.73). So we expect a progressive decay of the single X chromosome 
and as a consequence the extinction of the species E. lutescens.
P1282. Identification of primate-specific non-coding RNAs at 
human chromosome 15q11.2
C. Cerrato Rivera1, M. Ogorelkova1, X. Estivill1,2;  
1Centre de Regulació Genòmica, Barcelona, Spain, 2Spanish Nacional Ge -
notyping Center, Barcelona, Spain.
Non-coding RNAs play important roles in many cellular processes 
rather than serving as templates for protein synthesis. Computational 
and experimental approaches have predicted thousands of ncRNAs in 
human genome, but most of them are yet unknown and only a small 
fraction have been partially characterised in terms of function or ex -
pression pattern. We observed that the chromosomal region 15q11.2 
share characteristics with other regions containing ncRNAs: repetitive 
elements in tandem, imprinted locus, and signals of instability. We 
have performed a computational analysis of the target one-megabase Genomics, technology, bioinformatics1
sequence searching for putative ncRNAs at this region. Among 86 
stable hairpin candidates, of 100 nucleotides and not overlapping with 
repeats, we selected 30 to check their expression by northern blot and 
primer extension and we identified 21 primate-specific new ncRNAs. 
Two correspond to new microRNAs and 19 to a new class and fam -
ily of ncRNAs. Computational analysis based on conservation of the 
secondary structure supports that 15 of them are real ncRNAs. Most 
predicted genes targeted by these two miRNAs were common to both, 
and 11% of the targets encode proteins that participate in the devel -
opment of the central nervous system, suggesting a role of 15q11.2 
miRNAs in neurological functions and disorders
P1283. High throughput genomics using Applied Biosystem’s 
SOLiD™ System
M. D. Rhodes,  G. Costa, J. Ichikawa, J. Malek, A. Sheridan, L. Apone, C. Hen -
drickson, H. Peckham, S. Ranade, J. Sorenson, K. McKernan, A. Blanchard;  
Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States.
Massively parallel sequencing systems are making genetic analysis 
cheaper and enabling experiments capable of answering increasingly 
complex biological questions. The SOLiD™ system, is a new platform 
using either fragment or mate paired libraries to generate >1-2 GB of 
data/run with >99.99% consensus accuracy. We will present a sum -
mary of the current chemistry of the SOLiD™ system together with 
data generated to demonstrate sequence quality and coverage of a 
number of increasingly complex targets, including bacteria, yeast, C. 
elegans  and mammals. The SOLiD™ chemistry and instrumentation 
can be readily adapted to a number of applications by modification of 
the ways in which the input nucleic acids are prepared and the output 
data is analyzed. Some of the applications under development with 
collaborators will be presented as well as data demonstrating the utility 
of the system
P1284. Next generation sequencing - Opportunities and 
constraints in pooling and quantitative sequencing
F. M. De La Vega1, F. C. L. Hyland1, J. Sorenson1, E. Cuppen2, K. McKernan3;  
1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Hubretch Lab, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands, 3Applied Biosystems, Beverly, MA, United States.
Next generation sequencing promises to address a range of applica -
tions including: identification of somatic mutation profiles, gene ex -
pression by tag counting, and measurement of allele frequencies in 
pooled samples of cases and controls in association studies. We de -
veloped a model to simulate digital sequencing with pooled samples, 
in the presence of error. We discover that for pooling and quantitative 
sequencing, the number of samples that can be pooled and the minor 
allele frequency of variants that can be detected is critically dependant 
on the threshold for SNP calling, which in turn is strongly influenced by 
the measurement error rate. As next generation sequencing platforms 
typically produce short reads (25-35bp), coverage needs to increase 
over 20x to compensate. Increasing the coverage improves the esti -
mate of the error rate, but cannot overcome problems with detecting 
very low frequency variants with large numbers of pooled samples. We 
validated this model through empirical sequencing by oligonucleotide 
ligation and detection (Applied Biosystems SOLiD(TM) system) of 81 
PCR amplicons from exons of EMS-mutagenized C. elegans worms 
encompassing ca. 25kb of sequence with over 1500x coverage. Am -
plicons were pooled down to a 1:100 ratio (1:200 ratio for alleles). The 
results were compared with di-deoxy sequencing data carried out in -
dependently. Our results suggest that even if coverage needs to in -
crease significantly when using short reads as compared with di-deoxy 
sequencing, low platform error rate is the most critical factor for detect -
ing allele variants in pooled samples or mixtures by next generation 
sequencing platforms.
P1285. Measuring the quality of computer tools used in 
diagnostic genetic testing
A. Devereau1,2, N. Walker2;  
1National Genetics Reference Laboratory, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Uni-
versity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
As part of the EuroGentest project (www.eurogentest.org) we investi -
gated quality measurement of computer tools used within diagnostic 
laboratories. A literature survey highlighted the need to provide specific 
information, such as what the tool does, who it is for, etc.; information 
about data used by the tool; information about tool operation; and in -formation on its performance, such as sensitivity and specificity, or the 
completeness of its data coverage. A survey of laboratories found that 
most tools used are either for particular pieces of equipment or are da -
tabases. It also showed that quality assessment is often missing or un -
structured. Furthermore, there is no trustworthy source to validate the 
quality of the clinically most critical features of the tools. We propose 
that tools can be categorised according to their purpose, with a spe -
cific list of features developed for each category. Assessment of per -
formance requires standardised tests for parameters specific to each 
tool category. Expert groups for each tool type are needed to propose 
and review the features and performance measures. One important 
category of tool that we found in laboratories was sequence analysis 
tools. We have used previous work to propose a list of specific features 
and performance measures for these tools. We have investigated pre -
sentation of this data using a ‘wiki’, i.e. a web site editable by its users. 
This allows groups of experts to be formed for the particular tool cat -
egory and to collaboratively enter and review data about the tool.
P1286. In search of tissue specific regulators in periodontium - a 
bioinformatic approach.
A. M. Lichanska , N. Pham;  
School of Dentistry, Brisbane, Australia.
Tissue specific gene expression can be regulated by tissue specific 
promoters, enhancers, silencers, transcription factors, differential 
methylation, tissue specific alternative splicing, as well as other tran -
scriptional and post-transcriptional factors. The methods used for 
studying the regulatory elements are multiple, however, they are most -
ly useful in cases where some information about the promoters active 
in a given tissue is available.
While the tooth development is well described, the regulation of gene 
expression in the tissues maturing after the tooth development is 
complete is unclear. Periodontal ligament tissue (PDL) is essential for 
structural support of the teeth (attaches root to the bone). The under -
standing of what makes it so special is essential for the development 
of regenerative treatments of this tissue.
Expression profiling data of the primary cell cultures of periodontal 
ligament tissue and outer gum tissue (gingiva) was performed using 
Affymetrix HU133A arrays. The analysis has identified 333 genes dif -
ferentially regulated in these tissues. This set of genes was then sub -
jected to promoter analysis to identify the CpG islands and promoter 
binding sites. We have used a number of tools, such as Promoter-Ex -
press, TRES, TFSEARCH, PAINT, CpGProD, CpG islands searcher, 
Methylator and MethCGI to generate an overview of the promoters of 
the differentially regulated genes. As a result we identified signature 
promoter features of these differentially expressed genes.
Currently, we are analyzing the role of the differential methylation be -
tween the two tissues and the role of some selected transcription fac -
tors identified in this screen.
P1287. Direct Sequencing Quality Control: a Novel Software 
Approach to Reducing Variant Review Time and Labor
S. Jankowski , E. Vennemeyer, K. Hunkapiller, P. Shah;  
Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States.
With the completion of the Human Genome Project, the shift from de 
novo sequencing to direct sequencing (resequencing) has created the 
need for more accurate variant detection for medical research and clin -
ical diagnostics. The bottleneck in the workflow (from DNA extraction 
to result data analysis) has been cited as taking up to 70% of research -
er’s time per project, due to manual review of individual nucleotide 
bases. This review has been required due to the necessity of having 
confidence in the variant result.
Increasing confidence can come from applying diligent quality control 
metrics, including use of Quality Values for DNA trace value and confi -
dence values for variant validity. Based on Applied Biosystems experi -
ence, this system will filter out low quality data. The software will then 
direct users to review only low confidence variants.
A flexible workflow based system is being built to enable researchers 
to obtain their high confidence results in less time. Methods for filter -
ing low quality data based on optimal settings and quality visualiza -
tion tools will be integrated into the system along with simpler variant 
review and reporting tools to allow researchers to quickly analyze their 
data.Genomics, technology, bioinformatics20
P1288. RNA Integrity database: A web repository for RNA 
isolations
M. Valer1, M. Kim1, C. Caruso1, H. Brunnert2, M. Greiner2, R. Salowsky2;  
1Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA, United States, 2Agilent Technolo -
gies, Waldbronn, Germany.
Lab-on-a-Chip devices are broadly used for RNA integrity analysis on 
gene expression analysis. This creates the need and opportunity for 
users to screen and validate RNA traces for relevance and trouble -
shooting. Here we describe the design of the backbone as well as 
examples of use for a new RNA profile web database. The database 
aims to host a large variety of sample types spanning different ge -
nus, tissues and sample treatments, although the database is initially 
limited to contain bioanalyzer traces. Each electropherogram is an -
notated with sample source details as well as analytical data like UV, 
Ribosomal ratios, RIN and more. They also include details on the RNA 
extraction and the downstream experiment.
By design the database is open to the scientific community: free query -
ing and curated contributions for individuals as well as large batch up -
loads from core labs. Individuals are able to compare their own results 
with those of others with similar samples and protocols. Advanced fil -
tering also allows comparison of alternative RNA isolation methods 
based on its resulting electrophoretic traces or other criteria.
P1289. Easily obtain high quality RNA from human blood 
samples for gene expression analysis: Tempus™ blood RNA 
tubes and RNA isolation systems
J. Yen1, L. Montesclaros1, M. Goldrick2, J. Gonzales2, N. Harris2, A. Lemire2, P. 
Whitley2;  
1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Ambion, Austin, TX, 
United States.
When blood is drawn into standard evacuated collection tubes, the 
expression profile of gene targets can continue to change. Applied Bio -
systems has designed Tempus™ Blood RNA Tubes for the collection 
of human whole blood samples and the stabilization of RNA expres -
sion profile. After the sample collections, researchers can then choose 
from two streamlined protocols to isolate RNA. Recent real-time PCR 
and microarray data using the RNA isolated from the Tempus™ Blood 
RNA Tubes and the Tempus™ Blood RNA Isolation Kits have shown 
the gene expression profile is stable for up to five days when the tubes 
are situated at room temperature or for up to seven days at 4°C.
P1290. A rapid and sensitive method for RNA quality 
determination on capillary electrophoresis systems.
A. B. Shah1, S. Karudapuram1, L. K. Joe1, J. Hauser1, A. T. Huynh1, S. Pothini1, 
S. Samsani1, S. Ramachandra1, E. S. Vennemeyer1, J. Briggs1, H. M. Wenz1, C. 
A. Waldron1, C. Carver2, S. Bass2, P. Baumgartner2;  
1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Gene Logic, Inc., Gaith -
ersburg, MD, United States.
RNA quality is directly correlated to the success of various applica -
tions, such as microarray or real time qPCR-based gene expression 
analyses, cDNA library construction, Northern analyses, and RNAse 
protection assays, which utilize RNA samples from various organisms, 
tissues, cell lines, and precious biological samples. We present a novel 
method for examining RNA integrity and purity using capillary electro -
phoresis that is more cost-effective and scalable than current standard 
methods. This highly sensitive method uses less material, uncovers 
impurities following RNA purification, and detects degradation result -
ing from nuclease contamination. Total RNA and cRNA, derived from 
various tissues and cell lines, were stained with the dye YOYO-1 and 
run through a custom polymer formulation on a capillary electrophore -
sis platform. Using downstream analysis software, we resolved RNA 
species and their relative quality based on parameters such as size, 
profile, peak area, and peak height. Our results highlight the potential 
for high-throughput capillary electrophoresis as a much more discrimi -
natory and cost-saving method in evaluating RNA quality.
P1291. Collection, storage and processing of clinical samples 
for molecular analysis.
M. A. Harvey , B. O. Parker;  
Whatman Inc, Sanford, ME, United States.
The collection and preparation of clinical samples for molecular analy -
sis is important for expanding applications in genetic identification, drug 
discovery, predictive medicine and pharmacogenomics. To simplify sample processing we have developed two chemically treated devices 
which are useful for dried clinical sample collection, sample archiving 
and, most importantly, DNA preparation for amplification. Nucleic acid 
preparation from samples collected on a treated matrix is simple, rapid 
and automatable. Blood and buccal cell samples collected on FTA®, 
a surfactant modified matrix, and FTA® Elute, a chaotropic salt modi -
fied matrix, can be stored for over 10 years under ambient conditions 
as demonstrated by STR analysis. We have demonstrated the use of 
DNA from these samples for genetic identification, real time PCR, DNA 
sequencing, and allele specific hybridization methods.
Increasing demand for nucleic acids from archived samples dictates 
that systems and devices should be able to support whole genomic 
amplification. We have examined the recovery of DNA from samples 
archived on treated matrices and evaluated its’ suitability for whole 
genomic amplification. We have also measured the inter-sample vari -
ability and correlated this with nucleated cell counts, hematocrit and 
sample age. It is clear that blood and buccal samples dried on chemi -
cally modified matrices are stable and provide an excellent source of 
nucleic acids for future studies.
P1292. Computational prediction of SNPs of schizophrenia 
candidate genes that interfere with normal function of ESE
M. Behmanesh , S. Shariati, E. Aslankoohi;  
Department of Genetics, School of Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University,, Teh -
ran, P.O.Box 14115-175, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Despite the ability of genetic association studies in assigning schizo -
phrenia susceptibility genes, results have been quite spurious. SNPs 
(single nucleotide polymorphisms) are the most common genetic vari -
ation in schizophrenia association studies. Most of these variations are 
located in noncoding part of genome, previously thought to have no 
particular function. In recent years regulatory function of these SNPs 
has attracted much attention. SNPs which are located on regulatory 
elements might interfere with mechanisms that regulate gene expres -
sion such as splicing. Exonic Splicing Enhancers (ESEs) are one of 
the most important splicing regulatory elements which can stimulate 
splicing and seem to be particularly relevant for regulating alternative 
splicing. ESEs appear to be very prevalent and may be present in most 
exons, if not all. We have computationally analyzed SNPs of 16 can -
didate genes for schizophrenia, to find whether they interfere with the 
normal function of ESE. In total, 9335 SNPs were analyzed by S/R rich 
protein binding site prediction algorithm. 1.12% of SNPs can poten -
tially interfere with ESE function. These SNPs might have regulatory 
function thus are interesting candidates for schizophrenia association 
study. Following table shows the results of this study.
Number of SNPs after
Genetic FootprintingNumber of SNPs
Located at ESEAll analyzed SNPs Analyzes Genes
18 19 257 COMT
0 5 363 DTNBP1
2 9 638 NRG1
5 5 29 RGS4
2 2 559 GRM3
0 8 1367 DISC1
0 1 120 DAOA
2 2 87 DAAO
5 5 283 PPP3CC
11 11 287 PRODH2
8 8 125 Akt1
2 3 296 MUTED
3 4 597 MRDS1
6 6 3923 ERBB4
15 15 173 GAD1
3 3 231 FEZ1
82 106 9335 Sum
P1293. Low Volume Dispensing for DNA Sequencing at the 
Ernest Gallo Clinic and Research Center, University of California 
San Francisco
A. M. Gallagher1, D. Donnelly1, M. Robertson2, R. Chui3;  
1Deerac Fluidics, Dublin, Ireland, 2Ernest Gallo Clinic and Reserach Center, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, United States, 3Ernest Gallo Clinic 
and Research Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA, United 
States.
The Ernest Gallo Clinic & Research Center (EGCRC), a part of the 
Neurology Department of the University of California San Francisco 
(UCSF), studies basic neuroscience and the effects of alcohol on the 
brain. The Genome Center at the EGCRC is involved in a large re-Genomics, technology, bioinformatics21
sequencing project that consists of sequencing candidate genes for 
alcoholism from a set of approximately 1000 people, identifying rare 
variants of interest and tracking those variants through extended fami -
lies. The genomics facility produces about one million sequences per 
year utilizing two 3730xl instruments, (Applied Biosystems, Foster City 
CA), two Biomek FX robots and one Equator GX8 (Deerac Fluidics).
Miniaturization of sequencing reactions was undertaken to save in re -
agent costs by reducing volumes and to save in consumables by re -
moving the need for expensive disposable tips. The genome sequenc -
ing community uses quality metrics based on PHRED scores with 
20 being the base line for regular sequencing. In the Gallo genome 
core, heterozygous variant detection especially for very rare variants 
requires that sequences must yield a PHRED score of 30 before pro -
ceeding to analysis. It was essential to keep these quality metrics while 
at the same time reducing volume.
Here, the miniaturization process is described, along with the integra -
tion of the Equator GX8 into the sequencing pipeline resulting in a high 
level of data integrity and a significant reduction in operating costs.
P1294. Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) analysis in XX 
and XY sex reversal
G. Queipo1,2, N. Najera1,2, L. Zepeda1, J. Berumen1,2, S. Kofmanm3;  
1Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico, 2Facultad de Medicina 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico, 3Hospital 
General de Mexico-Facultad de Medicina Universidad Nacional Autónoma de 
México, Mexico City, Mexico.
Introduction: The sex determining genes SRY and SOX9  are required 
to initiate/maintain testicular development. However, the genetic inter -
actions controlling the earliest steps in gonadal development remain 
poorly understood. Molecular abnormalities underlying a high pro -
portion of human XY gonadal dysgenesis, XX maleness and XX true 
hermaphroditism remain undiscovered. The use of high density SNP 
array in sex reversal patients could be useful to characterize the etiol -
ogy of the abnormal gonadal development and provide new molecular 
insights into the normal regulatory network in the testis and ovary de -
velopment.
Aim: Evaluate gene dosage effect in 8 XY females and 8 SRY-negative 
XX males using a Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) chip.
Methods: Affimetrix 500,000 SNP array for screening over 80% of the 
genome within 10Kb of a SNP and a median inter-marker distance of 
3.3 Kb was used.
Results: Seven XY patients have been studied. The hybridization con -
ditions were optimal obtaining a call rate around 95%, data analysis 
was performed with Affymetrix gene chip software. We finished the 
analysis in 3 XY females, showing the presence of duplicated and 
deleted SNPs in all the cases. We found 3 shared regions in all the 
cases, in chromosome 2 and 14, where two and one possible candi -
date genes were present. In the meeting we will present the analysis 
of the rest of XY population and the preliminary results in XX-SRY 
negative males.
Conclusions: These results suggest that gene dosage participates in 
gonadal development, where threshold levels of expression control 
entry into the male or female pathway.
P1295. Splicing Sequences Finder: a bioinformatics resource to 
identify sequences involved in splicing
C. Béroud1,2, D. Hamroun1,2, S. Tuffery-Giraud1,3, O. Leroy1,3, G. Collod-
Béroud1,3, M. Claustres1,2;  
1INSERM, U 827, Montpellier, F-34000, France, 2CHU Montpellier, Hôpital Arn -
aud de Villeneuve, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, F-34000, 
France, 3Université Montpellier1, UFR Médecine, Montpellier, F-34000, France.
Today thousands of intronic or exonic variations potentially resulting 
in splicing defects are identified yearly in molecular diagnostic labo -
ratories. To assess the pathogenicity of these mutations, we develop 
the Splicing Sequences Finder (SSF) tool (http://www.umd.be/SSF), 
which allows the identification of the various splicing elements from a 
crude sequence. These elements include:
- The impact on the well-characterized acceptor and donor splice sites 
motifs.
- The identification of branch point sequences (BP) whose key role in 
splicing can also explain the pathogenicity of some intronic mutations.
- The ESE and ESS (exonic splicing enhancer or silencer), ISE and 
ISS (intronic splicing enhancer or silencer), which are now recognized as targets for exonic missense or even nonsense mutations.
The identification of these last motifs was mainly based on bioinfor -
matics and functional analyses. Therefore, many matrices are today 
available to predict these auxiliary-splicing sequences and to evaluate 
the pathogenic impact of mutations.
We designed the SSF software as a single resource that includes the 
various bioinformatics algorithms necessary for an exhaustive evalu -
ation of the various splicing elements. We also developed a new al -
gorithm to identify BP sequences. It was confronted to all mutations 
known to involve a BP sequence and was found reliable in all cases.
The SSF tool could give valuable information for molecular diagnostic 
laboratories to evaluate the pathogenicity of a mutation. It can also 
be used to identify potential targets for antisens oligonucleotides to 
silence ESE or BP and therefore lead to exon skipping.
P1296. Interactome of the Sushi-Repeat protein SRPX2 that 
causes brain disorders of the speech areas
B. Royer1, P. Roll1, G. Rudolf2, C. Leveque3, D. C. Soares4, I. E. Scheffer5, R. 
Vincentelli6, N. Roeckel-Trevisiol1, H. Gara1, A. Massacrier1, A. Robaglia-Sch -
lupp1, P. N. Barlow4, P. Pontarotti7, E. Hirsch2, C. Cambillau6, S. F. Berkovic8, M. 
Lathrop9, P. Cau1, P. Szepetowski1;  
1Inserm UMR491, Marseille, France, 2Departement de Neurologie, Stras -
bourg, France, 3Inserm UMR641, Marseille, France, 4Biomolecular NMR Unit, 
Edimburgh, United Kingdom, 5Department of medicine, Melbourne, Australia, 
6AFMB-UMR CNRS 6098, Marseille, France, 7EA3781, Universite de Provence, 
Marseille, France, 8Department of Medicine, Melbourne, Australia, 9Centre 
National de Genotypage, Evry, France.
The rolandic and perisylvian brain areas are responsible for speech 
production and association of rolandic epilepsy (RE) with oral and 
speech dyspraxia (OSD) is well known.
We have identified the first gene, SRPX2 (Sushi Repeat Protein, X-
linked 2) that is mutated either in RE with OSD, or in RE with bilat -
eral perisylvian polymicrogyria*. More recently, evolutionary study on 
SRPX2 identified only one human-specific mutation (p.R75K) that has 
appeared since the human-chimpanzee split. Three-dimensional mod -
eling of the first SRPX2 sushi domain located K75 in the same critical 
loop as where the pathogenic mutation p.Y72S has also occurred.
Sushi domains have been shown to sustain protein-protein interac -
tions and are frequently found in complement control proteins and in 
the selectin family of adhesion proteins. However, the actual function of 
SRPX2 remains unknown. We have undertaken a systematic SRPX2-
interactome strategy in order to understand the role(s) of SRPX2 
through the protein(s) it interacts with, and to identify novel candidate 
genes. The actual interactions of SRPX2 with its 18 putative partners 
as identified by yeast two-hybrid experiments, is currently being as -
sessed using in-cell co-transfection followed by co-immunoprecipita -
tion experiments, and on-chip (BIAcore) experiments. A first SRPX2 
interactor has now been firmly identified, providing exciting insights on 
the possible molecular mechanisms driven by SRPX2.
Generally, SRPX2 represents a first key point towards the identifica -
tion of molecular pathways associated with the functioning and the 
development of the brain speech areas, in both pathological and physi -
ological conditions.
*Roll et al., Hum. Mol. Genet. 2006
P1297. GENIUS: A New Universal Stripassay Analyzer Software
H. Onay1, B. Onay2, C. Oksuz2, E. Uslu2, A. Ekmekci1, E. Karaca1, F. Ozkinay1;  
1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, 
Turkey, 2IDEA Teknoloji Cozumleri Company, Istanbul, Turkey.
Molecular genetic diagnostic applications have been widely used 
worldwide. Reverse hybridization based stripassays helped dissemi -
nation of these applications. Evaluation of the stripassays is a subjec -
tive process and reporting of the results is not easy unless there is a 
medical genetic specialist who can interpret the results. An automated 
system which can scan, evaluate and archive stripassays and give a 
standardized report is essential for accurate reporting.
There was not an automation system in the market for different type 
of stripassays produced by different vendors. GENIUS was developed 
to automate analysis, comment and reporting steps of the stripassay 
usage. Today GENIUS can analyze over 20 different stripassays from 
different vendors. Some of these tests are CVD (Cardio Vascular Dis -
eases Susceptibility), Cystic Fibrosis, FMF (Familial Mediterranean 
Fever), Thalassemia, Haemochromatosis, Gaucher, etc.Genomics, technology, bioinformatics22
Application has a very strong image processing mechanism and flex -
ible database architecture. Medical staff puts tests into scanner and 
GENIUS gets image from device. Then application checks the test 
type. After the identification of test, it searches mutation areas and 
other critical check points on the stripassay. By using analysis results, 
GENIUS refers to database and generates comments about the re -
sults. Adding a new test to system takes approximately 2-4 hours de -
pending on the number of mutations on the stripassay. So it is very 
easy to adapt GENIUS for different markets which use different stri -
passays.
Oracle 10g is the database of the GENIUS. Addition to this Oracle BI 
EE is being used for analytic reporting.
P1298. Comparison of two fluorescent dsDNA binding dyes 
SYBR Green I and EvaGreen for Melting Curve Analysis
J. Radvansky1, G. Minarik1, A. Ficek1,2, P. Resko1, L. Kadasi1,2;  
1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2SAS, 
Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Bratislava, Slovakia.
One of the basic detection systems for real-time PCR is based on ds -
DNA binding fluorescent dyes, from which SYBR Green I is the best 
known. However, the SYBR Green I is not the only dye for these appli -
cations. Because of their unique feature (enhanced fluorescence when 
bound to the dsDNA) SLDs (SYBR Green Like Dyes) are frequently 
used in detection of specific PCR products by melting curve analy -
sis (MCA). Recently, a new fluorescent dye EvaGreen has appeared 
which shows (by the manufacturer’s information) better properties for 
real-time PCR than SYBR Green I. To investigate the more appropriate 
dye for our MCA applications we decided to compare some properties 
of these two dyes such as photostability, detection limit with diverse 
range of dye concentration and PCR product concentration and some 
parameters of the final peak in MCA. Since the molar concentration 
of each dye is different in the 1x working solution our measurements 
were done by the basic working concentrations and by equal molar 
concentrations too. We also compared the accuracy of the Tm values 
obtained from a larger set of each sample. In our study we used 4 
PCR products (for the detection of the 35delG, W24X, R127H mu -
tations and a polymorphism GJB2-SNP1 in GJB2 gene). According 
to our findings EvaGreen has better properties (the peaks obtained 
from MCA by EvaGreen are generally higher and sharper and the Tm 
values are more accurate) however it shows lower photostability than 
SYBR Green I. Detailed results will be presented on our poster.
P1299. Association study of therapeutic response and SERT, 
MDR1 and 5-HT2c gene polymorphisms in female schizophrenic 
patients
N. Bozina1, J. Sertic1, V. Medved2, M. Rojnic Kuzman2, L. Hotujac2;  
1Center for Functional Genomics and Clinical Institute of Laboratory Diagnosis, 
Zagreb University Hospital Center, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Department of Psychiatry, 
Zagreb University Hospital Center, Zagreb, Croatia.
Interindividual differences in treatment response to second generation 
antipsychotics point out that genetic factor may be relevant. The aim 
of this study was to investigate the relationships between variants of 
serotonin transporter gene (SERTPR and SERTin2), serotonine re -
ceptor (5-HT2c-759C/T) and multidrug resistant gene (MDR1-2667G/
T, 3435C/T), and initial symptomatology and treatment response in 
106 female schizophrenic patients treated with olanzapine for up to 
3 months. Afterwards, we compared allele, genotype and haplotype 
distributions between those patients and 108 control female subjects.
Methods: Genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP, and real-time 
PCR methods. To assess and evaluate therapeutic response, all pa -
tients were rated using PANSS. Overall, the presence of SERTPR-S 
allelic variant and SS genotype was associated with significantly more 
weight gain in subjects who were non-obese at the time of admission 
(p= 0.02). The presence of SERTPR-L variant was associated with sig -
nificantly better treatment response measured with total PANSS and 
general PANSS subscale (p<0.04), while the presence of SERTin2-l 
variant determined better treatment response only in several items. 
We found significant associations with lower initial PANSS, and MDR1-
2667G/T genotype. 2677T allele and TT genotype were associated 
with significantly worse treatment response. Also overrepresentation 
of G2677/3435T haplotype in schizophrenic female patients compared 
to controls was significant (p=0.025). Test result for linkage disequi -
librium between two MDR1 loci was found to be significant. These findings identify genetic factors associated with olanzapine- treatment 
response in female schizophrenic patients.
P1300. Gene expression signature in peripheral blood detects 
thoracic aortic aneurysm
Y. Wang1, C. Barbacioru1, F. Chan1, J. Blake1, D. Schiffman2, O. Iakoubova2, S. 
Balasubramanian3, K. Poulter1, M. Tranquilli4, G. Albornoz4, J. Elefteriades4, R. 
Samaha1;  
1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Celera Diagnostics, Al -
ameda, CA, United States, 3Pharmacyclics, Inc, Sunnyvale, CA, United States, 
4Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States.
Thoracic aortic aneurysm (TAA) is usually asymptomatic and associat -
ed with high mortality. Adverse clinical outcome of TAA is preventable 
by elective surgical repair; however, identifying at-risk individuals is 
difficult. We hypothesized that gene expression patterns in peripheral 
blood cells may correlate with TAA disease status.
Gene expression profiles of peripheral blood samples collected from 
58 individuals diagnosed with TAA and 36 normal individuals (controls) 
were analyzed in this study. Significance Analysis of Microarray (SAM) 
analysis identified potential signature genes characterizing TAA vs. 
normal, ascending vs. descending TAA, as well as sporadic vs. familial 
TAA. A 41-gene classification model for detecting TAA was constructed 
using a training set containing 36 TAA patients and 25 controls. Testing 
this classification model on an independent testing set containing 22 
TAA samples and 11 controls yielded an overall classification accuracy 
of 78%. These 41 classifier genes were further validated by TaqMan® 
real-time PCR assays. Classification on the 30 testing samples based 
on the TaqMan data resulted in similar classification accuracy (80%) 
as that from microarray data.
This study generated a distinct molecular signature in peripheral blood 
cells that can detect TAA patients from normal individuals. Validated 
by TaqMan® real-time PCR assays, the classifier genes identified in 
this study define a set of promising potential diagnostic markers, set -
ting the stage for a blood-based gene expression test to facilitate early 
detection of TAA disease.
P1301. Universal array-based multiplexed test for polymorphism 
detection of genes associated with inherited thrombophilia
E. S. Vashukova1, A. S. Glotov1, T. V. Nasedkina2, T. E. Ivaschenko1, M. S. 
Zainulina1, V. S. Baranov1;  
1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Rus -
sian Federation, 2Engelgardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian 
Federation.
Thrombophilia refers to disorders, which are associated with a persis -
tent hypercoagulable state and a tendency towards thrombosis. They 
may be inherited, acquired or complex, when genetic factors interact 
with environmental influences. Besides acquired risk factors, such as 
hyperhomocysteinemia and high levels of factor VIII, there are single 
nucleotide polymorphisms in the prothrombin (20210G> A), MTHFR  
(677C> T), factor V Leiden (1691FVG> A), PAI-1 ( 5G> 4G), GPIIIA 
(196C> T), fibrinogene (455G> A) genes which result in hereditary 
thrombophilia. We have developed the fast and easily adapted meth -
od of detection mutations associated with thrombophilia, suitable for 
technological process at any standart molecular diagnostic laboratory. 
This convenient and reliable detection of mutations is based on mul -
tiplex PCR with subsequent hybridization on the biochip. Use of this 
technique open new opportunities for carrying out large-scale popula -
tion researches of genetic predisposition to thrombophilia. The practi -
cal recommendations have been developed for the choice of therapy 
strategy in case of investigated mutations detection.
P1302. A homogeneous high-throughput assay for the primary 
screening of type 1 diabetes related HLA-DQB1 alleles
M. Kiviniemi1, J. Nurmi2, J. Ilonen1,3, T. Lövgren4;  
1Immunogenetics Laboratory, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Abacus Di -
agnostica Oy, Turku, Finland, 3Department of Clinical Microbiology, University 
of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland, 4Department of Biotechnology, University of Turku, 
Turku, Finland.
We have developed a homogeneous genotyping system allowing 
simple, low-cost and rapid genotyping of thousands of samples. The 
method utilizing an asymmetric PCR and subsequent hybridization of 
allele specific probes with LNA additions for the genotyping of HLA-
DQB1 alleles *02, *0302 and *05/6 can be used as the primary screen -Genomics, technology, bioinformatics2
ing step in large-scale projects where subjects at high genetic risk for 
development of type 1 diabetes are identified. The method was vali -
dated by typing a set of 50 known samples. To promote simplicity in 
handling and storage the sample material of choice was blood dried on 
sample collection cards.
The developed homogeneous assay platform allows the typing of hun -
dreds of samples within one working day; an assay can be run in ap -
proximately 4 hours with sample number limited only by the number of 
thermal cyclers available. The homogeneous assay gave correct ge -
notyping result for 100 % of the samples used to validate the method. 
The costs of the assay are minimal and the reductions in hands-on 
time provide considerable improvements compared to the heteroge -
neous genotyping methods comprising of separate PCR and hybrid -
ization steps.
The presented assay system provides a functional approach to the 
rapid screening of thousands of samples at low cost, a general starting 
point for large scale screening studies.
P1303. The chromatin state of ultraconserved non-coding 
elements
U. Choudhury1, F. Parisi2, F. Naef2, S. E. Antonarakis1;  
1University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Ecole Polytech -
nique Federale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Vertebrate comparative genomics has proven to be an effective ap -
proach for uncovering functional elements in the human genome. Ul -
traconserved elements (UCEs) show extreme conservation in mam -
mals and are defined by a perfect sequence identity between human, 
mouse and rat over at least 200 bp. Most UCEs map in the vicinity of 
genes that are key regulators of vertebrate development. A number of 
UCEs have been reported to possess enhancer activity and they are 
thought to be involved in the regulation these genes.
To further uncover the functions and mechanisms of action of UCEs 
we assessed their chromatin state in various human cell types (lym -
phoblastoid, fetal lung and neuroblastoid). We performed ChIP-on-
chip experiments using antibodies against histone H3 modifications 
that mark active (K4-dimethyl,trimethyl) or repressed chromatin con -
formations (K27-trimethyl and K9-dimethyl). Custom tiling microarrays 
were designed to contain the sequences of 287 non-coding UCEs, as 
well as the 5’ regions of the nearby genes.
Preliminary results show that ~20% of the UCE regions are strongly enriched for K4-dimethyl modification, out of which half are also en -
riched for K4-trimethyl. Many of these enrichments are present in all 
cell types, suggesting these modifications could be constitutive. These 
enrichments appear to be specific to UCE regions as they were not 
found in control regions. A very limited number of UCEs show a re -
pressed chromatin conformation. Our results provide a framework for 
further understanding the potential functions of UCEs in the regulation 
of developmentally essential genes.
P1304. Analysis of USF1 and USF2 by chromatin 
immunoprecipitation and whole genome tiling arrays identifies 
candidate genes for familial combined hyperlipidemia
C. Wadelius1, A. Rada-Iglesias1, A. Ameur2, P. Kapranov3, S. Enroth2, J. Ko -
morowski2, T. R. Gingeras3;  
1Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Linnaeus Centre for Bioinformatics, 
Uppsala, Sweden, 3Affymetrix Inc, Santa Clara, CA, United States.
USF1 is a transcription factor associated with familial combined hy -
perlipidemia (FCHL) and it binds as a heterodimer with USF2. Binding 
sites for USF1, USF2 and regions of histone H3 acetylation (H3ac) 
were mapped across the whole genome in HepG2 cells using ChIP 
and tiling arrays. Regions with signal significantly higher than negative 
controls were identified and subsequent Q-PCR in 48 such regions 
showed <1% false positives for each factor. Regions bound by USF1, 
USF2 and H3ac were characterized against a range of annotated 
genomic features. H3ac signal was found at 10.900 regions, 50% of 
them <1kb from transcription start sites (TSS) of protein coding genes 
(PCG). The footprint of this signal showed a bimodal pattern with a ma -
jor peak downstream of TSS at +600-800bp and a smaller peak sym -
metrically located upstream of the TSS. The ChIP-chip signals were 
compared to the expression pattern of 18 000 genes and the height of 
the downstream peak was positively correlated with gene expression. 
USF1 and USF2 preferentially bound -300 to -100bp i.e. upstream of 
TSS of PCG. In bidirectional promoters USF1 and USF2 bind between 
the two TSS and the peak of H3ac is downstream of each TSS. USF1 
and USF2 signal was found in promoters of over 1000 genes. Genes 
with promoters bound by USFs were analyzed using gene ontology 
classification and three biological pathways were identified that con -
tained genes that are excellent candidates for FCHL.Genomics, technology, bioinformatics2
Po09. Genetic counselling, education, 
genetic services, and public policy
P1305. EuroGentest Survey and Database of Quality Assurance 
in European genetic laboratories
N. Nagels1,2, A. Corveleyn1,2, L. Desmet1,2, C. Gaudebout1,3, B. Urbero1,3, S. 
Aymé1,3, E. Dequeker1,2, M. A. Morris1,4;  
1EuroGentest, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department for Human Genetics, University 
of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Orphanet, Paris, France, 4Molecular Diagnostic 
Laboratory, Service of Genetic Medicine, Geneva University Hospital, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
Although a number of public websites provide lists of medical genetic 
testing laboratories and of available, reliable public information about 
Quality Assurance (QAu) is sparse or even intentionally absent. To 
remedy this, EuroGentest has performed a long-term survey of QAu in 
European genetics laboratories, in collaboration with Orphanet. Over 
1000 laboratories in Europe offering some form of genetic testing were 
identified and received an online survey, and approximately 350 labs 
have replied to date, from 32 countries.
To ensure the highest possible quality of the data, which might vary 
according to the identity of the respondent in a laboratory, replies were 
peer-reviewed and validated by comparison with EQA providers and 
accreditation bodies, prior to dissemination via the European QAu da -
tabase.
Based on the evaluation of the QAu data for 2004-2005, half of di -
agnostic providers have a designated quality manager. Only 15% of 
laboratories are fully accredited and approximately 50% of laboratories 
participate in EQA schemes, distributed by 21 different providers. With 
the collaboration of the latter, we were able to confirm about 90% of 
EQA participation declared by laboratories.
With the new awareness of the central role of QAu, making this infor -
mation available will benefit consumers, by facilitating informed choice 
of laboratory partners for performing tests, and genetics services, by 
facilitating selection of reliable partners for referral of tests which can -
not be performed locally and by valorizing their efforts and investment 
in QAu. This study provides the first overview of the status of QAu in 
European genetics laboratories.
P1306. On the necessity of adult medical genetics services in 
developing countries
P. Phowthongkum ;  
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
Medical genetics service is often percieved as expensive, luxorious 
and unnecessary in public health in most developing countries. The 
situation is worse among adult medical genetic services that are al -
most completely neglected and limited to academic interest only. I 
performed a retrospective review of adult patients chart admitted at 
Chulalongkorn Hospital, a university-based hospital of Thailand to find 
the prevalence of genetic diseases and management. The main re -
sult is that the prevalence of genetic diseases in in-hospital patients is 
about 0.6% and the three main diagnoses are hypertrophic cardiomy -
opathy, thalassemia and familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome. 
This is still an underestimate because nearly all patients are not seen 
by medical geneticist and only obvious genetic disorders are recorded. 
This data is the first in our country to demonstrate the problem of adult-
onset genetic disorders. The fact that the prevalence isn this study is 
lower than in western countries, especially in pediatric wards, indicates 
that more comprehensive prospective records of in-hospital patients 
and community-based should be done to increase the awareness of 
genetic diseases, and thereby change national policy in the future.
P1307. Predictive genetic testing of Alzheimer disease - A public 
perspective
N. Pojskic1, L. Oruc2, A. Memic2, L. Kapur1;  
1Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, 2Psychiatric Clinic KCUS, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Alzheimer disease (AD) is the common cause of adult-onset progres -
sive degenerative dementia and complex in its etiology. Genetic fac -
tors have a key contribution to development of AD. Although several 
vulnerability genes are identified and well characterized, some familial 
cases of this disease are due to rare mutation in other genes. The risk 
of AD appears to be heterogeneous in its nature with additional genetic risk factors interplay.
Several certified tests for prediction of AD are commercially available 
enabling publically accessible genetic testing. Its certainty is compli -
cated by inability to assess all possible potent risk factors. Additionally, 
genetically based prediction of AD onset is questioned due to general 
ethical and social issues, concerning benefits but also potential harm.
However little is known about public standpoints towards predictive 
genetic testing in neuropsychiatric disorders as AD. This presenta -
tion argues main issues related to predictive genetic testing for com -
plex disorders supplemented with data from Bosnia and Herzegovina 
based on 1000 individual attitudes toward AD predictive genetic testing 
collected using pre-designed questionnaire. The statistical sample is 
representative for BH general population in terms of age, sex, social 
and demographic structure. Results are differentiated and structured 
among group of medical workers (familial with this issues) stratified 
by education level and general population subsample. There is a cor -
relation between affirmative attitude and level of education, medical 
branch and urbanization. The most important obstruction in this type of 
survey is incomplete knowledge on methodology of genetic testing of 
AD and potential risk of its inadequate interpretation.
P1308. Assessment of a selection of patient information 
materials discussing genetic testing from across Europe
C. Lewis , P. Mehta, A. J. Kent;  
Genetic Interest Group, Islington, United Kingdom.
AIM: To assess the quality of written information for patients and fami -
lies about genetic testing, from a range of European countries. METH -
OD: Written information relating to genetic testing for 5 conditions was 
gathered from genetic departments across 7 European countries. 50 
pieces in total were randomly chosen and assessed for the inclusion 
or omission of 14 key issues. These had been identified by pre existing 
tools as being important for inclusion when developing or assessing 
material relating to genetic testing. RESULTS: Whilst the majority of 
information discussed issues relating to the condition including back -
ground and effect (n=48, 96%), treatment and management (n=37, 
74%) and heredity and risk (n=49, 98%), less than half the informa -
tion discussed issues related to patient rights (n=12, 42%) and a dis -
cussion of benefits as well as potential risks of genetic testing (n=22, 
44%). Only half discussed where to get additional information and 
support from (n=25, 50%). Benefits were more likely to be included 
(n=41, 82%) than any risks involved (n=24, 48%). The issue discussed 
least frequently was the possible psychological and social effects of 
genetic testing (n=9, 18%). Pre-written leaflets provided a far more 
comprehensive discussion of the key issues than personal letters did. 
Information relating to hereditary breast cancer scored far better than 
information on the other conditions. DISCUSSION: It is important that 
patients and families receive good quality written information about 
genetic testing. The development and translation of quality assessed 
prewritten information leaflets is one way to ensure this.
P1309. Regulating expression: the governance of human 
developmental genetics.
K. Taylor , S. Woods;  
PEALS, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
In this poster we will present the findings from recent empirical re -
search undertaken as part of the Developmental Gene Expression Map 
(DGEMap) design study. This EU funded project aims to establish the 
foundations of a pan-European infrastructure, integrating a currently 
fragmented research effort. Our role within DGEMap has been to re -
port on the ethical, legal and social aspects of this area of research, 
which arise particularly from its requirement for tissue taken from em -
bryos donated following legal elective termination of pregnancy.
The first results we report are from an e-mail survey of scientists, con -
ducted during 2006, that included members of the ESHG. In our survey 
respondents were asked to offer their views on a range of issues con -
cerning research using human embryos including; ethical oversight, 
ethics training and legislation at local, national and EU levels. One key 
finding was a strong desire for ethics training for scientists at all career 
stages. Detailed results will be presented and the potential implica -
tions for a common research governance framework explored.
Secondly, we will present the findings of a symposium of invited ex -
perts that was held in Newcastle in February 2007. The aim of the 
event was to highlight the range of concerns and considerations for Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy2
the governance of developmental genetics research in as diverse an 
entity as the EU. The plurality of views on the status of the human 
embryo and the resulting implications for collaborative science will be 
explored.
P1310. Principles of Bioethics in the Universal Declaration on 
the Human Genome and Human Rights
F. Emam , F. Mirzajani;  
National Institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Re -
public of Iran.
Looking at the bioethical discussions from management perspective, 
it could be observed that those discussions are based on three policy 
principles put forward in the provisions of the above Declaration: inher -
ent dignity of human beings , their fundmental unity and respecting 
their human rights and freedoms. Strategical principles of bioethics aim 
at the best interests of human beings and protection of public health 
while respecting common genetical heritage of humanity. To achieve 
the above objectives, independent, multidisciplinary and pluralist eth -
ics committees must be established in order to first  assess the ethical, 
legal and social issues raised by research on the human genome and 
its application and second, to identify the practices that could be con -
trary to human dignity, such as germ-line interventions.
Putting forward a comparative (Islamic-International) analysis of the 
above principles, our paper tries to show the possible directions that 
bioethics system of Iran can take. The paper finishes with proposals on 
how to guide the system towards the best possible direction.
P1311. The twilight zone between health and sickness: A 
qualitative exploration with asymptomatic BRCA1/2 mutation 
carriers
E. Dagan1,2, S. Gil3, R. Gershoni-Baruch1,4;  
1Institute of Human Genetics, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 2Depart -
ment of Nursing, The Faculty of Social Welfare and Health Sciences, University 
of Haifa, Israel, 3School of Social Work, The Faculty of Social Welfare and 
Health Sciences, University of Haifa, Israel, 4Faculty of Medicine, Technion-In -
stitute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
Harboring a germ-line mutation in BRCA1/2 genes increases the life -
time risk for breast-ovarian cancer. Within the Ashkenazi population, 
three predominant mutations were identified in 2.5% of this popula -
tion, resulting in the increased prevalence of hereditary breast-ovarian 
cancer to 20% and 40%, respectively. The current study is aimed at 
exploring the way in which healthy women at high-risk for developing 
breast-ovarian cancer experience and give meaning to the dialectic 
between being healthy and being at high risk.
Seventeen in-depth interviews with asymptomatic BRCA1/2 mutation 
carriers were conducted. Analyzing the narratives revealed several 
themes constructed around: Fears in Conflict - the continuous conflict 
between the threat inherent in being a BRCA1/2 carrier and the fear 
accompanying the prospect of a prophylactic surgeries in the absence 
of clinical findings; Family Clock - the definition of personal risk in ac -
cordance with the age of onset of their mother’s cancer “I hope that 
nothing happens to me by the age my mother got sick.”; Illusion of 
Control - the sense that knowledge is power: “I have always known 
that I am a carrier. At least now, there is something I can do.”; The 
Inner Mother - the way in which the women’s mothers coped with the 
cancer shaped their own story of coping.
With growing knowledge about the contribution of molecular genetics 
to multi-factorial diseases, these findings provide insight into individu -
als whose lives hang in the balance between health and sickness, and 
suggest ways in which geneticists can integrate family context into 
their counseling practice.
P1312. Cancer in the Family - see your Geneticist! Who will go 
and who won‘t.
B. Bernhard , S. M. Holloway, J. Campbell, M. E. Porteous;  
Department of Clinical Genetics, Lothian University Hospitals NHS Trust, Edin -
burgh, United Kingdom.
The National Health Service (NHS) Scotland prides itself of a health 
care system that is free for all at the point of delivery and aims to 
offer equal access to health provisions regardless of age, employ -
ment status or socio-economic class. There are four regional genetic 
centres in Scotland serving a population of 5 million and delivering 
an integrated clinical and laboratory genetic service. The Scottish Executive, the ministerial body for health issues, has taken the lead 
in providing guidelines for genetic counselling, testing and screening 
of individuals at risk of colorectal (CRC) and breast/ ovarian cancer 
(BOC). Referrals to the Scottish genetics centres are ever increasing, 
but questions remain whether individuals most at risk are adequately 
accessing the service provided. We therefore investigated the refer -
ral and attendance patterns of 4178 individuals from CRC and BOC 
families at the South-East Scotland Clinical Genetics Centre between 
2000 - 2006 with a particular emphasis on age, sex and social depriva -
tion indices. Patients from CRC and BOC families attending the genet -
ics service had lower deprivation indices than the general population. 
Lower deprivation indices were more marked in the CRC group than 
in the BOC group (p<0.001). Effective education and communication 
strategies targeted at patients of all educational and socio-economic 
backgrounds need to be developed to address these inequalities in 
uptake of genetic services.
P1313. The first demonstration of genetic predisposition in all 
cancers using model of early onset breast cancer in Poland
J. Lubinski1, S. Narod2, B. Gorski1, C. Cybulski1, T. Debniak1, A. Jakubowska1, 
J. Matyjasik1, D. Wokolorczyk1, E. Grabowska1, K. Medrek1, T. Huzarski1, T. 
Byrski1, J. Gronwald1, B. Masojc1, P. Serrano-Fernandez1;  
1Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 2Centre for Research in 
Women’s Health, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Aim. Search for combinations of cancer susceptibility markers detect -
ing with 100% sensitivity early onset breast cancer patients.
Patients. 473 unselected Polish patients affected by breast cancers 
under age of 51 years and paired controls from families without can -
cers among first and second degree relatives matched for age and 
sex.
Methods. Frequency of all possible combinations between genomic 
markers identified as associated with cancer susceptibility in Poland 
have been composed between cases and controls.
Results. 17 combinations of 26 mutations or polymorphisms within 14 
genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, p16, XPD, MC1R, CYP1B1 and oth -
ers) have been found to cover all of breast cancer cases. The same 
genomic patterns were present only in 84.22% of controls.
Conclusions
Hypothesis:
1. All of cancers occur on the basis of increased genetic susceptibility.
2. Less than 50% of population has any risk of cancer of particular 
site.
Acknowledgments: Authors thank Ms Gibaszek R. and Putresza E. for 
excellent support in collection and analysis of registry data.
P1314. Baseline situation in Turkey about genetic consultancy 
for women who have risk of breast cancer
P. C. Unalan1, I. A. Güney2, S. S. Çifçili1;  
1Marmara University Medical Faculty Department of Family Medicine, Istanbul, 
Turkey, 2Marmara University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genetics, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
BACKGROUND:Breast cancer is the most common cancer among 
Turkish women. The BRCA1 and BRCA2 tumor suppressor genes ex -
plain most of the disease in families. Consequently, there is a growing 
demand for genetic assessment services including provision of genetic 
risk information and genetic counselling with possible presymptomatic 
testing.
AIM:This study reports prospective baseline data about the multidis -
ciplinary genetic and surgical assessment and counselling of familial 
breast cancer cases and their women relatives who have a risk.
METHOD:State University Hospitals are included in this cross-sec -
tional descriptive study as they are accepted role models for the health 
service system. Data is collected by the same researcher with a struc -
tured questionnaire during face to face interviews with the head of the 
related clinics.
RESULTS:Among 58 Turkish State Universities, 36 have medical fac -
ulties and research hospitals. In 18 of the university hospitals there are 
“Outpatient Clinics for Breast Diseases”. If there are at least 2 different 
disciplines working together on the issue is accepted as a multisci -
plinary clinic. Twelve of the outpatient clinics are multidisciplinary (2/3), 
9 of them (3/4) declared that they have links with psychiatry depart -
ment members but not as a continuous team member. Only in 4 of the 
clinics, genetic counselling or consultancy to the patients with familial Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy2
risk is given on standard algorithms.
CONCLUSION:Cancer clinics that deal with familial cancers will in -
clude genetic assessment programs. It must be remembered that pa -
tients have rights to receive breast cancer risk information and genetic 
testing consultancy before and after genetic testing .
P1315. Preconceptional CF and HbP carrier screening in the 
Netherlands: First results of a trial in a multi-ethnic society
P. Lakeman , L. Henneman, P. D. Bezemer, M. C. Cornel, L. P. ten Kate;  
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Objective: The reaction of couples planning a pregnancy was studied 
to a combined offer of ancestry dependent cystic fibrosis (CF) and 
haemoglobinopathies (HbPs) carrier screening.
Methods: 9453 people (20-35 years) were offered CF and/or HbP car -
rier screening at their general practitioner’s (GP) office by either their 
GP (n=4720) or the Municipal Health Service (MHS) (n=4733). The tar -
get group was defined as having a partner and planning a pregnancy. 
Its size was estimated by means of a reply form (=respondents) and a 
telephone survey among a sample of non-respondents (n=201).
Results: 14% (1365/9453) responded. The target group was estimated 
to be 33%: 490/1365 respondents and 66/201 out of the 8088 non-re -
spondents. Thirty-four percent intended to participate in carrier screen -
ing (166/490). Only 87 actually had a carrier test done together with 
their partner: 29% (25/87) and 71% (62/87) were invited by the MHS 
and their GP, respectively. The proportion participating non-Western 
immigrants (31%) was less than the proportion invited (50-60%), and 
people with lower education were underrepresented (only 10% of par -
ticipants). The participation rate was ~ 3%. “Lack of time” (37%) was 
the main reason for non-participation. The majority supported offering 
CF and HbPs carrier screening to all couples planning a pregnancy: 
77% and 71% of participants and non-participants, respectively.
Conclusion: Immigrants and people with lower education reacted dif -
ferently to the offer of preconceptional CF and HbPs carrier screening. 
Furthermore, MHS’ sending the invitations seems to be a barrier. Both 
lead to challenges for the implementation process.
P1316. Genetic Assessment of a Clinical Case of Congenita 
Myotonica
M. Dehghanmanshadi , T. Majidi Zadeh, M. Rostami, M. Ebrahimi, K. Bani -
hashemi, S. Saber, M. Houshmand;  
National Institute Center Genetics Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Is -
lamic Republic of Iran.
In clinical practice there would be some cases of myotonia with clinical 
symptoms other than muscular ones who have been associated with 
mutations in the muscle chloride channel gene. Most cases reported 
to date show a recessive inheritance pattern, with loss of function of 
the corresponding protein.
Myotonia congenita is inherited both in an autosomal recessive type 
namely Becker disease and also in an autosomal dominant manner 
which has been called Thomsen disease; the same mutation may oc -
cur in families with both types of inheritance. In the autosomal domi -
nant type of the disaese, the proportion of cases caused by de novo  
mutations is unknown. Perhaps each child of an individual with auto -
somal dominant myotonia congenita has a 50% chance of inheriting 
the mutation.
Here we report clinical and molecular findings on family members from 
the central region of Iran with dominantly inherited myotonia congenita 
as the two brothers in the family show characterized clinical picture 
of sustained contraction of the skeletal muscles which identified in 
Thomsen‘s myotonia. In genotype/phenotype correlations investiga -
tion these patients showed the typical EMG patterns of the dominant 
type resulted in a mild tendency for a discharge of repetitive action po -
tentials to occur in response to electrical and mechanical stimulation.
P1317. Genetics in clinical practice: Competences for non-
genetics healthcare staff
C. L. Bennett1, S. Kaur1, E. Tonkin1, J. Haydon2, A. Daly1, L. Gough3, A. Eaton3, 
P. Farndon1;  
1NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, 
United Kingdom, 2Centre for Education in Medical Genetics, Birmingham, 
United Kingdom, 3Skills for Health, Bristol, United Kingdom.
Genetics impacts on the patient care provided by many different health 
professionals. What genetic activities are appropriate for health pro -fessionals outside specialist genetics services, how should these ac -
tivities be carried out and how can we ensure a high quality service 
for patients?
In the UK, the NHS National Genetics Education and Development 
Centre collaborated with Skills for Health (the statutory body responsi -
ble for healthcare competences) to develop “competences for genetics 
in clinical practice for non-genetics healthcare staff”. Appropriate ge -
netic activities were identified by a large group of healthcare staff from 
many different professions. They identified nine activities which cover 
the pathway for patients with or at risk of a genetic disorder. For each 
activity, the health professionals described how the activity should be 
carried out - so that for the first time, a set of competences with perfor -
mance criteria and underpinning knowledge and understanding have 
been defined for genetic activities for non-specialists.
The competences cover widely applicable activities - such as under -
standing genetics relevant to your practice, recognising possible ge -
netic implications, taking an appropriate family history and referring 
patients - and more specialised activities such as assessing genetic 
risk or understanding genetic testing. Few health professionals will 
need all the competences, only those relevant to an individual’s clini -
cal role should be selected.
The competences can be used in job descriptions where genetic ac -
tivities are part of a professional’s role; in developing services or new 
roles; for assessing individuals’ learning needs; and to inform the de -
velopment of education and training courses.
P1318. Social support in the context of genetic testing of late-
onset neurological disorders
N. M. Oliveira , J. Sequeiros;  
Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, PORTO, Portugal.
Introduction: In genetic counselling, the evaluation of the social worker 
has the aim to value if the individuals at-risk, when informed about 
their probability of being or not a career of the gene of neurological 
hereditary late-onset disease (Huntington disease, Machado-Joseph 
disease, familial amiloyd polineuropaty (FAP) ATTR V30M and CA -
DASIL , are able to give an appropriate healthy answer (they dispose 
of resilient capacity) or an unsuitable answer not healthy, being this 
damaging for the individuals.
In our protocol of the genetic counselling for PST, the social worker 
values two groups of risk factors : (1) The vulnerability centered in 
the subject (the genetic predisposition, resources of the personality, 
cognitive resources, etc.) (2) The vulnerability connected with the ina -
dequacy of the environment in which the individual is inserted (fami -
liar unsuitable structure, the separation of the parents, death of the 
parents, chronic disease, economical fragility and / or poverty, social 
isolation, etc.)
The Social Intervention is carried out through: (1) Exchanges that hold 
emotional positive attitudes (Sluzki, 1996: 16); (2) The counselling (for -
mal or informal) which allow the establishment of interactions that have 
the aim of sharing informations on the disease in question; (3) Material 
or instrumental support; (4) Technical support or of services; (5) The 
access to new contacts.
Conclusions :Contribution of the development, psycodynamics, cogni -
tive and social models (strategies of resolution of problems, psychothe -
rapy, stress and coping, personalities, and attitudes) add an important 
value to the program of genetic counselling fo PST
P1319. Inheritance patterns in coronary heart disease
S. Seyedhassani1,2, M. Rafiee1, M. Nemayandeh1, R. Hemayati1, F. Ghasemi1, 
S. Sadr1, M. Hushmand2;  
1Medical science university, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National institute 
for genetic engineering and biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Introduction: Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the leading cause of 
death in developed countries. The prevalence of CHD is rising rapidly 
in the world due to increased exposure to CHD risk factors. CHD is the 
most common heart disease that is believed to be caused by multiple 
genetic factors, environmental factors, and interactions among these 
factors.
Material and method: 366 consecutive cases were studied by geneti -
cal analysis. Genetic counselling, pedigree analysis, clinical and Para 
clinical studies were done for patients.
Results: There were 282 male (77%) and 84 female (23%). Mean age Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy2
was 55.13±11.20. History of diabetes, hyperlipidemia, hypertension 
and obesity were seen in 22.4%, 51.9%, 32.1% and 42.3% respec -
tively. Familial marriage was seen in 66 patients (18.03%). There was 
early onset CHD (diagnosis at less than 50 year of age) in 156 cases 
(42.6%). 82% of them had positive familial pedigree in the different 
familial patterns. 25.6% of cases with early onset CHD and 12.4% of 
cases with late onset CHD were born from consanguineous marriage 
(P=001).
Discussion: This study can assist physicians and genetic counsellors 
to realize the contribution of positive familial pedigree and inheritance 
pattern to cases with CHD. Identification of familial patterns and other 
risk factors will provide valuable information for prevention and control 
of CHD. These results can be used for next molecular analysis.
P1320. Female triple heterozygous CF allele delF508, MTHFR 
C/T, MTRR A/G with fetus 69,XXX
I. J. Vasilieva1, M. O. Mkheidze2;  
1Municipal Centre of Medical Genetics, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 
2Medical Academy for Postgraduate Studies, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion.
Genetic counseling claimed by the healthy couples is very rare process 
in St.Petersburg and in all places of Russia. The couple consulted con -
siders they are healthy. Proband female 27-yr-old is Ukrainian descent 
and her husband 34-yr-old is Lezghian. Proband has occupational 
hazard (contact with mineral dyes). Our clients are intensive smokers. 
Proband’s gynecological history is advantageous. The couple denies 
congenital and inherited pathology among their relatives. The results 
of laboratory investigations are the following: couple karyotype 46,XX 
and 46,XY,21stk+; DNA investigation: PKU allele R408W is absent; 
proband is heterozygous for cystic fibrosis allele delF508, MTHFR C/T 
and MTRR A/G. She had higher level of blood homocystine (17.4 mi -
cromole/l vs. 5-15micromole/l). After medication during 3 months with 
Elevit (folic acid, VitB1 and VitB12) the level of blood homocystine was 
decreased to 8,9 micromole/l. Proband broke off medicine intake. She 
got pregnant soon after that. At 11th weeks of gestation oedema of 
fetus generalized, particularly of the back region of neck, was revealed 
with US investigation. The fetal material was obtained by biopsy of the 
chorionic villi. The fetus karyotype was found to be 69,XXX and this 
pregnancy was interrupted. We continue our genetic support of this 
couple.
P1321. Cross-cultural Communication in Genetic Services: 
Bridging the gap
V. Anastasiadou1,2, T. Delikurt1, K. Theochari1, A. Kotti2, E. Spanou1;  
1Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Archbishop 
Makarios III Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus.
The two major communities (Greek and Turkish Cypriot) in Cyprus 
were separated by a border since 1974. The sharing of healthcare 
services, between the two communities became very difficult. Recently 
efforts of bringing the two communities together have been underway.
Ethnic background and differences should not interfere with healthcare. 
Cross-cultural gaps and communication problems are often obstacles 
in the provision of healthcare services. Furthermore, the importance 
of a `multidisciplinary` team is known to be essential for the best care 
of patients with rare disorders as are genetic conditions. Communica -
tion between healthcare professionals, therapists and patients within 
such a team is fundamental. The multicultural composition of Cyprus 
creates need for a network to establish new and expand the existing 
channels of communication between such professionals.
Attempt to create a network in the care and referral of patients, living 
with or at risk of genetic or inherited conditions in both communities 
in Cyprus officially began in December 2006 although was in design 
since May 2006. Through this network, professionals will be able to 
collaborate, exchange ideas and assist each other with the common 
goal of assuring efficient and sustainable patient care. Also the pa -
tients are invited to share problems, experiences and hopes while 
contributing in building a network for better communication and multi -
disciplinary care.
The first steps of networking and bridging the gap will be presented as 
a poster. Furthermore the problems (practical, cross-cultural and oth -
ers) we encountered as the professionals who originated this network 
and partnership will be discussed.P1322. Technical validation of a system for cystic fibrosis 
newborn screening
M. J. Somerville1, S. L. Bleoo1, L. Podemski1, R. Kelln1, B. G. Elyas1, L. M. 
Vicen1, C. Revers1, F. J. Bamforth1, P. J. Bridge2, M. E. Lyon2;  
1University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 2University of Calgary, Calgary, 
AB, Canada.
Newborn screening for cystic fibrosis has recently been implemented 
for the province of Alberta, Canada. We were assigned the task of de -
veloping a comprehensive cystic fibrosis screening system for the ap -
proximately 42,000 births per year in this province. We assessed the 
effectiveness of a process designed to maximize diagnostic sensitivity 
and specificity. Initial immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT) measurement 
was carried out with the top 2% as a cutoff for cystic fibrosis transmem -
brane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene mutation analysis. Valida -
tion of four DNA extraction methods from dried blood spots on new -
born screen requisitions was followed by assessment of three CFTR 
mutation detection protocols. These mutation detection protocols were 
validated by analysis of 45 genotype controls and a test set of 5,000 
newborn blood spot samples, 2,000 of which were screened in parallel 
at two sites, prior to initiation of the newborn screening program. From 
these assessments, a system has been developed that incorporates 
standardized extraction and targeted analysis of common mutations 
as a primary screen. Clinical assessment of mutation-positive cases 
includes confirmatory testing, as well as full CFTR coding sequence 
screening for point mutations and intragenic rearrangements.
P1323. Professional accounts of inheritance in Type 2 Diabetes 
and Coronary Artery Disease involving ethnic minority groups
A. J. Clarke , S. Sarangi, M. Bekkers, U. Raisanen, P. Boddington;  
Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom.
The incidence of common, complex disorders such as diabetes type 
2 (T2D) and coronary artery disease (CAD) is known to vary between 
populations. We have examined the published literature and con -
ducted interviews with a range of professionals - clinicians, laboratory 
scientists and public health specialists - to assemble and compare the 
explanations put forward to account for the higher incidence of these 
conditions among UK South Asians and aboriginal groups in Australia. 
There are potentially important consequences for health and social 
policy of the different explanations proposed, as well as implications 
for responsibility and blame at individual, family and community lev -
els. In this presentation, we analyse interview data (from researchers, 
health professionals and support group representatives in the UK) us -
ing the methodology of rhetorical discourse analysis, by paying par -
ticular attention to how explanations of `inheritance’ are framed and 
justified in these accounts. Our findings suggest that `inheritance’ is 
articulated in multiple senses to include genetic, cultural and familial 
meanings, while allusion is made to lifestyle choices. This nuanced 
notion of inheritance is explored further by linking our analysis to no -
tions of `agency’, `responsibility’ and `blame’. We also report patterns 
of difference across and within the professionals’ accounts.
P1324. The reproductive choices made by South African 
mothers who have children with Down syndrome
J. C. Lampret1, A. L. Christianson2;  
1National Health Laboratory Service and University of the Witwatersrand, Jo -
hannesburg, South Africa, 2National Health Laboratory Service, Johannesburg, 
South Africa.
Down syndrome is the commonest cause of congenital developmental 
disability in industrialized countries, where it occurs in approximately 
1.4 per 1000 live births. In South Africa, the birth prevalence of Down 
syndrome was documented as 1.8 and 2.09 per 1000 live births in 
urban and rural populations, respectively.
The aim of this study was to determine the reproductive choices of 
women with a child with Down syndrome, aged 1 year or older. The 
survey was conducted using a structured questionnaire. The sample 
consisted of 50 women; 36 African, 4 Asian and 10 Caucasian. The 
questionnaire assessed the mothers’ knowledge of Down syndrome 
prior to diagnosis, what counselling was received and how this knowl -
edge was utilised. Information was obtained on the use of family plan -
ning, the knowledge and use of prenatal medical genetic screening and 
diagnosis, and decisions for future pregnancies. None of the mothers 
had prenatal diagnosis in their pregnancy with their Down syndrome 
child, but 76% (38) would want prenatal diagnosis in future pregnan -Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy2
cies. Of the 50 mothers, 21 (42%) would terminate a pregnancy if 
Down syndrome was detected, 26 (52%) would not, and 3 (6%) were 
unsure what they would have done if faced with this decision. Of the 
Caucasian women, 40% (4) would opt for termination of pregnancy, 
40% (4) would not and 20% (2) were unsure. Of the African and Asian 
women, 52.8% (19) and 75% (3) respectively would not terminate an 
affected fetus. The information gained has helped provide a more ef -
fective genetic counselling service.
P1325. DYSCERNE - A European Network of Centres of 
Reference for Dysmorphology
J. Clayton-Smith1, P. M. Griffiths1,2, D. Donnai1,2, H. Brunner3, B. Dallapiccola4, 
K. Devriendt5, M. Krajewska-Walasek6, N. Philip7, J. Taylor8,2, K. Strong1,2, B. 
Kerr1;  
1Central Manchester and Manchester Children’s Hospitals NHS Trust, Man -
chester, United Kingdom, 2Nowgen, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Universitair 
Medisch Centrum Sint Radboud, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 4Istituto Mendel, 
San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 5Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 
6Instytut Pomnik-Centrum Zdrowia Dziecka, Warsaw, Poland, 7Assistance Pub -
lique - Hospitaux de Marseille, Marseille, France, 8University of Manchester, 
Manchester, United Kingdom.
Over 2,500 rare and difficult to diagnose conditions presenting with 
patterns of birth defects have been identified. The rarity of these dys -
morphic conditions means that even in Centres of Reference, experi -
ence may be limited and a diagnosis might be delayed or not made at 
all. Making a correct diagnosis is the cornerstone of patient manage -
ment, enabling clinicians to locate other patients with the same condi -
tion, share clinical experience, and increase individual and collective 
knowledge about rare conditions. For patients and their families, the 
importance of having a diagnosis cannot be over emphasised. It can 
help them come to terms with the condition, reassure them that they 
are receiving appropriate care, and may facilitate making contact with 
other affected individuals and families for support and advice.
DYSCERNE aims to raise current standards for the diagnosis, man -
agement, and information dissemination of rare dysmorphic syn -
dromes. The Network is funded by the European Commission, Direc -
torate General for Health and Consumer Protection, and comprises six 
designated Centres of Reference for Dysmorphology (UK, Belgium, 
France, Italy, The Netherlands and Poland). The lead partner, Man -
chester University, UK, will be the coordinating and managing centre 
for the Network.
To facilitate the project aims, a web-based electronic dysmorphology 
diagnostic system will be established, enabling clinicians to submit dif -
ficult to diagnose cases electronically for expert review. Project mem -
bers will also develop guidelines for selected multi-system disorders 
which will be piloted and disseminated widely throughout the clinical 
genetics community. DYSCERNE will also serve as a demonstration 
project for future EU Networks.
P1326. Training non-MD medical geneticists: suggestions from 
Lithuania
J. Kasnauskiene , V. Kučinskas, D. Steponavičiūtė;  
Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania.
Translation of the achievements in human genetics and genomics into 
clinical practice results in increasing introduction of new diagnostic ge -
netic tests and growing demand for highly qualified non-MD specialists 
(medical geneticists) performing such tests, interpreting and communi -
cating their results. Nevertheless, adequate system for their training is 
still absent in a number of EU countries including Lithuania.
A three stage system for training non-MD clinical/laboratory geneticists 
is under development in Lithuania (introduction is expected in 2008). 
1st stage: undergraduate (bachelor) studies programme ensuring back -
ground education. 2nd stage: graduate (master) studies programme 
ensuring basic knowledge in the disciplines essential for clinical/labo -
ratory geneticists (molecular genetics, cytogenetics, biochemical ge -
netics, genetic counselling, bioinformatics). 3rd stage: post-graduate 
studies programme (comparable to a residency studies programme 
for medical specialties) ensuring a high level knowledge and expertise 
in one of the basic specialisations: molecular genetics, cytogenetics, 
or biochemical genetics. Specialists graduating from the 3rd stage stud -
ies programme will be able to apply for certification by the Lithuanian 
Society of Human Genetics.
A system for non-MD medical geneticists’ certification on the basis of a EU-level exam (e.g., similar to that already in action for labora -
tory chemists) is necessary. Such certification should enable including 
the non-MD medical geneticist into the EU Registry of clinical/labo -
ratory geneticists (more exactly, a special section corresponding to 
the above-stated specialisation). Registered specialist should be able 
to work in any clinical/medical genetics laboratory across EU. At the 
same time EU-level certification would be an official document con -
firming specialist’s qualification in his/her native country.
P1327. Genetic Education: Adapting Strategies for Secondary 
Schools
R. P. Leite , P. Botelho, C. Diniz, M. Souto, B. Carvalho, E. Ribeiro;  
Dept. Genetics, Centro Hospitalar de Vila Real-Peso da Régua, E.P.E, Vila 
Real, Portugal.
The Genetics Service participates in an initiative of the National Agen -
cy for the Scientific Culture, witch allows Secondary School students 
to do an internship integrated in the assistance work of a Health Ser -
vice, where the study of the genetic diseases  and prenatal diagnosis 
allow them to apply and to deepen the knowledge acquired in school, 
qualifying them for the active life, not neglecting the exercise of the 
citizenship.
The name of this internship project is „Genetics Seen by the Young 
People“. It has the duration of 1 week and was already attended by 
66 students.
This internship is essentially practical but is strongly based in the ge -
netic principles lectured in Biology Course. 80% of internship time 
is spent in laboratorial activities and the remaining 20% is spent in 
the Prenatal Diagnosis, Dismorphology and Preconception  consulta -
tion, always with previous authorization by the patients. Then, all the 
students that worked as interns in the service since 2001 reply to an 
inquiry that had several goals, namely the importance of the intern -
ship in the professional choice. The students unanimously affirmed 
that this internship had enormous importance in the acquisition of new 
knowledge and in the opening of other work perspectives that they 
only imagined possible with a Medical Degree.
Our conclusion is positive  and encouraging, and it suggests that a 
strong interconnection between the school and the business world 
can be the instrument that lacks, increasing the satisfaction and the 
self-esteem of the students, reducing deviant behaviours and school 
abandonment.
P1328. Methodology analysing decision making for 
multidisciplinary staff before antenatal diagnosis.
P. Malzac1,2, S. Sigaudy2,3, R. Bernard2, N. Philip2,3, M. Gamerre3, L. Despinoy1, 
P. Le Coz1;  
1Espace Ethique Méditerranéen, Marseille, France, 2Département de génétique 
médicale, Marseille, France, 3Centre de diagnostic prénatal, Marseille, France.
We introduce a methodology analysing decision making in clinical ethics.
It enables to assess the various reasons health professionnals refer 
to, without being clearly conscious of it, when a difficult decision has 
to be made.
The issue is :
- To define the ethical aspect in the decision through worldwide ac -
knowledged principles: autonomy, beneficience and non-maleficience 
(1)
- To work on the basic idea that emotions have to be used which we 
consider crucial in order to become aware of the ethical aspect of the 
decision
Thus we believe such worldwide valued concepts become clear to 
health professionnals through some emotional experiences (2). We are 
speaking here of respect, compassion and fear. Practitioners discover 
through these emotions how much they value these principles.
Feeling of respect reveals how much they value the principle of au -
tonomy, feeling of compassion how much they value the principle of 
beneficience and feeling of fear the principle of non-maleficience.
To make our point clear, we will show how our methodology works 
in a difficult decision making situation : a request for termination of 
pregnancy after a Turner syndrome chromosomal anomality has been 
revealed on the fetal caryotype.
1. T.L Beauchamp et J. Childress. Principles of Biomedical Ethics, Ox -
ford University Press, New-York/Oxford, 1994.
2. Livet P., Emotions et rationalité morale, PUF, coll. « Sociologie », 
Paris, 2002.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy2
P1329. Glucose metabolism, lipid profile and inflammatory 
markers in healthy subjects in relation to family history of type 2 
diabetes mellitus
E. Kurvinen1,2, K. Aasvee2;  
1Tallinn Children`s Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 2National Institute for Health De -
velopment, Tallinn, Estonia.
Population studies have shown that family history to type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM) is a risk factor for developing the disease, but also 
for T2DM predictors, including anthropometric and metabolic modifica -
tions.
Our study aimed to compare anthropometric data, lipid and glucose 
metabolism and inflammatory factors in healthy subjects with positive 
family history [Fam(+)] and negative family history [Fam(-)] of T2DM.
Subjects and Methods. A total of 139 healthy subjects were studied, 
the subjects whose first degree relatives suffered from T2DM were 
compared with those without T2DM among close relatives.
Weight, height, waist and hip circumference were determined, body 
mass index and waist-to-hip ratio were calculated. Fasting serum glu -
cose and insulin were measured and used for calculation of insulin 
resistance index by homeostasis model assessment (HOMA IR). Se -
rum TC, TG and HDLC levels were determined enzymatically, apoli -
poproteins A-I and B by Laurell’s electrophoresis, C-reactive protein 
by a highly sensitive immunoprecipitation test and fibrinogen by the 
method of Clauss.
Results. Anthropometrical data as well as mean values of lipoprotein 
parameters, fasting serum glucose, insulin, HOMA IR, C-reactive pro -
tein and fibrinogen did not differ between the groups of positive vs. 
negative family history to T2DM. Conclusion. Positive family history of 
T2DM was not associated with impaired glucose and lipid metabolism 
in our cohort of healthy subjects.
P1330. Offering carrier screening for fragile X syndrome to non-
pregnant women - a pilot study
S. A. Metcalfe1, A. Archibald1, J. Cohen2, V. Collins3, A. Henry3, A. Jaques3, K. 
McNamee4, L. Sheffield1,5, H. Slater6, S. Wake5;  
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and Dept Paediatrics, University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 2Fragile X Alliance, Melbourne, Australia, 
3Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 4Family Planning 
Victoria, Melbourne, Australia, 5Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, 
Australia, 6Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and Victorian Clinical Genet -
ics Services, Melbourne, Australia.
Population-based carrier testing for fragile X syndrome (FXS) remains 
controversial despite fulfilling many of the WHO criteria. Health profes -
sionals’ concerns relate to perceived difficulties in community under -
standing of the complexities of this condition.
To inform policy around genetic screening, we conducted a three-
phase pilot study to assess acceptability and feasibility of offering FXS 
carrier screening to non-pregnant women in an Australian family plan -
ning clinic.
In Phase 1, clinic staff and female patients attended an FXS infor -
mation session and participated in focus groups. Their understanding, 
views, interest and concerns about offering FXS carrier screening were 
discussed. Overall, women and staff were positive towards screening. 
These qualitative data informed production of a brochure, two ques -
tionnaires and testing protocols, which underwent validation. Ques -
tionnaires included demographics, awareness and knowledge of FXS, 
attitudes towards carrier screening, decision-making, and anxiety. In 
Phase 2, larger number of women were recruited, completed a ques -
tionnaire, and were also offered FXS screening. The second question -
naire was completed one month later. A small number of women who 
had completed both questionnaires took part in follow-up interviews 
(Phase 3) about their experiences in participation
Of the 338 women recruited, 96% completed Q1, 54% completed Q2, 
to date, and 30 have been interviewed. Of the 20% (n=63) of women 
who were tested, three grey-zones and one pre-mutation were found. 
Preliminary analysis indicates that women were overwhelmingly in fa -
vour of the availability of FXS screening to all women, although fewer 
had screening for a variety of reasons. Women’s understanding of FXS 
was reasonably good.P1331. From legislation to societal learning. A new policy 
paradigm for genetics and insurance.
I. Van Hoyweghen , K. Horstman, R. Vos;  
Health Philosophy and Ethics, University of Maastricht, The Netherlands.
Over the past years, one of the most contentious topics in policy de -
bates on genetics has been the use of genetic testing in insurance. In 
the rush to confront concerns about potential abuses of genetic infor -
mation in insurance, most countries throughout Europe have enacted 
genetics-specific legislation while the Genetic Information Nondiscrim -
ination Act (GINA) is currently pending in the US Congress. In this 
presentation we want to reflect on the adequacy of genetics-specific 
legislation. We will give two main arguments why we consider this 
approach not to be viable in the long run. First, these laws reflect a 
“genetic exceptionalism”, overemphasizing the role of genes and en -
hancing the reduction of our identity and life chances to genes. New 
developments in genomics therefore do not fit legal concepts. This 
means that there is a growing gap between legal relatively stable defi -
nitions and dynamic genomics practice. Secondly, genetics-specific 
legislation creates some unintended effects. By giving exclusive legal 
protection to the group of genetic risks, other non-genetic risk groups 
are unintendedly being under-protected. Given these drawbacks, we 
argue that it is time for a new policy paradigm, which stresses investing 
in social learning processes more than in introducing defensive legal 
walls. While genetics-specific legislation reifies a momentary relation 
between science and society, a social learning approach enables more 
continuous interaction between science and society. Just as genomics 
is enabling medicine to take a more prospective approach, policy mak -
ing will similarly need to experiment with the genome sciences as they 
affect science, health and society.
P1332. Exploring of medical staffs’ attitudes in genetic services 
provided to international spouses in Taiwan
S. J. Lin , M. R. Wang, M. C. Huang, Y. H. Wang;  
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
Global migration have challenge the health services in Taiwan. In re -
cent 3 years, every one out of five newly married couples are interna -
tional marriage. With this increased ethnic diversity, health profession -
als require more culturally competent approach especially in genetic 
counseling. The purpose of this study was to explore attitudes and 
needs among medical staffs who provide reproductive care and ge -
netic services to international spouses.
In this survey, an assessment checklist with 5 scaled score consisted 
of 18 questions related to cultural competent care was used in the 
questionnaire. Of the 470 participants, 374(79.6%) responded. We 
found that (1) Lack of language appropriate information materials: For 
example, 90.2% staffs agreed that education materials displayed had 
to reflect cultural backgrounds of counselees; however, only 34% com -
plied in practice. (2) In direct communication styles: 93.6% subjects 
considered themselves as unable to communicate directly with inter -
national spouse due to limited time during clinical encounter. (3) Ste -
reotype found in attitudes: For example, 81.5% participants concerned 
that international spouses could not make their own reproductive deci -
sions and had difficulties in caring of their children.
Conclusion: We found that there exist gap between concepts and 
practice during encounter with international spouses. Health profes -
sionals need to improve cultural competency to deliver appropriate 
trans-cultural genetic services.
P1333. Improving communication skills in genetic counseling 
- simulation based national project
M. Berkenstadt1,2, H. Bet-Or2, A. Harari-Shacham2, R. Nissani2, S. Kohan3, Y. 
Yaron3, D. Lev3, H. Berkenstadt4, A. Ziv4, B. Goldman1;  
1Danek Gertner Institute of Human Genetics, Ramat Gan, Israel, 2The Israel 
Society of Genetic Counselours, Ramat Gan, Israel, 3The Israeli Society of 
Medical Genetics, Ramat Gan, Israel, 4The Israel Center for Medical Simula -
tion, Ramat Gan, Israel.
Background: Simulated patients (SPs) using play rolling actors are 
widely used for training and evaluation of health care professionals. In 
this study SPs based course aiming to improve communication skills 
in genetic counseling was developed and validated.
Methods: Based on authentic clinical situations rising important coun -
seling dilemmas 8 SPs based scenarios were developed. Each sce -
nario included - description of the clinical situation and detailed script Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy0
to the actors on the answers and behaviors involved in the counsel -
ing process. Following actors training, the scenarios were evaluated 
during the training of experts in human genetics becoming later the 
trainers in this program. 36 human geneticists (7 genetic counseling 
students, 20 genetic counselors, 4 fellows and 5 experts in human ge -
netics) participated in 3 training days. Each participant was performing 
2-3 scenarios as active participant in the “hot seat” and observed 3-4 
other scenarios. Training was videotaped for debriefing and additional 
feedback was given by the actors.
Feedback: According to participants’ feedback questionnaires (using 
1-4 Likert scale) most participants indicated that - the scenarios rep -
resented realistic clinical cases (96%), training improved their under -
standing the counselees’ needs (78%), improved their ability to give 
information (63%), and increased the awareness to ethical issues 
(58%). All participants recommended the use of SPs for further train -
ing in genetic counseling.
Conclusions: In this study SPs based training scheme in genetic coun -
seling was developed and implemented. Feedback questionnaires 
supported the content validity of the scenarios and the potential contri -
bution of such project in improving communication skills in this field.
P1334. Genetic counselling network in the Islamic Republic of 
Iran(1997-2007)
S. M. Mirzamani, Z. Noparast, S. Akbaroghli , S. Farshidi;  
Deputy for cultural affairs and Prevention of welfare organization, Tehran, Is -
lamic Republic of Iran.
Introduction & Aims:  The importance of genetic and congenital factors 
which causes many diseases & disabilities is obvious with a glance 
at the facts and figures in the world. In Iran certain factors exist that 
worsen the situation, such as:
High percentage of consanguinous marriages & etc. This comprehen -
sive program is planned with the aim of implementation of a genetic 
counselling network. The General Goal is to decrease the incidence 
and prevalence of genetic and congenital disabilities.
Material& Methods : For implementing this program the network 
has gradually expanded with about 125 genetic counselling centers 
throughout the country.
The first level are counseling centers in smaller cities(The staff are 
a general physician along with a professional nurse, midwife or ge -
neticist); the intermediate level are counselling centers in the capital of 
each province(The staff are a specialist, a general physician, and one 
professional nurse, midwife, or geneticist).
The highest level is the „State Commission of Genetics“ in Tehran (The 
staff are about 10 specialists).
The referral centers (The head of six Regional Offices) are located in 
the capital of six provinces(The staff in the provincial referral center 
are at least 2 specialists and 2 - 3 general physicians, with years of 
experience).
Results: The network has gradually expanded since the year 1997, 
and now we have 125 governmental and private genetic counselling 
centers.These centers have been offering services to approximately 
220,000 clients until now.
Conclusion: The genetic counselling network offers good quality, low 
cost and easily available services to population at risk.
P1335. The evaluation of referral reasons for genetic counseling 
and prenatal diagnosis at a tertiary genetic center: a Turkish 
experience
O. Cogulu1, A. Alpman1, B. Durmaz1, E. Pariltay2, M. Akgul2, O. Kirbiyik2, E. 
Ataman2, H. Akin2, F. Ozkinay1, C. Ozkinay2;  
1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, 
2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey.
Genetic counseling is the process which assists individuals in under -
standing the nature of the genetic disorder, the probability of develop -
ing or transmitting it and the ways how to deal with the condition. With 
the advancements in human health field and particularly in genetics, 
it has been possible for the scientists and for the public to be aware 
of the mechanisms underlying genetic diseases. To what extend the 
scientific and communal evolution affected the genetic counseling ses -
sions is the aim of this retrospective study.
We evaluated 5549 files of a tertiary genetic counseling and prenatal 
diagnosis center retrospectively throughout 1998-2006 years in Tur -
key. Among the subjects provided genetic counseling, the groups in -cluded: those whose referral reason is related to prenatal diagnostic 
tests, and those whose referral reason was other than prenatal diagno -
sis. In the first group the most common referral reason was advanced 
maternal age (45.01%), which is followed by high risk result on triple 
test (22.99%), previous child with congenital malformations or single 
gene disorder (9.57%), abnormal ultrasound finding (5.35%), parental 
anxiety (4.81%), genetic disease in the family members (4.22%), the 
presence of thalassemia trait in the parents (2.74%) and the others 
(5.31%). In the second group the most common reason for referral was 
recurrent miscarriages (32.99%), which is followed by previous child 
with congenital malformations or single gene disorder (25.76%), infer -
tility (13.59%), unidentified genetic condition (9.82%), genetic disease 
in the family members (6.13%), amenorrhea (5.89%), consanguinity 
between couples (3.69%) and the presence of thalassemia trait in the 
parents (2.13%).
P1336. A qualitative investigation of the impact of DMD on South 
African families
K. Loggenberg , M. Futter, J. Greenberg;  
Division of Human Genetics, Cape Town, South Africa.
South African parents who have a son with Duchenne Muscular Dys -
trophy (DMD) are confronted with unique circumstances and barriers, 
including poverty and minimal access to resources. The aim of this 
study was to investigate the level of genetic knowledge of parents and 
the impact of DMD on the family.
A qualitative approach was selected as it aims to portray the richness 
and complexity of real-life events from the participants’ perspective. 
Ten semi-structured qualitative interviews were conducted with par -
ents who had sons with DMD between the age of 8 and 15 years, 
lived in the Cape Town metropolitan area and attended Red Cross War 
Memorial Children’s Hospital (RCWMCH).
The level of understanding of the genetics of DMD was generally in -
adequate; this was related to socioeconomic status, level of education 
and influenced by cultural beliefs. Financial problems, difficulties with 
public transport, lifting, inappropriate wheelchairs and home care of 
the affected boy were among the most frequently mentioned problems 
of the participants. Emotional problems related to having a son with 
DMD were also mentioned.
The findings of this study will help healthcare professionals involved 
in the care of boys with DMD to better understand some of the barri -
ers that South African parents face. Education and information are an 
important form of support. Therefore, the service at RCWMCH may be 
improved by having a dedicated genetic counsellor as a member of 
the inter-disciplinary team involved with families in which a diagnosis 
of DMD is made, to facilitate information giving and assist in providing 
psychosocial support.
P1337. Prenatal genetic counselling from the women‘s point of 
view
A. Baroncini1, L. Borghi1,2, S. Rosato1,3, P. Battaglia1, O. Calabrese3, S. Zucchi -
ni4, M. A. Nicoli5, E. Calzolari3;  
1U.O.Genetica medica, AUSL di Imola, Italy, 2Dip.di Psicologia, Università di 
Parma, Italy, 3U.O.Genetica medica, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di 
Ferrara, Italy, 4U.O. Ostetricia e Ginecologia, Ausl di Bologna, Italy, 5Agenzia 
Sanitaria Regionale, Bologna, Italy.
In Italy prenatal genetic counselling and diagnosis are part of the rou -
tine antenatal care offered to women at increased risk of fetal chromo -
somal anomalies. However, counseling methods (individual, in group, 
use of a decision aid) and involved providers (medical geneticists, 
obstetricians, nurse/midwives) vary widely among centres. The aim 
of this study was to explore the pregnant women’s genetic counsel -
ling experience and to compare the relative efficacy of different ap -
proaches to genetic counseling. Interviewed participants, all women 
of advanced maternal age (>= 35 years), can be divided in two main 
groups according to ethnic origin: Italian and immigrants mainly from 
Middle-East and Eastern-Europe. Overall, participants showed satis -
faction with the content of genetic counseling, while knowledge, coping 
and state anxiety vary according to counseling methods and patients’ 
demographic and socio-economic variables. Most women expressed 
a preference to be counselled by a nurse/midwive than by a “more 
technical” medical geneticist. Increased anxiety levels were reported 
by women experiencing a counselling approach with the administra -
tion of a pre-counselling genetic questionnaire.Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy1 Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy
P1338. Results of Genetic Counselling and molecular genetic 
testing of severe monogenic disorders in Hungary between 1993 
and 2006.
L. Tímár1, Á. Herczegfalvi2, J. Balog3, H. Pikó3, K. Hajdu4, A. Tóth4, V. Karcagi3;  
1National Institute of Child Health, BUDAPEST, Hungary, 2Bethesda Children’s 
Hospital, BUDAPEST, Hungary, 3Dept. of Molecular Genetics, Natl. Institute 
of Environmental Health, BUDAPEST, Hungary, 4National Institute of Health, 
BUDAPEST, Hungary.
During the genetic counselling of the severe monogenic genetic dis -
eases it is very important to establish the exact etiological diagnosis. 
The molecular genetic examinations play outstanding role in this diag -
nostic procedure. Molecular genetic diagnosis provides effective pos -
sibility for prevention of serious genetic disorders by prenatal diagno -
sis and possible termination of pregnancy whenever treatment of the 
diseases is unavailable. Moreover, genetic results provide accurate 
differential diagnosis and proper medical care for the patients.
Molecular genetic examinations on the following severe genetic dis -
orders have been performed in our laboratory during last 13 years: 
Spinal Muscular Atrophy -in 78 families with 98 prenatal diagno-
sis; FRAXA - in 38 families with 2 prenatal diagnosis; Charcot-Marie-
Tooth disease type 1A - in 14 families; Ducenne/Becker Muscular Dys -
trophy - in 12 families; Congenital Myasthenic Syndrome - in 1 family; 
Facioscapulohumeral Muscular Dystrophy - in 2 families; Limb Girdle 
Muscular Dystrophy - in 2 families; Angelman syndrome - in 5 families. 
The detailed results will be reported in our presentation.
By performing the molecular genetic analysis effective diagnosis and 
correct genetic counselling was established in our genetic unit.
P1339. The perspectives and experiences of genetic counsellors 
and linkworkers (interpreters) working together in clinical 
genetic consultations
T. Clancy1, G. Matta1,2;  
1Academic Unit of Medical Genetics and Regional Genetics Service, Manches -
ter, United Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Great Ormond Street 
Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
Language, ethnicity and culture affect many aspects of genetic coun -
selling, and there is a need for contextually appropriate and accurate 
communication. Britain is a multicultural and multifaith society, and 
English is not the patient’s first language in a proportion of consulta -
tions. This research provides an insight into the experiences and per -
spectives of genetic counsellors and linkworkers (interpreters) when 
they work together. The study was based on convenience sampling 
at one centre in the UK. Six genetic counsellors and five linkwork -
ers participated. Exploratory semi-structured interviews were taped 
and transcribed, and the transcripts were analysed thematically. Both 
groups identified the following issues as having an important impact on 
joint consultations: differences in their professional roles and respon -
sibilities; developing a working relationship; the language of genetics; 
and, training and support needs. All participants agreed that a partner -
ship between the two professional groups is key to achieving the best 
outcome for patients. However, they also commented that minimal (if 
any) training is provided to enable them to work together effectively. 
Relationships are ad-hoc, and there is little opportunity to prepare for 
consultations together. This small study has identified some ways to 
improve the service offered to patients, including: training for genetic 
counsellors and linkworkers to raise awareness of each other’s roles 
and to learn how to work together; the development of a common and 
consistent lexicon of key genetic counselling terms and concepts for 
translation into minority ethnic languages; and, ensuring there is time 
for pre- and post- consultation briefings to occur.
P1340. Prenatal and preimplantation diagnonis in Cancer 
Genetic: what’s the role of Genetic Counsellors?
E. Haquet1, A. Combes1, P. Pujol1, J. Duffour2, I. Coupier1;  
1CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 2CRLC Val D’Aurelle, Montpellier, 
France.
In cancer genetic, most syndromes are dominantly inherited - which 
leads to a risk of transmission of 50%.
Prenatal and preimplantation diagnoses are options frequently chosen 
by affected patients who do not want to have a child with the same dis -
ease. They do not wish their children to go through the same suffering. 
In France, those medical interventions depend on ethical laws which 
request a “particularly severe and not curable affection”. Prenatal and preimplantation diagnoses are not allowed to all the hereditary predis -
positions to cancer.
Genetic counsellors have newly been introduced in France. Before 
2004, genetic counselling was only done by specialized physicians. 
Now that genetic counsellors have been introduced to the field, their 
missions have yet to be defined.
This work presents different propositions about how genetic counsel -
lors could afford a comprehensive support through adapted consul -
tations to couple with one partner affected by a dominantly inherited 
cancer. Their missions could be mainly focused on accompanying 
couples from the first consultation of genetic through their questions 
about having a baby, taking the risk of transmission or not, all the way 
to the birth, the renouncement, the prenatal diagnosis or the preim -
plantation diagnosis.
P1341. “Coping first, genetics second”: A qualitative study 
exploring family communication of genetic information.
M. Aitken1,2, M. B. Delatycki1,3, L. Skene2, L. E. Forrest1,2;  
1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2University of Mel -
bourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, Melbourne, 
Australia.
Communicating genetic information in families can be problematic. 
Often important information about a person’s own health or their re -
productive health (or both) is not transmitted to all at risk relatives. 
Guidelines from peak bodies are general and fail to address how ge -
netic health professionals should facilitate communication to at-risk 
relatives. The authors are investigating families’ experiences of com -
municating genetic information and whether there is a greater role for 
genetic health professionals within this experience. Qualitative inter -
view data from consultands and focus groups with genetic health pro -
fessionals has revealed:
1) Consultands feel overwhelmed with information after genetic coun -
selling and their priority is to manage the health and social aspects 
of the genetic condition, relegating telling family members to a lower 
priority.
2) Consultands usually communicate with first degree relatives, how -
ever often pass responsibility to their parents to tell other siblings and 
second and third degree relatives. Further decisions are made about 
whom to tell based on social bonds and a feeling of moral obligation. 
Hence communication occurs in an ad hoc  manner, over time.
3) The accuracy of information and the message may be lost.
4) Both health professionals and families want assistance in facilitation 
of communication in families.
These data demonstrate the need for further evidence to inform best 
practice for genetic health professionals dealing with communication 
of genetic information in families.
P1342. Should Individuals be Informed about their Salt 
Sensitivity Status? First Indications of the Value of Counseling 
on Genetic Predisposition to Low-Risk Conditions
C. M. R. Smerecnik1, I. Mesters1, H. Van Keulen1, I. Scheffers2, E. Beeks2, P. 
W. De Leeuw2, N. K. De Vries1, H. De Vries1;  
1University Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2University Hospital Maas -
tricht and Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht (CARIM), Maastricht, 
The Netherlands.
The present study examined the possible pathways for positive effects 
of genetic testing for relatively ‘low-risk’ conditions by (1) exploring the 
impact of being tested for one’s genetic predisposition on intention and 
(2) exploring and comparing the determinants of the intention to re -
strict salt intake with and without a genetic predisposition to being salt-
sensitive. In a cross-sectional within-subjects design, patients being 
tested for genetic predispositions to salt sensitivity reported higher in -
tentions to restrict their salt intake in case their blood pressure should 
prove to be salt-sensitive, confirming the value of genetic testing for 
low-risk conditions. In case the blood pressure should prove to be salt-
sensitive, intention was observed to be significantly associated with 
general health, perceived severity, and self-efficacy, whereas the in -
tention in case no salt-sensitivity was predicted by perceived severity, 
self-efficacy, and current stage of change. Overall, the results suggest 
that genetic testing for low-risk conditions has a positive impact on 
the motivation to engage in preventive behavior. Furthermore, genetic 
counselors should primarily focus on the severity of the genetic predis -
position and the feasibility of the recommended preventive behavior.2
P1343. Developing family route maps - A tool to help access 
information and services for families with genetic conditions
A. Allford , M. C. Winter;  
Genetic Interest Group (patient organisation), London, United Kingdom.
AIM: To explore information and services currently available to families 
with six rare genetic disorders as the first stage in the development of 
Family Route Maps  designed to signpost information and guide pa -
tients, families and carers through the available appropriate services 
within the UK.
METHODS: Focus Groups and supplemental interviews with patients 
belonging to Support Groups as well as interviews with health profes -
sionals who specialise in these conditions. An online patient question -
naire is also available to widen patient participation.
SUMMARY: Common themes were identified and seven clear catego -
ries emerged: Information;Communication; Education of Healthcare 
professionals; Diagnosis of rare genetic disorders; Empowering pa -
tients and parents/carers; Ethical, Legal and Social issues; and, Treat -
ment & Surveillance of patients and families with rare genetic disor -
ders.
In addition to providing future practical guidance to people with the 
named disorders, the project has: Produced a generic Route Map  tem-
plate which can be used for other genetic conditions; Identified sev -
eral themes common to all the groups involved; Highlighted the real 
needs and concerns expressed by patients and their families; Raised 
awareness amongst clinicians of the necessity for clear care pathways 
to help patients living with rare and sometimes life-threatening condi -
tions, with the aim of a protocol for support, monitoring and treatment.
DISCUSSION: The themes have far-reaching implications for health 
service provision for people with genetic disorders, sharing the find -
ings with health care professionals as well as patients is essential.
P1344. The Italian External Quality Control (I-EQC) Programme 
for Beta Thalassemia molecular diagnosis: five years of activity
F. Tosto, V. Falbo, M. Salvatore , G. Floridia, F. Censi, D. Taruscio;  
Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
β-Thalassemia (βT) is one of the most common single gene disorders 
and is prevalent in the Mediterranean region, the Middle East, the In -
dian subcontinent and East Asia. Frequency of the disease may vary 
widely, depending on the ethnic population. The highest incidences are 
reported in Cyprus (14%) and Sardinia (12%) (1).
Approximately 200 different molecular defects affecting the β--globin 
gene ( HBB, 11p15.5 - OMIM 141900) have been reported.
Molecular genetic testing of HBB is available and may be useful for 
prediction of the clinical phenotype, presymptomatic diagnosis of at-
risk family members and prenatal diagnosis.
The I-EQC Programme for βT is performed within the National Project 
for the standardization and quality assurance of genetic tests (2).
Five trials have been performed from 2001 to 2006 (one per year); 
11/12, 14/14, 16/16, 16/16 and 18/18 are the respondent versus en -
rolled public laboratories (75% of Italian public laboratories) (3).
Genotyping results indicate a general good level of quality; 900 alleles 
were analysed in five years. About 98.8% of them was correctly as -
signed; 0.6% was wrongly genotyped.
Methods predominantly used to detect mutations were RDB, ARMS, 
DGGE and sequencing of DNA.
Reporting of results is still inadequate although a new form for the writ -
ten reports was introduced in 2004.
Funded by: “Progetto nazionale per la standardizzazione e l’assicura -
zione di qualità dei test genetici”, Ministry of Health (Rome).
1. Cao and Galanello, N Engl J Med  347(15), 2002;
2. Taruscio et. al., CCLM,  42(8):915-21 2004;
3. Dallapiccola et al., Analysis , 2006
P1345. Definitions of Genetic Testing vary widely among 
international institutions and professional and other 
organizations (EuroGentest WP3.4)
J. Sequeiros1,2;  
1IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS, Porto, Portugal.
This work resulted from the very first of the EC Expert Group “25 Rec -
ommendations on the Ethical, Legal and Social Implications of Genetic 
testing”. It aimed at contributing towards the discussion of a consensus 
definition and its global applicability.
We collected 153 documents, from 77 European and international in -stitutions, national health associations, regulating and research fund -
ing agencies, professional organizations, civic and ethics bodies, phar -
maceutical and insurance industry.
Definitions ranged from being strictly synonymous to DNA-based test -
ing, to any source that can provide unambiguous genetic information. 
They may or not bridge different applications, contexts, mutations and 
material analysed. Pharmacogenetics, somatic mutations, population 
screening, or even carrier testing and caryotyping were included only 
sometimes; while non-medical or research applications, identity testing 
and sources other than genetic material (other tests, physical exam, 
family history) are seldom covered. Some trends could be found when 
comparing different professional organizations or among countries 
and cultures (geneticists vs. pathologists, insurers vs. human rights 
and patient interest-groups, ethical bodies vs. commercial labs, Eu -
rope vs. USA). E.g., the ASHG definition covers only tests in DNA and 
specific gene-products, while the ESHG includes also caryotyping and 
all sources of genetic information.
We conclude that a consensus definition that could be globally devel -
opped and applicable is probably impossible, and that there should be 
instead several context-dependent and/or working definitions, accord -
ing to the purposes aimed. While methodology is irrelevant, informa -
tion content (genetic information) and/or the genetic material analysed 
(DNA-based and cytogenetic testing) may serve different motivations 
for genetic testing. This has practical implications in the scope and 
competences among different professionals, for oncogenetics, phar -
macogenetics and forensic genetics, regulation of health activities, pri -
vate labs, health economics and policies, insurance, reimbursement 
of costs and anti-discrimination policies. All this, in turn, will reflect on 
national and international legislation, either in practice or to be devel -
oped.
P1346. Patient’s and doctor’s attitude to genetic testing for 
common disease predisposition
V. V. Pogrebenkova, O. A. Makeeva , L. I. Minaicheva, V. P. Puzyrev;  
Tomsk Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation.
Developing tools in genetic testing for common diseases demand 
for careful examination of what people and health care professionals 
know and expect from new technologies.
100 doctors and 100randomly selected people from general rural 
population (Tomsk,Russia) were studied in respect to their attitude 
to genetic testing for diseases predisposition with the help of special 
questionnaires.
It was revealed that 78% of respondents would like to determine 
the risk for diseases with genetic predisposition. The main reasons 
to undergo such investigation were people’s concern about their 
health(43%), doctor’s recommendation(21%), and curiosity(20%). If 
the elevated risk for any of common diseases would be diagnosed 
than 88% of people would change their habits and only 12% would 
not change anything. The desire of people to evaluate their own risk of 
probable diseases did not depend from the level of education, but last 
seriously affected the people’s awareness about new genetic tools. 
Positive attitude to a suggestion to undergo genetic testing for disease 
predisposition can be influenced by current patient’s health status -
most of people(75-80%) whom self-reported health was “excellent”, 
“good” or “normal”would like to be tested whereas in a group who de -
fined their health status as “unsatisfactory” only 50% expressed their 
wish to be tested genetically.
93%of doctors considered future opportunities with genetic testing to 
be useful for the purpose of prophylaxis-33%, more accurate defini -
tion of patient’s diagnoses(47%), and in adjusting patient’s manage -
ment(17%). 95% of responded doctors were sure that results of ge -
netic testing would be useful to persuade their patients to change life 
style with the aim of prophylaxis.
The results of that study have shown the considerable interest of both 
patients and doctors for arising new genetic technologies in the sphere 
on common disease predisposition testing, positive attitude of both 
groups as well as the need of education in that sphere.
P1347. Information on genetic testing in Europe : successes and 
difficulties
C. Gaudebout1, V. Thibaudeau1, M. A. Morris2, E. Dequeker3, A. Corveleyn3, 
B. Dallapiccola4, R. Mingarelli4, J. Schmidtke5, K. Rommel6, D. Donnai7, E. Gil -
laspy7, B. Urbero1, S. Aymé1;  Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy
1Inserm sc11, Paris, France, 2Service of genetic medicine, University hospital, 
Geneva, Switzerland, 3EuroGenTest, Leuven, Belgium, 4CSS-Mendel Institute, 
Rome, Italy, 5Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany, 6Med-
izinische Hochschule, Hannover, Germany, 7Academic Unit of Medical Genet -
ics, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Genetic tests are now offered internationally, through both public and 
private sector genetic testing services. The physicians prescribing 
these test and the biologists receiving the samples need to know which 
tests are available, where they are offered and whether the identified 
laboratories meet quality standards. To meet this need, www.orpha.
net started ten years ago to set up a database of clinical laboratories 
in the field of rare diseases. The data collection covered 1 country in 
1997, 7 in 2001, 15 in 2003, and 22 in 2006. It will cover 35 countries 
in the coming two years. This major effort was made possible thanks 
to the support of the EuroGenTest NoE, with additional resources from 
the EC DG for public health. Currently, the database includes data 
from 1,166 laboratories offering 14,451 tests for 1,318 diseases. The 
data collection is done mainly at the country level through partner -
ships with key leaders in the field. The laboratories are requested to 
fill-in an extensive questionnaire (either online or by more traditional 
means). The response rate is about 80% after three reminders. All the 
information is updated yearly through an online questionnaire already 
containing the existing information, in order to minimize the workload 
for the laboratory. One of the identified problems is the large number 
of requests that laboratories receive to complete surveys. This infor -
mation is widely used by our website visitors. Orphanet is accessed 
daily by over 20,000 users, of which 20% are looking for information 
on genetic testing.
P1348. Justice in delivering genetics: assessing the role of 
intellectual property law
L. Bernier ;  
University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, PQ, Canada.
While it is believed that genetics could offer numerous opportunities for 
global health improvement and play an important role in meeting the 
UN Millennium Development Goals  (MDGs), there is also a fear that 
existing global health inequalities will be amplified by the evolution of 
genetics. There are a plethora of normative, socio-economic and politi -
cal obstacles to more equitable distribution of health and genetic re -
lated benefits that will be addressed in the course of this presentation 
to get a better understanding of how public policy should be designed. 
This evaluation is vital to ensure that legal regimes and adequate pub -
lic policy assist in ensuring that this promising field develops in a way 
that improves people’s health without leaving the most vulnerable out -
side of the process.
My paper attempts to determine how and if a justice theory of distribu -
tion translates into positive law. I chose to assess the patent system in 
referring to the standard of access through different lenses and to how 
underlying politics and economics matter. This leads me to realise that 
the application of strong patent rights in genetics is more compatible 
with the reduction of the public commons, the creation of health gaps 
associated with people’s capacity to pay, and with an international ba -
sic structure established by a few powerful stakeholders. This evalu -
ation is vital to ensure that public policy can assist in ensuring that 
genetics develops in a way that improves health without leaving the 
most vulnerable outside of the process.
P1349. Patient Empowerment In Clinical Genetics Services: A 
New Model Developed from Qualitative Research
M. McAllister1,2,3, K. Payne1,3, S. Nicholls1, R. McLeod1,2,3, D. Donnai1,2,3, L. 
Davies4;  
1Nowgen, The North West Genetics Knowledge Park, Manchester, United King -
dom, 2North West Regional Clinical Genetics Department, St Mary’s Hospital, 
Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Academic Unit of Medical Genetics, University 
of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Health Economics Unit, Univer -
sity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Measuring the benefits to patients from using clinical genetics services 
is problematic, with little agreement about appropriate outcome do -
mains. The aim in this qualitative grounded theory study was to devel -
op a theoretical framework describing how patients and their families 
benefit from using clinical genetics services. Seven focus groups and 
19 interviews were conducted with patients, representatives from pa -
tient support organisations, and health professionals. Results suggest that the patient benefits from using genetics services could be sum -
marised by a new concept of empowerment. Empowerment includes 
dimensions of decision-making, knowledge and understanding, future-
orientation and instrumentality. Empowerment is a similar concept to 
that of perceived personal control (PPC), and a measure of PPC has 
been developed for use in evaluating clinical genetics services. How -
ever, empowerment includes some benefits not captured by PPC relat -
ing to the empowerment of other at-risk relatives, and future genera -
tions. The present study also identified what genetics services can do 
to empower patients and their families, such as providing information 
and counselling, and better guidance through the health and social 
care systems. Aspects of service process identified as contributing to 
empowerment included providing time to talk, open access and yearly 
follow-up. These findings will contribute to identifying a core set of out -
come measures for clinical genetics services.
P1350. Decision models evaluating genetic testing in 
haemochromatosis: a multidisciplinary collaboration.
C. Patch1,2, J. Bryant3, K. Cooper3, J. Picot3, P. Roderick2, W. Rosenberg2, A. 
Clegg3;  
1Guys and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 
2University of Southampton Medical School, Southampton, United Kingdom, 
3Southampton Health Technologies Assessment Centre, Southampton, United 
Kingdom.
It’s recognised that evaluation of genetic technologies requires collab -
orations between geneticists, health service researchers, public health 
and health economics. We present the methods used in a Health 
Technology Assessment examining the clinical utility of DNA testing in 
haemochromatosis (HHC). The aim being to evaluate the use of DNA 
tests for detecting HHC in subgroups of patients suspected of having 
the disorder on the basis of clinical presentation and disturbed iron 
parameters, and in family members of those diagnosed with haemo -
chromatosis. A clear distinction is drawn between diagnostic strategies 
in those suspected of having haemochromatosis and testing strategies 
in family members.
Objectives and Methods: To determine the clinical validity of DNA tests 
to diagnose HHC.
To summarise the evidence on the clinical utility of diagnostic strate -
gies using DNA tests to detect cases for treatment or monitoring in 
terms of clinical- and cost effectiveness.
To compare costs and consequences by decision analytic modeling of 
diagnostic algorithms for HHC and family testing strategies with and 
without DNA testing in terms of cost per case detected.
The structure and data inputs of all the decision trees are informed by 
systematic literature reviews, the results of systematic searches and 
discussion with experts. Costs will be derived from primary data from 
previous studies, and national and local NHS unit costs. The outcome 
will be reported as cost per case detected.
Results: The structure of the decision models will be presented and the 
results of the reviews used to provide data to populate the models.
P1351. Two years Belgian experience in molecular diagnosis of 
Haemophilia.
N. Lannoy1, I. Abinet1, A. Bosmans1, C. Verellen1, C. Vermylen2, C. Hermans3, 
K. Dahan1;  
1Centre for Human Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, 
Belgium, 2Department of Paediatric, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brus -
sels, Belgium, 3Department of Haematology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, 
Brussels, Belgium.
Deficiency or dysfunction of blood coagulation Factor VIII (F8) or factor 
IX (F9) causes Haemophilia A and B, the two most common bleeding 
disorders affecting one in 5000 or in 30000 males respectively. Clini -
cally, the classification as mild, moderate or severe depends on the 
level of clotting factor which is strongly linked to the nature of genetic 
defect. The two responsible genes F8 and F9 are located on Xq28 and 
respectively encode a mature protein of 2332 and 415 amino acids. 
Since 2005, we performed mutational testing on 103 haemophilia A 
(61 severe, 42 moderate/mild) and 21 haemophilia B (9 severe, 12 
moderate/mild) unrelated individuals from the Haemophilia Centre 
in the Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc. In the severe haemophilia 
A group, using a multistep strategy including mutation targeted PCR, 
Southern blot and gene dosage by MLPA technology (MRC-Holland), 
we observed one inversion of intron 1 (1%), 24 inversions of intron Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy
22 (40%), 4 deletions and 1 duplication (8%). F8 sequencing showed 
68 additional mutations distributed throughout the coding exons. Of 
the 68 mutations, 17 (28%) predicted premature truncation in the se -
vere group while the others are amino acid substitutions in both severe 
(11/61, 18%) and moderate/mild group (40/42, 95%). F9 sequencing 
allowed the detection of all mutations (17 missense, 2 small deletions, 
1 small insertion and 1 large deletion). In conclusion: 90 distinct muta -
tions including 25 novel changes unreported so far were found in Bel -
gian haemophilia individuals underlying the interest of genetic testing 
for carrier detection and prediction of antibodies production.
P1352. Development of molecular biology laboratory training 
courses for health care professionals at the North West Genetics 
Knowledge Park in the UK
M. J. Leech1,2, F. Salway3, F. Jury3, P. Day3, D. Carthy3, K. Mathieson1,2, P. Fine -
gold1,2, D. Donnai1,2, H. Middleton-Price1,2;  
1North West Genetics Knowledge Park, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Uni-
versity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Centre for Integrated 
Genomic Medical Research, University of Manchester, Manchester, United 
Kingdom.
Techniques for analysing genetic variants related to disease and treat -
ment are constantly advancing allowing more sophisticated and rapid 
analysis of patient samples. The consequence of greater access to 
these techniques is that many clinical disciplines have to embrace the 
new technology.
The North West Genetics Knowledge Park is developing a programme 
of training courses for health professionals in response to the ex -
pressed need for training in practical molecular genetics laboratory 
techniques. The first of these training courses - a national, recurrent 
two-day course for clinical cytogeneticists, accredited by The Royal 
College of Pathologists - was run in January 2007 with successful 
training outcomes. Course evaluation has provided useful insights and 
protocols for future development: it is intended that the developmen -
tal process for this pilot course could be replicated with other health 
professionals.
An opinion canvassing exercise was initiated within the cytogenetics 
profession. A questionnaire was sent to the leads of UK clinical cytoge -
netics laboratories via the Association of Clinical Cytogeneticists, to as -
sess the need for a laboratory-based training course. Questions were 
asked about the optimum length of a course and the key laboratory 
techniques they would want to see included. The initial course content 
was based on this consultation. Techniques in the intensive two-day 
course included the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), Quantitative 
Florescence (QF) PCR, Multiplex Ligation Dependent Probe Amplifica -
tion (MLPA) and microarrays.
Further, specific training courses are being developed for profession -
als working in other clinical disciplines including general pathology 
laboratory staff, using the successful protocol used for cytogenetics 
professionals.
P1353. Health Perception in individuals requesting pre-
symptomatic testing for late-onset neurological diseases
Â. M. T. Leite , J. Sequeiros, C. Paul;  
Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portugal.
Health perceptions are personal beliefs and assessments of general 
health and show us how people see themselves as being well or not. 
Health perceptions are a subjective concept and may reflect more in -
dividual feelings and beliefs than their current health state. Individual 
perceptions about their own health are very important for counseling 
in late-onset diseases (Huntington’s disease, Machado-Joseph’s dis -
ease and familial amyloid neuropathy).
Our aim is to evaluate the health perception of the individuals that 
come for pre-symptomatic testing and compare them with healthy 
people, not at risk for genetic disease.
HYPOTHESIS Individuals at-risk that come for pre-symptomatic test -
ing may present a worst health perception and show more adverse 
indicators regarding their health, once they are pressed by the doubt of 
being or not being a carrier for an incapacitating disease.
RESULTS
• There are significant differences regarding factor “current health”. 
The group at-risk presents a more positive perception about their cur -
rent health.
• The group at-risk shows higher health perception indicators than the control group.
• The thinks that their current health is better than the control group 
and, more than this one, try to continue their life even when feeling 
ill; the group at-risk see themselves healthier and feeling well-being 
longer than the control group. The group at-risk is more reserved when 
feeling ill and is more worried with their health than the control group.
• The control group avoids that illness interferes in their lives, more 
than the group at-risk. The control group has more expectations about 
having a healthier life and suffered less delayed diseases.
P1354. The North West Genetics Knowledge Park (Nowgen): the 
first five years
H. R. Middleton-Price1,2, P. Finegold1,2, Z. Talks1,3, J. Dobson1,3, D. Donnai1,2;  
1North West Genetics Knowledge Park, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Uni-
versity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Central Manchester and 
Manchester Children’s University Hospitals NHS Trust, Manchester, United 
Kingdom.
Nowgen was set up as one of six Genetics Knowledge Parks (GKPs) 
in the UK, funded by the Department of Health for five years in 2002.
The vision for Nowgen was to build on the achievements of one of the 
most comprehensive genetics services in the UK, to create multidisci -
plinary work programmes. This was served by the award of €6 million 
to build The Nowgen Centre in Manchester, providing a focus for all 
Nowgen’s activities, including networking events to create links with 
industry, aimed at increasing innovation.
Nowgen has created a multidisciplinary health services research pro -
gramme to improve delivery of genetic medicine whilst considering 
priorities for patients. Our innovative approach comprises: evaluation 
of clinical genetics services; economic evaluation of new services and 
technologies; an academic research programme on ethical and so -
cial dimensions; projects mainstreaming genetics into the NHS; a pro -
gramme of professional education.
We place public engagement at the core of our activity, since we con -
sider that informed choices about priorities in healthcare will be critical 
to the integration of genetics into mainstream medicine. Through its 
Public Programmes, Nowgen is highly regarded for its work in educa -
tion and dialogue, empowering people to make decisions about health 
management.
Nowgen has established a coherent programme (of health services re -
search, professional training, commercial events, and public engage -
ment and education), strategic relationships and clear commercial 
opportunities for the future. As we reflect on achievements to date, 
we are revising our strategy to impact health and science policy and 
practice over the next five years.
P1355. Study on causes of hearing loss and patterns of 
inheritance of genetic deafness in Iran
N. Mehran , C. Azimi;  
Cancer Institute,Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Repub -
lic of Iran.
Hearing loss is one of the most frequent anomalies in some parts of 
the world. A deaf person suffers many problems such as social rela -
tionships, information acquisition from his/her environment, increased 
anger, and treatment costs.Through genetic counseling, we may de -
crease the chance of birth of deaf people.To do so, we need an ac -
curate statistical data of causes of hearing loss and patterns of inheri -
tance in genetic deafness in every population.
The aim of this study was to find out the causes of hearing loss and 
patterns of inheritance of genetic deafness among our referred pa -
tients.
We studied all the 7092 pedigrees of patients which referred to us 
for genetic counseling during the years 2001-2004. From 7092 pedi -
grees, 335 had hearing loss. Among these 335 pedigrees, 616 cases 
of hearing loss were found.Therefore, these 616 cases were studied 
according to the causes of hearing loss, patterns of inheritance, con -
sanguineous and non-consanguineous marriages, and sex by using 
SPSS software. Our study showed that genetic causes was the main 
etiology of hearing loss (67.8%).The most frequent pattern of inheri -
tance was autosomal recessive (86.7%),after that autosomal dominant 
(11.2%) and the last pattern was X-linked(2.1%).
In consanguineous marriages, the most frequent cause of hearing loss 
was genetic causes while in non-consanguineous marriages the most 
frequent cause was acquired and unknown causes. The pattern of Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy
autosomal dominant was more frequent in non-consanguineous mar -
riages than consanguineous marriages. Our study also showed that 
there was no relation between sex and cause of hearing loss and pat -
terns of inheritance.
P1356. Intention towards ethnicity-based carrier screening 
referral for hereditary hemoglobinopathies among primary 
health care providers in the Netherlands
S. S. Weinreich1,2, E. S. M. de Lange-de Klerk3, F. Rijmen3, M. C. Cornel1,2, M. 
de Kinderen4, A. M. C. Plass1,2;  
1VU University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Section Com -
munity Genetics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2VU University Medical Center, 
Institute for Research in Extramural Medicine (EMGO), Amsterdam, The Neth -
erlands, 3VU University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Epidemiology 
and Biostatistics, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 4Erfocentrum, Soestdijk, The 
Netherlands.
In the Netherlands, carriership risks for hereditary haemoglobinopa -
thies are particularly high in (descendants of) of immigrants from Su -
rinam, the Antilles, Turkey, Morocco and western Africa, but general 
practitioners and midwives have no formal guidelines for informing 
their patients about carrier screening for these diseases. Patients too 
may be unaware of options for testing. The aim of this pilot was to 
explore attitudes and intentions towards haemoglobinopathy carrier 
screening on the basis of ethnicity, in primary health care providers.
Intention to refer patients for carrier screening was measured using 
structured questionnaires based on the theory of planned behaviour. 
Surveys were collected from 191 primary health care providers. At -
titude towards patient-education programmes about the subject was 
positive, but they showed no clear intention to refer patients for carrier 
screening solely on the basis of ethnicity (on 7-point scales, general 
practitioners and midwives had respective median scores of 5.0 and 
5.7 for attitude and 4.0 and 4.5 for intention). Regression analysis 
showed that social norm explained 43% of intention to refer for carrier 
screening. Colleagues’ (supposed) opinions are thus a strong influ -
ence. Both professional groups do take ethnicity into account when 
diagnosing anaemic patients, as prescribed by existing guidelines.
Primary health care providers were also invited to attend an informa -
tional session about screening and testing for hereditary hemoglobin -
opathies. Attendees of such sessions (N=33) did not score differently 
than persons surveyed beforehand (N=166), on any of the psychologi -
cal parameters. Thus, new measures are needed to change behaviour 
in carrier screening referral.
P1357. Molecular Characterization of the Diseases B- 
Thalassemia & Hemophilia-A amongst the people of Jammu & 
Kashmir State
S. C. Gupta , T. R. Raina, P. Kumar, V. Dogra, W. K. Balwan;  
Human Genetic Research cum Counselling Centre, University of Jammu, 
Jammu, India.
The present study on the Molecular Characterization of the Diseases 
B-Thalassemia & Hemophilia-A affecting the people of J&K State, 
India,has been carried out with an aim to characterize the types of 
mutations affecting populations of J&K State and also to identify the 
carriers amongst these populations. During this study the primers we 
used had already been used by the people in the adjoining states. 
Present study helped in detecting the common mutations and this has 
successfully been been used for the purpose of Genetic Counselling in 
the Human Genetic Research cum Counselling Centre, in Jammu. De -
tails of the Primers used in the present study and the results obtained 
shall be discussed.
P1358. Presymptomatic testing for Huntingtons disease in 
Norway
K. Bjørgo1, M. Fannemel1, K. Eiklid1, E. Blinkenberg2, O. Solberg3, J. Apold2, A. 
Heiberg4, L. Retterstol1;  
1Dept. of Medical Genetics, Ulleval University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Dept. of 
Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 3Center for 
Rare Diseases, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Center, Oslo, Norway, 
4Dept. of Medical Genetics, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Center, 
Oslo, Norway.
Huntington’s disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenera -
tive disease caused by an expanded number of CAG repeats in the 
HD-gene. The number of HD patients in Norway is estimated to 225 and there are approximately 1125 risk individuals. Empirically, most of 
these are aware of their increased risk. We present nationwide data of 
presymptomatic tests in Norway since 1990.
HD was mapped to chromosome 4p in 1983 and the HD-gene was iso -
lated in 1993. Direct PCR-analysis of the gene has been available in 
Norway since then. Presymptomatic testing started at Ullevål Univer -
sity Hospital in Oslo in 1990 and at Haukeland University Hospital in 
Bergen in 2003. A standardized test procedure following the IHA/WFA 
guidelines has been used. In addition, there has been a possibility of 
an individual follow-up consultation in the department of medical ge -
netics or follow-up in group sessions.
In the years 1990-93, 54 risk individuals underwent linkage analysis 
and in the years 1994-99, 108 risk individuals were tested directly. 
In the period 2000-06 180 risk individuals have been tested. Based 
on this number, we estimate that 16 % of Norwegian risk individuals 
chose presymptomatic testing in recent years. Of these risk individu -
als, 80 (44 %) were HD gene carriers. Up to 2006, a total number of 
342 persons have completed presymptomatic testing for HD.
Conclusion: Sixteen percent of Norwegian HD risk individuals choose 
presymptomatic testing. This is in line with other Western European 
countries.
P1359. Time trends in incidence of cystic fibrosis in two 
European regions: Data from two newborn screening 
programmes.
V. Scotet1,2, B. M. Assael3, I. Duguépéroux1,2, M. P. Audrézet1,4, C. Férec1,4, C. 
Castellani3;  
1Inserm U 613, Brest, France, 2Université, Brest, France, 3Cystic Fibrosis Cen -
ter, Verona, Italy, 4CHU Brest, Hôpital Morvan, Brest, France.
This study aimed to determine the incidence of cystic fibrosis (CF) and 
its time trends over a 16-year period (1990-2005) in two European 
regions which have a long practice of newborn screening for CF: Brit -
tany (western France) and Veneto/Trentino Alto-Adige (northeastern 
Italy). The birth incidence of CF was 1/3153 in Brittany and 1/3540 
in Veneto/Trentino, what did not differ significantly ( p=0.2450). Time 
trends analysis using Poisson regression revealed that the birth in -
cidence decreased significantly in the Italian area over the 16-year 
period (average annual percent change (AAPC): -4.7% - 95% CI: [-
7.3; -2.0] - p=0.0008), whereas this trend was not observed in Brittany 
(AAPC: -0.6% - 95% CI: [-3.7; 2.5] - p=0.6909). The uptake of prenatal 
diagnosis (PD) appeared more common in Brittany. By incorporating 
in the calculations all the terminations of CF-affected fetuses made 
over the same period (79 for Brittany and 31 for Veneto/Trentino), the 
adjusted incidence of CF would be 1/2191 in Brittany and 1/3116 in 
Veneto/Trentino. This would correspond to a change in the incidence 
rates of 30.5% for the first region (highly significant - p=0.0002) and 
of 12.0% for the second one (not significant - p=0.1600). As the mo -
tive of each PD was registered (previous affected child, family testing, 
prenatal screening, echogenic bowel), the impact on the incidence of 
the various public health policies could easily be measured. This study 
illustrates how the incidence of a disease evolves according the region 
characteristics, the public health strategies implemented and the cul -
tural attitudes towards PD.
P1360. A comprehensive and practical model to integrate 
Genomic Services in Iranian Primary Health Care (PHC) system, 
a pilot survey
V. R. Yassaee1, H. Malekafzali2, B. Malekafzali3, F. Yassaee4;  
1Genomic Research Center, Shaheed Beheshti University of Medical Sci -
ences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Deputy for Research, Iranian Ministry 
of Health, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Islamic AZAD Medical University, 
Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Dept. of Gynecology, Shaheed Beheshti Uni -
versity of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Background: Over the last 25 years, promotion level of public educa -
tion along with a high range of health services in both rural and urban 
areas of Iran has lead to a remarkable improvement of health indices. 
In the meantime, a national screening program for thalassemia has 
also been set up in Primary Health Care (PHC), resulted in a 70% 
reduction in the expected annual birth rate of affected infants (Sama -
vat A. et. al. 2004). In this survey, we are seeking a practical model to 
implement a wide range of genomic services in the PHC of Iran.
Method: There are different genomic testing strategies worldwide. 
Some are offered publicly such as in the UK and some are offered Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy
privately such as in the USA, for instance.
Since 2004, a screening program has been set up in a well-defined 
population of Tehran, Iran’s capital. Based on our experiments earned 
from referral/follow-up system within PHC, we designed 2 distinctive 
and comprehensive programs for the urban and rural areas.
We therefore proposed following 3 phases:
1-Mobilizing and organizing the community to active participation;
2-Implementation,
3-Assessment the program.
Conclusion: As a general condition of Iran, population of 68 millions, 
population age distribution mean which is 23 years, high rate of con -
sanguinity, strength of national PHC, general public demand, and the 
human rights may direct us to offer a national extraordinary health ser -
vices including genomic services.
This pilot survey may lead us to achieve valuable results; however, 
further studies are required to reach a comprehensive model.
P1361. Implementation of the Swiss Federal Law of Human 
Genetic Analysis
M. C. Rebsamen1, I. Filges1, C. Benedetti2, M. A. Morris1;  
1Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Service of Genetic Medicine, Geneva Uni -
versity Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Federal Office of Public Health, Berne, 
Switzerland.
The new Swiss Federal Law of Human Genetic Analysis (LAGH), 
applicable from April 2007, fixes the legal framework for prescribing 
and performing non-research genetic tests in humans. In the era of 
constantly-increasing genetic knowledge and of rapidly progressing 
laboratory techniques, the LAGH is designed to protect human dignity, 
prevent abuses and ensure a high standard of testing.
We will focus principally on the medical application of the Law, which 
also encompasses testing in legal, workplace and insurance contexts 
including DNA profiling for investigating parentage and for identifica -
tion purposes in civil and administrative proceedings.
Non-directive genetic counselling and respect of the patient’s right to 
autodetermination is required and the conditions are described in de -
tail in the text of the Law.
Informed consent is required before performing any genetic testing, 
and must be obtained in writing before tests for presymptomatic, pre -
natal and “family planning” (reproductive choice) purposes.
Prescription of genetic tests is restricted to medical doctors and, in pre -
natal or presymptomatic settings, to those with specific competence in 
genetic counselling.
Licensing to perform molecular or cytogenetic testing is obligatory. 
The accompanying Ordinance on Human Genetic Analysis defines 
the criteria for the minimum acceptable standard of quality manage -
ment, including the competence of the laboratory director and person -
nel, EQA and quality assurance requirements comparable to the ISO 
15189 standard.
The obligations defined by the LAGH are closely based on pre-existing 
national and international standards and practices, yet Switzerland is 
one of the first countries in the World to transfer these into law.
P1362. Medical genetic service of Leningrad province: 2003-2005 
years
I. A. Ivanov1,2, M. O. Mkheidze2;  
1District Children Hospital, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Medical Acad -
emy for postgraduate studying, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Medical genetics service is stationed at District Children Hospital. It 
works in close co-operation with the Department of Medical Genet -
ics of the MAPS, Municipal Centre of Medical Genetics etc. Genetic 
service realized neonatal screening for PKU and CH, cytogenetic in -
vestigations for making diagnosis of chromosomal pathology (2840 
samples), second trimester prenatal screening for congenital defects, 
double-test, (18000 pregnant women); confirmation of hereditary di -
agnosis, medical care, long term inpatient and outpatient care, dietary 
management, genetic counseling. 36589 of newborns(98,65%) were 
examined through neonatal screening. Five cases of PKU and five 
cases of CH were diagnosed. Cohort of children with PKU (23 cases) 
and with CH (46 cases) has special dietary and medicinal treatment. 
Ultrasound investigation was performed for pregnant women (25821of 
examinations). 225 of the fetuses were found to have congenital mal -
formations. 160 of pregnancies were interrupted owing to congenital 
malformations or chromosomal diseases of the fetuses.P1363. Sequencing and MLPA under diagnostic rules
D. du Sart ;  
Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia.
The field of molecular genetics is innovative and dynamic, resulting in 
continual upgrading or improvement of technology. Molecular genetic 
diagnostics therefore needs to be responsive to this to bring new or 
improved technology into clinical management of patients and fami -
lies, but in the context of strict regulation and control. In Australia, the 
National Pathology Accreditation Advisory Council (NPAAC), the body 
responsible for setting guidelines and standards for medical labora -
tory accreditation, have released standards for validation of in-house 
developed assays for use in diagnostic testing. The detailed require -
ments include full documentation of the design phase, the production 
phase, the technical validation phase and the monitoring phase.
The design phase includes literature review and /or peer consultation 
process to identify alternatives and the experience of other as well as 
the clinical usefulness of the proposed assay. The production phase 
includes conforming to safety principals for patients and laboratory 
staff as well as assessment of the analytical performance and the clini -
cal performance of the assay. The technical validation phase includes 
assessment of the assay sensitivity and specificity, measurement of 
uncertainty if applicable and medically relevant criteria. The monitoring 
phase includes assessment of the assay performance in internal QC, 
external QAP or sample exchanges with other laboratories. The pre -
sentation will encapsulate the above phases of validation for molecular 
genetic testing in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), 
using a capillary sequencing assay to detect unknown sequence 
changes and the MLPA assay (multiplex ligation-dependent probe am -
plification) to detect intragenic or whole gene deletion mutations.
P1364. Myotonic Dystrophy in Yakuts (Russian Federation)
A. L. Sukhomyasova1, N. R. Maximova2;  
1Republican Hospital No. 1 - National Center of Medicine, Yakutsk, Russian 
Federation, 2Yakutsk Science Center of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences 
and the Government of the RS(Y), Yakutsk, Russian Federation.
In the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) among Yakuts (430 thousand peo -
ple) we have documented a high prevalence of DM1, that is is 21,3 per 
100 thousand.
The purpose of this research was studying distribution among different 
ethinc groups, the clinical presentations of myotonic dystrophy and the 
distribution of the CTG-repeat in the indiginous populations of Yakutia. 
Two regions of accumulation of DM1 are established in the territories 
of Viluiskii and the Central group of uluses. In 35 Yakut families the 
classical form of myotonic dystrophy prevails (81,5 %), but we also 
encountered congenital and early childhood forms of the disease. The 
median age of patients with DM1 was 31,4±1,5 years, and the average 
age of onset was 16,8±1,1 years. The most common clinical presenta -
tions were, progressive muscular weakness, cardiovascular and endo -
crinological symptoms. Family studies revealed clinical variability and 
anticipation. We analysed the distribution of CTG-repeat alleles in the 
normal Yakut population(Federova et al., 2003) in the two main ethnic 
groups groups (Viluiskii, Central, Northern Yakuts - 192 individuals). 
We found 18 different allelic variants from 5 up to 29 CTG-repeats. The 
most common alleles had 12 and 13 repeats (combined prevalence 
79 %). We found a low frequency (3-6 %) of unstable alleles with > 19 
CTG repeats.
We suggest that one of the reasons for the accumulation of DM1 in 
the Yakut population is a founder effect of these unstable alleles. This 
needs to be confirmed in further studies. A method of preventive main -
tenance of DM1 in Yakuts is to provide effective medical-genetic con -
sultation with prenatal DNA-diagnostics.
P1365. Implementing Personal Health Records for 
Neurofibromatosis Type 1 - Patients‘ and Health Care 
Professionals‘ Views and Experiences
P. M. Griffiths1, S. Huson1, R. Abbott1,2, E. Howard1, J. Clayton-Smith1, K. Met -
calfe1, G. Evans1, S. Harrison1, M. Kenney1, S. Collitt1, K. Strong1, B. Kerr1;  
1Central Manchester and Manchester Children’s Hospitals NHS Trust, Man -
chester, United Kingdom, 2The Neurofibromatosis Association, Kingston upon 
Thames, United Kingdom.
Personal health records (PHRs) are client held records. As part of our 
Service Development Project, we have developed a PHR for children Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy
and adults with Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (Nf1).
Nf1 is a relatively common autosomal dominant condition characterised 
by wide variability in its clinical expression. Birth incidence is about 1 in 
3,000 which means there are approximately 164,000 affected individu -
als in the EU. The course of the disease is unpredictable and affected 
individuals carry a lifelong risk of developing serious complications. 
Fortunately, most people affected with Nf1 will have skin signs only, 
but there is still a need for vigilance particularly during the first five 
years, and also during adolescence, when the risks of developing spe -
cific types of complications are greater. Because of this, regular clinical 
reviews and targeted screenings are important in the management of 
these patients, and it is hoped that the PHR will facilitate this, particu -
larly where there is a high disease burden and patients are under the 
care of several specialists.
Nearly 200 PHRs have been issued to Nf1 patients attending clinics 
in Manchester, Liverpool and Newcastle. An evaluation exercise is un -
derway which will look at the effectiveness of PHRs as clinical tools, 
and explore patients’ and health care professionals’ experiences using 
the records. This submission will present the results from this evalua -
tion and will include feedback from a patient satisfaction survey, audit 
data regarding record use, and feedback from a questionnaire given 
to health care professionals working in a variety of roles and clinical 
specialities.
P1366. Exploring existing and deliberated community 
perspectives of newborn screening in Australia to inform policy 
standards in newborn screening and the storage and use of 
dried blood spots
K. K. Barlow-Stewart ;  
Centre for Genetics Education, NSW Health, Sydney, Australia.
Since the 1960s newborn screening (NBS) for several rare and serious 
disorders has been in place across Australia and testing now enables 
the early detection of over 30 conditions. Policies across Australian 
States have diverged in some aspects of NBS, especially in the reten -
tion and further use of the dried blood spots collected as part of the 
screening. To date there has been limited empirical evidence of wider 
community attitudes to inform the deliberations of health professionals 
and policy makers towards national consistency.
Methodologies: Nine moderated small group discussions were held 
with 40 participants including young adults, recent parents and old -
er parents. The groups were reconvened one week later for further 
discussion enabling considered deliberation of the issues raised and 
prompted by the stimulus materials provided.
Results: The findings suggest that there is limited community aware -
ness of the public health importance of NBS and that resulting bio -
logical samples are stored for varying periods in different Australian 
States. Members of the wider community presented with opportunities 
to consider current procedures and policies surrounding consent, stor -
age and further use of the dried blood spots appear reassured and to 
have high levels of trust. However there are clearly some groups who 
have concerns with the storage of dried blood spot specimens and 
perceive that these may be abused.
Conclusions: The findings are important for improving current com -
munications about NBS, developing policies, maintaining public confi -
dence and the development of State and National initiatives in genetic 
health.
P1367. The overlapping area between Osteogenesis Imperfecta 
and child physical abuse: a bibliometric analysis.
C. Ranzato1, M. Rosa Rizzotto1, E. Lenzini2, P. Facchin1;  
1Epidemiology & Community Medicine Unit - Paediatric Department, Padova, 
Italy, 2Molecular Cytogenetic Lab - Paediatric Department, Padova, Italy.
Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a hereditary connective tissue disor -
der. Its manifestations are fragile bones, multiple bone fractures, bone 
deformities with a history of minimal or no trauma. This clinical picture 
may be observed in Child Physical Abuse (CPA). CPA is a relevant 
differential diagnosis when a child presents unexplained fractures. Aim 
is to quantify the weight and the trends of the worldwide literature on 
OI and CPA, in order to measure if and how the 2 topics overlap and 
are studied together. A retrospective bibliometric analysis was carried 
out. Through PubMed, literature was explored and 2 quoted phras -
es Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI), Child Physical Abuse (CPA) were 
searched in all available manuscripts. Starting from retrieved papers, a descriptive analysis and a text mining search were performed (SAS 
software). Search retrieved 7,140 manuscripts, distributed per interval 
period (1950-2006) per each DB as follows: OI 48%, CPA 52%. Eng -
lish is the leading language of publication: OI 70%, CPA 93%. For both 
DBs, top Countries of publication are USA and UK. An overlapping 
area exists between OI & CPA: 70 manuscripts representing the 1% of 
the whole (1969-2006), written in English (84%) and published in the 
US and UK (45% and 29%). Further results on text mining search will 
follow. Results obtained show that English-written papers predominate 
and understanding English results fundamental to update oneself. The 
overlapping area is nearly absent despite the strong correlation of the 
two issues, it means that bibliographic search on CPA/differential di -
agnosis could be easily biased retrieving incomplete results, with the 
continuous risk of falling in a bibliographic cul-de-sac.
P1368. Psychological effects of parenting stress on parents of 
Down Syndrome children
A. Alpman1, T. Cankaya1, B. Durmaz1, A. Vahabi2, C. Gunduz3, O. Cogulu1, F. 
Ozkinay1;  
1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, 
2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, 
Turkey, 3Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, 
Izmir, Turkey.
Down syndrome (DS) occuring in one out of 800 live births is the most 
frequent genetic cause of mental retardation and associated medical 
problems. Having a child with DS is an unexpected and stressful ex -
perience for most parents but they are the ones who have a key role 
to play in determining the extent of their child’s handicap. In addition 
to this, cultural and social aspects play a great role in determining the 
behaviors of the mother and the father; usually differ in a great va -
riety. The aim of the study is to evaluate the social, economical and 
individual problems of the parents who have a child with DS by using 
a questionnaire designed by our group. The questionnaire consisted 
of 18 questions assessing the families’ characteristics, their relations 
with each other and the other people and their attitudes towards the 
DS child. We found out that DS children mostly spent their time by their 
mothers, and mothers reported higher levels of stress than fathers 
(p<0.05). Most of the parents tried to solve their problems by helping 
each other, however the rate of mothers who reported higher possibili -
ties to divorce was significantly higher than the fathers (p<0.05). We 
focused on the effect of having a child with Down syndrome on the 
parents, factors causing problems on the family and the characteristics 
of a family with Down syndrome children. In conclusion genetic coun -
seling and follow-up visits of those families need more specified and 
professional approach.
P1369. Are DNA patents hampering genetic testing? - An 
empirical study
N. Berthels1,2, B. Verbeure1, G. Matthijs2, G. Van Overwalle1;  
1Centre for Intellectual Property Rights, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, 
Belgium, 2Department of Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium.
In the debate about DNA patenting and its impact on public health ser -
vices and access thereto, empirical data are essential to demonstrate 
whether patents are hindering access to diagnostic testing or not. We 
provide a patent landscape analysis i.e. a quantitative and qualitative 
patent analysis related to hereditary diseases. We focus on patents re -
lated to human genes or their use in diagnostic testing in Europe. They 
include the most frequently tested hereditary diseases like hereditary 
breast and ovarian cancer, hereditary colon cancer, cystic fibrosis and 
Fragile X syndrome.
Quantitatively, the amount of patent applications and patents granted 
by the EPO and the USPTO were mapped. This is primarily based 
on internet searches of patent databases using specifically developed 
search algorithms. Qualitatively, the claims of relevant DNA patents 
were exhaustively analysed and classified according to their subject 
matter. In general, the data extracted from the DNA patents provide in -
sight into several areas including the scope of patent protection sought 
or obtained, the identification of closely related patents, trends in DNA 
patenting for diagnostics, identity and activity of competitors active in 
the field, etc.
The outcome of this empirical study is an overview of DNA patents 
covering diagnostic practice. On this basis, it will become possible to Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy  Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 
test to what extent the claim that a ‘patent thicket’ is emerging in the 
genetics field is valid and that patents are indeed hindering access. 
This study could contribute to policy formation in the field of DNA pat -
enting and development of new licensing strategies.
P1370. Patient experiences and preferences of receiving genetic 
information.
S. Burke1,2, C. Bennett2, J. Bedward1, P. Farndon2;  
1Centre for Research in Medical and Dental Education, Birmingham, United 
Kingdom, 2NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, Bir -
mingham, United Kingdom.
In 2006 we conducted a qualitative study of 27 people (with or at risk 
of genetic conditions or parents of children affected by a genetic condi -
tion) to explore their experiences and preferences of receiving genetic 
information. Telephone interviews focused on provision of information 
by healthcare professionals outside specialist genetics services and 
explored how and from where patients initially received information 
about the genetic basis of the condition and their views and prefer -
ences on such information provision.
The results indicate a perceived need for greater awareness of genetic 
aspects of conditions amongst healthcare professionals. Patients ac -
knowledged that healthcare professionals cannot have detailed knowl -
edge about all genetic conditions, but felt that identifying and referring 
patients appropriately was important. Whilst they recognised the value 
of information from specialist genetic services, some would prefer their 
specialty consultant, with whom they had established a rapport, to be 
more involved in the provision of genetic information. Family practitio -
ners were viewed as the best group to provide ongoing support and 
co-ordination of information.
Patients stressed the need for healthcare professionals providing ge -
netic information to do so in a non-judgemental manner; be mindful of 
their use of terminology; tailor the information provided to the prefer -
ences of individuals; and inform people where they can access further 
information. Awareness of the emotional impact of genetic information 
for individuals and the wider family was also considered important. 
These results have implications for the education of healthcare profes -
sionals if patient expectations are to be met.
P1371. Retrospective evaluation of the referral reasons of 
patients at a tertiary paediatric genetic center in Izmir, Turkey
B. Durmaz1, E. Pariltay2, M. Akgul2, A. Alpman1, E. Ataman2, O. Kirbiyik2, O. 
Cogulu1, F. Ozkinay1;  
1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Division of 
Genetics and Teratology, Izmir, Turkey, 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, 
Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey.
Genetic counseling is a service to help individuals and the other fam -
ily members translate scientific knowledge into practical information 
which is possible before conception, during pregnancy, after birth, dur -
ing childhood, or even in adulthood. Particularly families seek genetic 
counseling when their children have features suggestive of a genetic 
disorder. Our study aimed to review and evaluate the distribution of 
the referral reasons during the past eight years. A total of 2342 pa -
tients were referred to our outpatient clinic. The referral reasons in -
cluded genetic disorders comprising mental retardation-multiple 
congenital anomaly and isolated anomalies in 1472 cases (62.85%), 
syndromes which may be associated with cytogenetic abnormalities 
in 634 (27.07%), suspected single gene disorders in 134 (5.72%), 
suspected microdeletion syndromes in 48 (2.05%) and the others in 
54 (2.31%). Among the 1472 cases with genetic disorders comprising 
mental retardation-multiple congenital anomaly and isolated anoma -
lies, dysmorphological facial features were detected in 821, isolated 
anomalies in 374, mental retardation in 351 and growth retardation 
in 244. In this study it was determined that 494 cases (21.09%) were 
referred because of clinical suspicion of Down syndrome, 124 (5.29%) 
Turner syndrome, 50 (2.13%) metabolic storage diseases, 38 (1.62%) 
neuromuscular disorders, 33 (1.41%) ambiguous genitalia. In conclu -
sion, genetic disorders such as Down syndrome and Turner syndrome 
still account a considerable number of the referrals in our outpatient 
service. Although complex diseases are very common in the popula -
tion, cases with those diseases were not referred as much as expected 
to the genetic counseling sessions.P1372. Using a new package for drawing pedigrees for teaching 
medical genetics
L. Akhmadeeva ;  
Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation.
Recently we published a paper about our newly created package for 
drawing pedigrees (B.Veytsman, L.Akhmadeeva, The PracTeX Jour -
nal, Nov, 2006). This software suite could be useful for teaching medi -
cal genetics at the Universities. Every medical student has to get a 
skill of making pedigrees. Pedigrees are very helpful in confirming 
diagnosis and in estimating prognosis for people in the family. Using 
our new package could help students to draw beautiful genealogic 
trees. It makes them learn more about different symbols of a pedigree 
and about methodology, it saves much time which is precious during 
classes, it gives a chance to save all the versions and to add new fam -
ily members easily.
P1373. Brazilian’s case-study of Poverty and Deficiency
A. S. N. Marinho1, F. G. Cavalcante2;  
1FUNLAR - RIO, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2CLAVES/FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
Recent demographic studies are related to the growth of the relation -
ship between poverty and the risk for deficiency (Fujiura & Yamaki, 
2000; Kaye et al, 1996) which can be described as a “new morbid -
ity” (Baumeister, Kupstas, 1996). The present study discuss the “co-
prevalence” of poverty in a Social Rehabilitation Program based in 
Community  (PRC), from Francisco de Paula Municipal Foundation, in 
Rio de Janeiro/ Brazil (FUNLAR-RIO), specially focusing families with 
children and teenager from 0 to 24 years old. A qualitative research 
related to maltreatment and human rights of people with disabilities 
was done through 24 case-studies in profundity, using a triangulation 
method of case-discussions with team work, reflexive groups with 
families, interview with local leaderships and participant-observation 
with the financial support of Faperj and CNPq (2005-2006). Working 
with people in extreme social exclusion, PRC make the registration of 
the disabled people they encounter in different favelas, make an evalu -
ation of their needs and try to create a network of different sources 
according to family needs and their disabled son or daughter (health 
promotion, education inclusion, social benefits for poor families, etc). 
Domestic Violence is another problem to be faced with protective solu -
tions involving Brazilian social polices. In this study we can evaluate 
the impact of actions to promote human right and violence prevention 
with families of disabled children. We could describe changes in health 
conditions, work and school inclusion, leisure and recreational activi -
ties, physical and social environment and the importance of Brazilian 
social politics to protect their poor population.
P1374. Provision and quality assurance of preimplantation 
genetic diagnosis in Europe
A. Corveleyn1,2, M. A. Morris3,2, E. Dequeker1,2, K. Sermon4, J. Lawford Da -
vies5,6, G. Antiñolo7,8, A. Schmutzler9, J. Vanecek10, N. Nagels1,2, E. Zika11, F. 
Palau7,12, D. Ibarreta11;  
1Department of Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2EuroGentest, Leuven, Bel -
gium, 3Service of Genetic Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 4Centre for Medical 
Genetics, Brussels, Belgium, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle, United 
Kingdom, 6Bevan Brittan LLP, London, United Kingdom, 7Centre for Biomedical 
Research on Rare Diseases, Valencia, Spain, 8Unidad Clinica de Genetica y 
Reproduccion, Seville, Spain, 9Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Kiel, Ger -
many, 10Technology Centre of the Academy of Sciences CR, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 11European Commission, Joint Research Center, Seville, Spain, 12In-
stitut de Biomedicina de València – CSIC, Valencia, Spain.
Although PGD is now a well-established treatment, no current, com -
prehensive independent data exist about the practice and provision 
of PGD in Europe. In response to this, a survey was developed in 
collaboration with EuroGentest and ESHRE, to assess the provision 
of PGD services in Europe, access by patients and the current state of 
quality assurance. Additionally, expert opinions were obtained through 
interviews conducted with professionals in specific countries.
The survey identified 53 centres offering PGD in 17 European coun -
tries, performing a total of 2-3000 cycles in 2005 (excluding PGS). The 
most widely-available testing was for familial chromosomal anomalies, 
followed by monogenic diseases, and HLA typing. Quality assurance 
of PGD testing was evaluated by several criteria. While half of the cen -
tres have designated quality managers, just 33% have or are prepar - Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 
ing for accreditation or certification. Two-thirds of centres responded 
that they did not participate in EQA, a problem exacerbated by a lack 
of PGD-specific schemes. Approximately 19% of the centres do not 
keep data on accuracy; 9% do not even follow up until birth. Genetic 
counselling is provided and informed consent obtained in 94% of cen -
tres but follow-up after testing is very limited.
PGD is an expanding activity with an increasing international flow. We 
identified a potential need for improvement in the overall quality sys -
tem of providers.  In this respect, development of PGD-specific EQA is 
of particular importance. There is also a need to improve monitoring of 
PGD, especially long-term follow-up, through increased public funding 
and international co-operation.
P1375. The role of genetic counseling on women′s informed 
decision making for invasive prenatal testing
O. Miljanovic1,2, S. Teofilova3;  
1Center for Medical Genetics and Immunology & Institute for Children’ s Dis -
eases - Clinical Center of Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro, 2Medical 
Faculty – University of Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro, 3Center for Medi -
cal Genetics and Immunology - Clinical Center of Montenegro, Podgorica, 
Montenegro.
Genetic counseling is a unique psycho-educational process centered 
on providing very special genetic information, with the goal to facilitate 
clients′ knowledge and ability for optimal decision making for invasive 
prenatal testing: understanding relevant information, informed choos -
ing a course of action consistent with one′s attitudes and resulting in 
minimal decisional conflict, guilt or regret.
This study was aimed to assess whether a special genetic counseling 
and decision aid, when compared to a leaflet or referral MD information, 
improve women′s informed decision making and diminish uncertainty 
in the context of prenatal invasive testing. Pregnant women at 15-18 
weeks gestation, referred for prenatal invasive testing, were asked 
to fill our questionnaire, before testing. They where divided into two 
groups: first group has been provided with special genetic counseling, 
and second group was provided with pamphlet or referral MD informa -
tion. Knowledge, understanding relevant information, informed choice, 
and anxiety and decision conflicts were measured. Satisfactory level of 
knowledge was found significantly more frequent in decision aid group 
compared with the leaflet group. Decision aid group was more than 
twice better eligible for informed choice. Depression, worry and anxiety 
attitudes to the pregnancy/fetus were found more frequently in leaflet 
group. Decisional conflict was found very low in both groups.
Appliance of specify genetic counseling resource can produce an im -
provement in women′s knowledge about the complexities of prenatal 
genetic testing. This resource can potentially play an important role in 
improving women′s informed decision making.
P1376. An integrated programme of professional development in 
genetic medicine at the North West Genetics Knowledge Park
K. Mathieson1,2, P. Finegold1,2, M. Leech1,2, D. Donnai1,2, H. Middleton-Price1,2;  
1The North West Genetics Knowledge Park, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2The 
University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
It is widely recognised that there is a need for training in genetic medi -
cine for people working in many medical disciplines. It is also vital that 
the general public is both informed and involved in decision-making 
about how genetic technologies are used within health services.
At Nowgen, the UK’s North West Genetics Knowledge Park, we have 
exploited our position at the interface between clinical genetics, pa -
tients and the public, and our links with national professional develop -
ment initiatives, to devise a comprehensive training programme that 
addresses these important issues. This comprises three main ele -
ments:
1. A comprehensive programme of training for health profession -
als, in order to ease the integration of genetics into mainstream 
health services, which will ensure that over 5000 training hours 
are delivered this year. Attendees are drawn from specialties 
such as cardiology, midwifery, paediatrics and oncology.
2. We have developed and delivered a programme of communi -
cation workshops, to help geneticists to communicate with non-
specialist audiences.3. As genetic medicine makes a greater impact on people’s lives 
there are more demands on other professionals, such as school 
teachers, lawyers, journalists and ethicists, to understand the 
latest developments in genetic medicine. We have supported a 
diverse group of non-healthcare professionals through training 
events, to increase awareness of genetic medicine in society.
We shall continue this integrated programme, which will address the 
professional, public and policy implications of genetic medicine and 
ensure greater links between all stakeholders, essential for future 
delivery of modern health services.
P1377. An invasive prenatal diagnosis and termination for 
abnormal cytogenetic findings. Psychological experience for 
pregnant women following
S. M. Brankovic Niksic , Pilic Radivojevic G., Jelisavcic M., Milutinovic M., and 
Mitrovic T.;  
Institute of Mental Health, Belgrade, Serbia and Montenegro.
Background. The invasive prenatal diagnosis includes the applica -
tion of early amniocentesis (16-18 gestational week) or cordocente -
sis (22-25 week of gestation) in a pregnancy with certain indications. 
Abnormal cytogenetic finding results in interrupting of a pregnancy. 
That causes one of the greatest psychological traumas that have its 
characteristics.
Purpose. Study analyzed the kind of psychological problems, somatic 
problems, the influence on marriage and the duration of these prob -
lems in women whose pregnancy was interrupted depending on the 
method of prenatal diagnosis that was used.
Methods. Based on the research carried out at the Institute of Mental 
Health, Department of Medical Genetics from 1999-2003, 146 preg -
nancies were interrupted because of the abnormal cytogenetic find -
ings. The interruptions were performed in 20-27 gestational week. 
After pregnancy interruption women were filling form that tested the 
kind of problem that appeared (psychological, somatic or combined), 
divorce and the duration of psychological problem. Statistical method 
that was used was Chi square test.
Results. 83% of all pregnant women describe psychological problem 
(most frequently in 55% - emotional problem that persisted during the 
period of two years (38%)). Divorce was the less frequent (1%).
Conclusion. Statistically significant difference was not proven that 
there is correlation between the kind of the problem and the method 
used for prenatal diagnosis. Nevertheless, certain specificities exist 
and they will be discussed in the presentation.
P1378. Synthetic quality controls for Cystic Fibrosis testing, are 
they useful for a diagnostic laboratory?
S. Berwouts1,2, J. T. Gordon3, C. A. Rundell3, D. E. Barton4,2, E. Dequeker1,2;  
1University of Leuven, Centre for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2Eu-
roGentest, Leuven, Belgium, 3Maine Molecular Quality Controls, Inc, Scar -
borough, ME, United States, 4National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, 
Ireland.
One of the necessities for laboratories to assure high quality in mo -
lecular genetic testing, is the use of appropriate positive quality control 
(QC) materials.
Laboratories mainly use patient samples as QC, which of course in -
clude a maximum of two mutations per sample. Bearing in mind that 
some assays can test for more than 100 mutations, multiplex QC ma -
terials could save valuable time and reagents.
The European Cystic Fibrosis (CF) Network enclosed a synthetic 
multiplex QC developed by MMQCI as an additional sample in two 
consecutive CF External Quality Assessment schemes. For 2005, 
the sample included R553X, I507del, R117H, 394delTT, 2183AA>G, 
R347H and 5T all in homozygote state.  In 2006, again a synthetic sam -
ple was distributed, with partly the same variants: 3876delA, R553X, 
394delTT, R117H, I507del, W1282X, 3905insT, F508C, 5T and 7T all 
in heterozygote state.
133 laboratories returned their results on the analysis of the synthetic 
blood sample in 2005. The multiplex QC material performed well in the 
majority of assays and laboratories.  The most common error was the 
inability to find all mutations (20%). Seven laboratories encountered 
detection problems and five laboratories reported extraction failure. 
Mutations not present in the QC material were reported by 14 out of 
83 laboratories. 0 Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 0
For the scheme of 2006, results were submitted early 2007. A compari -
son will be made between the two trials. Furthermore, the evaluation 
will determine if there is any improvement for laboratories who partici -
pated in the trial twice.
P1379. Quality Management and accreditation of genetic testing 
services
R. J. Hastings1, D. Barton2, S. Berwouts3, C. Brady2, P. Corbisier4, A. Corve -
leyn3, R. Elles5, B. Fowler6, D. Gancberg4, P. Litynski6, M. Macek Jr7, U. Mal -
burg8, G. Matthijs3, M. Morris9, C. Mueller8, N. Nagels3, B. Quellhorst-Pawley1, 
A. Stambergova7, J. Vermeesch3, K. Vickers5, E. Dequeker3;  
1John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Our Lady’s Children’s Hos -
pital, Dublin, Ireland, 3KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4European Commission, 
Geel, Belgium, 5St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6University 
Children’s Hospital, Basel, Switzerland, 7Charles University, Prague, Czech 
Republic, 8Universitaet Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 9CMU, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
The EuroGentest network aims to improve and harmonize the qual -
ity of the genetic services in Europe. The network encompasses Bio -
chemical, Clinical, Cyto- and Molecular Genetics. The EuroGentest 
Quality Management group is aiming to improve the organization and 
harmonization of External Quality Assessment (EQA) schemes, facili -
tate the development of guidelines and disseminate Quality assurance 
(QAu) information through a databaseas well as assisting laborato -
ries in attaining and maintaining accreditation. In addition, this group 
is reviewing suitable quality control materials (QCMs) and providing 
documentation/SOPs on new technologies.
Since January 2005, the group has disseminated information on ac -
creditation through five international workshops. A database on the 
current status of QAu in European genetic testing services will soon 
be publicly available. On the website, laboratories can find the EQA 
scheme most appropriate to their needs through discipline specific 
registers of schemes in Europe. All three laboratory disciplines have 
expanded their repertoire of EQA including a pilot European cytoge -
netics scheme, CEQA. Minimum quality guidelines have been pub -
lished for cytogenetics and some biochemical analytes. Draft guide -
lines for microarrays will be published later this year. In collaboration 
with EMQN, best practice meetings will be organised in 2007 for Famil -
ial Breast Cancer, Spinocerebellar Ataxias and Maturity Onset Diabe -
tes of the Young to generate consensus guidelines. Finally QCMs for 
Prader-Willi/Angelman syndromes are being developed and validation 
of MLPA, diagnostic CF-testing kits and DNA extraction methods are in 
progress through a core group of accredited laboratories with reports 
due this year.
P1380. Improving the quality system in our laboratories by 
sharing experiences
E. Dequeker1,2, S. Berwouts1,2, M. Gielis3,2, A. Wynants3,2, M. A. Morris4,2;  
1KULeuven Centre for Molecular Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2EuroGentest, 
Leuven, Belgium, 3MCR, Leuven, Belgium, 4Medical Genetics, Geneva Univer -
sity Hospitals, Genevea, Switzerland.
Genetic services have considerably increased their activity in the past 
few years and quality assurance (QAu) is now essential in order to 
minimize potential errors and deficiencies. The introduction of quality 
standards in laboratories, and the growing interest in and requirement 
for accreditation, has made better understanding of quality manage -
ment (QM) and QAu a priority. Consequently the EU project Euro -
Gentest aims to improve and harmonize the overall quality of genetic 
services.
In a focus on training and education, key parameters in improving 
quality, a series of workshops has been held in 2005 and 2006 to aid 
laboratories in their processes of developing QM systems and working 
towards accreditation. The subjects varied from living with quality sys -
tems and comparing the different norms for accreditation, to specific 
topics like internal audit and IT support for QM.
An interactive approach combining brief expert presentations, case 
studies of concrete situations related to quality and group debates to 
exchange experiences and opinions form the basis of the workshops. 
A specialist in the “human side of change processes” participated ac -
tively in these workshops, helping to overcome the aspect of moti -
vation and change, which is inevitable when implementing a quality 
system.
Approximately 60 different genetic laboratories from 20 different coun -tries have participated in the first five workshops and 16 laboratories 
participated more than once. Tangible outcomes have included criteria 
for selecting an appropriate IT programme to support QM systems, a 
list of companies providing such software, and a concrete interpreta -
tion of all phases of an internal audit.
P1381. Collaborative Experience of the Romanian Prader Willi 
Association with Medical Specialists
M. Puiu1, D. Dan2, C. Skrypnyk3;  
1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2Romanian Prader 
Willi Association, Zalau, Romania, 3Medical Faculty, Oradea, Romania.
Introduction In the absence of a national governmental strategy for 
Rare Diseases (RD), an EU priority for Romania, the collaboration of 
local and national NGOs and medical specialists is essential. The aim 
of our paper is to focus on the encouragement of a collaborative effort 
between Higher Education Medical Universities, medical specialists, 
and NGOs serving beneficiaries in the RD sector through a multidisci -
plinary approach.
Results Families of children with RD have interacted with medical spe -
cialists and benefited by becoming more assertive and by achieving 
more developmental milestones. APWR has established contacts with 
a Genetic Lab and renewed the contact with Mauro Baschirotto, Insti -
tute for Rare Diseases and established new relationships with genet -
ics specialist which helped us to diagnosed the patients in important 
genetics Institute and laboratories: Institute of Medical Genetics from 
Zurich, Institute of Human Genetics- Wurzburg, Institute of Clinical 
Genetics, Olgahospital-Stuttgart, Genetic Lab. Organized a training 
course for parents, genetic evaluating for children, a training course in 
genetics for family doctors, under auspicious of the Medical University, 
Timisoara.
Conclusions The health of people with disability and the social integra -
tion can be improved if they have every opportunity to enjoy family life, 
education, friendship, access to public facilities and freedom of move -
ment. Action should be aimed at collaboration between medical spe -
cialists, families, and NGOs. Developing awareness about the needs 
of children with RD and engaging public in a shared strategy for the 
development of genetic services, will ensure a collaborative interna -
tional approach in sharing of expertise and experience.
P1382. Recurrent spontaneous abortion and consanguinity
N. Ghasemi1, M. Mosaddegh2, M. Abdoli1;  
1Infertility Research and Clinical Centre, Yazd Shahid Sadoughi Medical Sci -
ences University, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Yazd Shahid Sadoughi Medi -
cal Sciences University, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran.
An expected 15% of clinically established pregnancies abort sponta -
neously. When all known causes of fetal losses are ruled out, there 
remains a population of women (0.5-1.0%) who have recurrent fetal 
losses of unknown etiology. A important part of these recurrent spon -
taneous abortions may be due to primarily genetic causes. The sig -
nificant characteristic of couples experiencing such fetal losses is the 
sharing of alleles between husband and wife. The suggestion devel -
oped here states that the sharing of recessive lethal genes could be 
caused by consanguinity. These recessive lethal alleles could not act 
alone to cause problem, but they could act with lethal alleles on other 
sister chromosome. This means both husband and wife were normal 
and usually their family did not have any genetic disorder, but these 
fetuses could not live with these alleles.
Present study reports the result of genetic counseling for couples with 
recurrent spontaneous abortion in Yazd Infertility Research and Clini -
cal Centre. The results showed the coefficient of inbreeding of 4% of 
these couples was 1/8. In 25% it was 1/16 and in 14% was 1/32.
Karyotype was normal in 99% and remain 1% had inversion especially 
in chromosome 9.
Finding the lethal genes in most of these couples was not possible or 
very expensive, because no abnormalities were found in their pedi -
gree. Abortion causes important psychosomatic problem for mothers, 
therefore using assisted reproductive technique such as egg or em -
bryo donation were recommended in most of these couples especially 
after 5 or 6 abortion.1 Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 1
P1383. EuroGentest: Reference Systems for Genetic Testing
D. E. Barton1, D. Gancberg2, P. Corbisier2, C. Brady1;  
1National Centre for Medical Genetics, University College Dublin, Our Lady’s 
Children’s Hospital, Crumlin, Dublin 12, Ireland, 2European Commission, Joint 
Research Centre, Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements, Geel, 
Belgium.
The lack of well-characterised reference materials (RMs) for most ge -
netic tests causes difficulties in validating and developing new assays 
and results in tests being run without proper quality controls. EuroGen -
test is addressing this issue by defining the present and future needs 
for RMs, setting priorities for and supporting the development of new 
RMs and building an enduring network involving all stakeholders in 
RM development.
Two International Symposia on Reference Materials for Genetic Test -
ing have been organised, involving health care professionals, scien -
tists, regulatory and industry representatives. The symposia led to in -
ternational collaborations, enabled the development of a prioritization 
list of RMs needed, and gave an update and better awareness of the 
international situation.
In direct support for the development of RMs for genetic testing, field 
trials for new candidate RMs have been organised, research on the op -
timal stability conditions of DNA-based candidate RMs was performed, 
and NIBSC was awarded a sub-contract to develop RMs for Prader-
Willi and Angelman syndromes. Furthermore, a guidance document on 
the use of RMs in genetic testing and the availability of new RMs for 
genetic testing on the market has been drafted.
Meetings have also been organised in order to clarify the role and 
interpretation of the IVD Directive 98/79/EC in the fields of genetic test -
ing and RMs by bringing together regulatory authorities, industry and 
stakeholders in genetic testing.
These activities have raised awareness of the importance of properly-
characterised RMs and reference methods in genetic testing, and will 
lead to availability of additional RMs in this field.
P1384. Prenatal diagnosis - evaluation of attitude, experience 
and choice of counseled families
A. V. Shopova , S. Shopova, E. Simeonov;  
Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria.
The aim of this study was focused on the influence of prenatal diagno -
sis on the emotional state of patients and the significance of medical 
and informational factors on the reproductive decision of the coun -
seled families.
A total of 120 pregnant women: 30 after ultra-sonographic screening, 
30 with family history for hereditary diseases, 30 in advanced maternal 
age and 30 healthy controls underwent an information interview, an 
anxiety questionnaire and a grief scale.
Most of the women have received information by obstetrician or clinical 
geneticist. Women with previous reproductive failure and those who 
had higher educational level proved to be well informed. High propor -
tion of the participants considers reliable the diagnostic and prognostic 
potential of the prenatal diagnosis. The type of the diagnostic proce -
dure influences insignificantly the reproductive decision.
On the base of this study we concluded: The reproductive decision 
depends on the quality of genetic counseling. The level of anxiety is 
determined by the kind of procedure and reproductive history. Age, 
previous reproductive failure and its type are decisive factors for cop -
ing with the loss.
P1385. Rett syndrome molecular diagnosis and implications in 
genetic counseling: report of a case
M. Noruzinia1, M. T. Akbari1,2;  
1Tarbiat Modares University, Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, 2Akbari Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Tehran, Islamic Re -
public of Iran.
Rett syndrome is a rare genetic disease with X linked dominant inheri -
tance. RTT is one of the most frequent causes of mental retardation in 
females. We report a case of Rett syndrome in a 4 years old girl with 
hypotonia and hypotrophia. Stereotypic hand movements like clapping 
and tapping, upper limb spastisity, absence of object grabbing and eye 
contact were evident. She couldn’t sit or walk. Deep Tendon Reflexes 
were diminished. Eye fundoscopy was normal. The parents had the 
impression that the infant had not been normal even in the first days of 
life. MRI showed a mild cerebral atrophy at 15 months of age. Familial history was unremarkable.
We found 502C>T nonsense mutation in MeCP2 . Genetic analysis 
in parents showed no genetic alteration in wild type MeCP2 . As the 
mother was pregnant, PND was performed and sequence analysis in 
CVS DNA showed no alteration.
Due to familial cases and germinal musaicism reported in some fami -
lies, genetic counseling must include mutation detection in mother and 
PND if requested by parents. As mutations in MeCP2  can be expressed 
by a spectrum of atypical phenotypes genetic analysis might be pro -
posed in many cases which are not presented as classical RTT.
Recently mutations of CDKL5  and NTNG1  have been found in patients 
with RTT features. Further studies are needed to define clinical guide -
lines for their analysis in a MeCP2 unrelated Rett syndrome.
P1386. Risk Perception of Developing Inherited Diseases
Â. M. T. Leite , J. Sequeiros, C. Paul;  
Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portugal.
Huntington’s disease, Machado-Joseph’s disease and familial amyloi -
dal neuropathy are progressive neuropsychiatric disorders which are 
inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. They are late onset diseases 
with symptomatic treatments but no cure. These three diseases result 
in different levels of disability, which may cause different risk percep -
tions. Although the risk of developing the disease decreases gradu -
ally with age, at-risk individuals are never entirely sure that they have 
escaped the disease.
Some at risk subjects who have not been tested are aware of their 
50% risk, but some are not.
We studied 213 individuals who are at risk for late-onset genetic dis -
eases, specifically with a 50% genetic risk for three diseases. These 
individuals were asymptomatic, aged 18 year or older and they had not 
been tested for the respective disease.
From a total number of 213 subjects, 193 answered the question re -
garding whether or not they were informed regarding their risk. Among 
the 193 subjects, 116 (54,5%) were aware of the 50% risk condition, 
and 77 (36,2%) were not.
The value of the subjective risk is greater (52, 41%) and closer to 50% 
when the subjects were aware of their 50% risk than when they were 
not (44, 79%).
There are significant statistical differences between the subjective risk 
of the subjects that were aware of their 50% risk and those who were 
not (F (1,191) = 4.143, p<.050).
The subjects who were aware of their 50% risk had a higher level 
of education (F (4,188) = 4,918, p<.010) than the subjects who were 
not.
Sex, age, disease and education level did not influence the choice of 
the risk perception value.
P1387. Professor Svetlana K. Klueva, founder of the Department 
of Medical Genetics of SPbMAPS
M. O. Mkheidze ;  
Medical Academy for postgraduate studying, St.Petersburg, Russian Federa -
tion.
In memoriam of Professor Svetlana Kliment’evna Klueva (1931-
2005).
In Russia medical education has some specific features. It provides 
periodical training for certificated physicians at the institutes of ad -
vanced medical studies like MAPS, the oldest one, to improve their 
professional skills. Over a long period of time in the USSR genetics 
and medical genetics were prohibited and a lot of physician genera -
tions were not able to study human genetics. Now it is impossible to 
be successful physicians without knowledge of medical genetics and 
molecular medicine. Professor Svetlana Klueva was the founder of 
the Department of Medical genetics in SPbMAPS. She was obliged 
to carry on a longtime and exhausting struggle with officialdom to or -
ganize this department. It was formed in 1989 and its staff included 5 
physicians certificated and highly skilled in medical genetics (a clinical 
geneticist highly skilled in human genetics and complex diseases, a 
clinical geneticist-pediatrician, a clinical geneticist highly skilled in bio -
chemical genetics and inborn errors of metabolism, a clinical geneti -
cist-neurologist and a clinical cytogeneticist. Two principal trends were 
based by S. Klueva: 1) training physicians for practical genetic service 
and 2) teaching medical genetics for all doctors with basic clinical spe -
cializations. The principal goal of S.K.Klueva’s activities was forming 2 Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 2
genetic thinking in the physicians independently of their specialization. 
Professor S. Klueva with her colleagues provided possibility to acquire 
knowledge of human genetics for more than 5000 physicians. The De -
partment of Medical Genetics organized by Professor Svetlana Klueva 
is her “monumentum aere perennius”.
P1388. Genetic screening criteria in the age of Genomics
M. C. Cornel1, C. van El2, L. Krijgsman1, T. Pieters2;  
1Clinical Genetics/EMGO Institute, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands, 2Medical Humanities, VU University Medical Center, Amster -
dam, The Netherlands.
In the domain of genetic screening insight in screening criteria is need -
ed. They help weighing pros and cons when preparing decisions on 
new possibilities for screening generated by Genomics. Some genetic 
screening programs in the Netherlands have developed rapidly, such 
as cascade screening for familial hypercholesterolaemia, while others 
were introduced many years after implementation in other countries, 
such as prenatal Down syndrome screening.
We investigated long term developments in Dutch genetic screening 
policy by the means of a witness seminar. Most of the key players 
involved in decision making on genetic screening since 1970 attended 
the seminar. In addition we set up focus group meetings to explore at -
titudes and choices of potential users regarding genetic testing.
The witness seminar showed a remarkable confusion of tongues on 
terms like “prevention”, “responsible parenthood” and “population 
screening” as part of the Dutch screening debate in the 1970s and 
1980s. Moreover there were frequent misunderstandings among policy 
makers and scientists on the ins and outs of informed decision making 
in the domain of reproductive screening. Screening was sometimes 
understood as obligatory, where informed decision making was in -
tended. Policy aims to “protect citizens against the dangers of screen -
ing”. Hence, screening for disorders for which no treatment is available 
(including prenatal screening) is deemed problematic. However, focus 
group participants stated that they want to be able to make a personal 
choice as independent citizens, based on adequate information.
Governmental responsibility for quality control suits citizens present-
day expectations better.
P1389. Supporting policy development for population-based 
genetic screening
I. R. Blancquaert1,2, A. Andermann1,3, S. Beauchamp1, I. Costea1,2, V. Déry1,2;  
1Agence d’évaluation des technologies et des modes d’intervention en santé, 
Montréal, PQ, Canada, 2Université de Montréal, Montréal, PQ, Canada, 3McGill 
University, Montreal, PQ, Canada.
Jurisdictions around the world face complex decisions regarding the 
introduction or expansion of population-based genetic screening pro -
grams. Over 50 sets of criteria have been proposed to support deci -
sion-making.
OBJECTIVES: 1) to propose a systematic approach to genetic screen -
ing policy-making which enables more balanced and informed deci -
sions and integrates multiple issues, types of evidence and perspec -
tives; and 2) to initiate consensus-building among stakeholders around 
the decision-making criteria and process.
METHODS: A series of literature reviews and consultations were used 
to draw upon existing criteria and to analyse the decision-making pro -
cess. Focus groups were conducted with geneticists, public health spe -
cialists, social scientists and citizens to explore the utility and accept -
ability of core criteria derived from the literature review. Discussions 
within a knowledge network and consultations with policy-makers and 
international experts contributed to refining the decision-guide.
RESULTS: The decision-guide consists of general principles, three de -
cision-nodes, criteria for each node, and types of evidence to consider 
for each criterion. The logic of the decision-making process is reflected 
in the decision nodes addressing 1) the utility of the screening strat -
egy for individuals and families, 2) the relevance of implementing the 
screening program for a particular target population, 3) and the judi -
cious allocation of resources at the societal level.
DISCUSSION: The decision-guide makes explicit the reasoning and 
the information upon which policy decisions are based and presents a 
number of innovations over existing criteria, by clarifying the iterative 
nature of decision-making, balancing perspectives, comparing alterna -
tives, considering context, and promoting the documentation of knowl -
edge gaps and trade-offs.P1390. The delay between pregnancy confirmation in primary 
care and antenatal sickle cell and thalassaemia screening: a 
population-based cohort study
T. M. Marteau , E. Dormandy, E. Reid, K. Brown, M. Gulliford;  
King’s College London, London, United Kingdom.
Background: Antenatal sickle cell and thalassaemia (SCT) screening 
programmes aim to facilitate timely informed choice for couples. In the 
UK, for example, the target for screening is ten weeks gestation. The 
objective that screening should be implemented early in pregnancy 
may be compromised if there is any delay between pregnancy confir -
mation in primary care and implementation of screening.
Objective: To determine the time between confirmation of pregnancy in 
primary care and antenatal SCT screening.
Design and setting: Cohort study of all pregnancies reported in 25 gen -
eral practices in two UK inner city Primary Care Trusts with universal 
screening policies.
Participants: Anonymised data on all pregnancies reported to the par -
ticipating general practices for a minimum of six months.
Main Outcome: Time from pregnancy confirmation in primary care to 
antenatal SCT screening.
Results: There were 1,496 eligible women whose SCT carrier status 
was not known and who intended to proceed with the pregnancy. The 
median (interquartile range) gestational age at pregnancy confirma -
tion was 7.6 weeks (6.0-10.7 weeks). The median gestational age at 
screening was 15.3 weeks (IQR 12.6-18.0 weeks), with only 4.4% be -
ing screened by 10 weeks. The median delay between pregnancy con -
firmation and screening was 6.9 weeks (4.7-9.3 weeks). After allowing 
for practice-level variation, there was no association between delay 
times and maternal age, parity and ethnic group.
Conclusion: Reducing the considerable delay between pregnancy 
confirmation in primary care and antenatal SCT screening requires 
development and evaluation of methods of organising and delivering 
antenatal care that facilitate earlier SCT screening.
P1391. Language skills and narrative production in individuals 
with Smith-Magenis syndrome
M. T. Le Normand1, H. de Leersnyder2, K. Hernandez2, A. Verloes2;  
1INSERM, PARIS, France, 2Department Genetics, PARIS, France.
Smith-Magenis syndrome is a rare genetic disorder in which language 
abilities are dependant on different factors: mental retardation, speech 
delay, severe behavioral difficulties.
Language impairment and delayed language onset have been de -
scribed, although not investigated in detail, in children with Smith-Ma -
genis (17p.12 deletion syndrome).
The aim of the study is to investigate different areas of language: abil -
ity to tell a narrative, phonology, syntax and receptive vocabulary in a 
group of six girls and eight boys, aged 8 to 28 years, with 17p12 dele -
tion syndrome. The mean range full-scale IQ was below 40 to 70 for 
children and 44 to 64 for young adults (see Table 1)
Four different language tasks were used: (1) a narrative task (Frog 
Story) (2) a repetition task including all 36 French phonemes in differ -
ent positions (3) a picture vocabulary task and (4) a receptive syntactic 
task
Results revealed dramatically significant improvements in articulation 
tasks especially in young SMS. Young adults still made phonetic and 
syntactic errors and provide ambiguous references in the story. Their 
language performance was better in lexicon than in other components 
of language. Such findings suggest slow and asynchronous develop -
ment in language and communicative skills. An implication of these 
results is the need for continuing speech and language intervention in 
individuals with Smith-Magenis Syndrome
Table 1. Demographic details for SMS
Children  
n = 10Young Adults  
n = 4
Sex
Males  
Females5 
53 
1
Age (years.months)
Mean (SD)  
Range9.7 (2.4)  
8-14.1122.10 (3.7)  
20.11-28
IQ
Mean (SD)  
Range43 (10.7)  
below 40 to 7055 (13.4)  
44 to 64 Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 
P1392. Neuropsychological and Behavioural profile in 
adolescents and young adults with Smih-Magenis syndrome
K. Hernandez1, M. T. Le Normand2, H. de Leersnyder1, A. Verloes1;  
1Department Genetics, PARIS, France, 2INSERM, PARIS, France.
Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS) is a multiple congenital anomalies 
and mental retardation syndrome associated with an interstitial dele -
tion of chromosome 17 band p11.2. Six adolescents (3 boys and 3 
girls aged 12 to 15 years) and 4 adults (3 boys and 1 girl aged 19 to 
22 years) with SMS were administered a cognitive battery including 
a neuropsychiatric and a behavioural scale for measuring Intellectual 
efficiency (PEP-R, EDEI-R, WAIS) Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI), 
Social maturity and Autonomy (Vineland Adaptative Behaviour Scale).
The results demonstrate a mild-to-moderate range of mental retarda -
tion of all patients, (IQ for young adults ranged from 44 to 64), without 
any discrepancy between verbal and performance scales.
Adolescents show impulsive and unstable behaviors with agitation/
mood instability, auto and hetero-aggressivity which interfered with 
learning and social variables. Intellectual efficiency is underestimated.
Sociocultural level is a strong factor to understand the pattern of their 
cognitive profile. Scores on logical reasoning and working memory are 
poor. Moreover, speed of information processing is very impaired.
Adults were so impulsive that they could not inhibit a contrary action.
Concerning sexual behavior, desinhibition is very frequently reported 
by the families.
Motor instability remained important but the mood instability was more 
adaptive. 3 out of 4 young adults have episodes of fabulation but none 
have any depression.
Such results show evidence that stimulations for speaking and learn -
ing are crucial in adolescents and young adults with SMS and should 
be carried on. Their needs are still educational and have strong impli -
cations for their cognitive abilities and autonomy.
P1393. Molecular diagnosis of Egyptian patients with spinal 
muscular atrophy
M. L. Essawi , G. M. M. Al-ettribi, A. A. El-Haroni, L. Effat, K. S. Amr, S. Ismail, 
Y. Z. Gad;  
National Research Center, cairo, Egypt.
Childhood spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is one of the most com -
mon autosomal recessive disorders. It is characterized by symmetrical 
muscle weakness and atrophy of limbs and trunk. It has an estimated 
incidence on 1:6000 live births and a carrier frequency of 1:50 individu -
als. Childhood SMA is classified into 3 types (I, II and III) according to 
the age of onset and the clinical severity.
This study aimed to characterize the molecular basis of SMA among 
Egyptian patients.
Eighty two Egyptian patients were clinically diagnosed as SMA, they 
were classified into 32 type I, 36 type II and 14 type III cases. Detection 
of homozygous absence of exons 7 and 8 of SMN1 gene was carried 
out using the PCR-restriction digestion method, whereas, deletion of 
NAIP exon 5 was detected through multiplex PCR.
Homozygous absence of SMN1 gene exon 7 and 8 or exon 7 only was 
found in 69.4% of all patients. Of these patients, exon 5 of NAIP gene 
was deleted in 78% of type I, 34.3% of type II, and 28.6% of type III.
The molecular basis of SMA in Egyptian is almost similar to that re -
ported by other ethnic groups. The PCR-restriction digestion method 
is fast, accurate and reliable for direct diagnosis of SMA and it could be 
used efficiently for genetic counseling. Studying the presence of com -
pound heterozygous and homozygous point mutations in SMN1 gene 
is recommended in the non-deleted SMA patients (approx. one third).
P1394. Cardiac genetic services - Ascertaining individuals at risk 
of a sudden cardiac death syndrome
S. J. Collitt1, B. Kerr1, W. Newman1, J. Clayton-Smith1, K. Strong2, P. Griffiths1, 
K. Metcalfe1;  
1Central Manchester & Manchester Children’s University Hospitals NHS Trust, 
Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Nowgen, Manchester, United Kingdom.
Purpose: An audit of referrals to the North West Regional Genetic Ser -
vice (population 4.3 million) in 2004, showed that 24 patients had been 
referred to Clinical Genetics with a personal or family history of a Sud -
den Cardiac Death (SCD) syndrome e.g. long QT syndrome, Brugada 
syndrome or a cardiomyopathy. Statistically there are approximately 
12,000 patients in Greater Manchester alone with these conditions. 
Clearly this patient group is under-represented in genetic services sug -gesting a large unmet need.
In order to determine the optimum method of increasing appropriate 
referrals to Clinical Genetics, a two year service development project 
was designed looking at three different referral methods, across the 
three cardiac tertiary centres in the North-West.
Findings: The project has demonstrated that the most effective way of 
increasing appropriate referrals has been the presence of the cardiac 
liaison nurse in cardiology clinics and on the wards. This has resulted 
in a 454% increase in referrals to 109 in the first year of the project. An 
audit of 61 referrals has shown an average of 5 surviving first degree 
relatives per pro band. The project has therefore identified approxi -
mately 545 at risk relatives.
The nurse has also been able to identify barriers to referrals and ways 
of overcoming them.
Conclusion: Increasing appropriate referrals to clinical genetics has en -
abled the identification of family members at risk of a SCD syndrome. 
This has facilitated the provision of genetic counselling, genetic testing 
and cardiac assessment of these family members, thereby reducing 
the risk of Sudden Cardiac Death.
P1395. Partnering to develop orphan drugs : evaluation of 
OrphanXchange services
V. Thibaudeau1, J. McGregor2, C. Holef2, A. Dubosq2, B. Urbero2, S. Aymé2;  
1Inserm sc11, paris, France, 2Inserm sc11, Paris, France.
The OrphanXchange project started in the context of a FP6 European 
contract called OrphanPlatform. One of the aims of this project was the 
development of information tools to allow a comprehensive and inte -
grated approach for addressing the set of factors that currently affects 
translational research in the field of rare diseases and orphan drugs. A 
database of ongoing research projects was set up in the context of Or -
phanet and a specific website, www.orphanxchange.org, was created 
to facilitate the formation of partnership activities between academic 
scientists and industry. The website provides free access to research 
projects that scientists wish to develop in partnership with industry. For 
industry, it is a database of business opportunities. Although minimal 
information is provided freely, more detailed information is only acces -
sible after registration, which allows identification of the customers. 
Customers only have access to the scientist’s details if they make a 
contact request. Currently, the database includes 129 projects. The 
site is visited 500 times per month. Half of the 213 registered users are 
from industry (biotech, big pharmas, consultants, investors), and the 
other half are from academia. These members are from 31 countries, 
the largest number of users coming from France, Japan, the USA, 
and Sweden. In two years, 113 requests to make contact with a re -
searcher were received. Three partnership projects were successfully 
developed thanks to the service. The plan is to extend this service to 
cover requests for partnership between academic teams, and between 
industry teams (for example, small SMe and big pharma).
P1396. A procedure for validation, verification and follow-up of 
methods in an accredited genetics laboratory
I. Bouchardy , I. Moix, C. Hinard, M. A. Morris;  
Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland.
Test validation, defined as “confirmation, through the provision of ob -
jective evidence, that the requirements for a specific intended use or 
application have been fulfilled” is a necessary element of quality assur -
ance and a requirement for laboratory accreditation.
Both new methods and modifications that may influence the quality 
of the results must be validated before diagnostic use. For practical 
reasons, the intensity of validation must be adapted for different pro -
cedures - laboratories should define for each test the elements to vali -
date that are necessary and sufficient.
Validation, the more thorough procedure, requires test-based confir -
mation of precision (repeatability and reproducibility), sensitivity, speci -
ficity and ruggedness. It is applied for example to new technologies, or 
in case of major technical modifications to existing methods, or when 
the performance of installed methods is insufficient.
Verification (or “implantation validation”) is a less intensive procedure, 
typically employed in case of minor technical modifications or addi -
tions, or when implanting a diagnostic kit that has been validated by an 
external company or laboratory. Examples include changing a primer 
sequence in a PCR reaction or an enzyme for digestion, or adding an 
additional exon to an existing sequence-based test. Genetic counselling, education, genetic services, and public policy 
Even when the new test is applicable, validation is never finished: it is 
essential to define appropriate internal quality control (IQC) to follow 
the performance of the test and detect possible problems.
We present detailed examples of validation/verification in our accred -ited laboratory and a new approach to IQC which reveals a continuous 
improvement in the ruggedness of our methods since accreditation. Therapy for genetic disease 
Po10. Therapy for genetic disease
P1397. Neonatal lentiviral gene transfer in a knock-out mouse 
model for afibrinogenemia
A. Fort1, V. Dung1, T. H. Nguyen2, L. Palumbo1, J. Degen3, M. Neerman-Ar -
bez1,4;  
1Dpt Medecine Genetic and Development, University Medical Center, Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2INSERM, CHU Hotel-Dieu, Nantes, France, 3Children’s Hospital 
Research Foundation, Cincinatti, OH, United States, 4Division of Angiology and 
Haemostasis, University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland.
Congenital afibrinogenemia is a rare autosomal recessive coagulation 
disorder characterized by the complete absence of plasma fibrinogen. 
The fact that afibrinogenemia is caused by mutations in a single small 
gene, in most cases the fibrinogen alpha-chain gene (FGA), combined 
with the existence of a knock-out mouse model, encouraged us to de -
sign a gene therapy approach to correct the coagulation deficiency. 
The C57BL/6J Fga knock-out mice used in this study develop abdomi -
nal hemorrhagic events during the neonatal period. We observed an 
important variability in the severity of the bleeding phenotype and the 
survival rates in homozygous Fga -/- mice. Certain characteristic pat -
terns of bleeding, notably navel bleeding, allow us to select candidates, 
before genotyping is possible, with good chances of survival post-in -
jection. HIV-1-derived lentiviral vectors expressing GFP, human FGA 
or murine Fga cDNAs under the control of a ubiquitous or hepatocyte 
specific promoter have been produced in the laboratory. Considering 
the early onset and the severity of the phenotype, we opted for neona -
tal gene transfer by injection of lentiviral vectors in the temporal vein. 
Injections of lentiviral vectors expressing GFP revealed that newborn 
fibrinogen deficient mice survive the intra-temporal vein injection, with 
the efficiency of hepatic transduction estimated by immunohistochem -
istry at approximately 20%. Analysis of one knock-out mouse injected 
with lentiviral vectors expressing murine Fga revealed the presence of 
fully assembled fibrinogen hexamers in plasma. Investigations are on -
going to define the minimum therapeutic vector dose, and to evaluate 
the efficiency of correction of the bleeding phenotype, both short-term 
and long-term.
P1398. The role of c-myc in the pathogenesis of Autosomal 
Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease Type 2
P. Koupepidou1, K. N. Felekkis1, E. Kastanos1, L. Tsiokas2, N. Gretz3, C. Del -
tas1;  
1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Department of Cell Biology, University 
of Oklahoma, Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma, OK, United States, 3Medical 
Research Center, Klinikum Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, 
Germany.
Autosomal Dominant Polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is one of the 
most frequent genetic diseases in humans and results from mutations 
in the PKD1 or PKD2 gene. Some of the pathogenic features of PKD 
are dysregulated epithelial cell proliferation, apoptosis and differentia -
tion.
Although the genes mutated are known, the mechanism by which 
cysts are formed remains unclear. Many proteins and pathways are 
dysregulated in polycystic kidneys. One of these is the proto-oncop -
rotein c-myc, found to be overexpressed in kidney epithelial cells in 
animal models and tissues from human patients. In addition, a c-myc 
transgenic mouse developed a PKD phenotype suggesting that c-myc 
contributes in the pathogenesis of PKD.
The purpose of this study is to determine whether c-myc plays a role in 
the PKD2-induced abnormal proliferation observed in epithelial cells.  
We generated stable clones overexpressing mutated PKD2 in HEK293 
cells, to examine whether c-myc expression was altered in this system. 
Overexpression of WT or mutant PKD2 does not alter cellular prolif -
eration or c-myc levels. As a result, we assumed that the increased 
expression of c-myc may be a secondary effect and is produced by the 
dysregulation of other pathways in the cells.
Using a transgenic rat model generated by overexpression of mutated 
PKD2 (1-703), we isolated kidney tubular epithelial cells and showed 
augmented levels of PCNA, accompanied by an increase in c-myc 
expression compared with WT tubular epithelial cells. Therefore, we 
decided to use this model to study whether downregulation of c-myc at 
the cellular level reverts the abnormal proliferation phenotype.P1399. Bioethics, Human Cloning: Aspect of Theologians, 
Physicians and Geneticists in Iran
M. Saniei1, S. Amina2, A. Melati Rad3, S. Shahraz3, E. Jafari Mehr3, L. Zahedi3, 
A. Shekarchi4, M. Zali3;  
1UMC St Radboud, Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands Antilles, 2The York 
Management School, University of York, York, United Kingdom, 3Research 
Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shaheed Beheshti University 
of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Sociology Department, 
Shaheed Beheshti University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran.
Introduction: It appears that the nature and extent of public information 
and debate on cloning and its potential advantages and disadvantages 
in the area of human health vary around the world.Furthermore an 
oriental trend has shown in this field .The research team thinks that 
scholars are among the most powerful effectors that shape attitudes 
towards human cloning.This study illuminates how Iranian scholars in 
the field of medicine,genetic and theology think about the most impor -
tant ethical consequences. 
Methods: Ethical issues that arise in human cloning are discussed 
along with reasons susceptibility data may be offered to participants 
in the future.To develop a questionnaire,a series of the most important 
ethical considerations of human cloning were grouped under the four 
bioethical principles;autonomy,beneficence,nonmaleficence and jus -
tice. The method of filling that was face to face interview.
Results: One hundred and two physicians,34 geneticists and 65 theo -
logians responded to the survey  for a response rate of 75%.The over -
all main attitude of physicians and geneticists towards human cloning 
and stem cell research was 3.11 and the main attitude of theologians 
towards these issues was 3.21 out of 5.Age,sex and literacy grade 
has no significant effect on the attitude in different groups of profes -
sionals. 
Conclusions: Biomedical and theological scientists in this study 
showed weak positive attitude towards the issues.Knowing many limi -
tations we faced like lack of previous comparable method,possible 
selection bias,and intuitive nature of many conclusions,no generaliza -
tion is wise and further research efforts especially qualitative ones are 
indispensable for unmasking the realities and making new theories in 
this respect.
P1400. Antisense-mediated exon 51 skipping restores local 
dystrophin expression in muscle of Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy patients
G. B. van Ommen1, A. A. M. Janson1, A. Aartsma-Rus1, G. Platenburg2, J. J. G. 
M. Verschuuren1, J. C. T. van Deutekom2,1;  
1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands, 2Prosensa BV, 
Leiden, The Netherlands.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) patients suffer from a progres -
sive, severe muscle-wasting disease due to frame-disrupting mutations 
in the dystrophin gene and a complete loss of functional dystrophin. 
By contrast, mutations that maintain the open reading frame give rise 
to internally deleted, partially functional dystrophins and are found in 
the less severe Becker muscular dystrophy patients (BMD). Antisense 
oligonucleotide compounds (AONs) have recently shown therapeutic 
promise for DMD patients. By inducing specific exon skipping during 
mRNA splicing AONs have been successful in repairing the open read -
ing frame and thus restoring dystrophin expression  in cultured muscle 
cells from patients, as well as in the mdx mouse model. As an es -
sential step towards broad clinical studies and future applications, we 
here evaluated efficacy of a single, intramuscular dose of DMD AON 
PRO051. Four DMD patients with different mutations were included on 
basis of eligible mutation, adequate condition of the target muscle, and 
positive in vitro  PRO051 skip-response. A dose of 0.8 mg PRO051, 
without any excipient, was injected into the tibialis anterior muscle and 
a biopsy was taken after 4 weeks. In each of the individual biopsies 
specific exon 51 skipping was observed on RNA level. This resulted in 
abundant dystrophin protein expression at the membrane, as demon -
strated by immunohistochemical and western blot analyses. PRO051 
was well tolerated and did not provoke serious adverse events in any 
of the patients: local treatment with PRO051 was safe and highly ef -
ficient. Our results provide strong basis for subsequent studies on sys -
temic treatment of DMD patients. Therapy for genetic disease 
P1401. Enzyme replacement therapy in 4 patients with 
mucopolysaccharidoses type-6
S. Başaran Yılmaz, E. Karaca, B. Tüysüz ;  
Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School, Medical Genetics, İstanbul, 
Turkey.
The mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) are a heterogeneous group of 
lysosomal storage disorders caused by the deficiency of enzymes in -
volved in degradation of glycosaminoglycans. Mucopolysaccharidosis 
type-6 is characterised by osseous, corneal and visceral changes with -
out intelligence impairment.
We started to enzyme replacement therapy in four patients with MPS 
type-6 on November 2006 with Naglazyme (Galsulfase). Our patients 
are a girl-7.5 years old and 3 boys-3.5, 6 and 9 years old. All patients 
have coarse facies, joint stiffness, corneal clouding, hearing loss, val -
vular heart dissease, dysostosis multiplex, hepatosplenomegaly and 
normal intelligence. One patient has also glaucoma, and one has ad -
enoid vegetation.
These patients were diagnosed clinically and definitive diagnosis were 
made by enzyme analyses. Deficiency of Arylsulphatase B enzyme 
was found in all patients.
We assayed the patients with clinical examination,vital signs, 6 min -
utes walking test, echocardiography, measures of joint ranges, pulmo -
nary function tests, ophtalmologic and hearing examinations before 
the therapy.
All patients received weekly intravenous infusions with 1 mg/kg Galsul -
fase. Because of the potentiallity of infusion reactions patients received 
antihistamines and antipyretics before the infusions. They hadn’t any 
complication except two patient had vomits for two times.We aimed to 
treat the somatic symptoms of patients. When 3 months of the therapy 
were completed we reassay the patients clinically. Their complaints 
about sleep apnea and difficulties of daily activities were reduced.
P1402. Multi-exon skipping removing exons 45 through 55 of the 
DMD transcript could rescue up to 63% of Duchenne Muscular 
Dystrophy patients
C. Béroud1,2, S. Tuffery-Giraud1,3, M. Matsuo4, D. Hamroun1,2, V. Humbert -
claude1,2, N. Monnier5,6, M. Moizard7, M. Voelckel8, L. Michel Calemard9, P. 
Boisseau10,11, M. Blayau12, C. Philippe13, M. Cossée14, M. Pagès15, F. Rivier16, O. 
Danos17, L. Garcia17, M. Claustres1,2;  
1INSERM U 827, Montpellier, France, 2CHU Montpellier, Hôpital Arnaud de Vil -
leneuve, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Montpellier, France, 3Université 
Montpellier 1, UFR Médecine, Montpellier, France, 4Department of Pediatrics, 
Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan, 5Laboratoire de 
Biochimie Génétique et Moleculaire, CHU de Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 
6INSERM U607, Grenoble, France, 7INSERM U 619, CHU Bretonneau, Tours, 
France, 8Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Département de Génétique 
Médicale, Hôpital d’Enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 9Laboratoire de 
Biochimie, Hôpital Debrousse, Lyon, France, 10INSERM U 533, Nantes, France, 
11Université de Nantes, Nantes, France, 12Laboratoire de Génétique Molécu -
laire, Rennes, France, 13Laboratoire de Génétique, EA 3441, CHU Brabois, 
Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France, 14Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpi -
taux Universitaires de Strasbourg et Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France, 
15Département de Neurologie, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 16Ser-
vice de Neuropédiatrie, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 17Genethon & 
CNRS UMR 8115, Evry, France.
To collect and analyze mutation information, we developed a generic 
software called Universal Mutation Databases (UMD). This software 
includes a large set of analysis tools primarily created for molecular 
epidemiology studies and subsequently to address more complex top -
ics such as genotype-phenotype correlations. With the development of 
innovative therapies for patients suffering from rare genetic diseases, 
it appeared that bioinformatics and LSDBs could play an important 
role.
Thus, we created specific routines to help researchers to design 
therapeutic strategies such as exon skipping whose archetype is the 
DMD gene associated with Duchenne (DMD) and Becker dystrophies 
(BMD).
Approximately two-third of DMD patients show intragenic deletions 
from one to several exons of the DMD gene leading to a premature 
stop codon. Other deletions that maintain the translational reading 
frame result in BMD. The opportunity to transform a DMD phenotype 
into a BMD phenotype appeared as a treatment strategy with the de -velopment of various technologies, which are able to induce an exon 
skipping at the pre-mRNA level in order to restore an open reading 
frame. Because the DMD gene contains 79 exons, thousands of po -
tential transcripts could be produced by exon skipping and should be 
investigated.
By using UMD algorithms, we predicted that an optimal multi-exon 
skipping leading to the del45-55 artificial dystrophin (c.6439_8217del) 
could transform DMD phenotype into asymptomatic or mild BMD phe -
notype. This multiple-exon skipping could theoretically rescue up to 
63% of DMD patients with a deletion while the optimal mono-skipping 
of exon 51 would rescue only 16% of patients.
P1403. Recovery of female Fanconi anemia fertility after 
chemotherapy, irradiation and bone marrow allograft/further 
evidence against oocyte regeneration by bone arrow-derived 
germline stem cells
M. S. Fellous1, V. Reiner1, G. Eliane2, S. Jean2;  
1Institut Cochin FDPM,, Paris, France, 2Hopital Saint Louis, Service de greffe 
de Moelle Osseuse, Paris, France.
Mammalian oocytes are formed before or shortly after birth. However, 
recent controversial papers cast doubts on this paradigm by claiming 
that new ovarian follicles can be generated in the mouse by germline 
stem cells (GSCs) supplied by the bone marrow (BM). Here we con -
sider an issue related to the potential existence of GCSs : the genetic 
origin of offspring after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplanta -
tion in humans. To clarify this issue, we have examined a rare clinical 
situation in which a woman with Fanconi Anemia (FA) gave birth to 
a child after allogeneic BM transplantation. We have genotyped the 
mother (patient), the daughter, and the donor; several informative poly -
morphic microsatellites demonstrated the genetic relationship between 
the other and the daughter. The rare clinical situation described here is 
reminiscent of the observations described in the controversial papers. 
However, it leads to an alternative explanation. Our data show that 
recovery of fertility after BM transplantation can result from incomplete 
depletion of the ovarian follicular pool and not from its replacement by 
donor BM-derived GSCs.
P1404. The pharmacological chaperone AT1001 increases levels 
of mutant alpha-galactosidase A in Fabry patient cell lines and 
reduces GL-3 levels in a mouse model of Fabry disease
E. R. Benjamin1, R. Khanna1, H. H. Chang1, R. Soska1, A. Schilling1, C. Pine1, 
B. A. Wustman1, R. J. Desnick2, D. J. Lockhart1, K. J. Valenzano1;  
1Amicus Therapeutics, Cranbury, NJ, United States, 2Mount Sinai School of 
Medicine, New York, NY, United States.
Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by de -
ficient α-galactosidase A (GLA) activity and accumulation of globotrio -
sylceramide (GL-3) and related glycolipids. Over 400 Fabry mutations 
have been reported; ~60% are missense. Previously, the pharmaco -
logical chaperone, AT1001 (migalastat hydrochloride), was shown to 
increase R301Q GLA activity in vitro  and in vivo . To evaluate the re -
sponse of other Fabry GLA mutations, male patient lymphoid cell lines 
representing more than 50 different missense mutations were incubat -
ed with AT1001 (5 nM to 1 mM) for 5 days, and effects on GLA activity 
were determined. Basal enzyme activity ranged from 0% to 35% of 
wild type (WT). Significantly increased GLA activity was observed in 
over 34 cell lines (1.5- to 20-fold; post-treatment GLA activities ranged 
from 2.4% to 110% WT), with varying EC50 values: from 600 nM to 
>1 mM. Next, the effect of AT1001 was tested in GLA knockout mice 
that express a human R301Q transgene (R301Q Tg/KO). Daily oral 
gavage of AT1001 (30 mg/kg PO; 4 weeks) to male R301Q Tg/KO 
mice resulted in significantly increased GLA activity (p<0.05; n=6-7) 
and significantly reduced GL-3 levels in skin and heart (p<0.05; n=6-
7). In kidney, GL-3 levels were reduced but did not reach statistical 
significance. In conclusion, GLA activity is increased in patient-derived 
cell lines after incubation with AT1001 for many mutant forms of the 
enzyme. Increased enzyme activity is also seen after oral delivery of 
AT1001 to Fabry transgenic mice, with a concomitant decrease in tis -
sue GL-3 levels. Therapy for genetic disease 
P1405. Safety of agalsidase alfa enzyme replacement therapy in 
a cohort of 1329 patients in FOS - the Fabry Outcome Survey
G. Sunder-Plassmann1, M. Beck2, J. Clarke3, A. Linhart4, A. Mehta, on behalf 
of the FOS Investigators5;  
1Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Vienna, Austria, 2University of Mainz, 
Mainz, Germany, 3Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic, 5Royal Free Hospital, London, United 
Kingdom.
Background: FOS was established in 2001 to monitor the long-term 
efficacy and safety of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with agalsi -
dase alfa in patients with Fabry disease. This is a rare X-linked lyso -
somal storage disorder that results in progressive accumulation of the 
enzyme substrate globotriaosylceramide in cells throughout the body, 
leading to organ failure and premature death. The FOS database has 
recently been expanded to include patients from non-European coun -
tries. The present analysis provides demographic and safety data from 
a total cohort of 1329 patients enrolled in FOS as of January 2007.
Methods: The FOS database was analysed in terms of patient demog -
raphy and safety of ERT.
Results: The 1329 patients in FOS have been recruited from 109 cen -
tres in 19 countries. Of those enrolled, 828 (62%) are receiving ERT. 
Approximately equal numbers of males and females are on treatment, 
and 154 (18.6%) are receiving treatment at home. More than 25 men 
have been given agalsidase alfa for at least 6 years, and > 50% of the 
200 children in FOS are receiving ERT. Mild infusion reactions are the 
most common drug-related adverse events, reported in 11% of males 
and 4% of females and representing < 1% of the infusions given. Most 
reactions occurred between 3 and 6 months after the start of treat -
ment and then declined in frequency. No IgE antibodies have been 
detected.
Conclusion: Long-term safety data from a large cohort of male, female 
and paediatric patients in FOS confirm that ERT with agalsidase alfa 
is very well tolerated.
P1406. A Gaucher disease e x vivo  response study: the 
pharmacological chaperone AT2101 increases levels of 
glucocerebrosidase in patient-derived cells
C. W. Pine1, B. E. Ranes1, F. Insinga1, K. Ludwig1, G. A. Grabowski2, N. J. 
Weinreb3, G. M. Pastores4, D. Gruskin5, P. Kaplan6, H. Do1, D. J. Lockhart1, B. 
A. Wustman1;  
1Amicus Therapeutics, Cranbury, NJ, United States, 2Division of Human Ge -
netics, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United 
States, 3University Research Foundation for Lysosomal Storage Diseases Inc, 
Northwest Oncology Hematology Associates, Coral Springs, FL, United States, 
4Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 5Departments of Human Genetics and 
Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States, 
6Section of Metabolic Diseases, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, University 
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
Gaucher disease (GD) is caused by a deficiency of lysosomal glucocer -
ebrosidase (GCase). Deficient GCase activity leads to symptoms such 
as anemia, thrombocytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly, bone necrosis, 
infarcts and osteoporosis, and in some cases, neuropathic disease. 
To evaluate the effects of a pharmacological chaperone, AT2101, on 
mutant GCase levels, we conducted an ex vivo  response study using 
macrophages and EBV-transformed lymphoblasts derived from pe -
ripheral leukocytes. Plasma was also screened for potential biomark -
ers associated with inflammation, bone metabolism, multiple myeloma 
and neurodegeneration. An interim analysis was conducted on sam -
ples from 40 patients enrolled at 5 sites in the United States. Results: 
The study included 21 males and 18 females with type I GD, and one 
male with type III GD. Patients ranged in age from 7 to 83 years, 38 
of 40 patients were receiving enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) and 
blood was drawn prior to ERT infusion. Analysis of 40 potential mark -
ers in plasma showed elevated TRACP 5b, PARC, IL-8, IL-17, VEGF, 
MIP-1α and α-synuclein and reduced bone-specific alkaline phospha -
tase levels in most patients. Macrophages were successfully derived 
from 34 of 40 patients, of which 32 demonstrated a dose-dependent 
increase in GCase levels (average = 2.8-fold, range = 1.5- to 6.5-fold) 
when treated with AT2101 (5 days). Similar results were observed for 
5 additional patient-derived lymphoblast cell lines. AT2101 significantly 
increased GCase levels in cells from patients with different genotypes 
including N370S/N370S (n=11), N370S/L444P (n=8), N370S/84insG (n=11), N370S/R163X, N370S/Y212H, L444P/del 136T, L444P/F216Y, 
L444P/L174F, G202R/R463C, and K79N/complex B exon 9/10 (type 
III GD).
P1407. Hyperbranched polylysines as vehicles for gene delivery 
into eucaryotic cells
A. A. Egorova1, A. V. Kiselev2,1, P. L. Il’ina1, V. Y. Aksenova1, A. N. Baranov2, V. 
S. Baranov2;  
1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s 
Institute for Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation.
Efficient gene delivery into eucaryotic cells is an extremely critical step 
in gene therapy. Development of new non-viral DNA vectors seems to 
be a perspective approach for effective gene delivery into cells. This 
study was confined to the groups of hyperbranched polylysine vehi -
cles (spLLs). Hyperbranched polylysine with its arginine or histidine 
surface modified derivatives was studied. Surface lysine/arginine or 
histidine ratio was 1/1 or 9/1. All vehicles were studied for their capac -
ity to bind DNA and provide protection of plasmid DNA from nucle -
ase degradation. Beta-galactosidase gene expression in HeLa cells 
indicated transfectional capacity of tested vehicles. All spLLs proved 
their capacity to condense and protect plasmid DNA. Transfectional 
capacity of arginine-modified spLLs had no distinguishable difference 
from that of unmodified hyperbranched polylysine. Histidine-modified 
polylysine compounds showed 7-20-fold increase of transfectional ac -
tivity in comparison with unmodified vehicle. Transfectional activity of 
histidine-modified polylysines was not affected by glycerol treatment. 
Thus histidine-modified spLLs were found out to provide more effec -
tive DNA delivery into cells, compared to arginine-modified spLLs. We 
suggest that modification of polylysine surface with histidine results 
in increase of endosomolytic ability and augmented transfectional 
activity. Inclusion of endosomolytic peptide JTS-1 into DNA/histidine-
modified spLLs complexes resulted in 4-fold increase of transfection 
efficiency. The level of transfectional activity was comparable to that 
of PAMAM-dendrimer Polyfect. The results demonstrate that polymer 
surface modification with histidine might be perspective for develop -
ment of new effective gene delivery vehicles on the basis of hyper -
branched polylysines. This work was supported with grants of CRDF 
(ST-012) and RFBR (06-04-08338).
P1408. Miglustat in Gaucher Disease Type 3
A. Vellodi1, C. Harris2, C. DeVile3, E. Davies1, E. Fitzgibbon3, L. Abel4, P. Camp -
bell2, N. van Schaik5, W. Benko3, M. Timmons3, R. Schiffmann3;  
1Great Ormond Street Hospital for Sick Children, London, United Kingdom, 
2University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 3National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Australia, 5Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Thirty patients (29 on ERT, one BMT) were randomized 2:1 to receive 
for 12 months either miglustat 200 mg t.i.d. or no treatment. All enrolled 
patients in the 12-month extension phase received miglustat.
Of the 30 patients who completed the first year of treatment, 28 en -
tered the extension study. Mean age (SD) was 10.2 (4.8) years (60% 
female). The median exposure to miglustat was 729 days (6-802 days). 
The prevalence and severity of the clinical manifestations were hetero -
geneous. Comparison of 24 months versus 12 months of treatment did 
not show a significant difference in vertical saccadic eye movement 
velocity changes, the primary endpoint. Organ volumes and haema -
tological parameters were stable. A decrease in chitotriosidase levels 
and an increase in pulmonary FVC were observed in some patients. 
The most frequently reported adverse events (AEs) were diarrhoea 
(72%), tremor (38%) and abdominal pain (34%). Diarrhoea was mild 
and its frequency decreased over time. None of the previous AEs led 
to study discontinuation. One patient had a confirmed polyneuropa -
thy and withdrew from the study and 3 had sub-clinical neuropathy (1 
poly- and 2 mono-neuropathy); one of the latter was included in the no 
treatment group. There were no deaths.
This 24-month miglustat trial in GD3 patients did not show an effect 
on the neurological endpoints assessed, but some effects on systemic 
disease parameters and lung function were observed. The tolerability 
profile of miglustat at 200 mg t.i.d. was comparable to that reported 
with the approved dose for GD1 (100 mg t.i.d.). Therapy for genetic disease 
P1409. The Hunter Outcome Survey (HOS): clinical 
characteristics of patients with mucopolysaccharidosis type II
J. E. Wraith1, M. Beck2, R. Giugliani3, B. K. Burton4, L. DeMeirleir5, J. Zeman6, 
on behalf of the HOS investigators;  
1Royal Manchester Children’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Chil-
dren’s Hospital University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 3Hospital de Clinicas de 
Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 4Children’s Memorial Hospital, Chicago, IL, 
United States, 5University Hospital of the Vrije Unversiteit Brussel, Brussels, 
Belgium, 6Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II; Hunter syndrome) is a rare, 
progressive, X-linked disorder of glycosaminoglycan (GAG) metabo -
lism caused by a deficiency of the enzyme iduronate-2-sulfatase. This 
results in progressive GAG accumulation within multiple tissues and 
organs. In 2006, a global survey of MPS II patients - the Hunter Out -
come Survey (HOS) - was established to enhance our understanding 
of the natural history of MPS II, monitor the safety and efficacy of en -
zyme replacement therapy, and provide the basis for the development 
of clinical management guidelines. As of October 2006, 100 patients 
had enrolled in HOS at centres in 11 countries. The median ages at en -
rolment, onset of symptoms and diagnosis of MPS II were 11.3 years, 
1.5 years and 3.5 years, respectively. The prevalence of clinical fea -
tures at the time of enrolment into HOS was variable; nasal obstruc -
tion was reported in 28% of patients, enlarged tonsils or adenoids in 
68%, enlarged liver or spleen in 88%, joint stiffness in 87% and facial 
dysmorphia by 98%. Cardiovascular manifestations of MPS II were 
found in approximately 75% of patients. These included murmur in 
77%, valve disease in 69%, and cardiomyopathy in 12% of patients. 
Life-table analyses indicated that by age 7 years, approximately 50% 
of patients with Hunter syndrome display some cardiovascular abnor -
malities, increasing to 95% by age 15 years. As enrolment increases, 
HOS will improve our understanding of MPS II, advance the assess -
ment of the long-term impact of ERT, and allow the development of 
evidence-based clinical management guidelines.
P1410. Oxidative stress in Peroxisomal disorders
H. T. El-Bassyouni ;  
National Research Center, Guiza, Egypt.
Peroxisomal disorders are subdivided into peroxisome biogenesis 
disorders (PBDs) and single peroxisomal enzyme deficiencies. Many 
peroxisomal diseases exhibit excessive oxidative stress leading to 
neurological alterations and dysfunction. This study aimed to inves -
tigate whether oxidative stress is involved in the pathogenesis of per -
oxisomal disorders by estimating various oxidative stress parameters 
in cases suffering from peroxisomal disorders.
A total of twenty patients with peroxisomal disorders, their ages ranged 
from 6 months to 13 years (mean 5.9 ±3.2) were compared to four -
teen healthy controls. All individuals were subjected to full history tak -
ing including three-generation pedigree analysis concerning parental 
consanguinity and similarly affected members in the family with me -
ticulous clinical examination to detect any malformation or anomaly. 
VLCFAs and phytanic acid estimation was done to verify the diagnosis. 
Other investigations including brain magnetic resonant image (MRI), 
electric encephalogram (EEG), visual evoked potential (VEP), auditory 
potential and plain X- rays were done to asses the pathological condi -
tion of the patients. Oxidative stress parameters including nitric oxide 
(NO), malondialdehyde (MDA) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) were 
estimated in both patients and controls.
This study showed significant increase of both MDA and NO in PBDs. 
It was also demonstrated that SOD was significantly low in PDB more 
than controls.
Conclusion: Lacking functional peroxisomes leads to generalized in -
crease in oxidative stress confirming the important role of peroxisomes 
in homeostasis of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the implications 
of its disturbances in cell pathology. The study recommends supple -
mentation with antioxidants besides other lines of treatments.
P1411. Activation of PPAR pathway stimulates mitochondrial 
oxidative phosphorylation and is a potential therapy in 
respiratory chain defects.
J. Bastin1, F. Aubey1, A. Munnich2, F. Djouadi1;  
1CNRS UPR 9078, Paris, France, 2INSERM U781, Paris, France.
The mitochondrial Respiratory Chain (RC) disorders are the largest 
group of inborn errors of metabolism and still remain without treat -ment in most cases. Here, we tested whether bezafibrate, a drug act -
ing as a Peroxisome Proliferator Activated Receptor (PPAR) agonist, 
could induce a stimulation of RC residual capacities in four patient cell 
lines carrying mutations in the Fp (flavoprotein, complex II, CII), or 
BCS1 (complex III, CIII), or SURF1 (complex IV, CIV), or COX10 (CIV) 
genes. Exposure to bezafibrate (400µM, 72h) was found to increase 
(+38 to +50%) the CII, CIII and CIV activities in control fibroblasts, 
and immunoblots showed parallel increases (+82 to +150%) in Fp, 
Core 2, SURF1, COX2 and COX4 protein levels. A similar treatment 
by bezafibrate improved RC capacities in BCS1- and COX10-deficient 
fibroblasts, as indicated by the stimulation of CIII (+133%) and CIV 
(+71%) enzyme activity, and by the higher expression of represen -
tative proteins. This was related to a drug-induced augmentation in 
the mRNA abundance of the mutated BCS1 or COX 10 gene. Fp and 
SURF1 mRNA were also induced by bezafibrate, but without changes 
in RC residual capacities due to the mutated protein instability. The 
molecular mechanisms underlying these effects likely involved PPARδ 
and the co-activator PGC1α that could induce the expression of genes 
encoding structural subunits or ancillary proteins of the OXPHOS ap -
paratus, leading to stimulate the activity and protein levels of RC com -
plex. These effects could find applications for the correction of some 
moderate RC disorders due to mutations in nuclear genes.
P1412. Growth Hormone is Effective in Treatment of Short 
Stature Associated with SHOX Deficiency: Two-year Results of a 
Randomized, Controlled, Multi-Center Trial
W. F. Blum1, B. J. Crowe1, C. A. Quigley2, H. Jung3, D. Cao2, J. L. Ross4, L. 
Braun2, G. Rappold3;  
1Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, Bad Homburg, Germany, 
2Lilly Research Laboratories, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, United 
States, 3Department of Molecular Human Genetics, Institute of Human Genet -
ics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Department of Pediatrics, 
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, United States.
SHOX encodes a homeodomain transcription factor responsible for a 
significant proportion of long-bone growth. Patients with mutations or 
deletions of SHOX, including those with Turner syndrome [TS] who are 
haploinsufficient for SHOX, have variable degrees of growth impair -
ment, with or without a spectrum of skeletal anomalies consistent with 
dyschondrosteosis.
Fifty-two prepubertal subjects (24 male, 28 female; age 3.0-12.3 
years) with a molecularly-proven SHOX gene defect and height below 
the 3rd percentile for age and gender were randomized to either a 
growth hormone (GH)-treatment group (n=27) or an untreated control 
group (n=25) for 2 years. To compare the GH treatment effect between 
subjects with SHOX-deficiency (SHOX-D) and those with TS, a third 
study group, comprised 26 pts with TS aged 4.5-11.8 years, who also 
received GH. Between-group comparisons of height velocity, height 
standard deviation score (SDS) and height gain (cm) were performed 
using analysis of covariance accounting for diagnosis, sex and base -
line age.
The GH-treated SHOX-D group had a significantly greater first-year 
height velocity than the untreated control group (p<0.001) and similar 
first-year height velocity to GH-treated subjects with TS (8.9±0.4 cm/y, 
p=0.592). GH-treated subjects also had significantly greater second-
year height velocity (p<0.001), second-year height SDS (-2.1±0.2 vs. -
3.0±0.2, p<0.001) and second-year height gain (16.4±0.4 vs. 10.5±0.4 
cm, p<0.001) than untreated subjects.
In summary the efficacy of GH treatment in subjects with SHOX-D was 
equivalent to that seen in subjects with TS. We conclude that GH is 
effective in improving the linear growth of patients with various forms 
of SHOX-D.
P1413. Treatment of SMA cell line using 5-NENI-amiloride
J. G. Chang1, H. H. Lin1, A. Chang1, C. Y. Yuo1, W. K. Yang2;  
1Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, 2China Medical 
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a common inherited neuromuscular 
disorder caused by homozygous loss of the survival motor neuron 1 
(SMN1) gene. All SMA patients carry at least one copy of a nearly iden -
tical SMN2 gene. However, a critical nucleotide change in the exon 7 
of SMN2 results in alternative RNA splicing and exclusion of exon 7 in 
the majority of SMN2 mRNA, thus producing a low level of functional 
SMN protein. Increasing SMN protein production by promoting SMN2  Therapy for genetic disease 
exon 7 inclusion and/or SMN2 gene transcription, therefore, could be 
a therapeutic approach for SMA. It has been shown that cellular pH 
microenvironment can modulate pre-mRNA alternative splicing in vivo. 
In this study, we tested whether inhibitors of the NA+/H+ exchanger can 
modulate the exon 7 splicing of SMN2 mRNA. We found that treatment 
with a NA+/H+ exchanger inhibitor, 5-(N-ethy1-N-isopropy1)-amiloride 
(NENI-amiloride), significantly enhances SMN2 exon 7 inclusion 
as well as SMN protein production in SMA cells. In addition, NENI-amiloride increases the number of nuclear gems in SMA cells. We fur -
ther explored the underlying mechanism and our results suggest that 
NENI-amiloride may promote SMN2 exon 7 inclusion through up-regu -
lation of the splicing factor SRp20 in the nucleus. In conclusion, our 
finding that NENI-amiloride, an inhibitor of the NA+/H+ exchanger, can 
increase SMN protein production in SMA cells provides a new direction 
for the development of drugs for SMA treatment.